GOTTHELF
FLSEVTER
SAUNDERS
SMALL
ANIMAL
EAR
DISEASES
ANILLUSTRATED GUIDE
SECOND EDITION
小尾巴宠物健康中心htlp://tahc.laobao.com
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
11830 Westline lndustrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES: AN
ILLUSTRATED GUIDE, SECOND EDITION
ISBN 0-7216-0137-5
Copyright @ 2005 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means,electronic ormechanical,including photocopying,recording,or any
information storage andretrieval system,without permission in writing from the
publisher. Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences
Rights Department in Philadelphia, PA, USA: phone: (+l) 215 238 7869, fax:
(+ l) 215 238 2239, e-mail: healthpermissions @elsevier.com. You may also complete
by selecting 'Customer Support’ and then *Obtaining Permissions'.
NOTICE
Veterinary Medicine is an ever-changing field. Standard safety precautions must be followed,
therapy may become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current
product inforrmation provided by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the
recommended dose, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. lt is the
responsibility of the treating veterinarian, relying on experience and knowledge of the animal to
determine dosages and the best treatment for the animal. Neither the publisher nor the editor
publication.
The Publisher
Previous edition copyrighted 2000
Intermational Standard Book Number 0-7216-0137-5
Pubtishing Director: Linda Duncan
Acquisitions Editor: Anthony J. Winke]
Devetopmentat Editor: Shelly Dixon
Pubtishing Services Manager:Linda McKinley
Senior Project Manager: Jennifer Furey
Designer: Amy Buxton
Printed in China.
Last digit is the print number:987654321
Contributors
John C. Angus, DVM, Diplomate ACVD
Staff Dermatologist
Southerm Arizona Veterinary Specialists
Tucson, Arizona
Cytology of the Ear in Health and Disease
Margo Ruth Roman-Auerhahn, BS, DVM
Staff Clinician and Owner Veterinarian
MASH Main St. Animal Services of Hopkinton
Hopkinton, Massachusetts
Anatomy of the Canine and Feline Ear
Todd W. Axlund, DVM, Dipl ACVIM
Assistant Professor
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Auburn University
Aubum, Alabama
Otitis Interna and Vestibular Disease
Noel Berger, DVM, MS
Boston Road Animal Clinic
Sutton, Massachusetts
Laser Ear Surgery
Paul Bloom, DVM, DACVD, DABVP
Assistant AdjunctProfessor
 Department of Dermatology
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan
Adverse Food Reactions
Peter H. Eeg, B.Sc., DVM
Poolesville Veterinary Clinic, LLC
Poolesville, Maryland
Laser Ear Surgery
vi
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
Animal Hospital of Montgomery
Montgomery, Alabama
Examination of the Extermal Ear Canal; Primary Causes of Ear Disease; Factors
that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa;Factors that Perpetuate Otitis Externa;
Failure of Epithelial Migration: Cerumenoliths; Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis
Media;Healing of the Ruptured Eardrum;Inflammatory Polyps; Ototoxicity
A. Kumar, BVSc, MVSc, MS, PhD
Professor, Department of Biomedical Sciences
Course Director, Small and Large Animal Gross Anatomy
Co-Director, Clinical Anatomy
Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine
 North Grafton, Massachusetts
Anatomy of the Canine and Feline Ear
Genevi ve Marignac, DVM
Unite de Parasitologie-Mycologie-Dermatologie
Ecole Nationale Veterinaire d'Alfort
Maisons-Alfort, France
Diseases that Affect the Pinna
Steven A. Melman, VMD
Founder
Dermapet, Inc.
Potomac, Maryland
Simple Diagnosis and Treatment of Pruritic Otitis
Sandra R. Merchant, DVM, Dipl ACVD
Professorof Dermatology
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Microbiology of the Ear of the Dog and Cat
Jeffrey R. Moll, DVM
Christensen Animal Hospital
Wilmette, Illinois
Laser EarSurgery
Contributors
vi
Mauricio Solano, MV, DACVR
Assistant Professor of Clinical Sciences
Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine
Hospital for Large Animals
North Grafton, Massachusetts
Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging in the Ear
Norma White-Weithers, MS, DVM, Diplomate ACVD
Staff Dermatologist
Center for Specialized Veterinary Care
Westbury, New York
CeruminousDiseasesoftheEar
Ronald E. Whitford, DVM
Chief of Staff
St. Bethlehem Animal Clinic
Clarksville, Tennessee
Marketing Ear Service
Preface
As a full-time veterinarian in a small animal practice, working every day on the front
lines of veterinary medicine, I am always asked, "How can you find the time to write
a book?' My answer is that I truly believe that one of the most important challenges
of being a doctor is that we should each share the knowledge that we acquire with
our colleagues. I have found that I read everything I can find in books and jourmals.
as well as on the Intermet, pertaining to dog and cat skin and ear diseases. So, writ-
ing a book to share the information I have gathered about ear disease seems to be a
logical progression.
Since the introduction of the first edition of Small Animal Ear Diseases: An
Hlustrated Guide, the awareness of otic disease as a serious ailment has been brought
to the forefront of veterinary medicine. Veterinarians worldwide have embraced the
use of video otoscopic diagnostics for ear disease, and we are now more often iden-
tifying treatable ear disease as a result. For example, recognizing otitis media in our
patients and properly treating it has helped to relieve the misery and suffering that
accompanies this painful disease.
The body of knowledge about ear disease is ever increasing. The number of
published papers on the diagnosis and treatment of extermal and middle ear diseases
lectures on ear disease and provides hands-on laboratory sessions using video
otoscopy. New treatment modalities are being used in ear disease, and that has
increased therapeutic options. Treating the tympanic bulla with infused topical
medication is one example. Newly improvised intra-otic surgical procedures using
the COz laser and the diode laser, as well as radiofrequency surgery through the
video otoscope, have decreased the number of lateral ear canal resections and ear
canal ablations.
 Many questions remain umanswered, but there are currently many ongoing stud-
ies that are attempting to answer the questions of why the ears become infected and
what therapeutic options are the best for treatment. Exciting new drug classes and
nutritional products may prove to be valuable in the prevention and treatment of ear
diseases.
In this second edition, I have added new, useful information to the body of knowl-
edge. Obviously, some of the information has not changed since the first edition, but
based on the feedback that I received from readers, many of these topics have been
expanded to give an in-depth review. The new chapters are enlightening. One of my
goals in the second edition was to bring a better discussion of otic cytology and a
photographic manual of ear cytology to the practitioner. In addition, the chapter on
disease.
Many new photos in the second edition illustrate the vast number of ear condi-
tions that are being commonly identified in dogs and cats by veterinarians. I have
received many photos of interesting cases from practitioners and I have included
several in this volume where appropriate.
ix
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
veterinarians can improve patient care. I would also hope that it poses some diag-
mostic and therapeutic problems that stimulate more research interest.
Louis N. Gotthelf
Montgomery, Alabama
Acknowledgments
It is important to recognize that I would not have the time to devote to the study of
ear disease and to the preparation of a book manuscript if it were not for the support
of my family, my staff at the Animal Hospital of Montgomery, and the clients who
have the confidence in my abilities to allow me to treat their beloved companions.
But I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the warm reception and construc-
tive feedback that I have received as encouragement from my veterinarian colleagues
all over the world. The letters and phone calls I receive thanking me for providing a
book that helps them understand the mechanisms of ear disease and the logical
approach to ear treatments have helped motivate me to write the second edition. Part
of the reason for this second edition is that, through colleague comments and ques-
tions, I found that there is a thirst for new, useful information that needs to be
quenched.
I would also like to again thank Ron Buck and Rodney Glass from MedRx, Inc.
who have supported me since 1996. Their commitment to veterinary continuing
education allows me to do 25 ear disease lectures and wet labs each year for veteri-
narians and technicians all over the United States and elsewhere. Their foresight in
adapting their video otoscopic equipment to the needs of our profession makes it
possible for me to show pictures of diseases of the ear in this book.
I have come to realize that writing the manuscript is the easy part of writing a
book. Actually putting it all together into a meaningful end product is the hard part;
from the language editing to the page layout, printing, marketing, and distribution,
many people whom I do not even know had a part. So a big "thanks' to all of the
people at Elsevier who worked as a team to get it into the final form.
Xi
Anatomy of the
Canine and
Feline Ear
A. Kumar, DVM, PhD
Margo Ruth Roman-Auerhahn, DVM
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
he basic anatomical components of the dog and cat ear are as follows:
·Auricle, or pinna
· Auditory canal, or extermal auditory meatus
·Middle ear
·Intemal ear
Structure of the External Ear
The extermal ear is composed of three elastic cartilages: annular, scutiform, and auric-
ular (Figure 1-1). The annular and auricular cartilages form the extermal ear canal,
and the auricular cartilage expands to form the pinna. The scutiform cartilage lies
Apex
Scapha
Lateral border of helix.
Medial border
of helix
Foramen for blood vessel
Lateral incisure
Anthelix
Antitragohelicine incisure
Spine of helix
(distal crus of helix)
Styloid process
Lateral process of antitragus
Lateral crus of helix
Medial process of antitragus
Pretragic incisure
Medialcrusofhelix
Intertragic incist
Tragu
Auricular cartilage
Annularcartilage
Scutiform cartilage
Fgure 1-1
Cartilages of the right external ear. (From Evans HE, ed: Miler's Anatomy of the dog. ed 3,
Philadelphia, 1993, WB Saunders.)
CHAPIER 1 Anatomy ofthe Canine and Feline Eal
5
Interparietoscutularis
muscle
Cervicoauricularis
superficialis
muscle
Cervicoscutularis
muscle
Occipitalis
muscle
C2 branch
Interscutularis
muscle
Scutiformcartilage
Scutoauricularis superficialis
dorsalis muscle
Frontalis
muscle
Zygomaticusmuscle
Figure 1-2
Location of the scutiform cartilage in relation to some of the external ear muscles in the dog.
medial to the auricular cartilage within the auricular muscles that attach to the head
(Figure 1-2).
Pinna, or Auricle
The pinna, or auricle, is a highly visible structure. Carriage of the pinna is breed-
specific in the dog but mostly upright in the cat. It is designed to localize and collect
sound waves and transmit them to the tympanic membrane (eardrum). The ear is
moved by three sets of muscles (rostral, ventral, and caudal) that are innervated by
branches of the facial nerve (cranial nerve VTI).
The leaf-shaped pinna of the extermal ear is broad with medial (rostral) and lateral
(caudal) margins. The caudal margin of the pinna exhibits a cutaneous pouch called
the marginal pouch (Figure 1-3). This pouch has no obvious function. The skin on the
concave surface of the pinna is very tightly connected to the underlying auricular
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
cartilage, accentuating all the auricular prominences (see Figure 1-3). The skin
covering the auricular cartilage may show breed-specific pigmentation. The shape
and size of the extemal ear vary greatly among different breeds of dogs, mainly
owing to the auricular cartilage that fonms the skeleton of the pinna. It is the largest
cartilage of the extermal ear. The broad auricular cartilage has numerous holes
(see Figure 1-1), which are traversed by branches arising from the caudal auricular
artery.
The auricular cartilage is broad dorsally and funnels to a narrow tubelike structure,
the tubus auris, which fits around the annular cartilage ring. The parotid salivary gland
occupies the base of the extermal ear, partially surrounding the tubus auris (Figures 1-4
and 1-5). The tubus auris encloses the vertical part of the extermal canal and, together
Apex
Medial (rostral)
border of helix
Lateral (caudal) border
/ofhelix
Scapha
Cutaneous
Spine of helix
marginal
pouch
Anthelix
Medial process
Lateral crus ofhelix
 of antitragus
Intertragic
incisure
Pretragic incisure
Medial crus of helix
Tragus
Hgure 1-3
Anatomical features of the left external ear of the dog.
CHAPIER 1Anatomy of the Canine and Feline Ear
5
Rostral auricular
vessels
Tubus auris
Caudal auricular
vessels
Branches
offacial
nerve
Parotid
salivary
gland
Fgure 1-4
Relationships of the tubus auris to the parotid salivary gland and auricular vessels. The facial
 nerve runs deep to the parotid salivary gland, immediately ventral to the annular cartilage, and
gives off motor branches to the facial muscles.
with the tragal, antitragal, and antihelicene borders, forms the extermal acoustic
meatus (see Figure 1-3).
Usually, the entrance to the extermal ear canal is guarded by a few fine hairs.
Certain breeds, such as Airedales and Old English sheepdogs, exhibit hairy extemal
ear canals. The extermal ear canal of the cat is devoid of hairs, and the ear canal is
well ventilated. This may be a significant factor contributing to the lower incidence
of extermal ear canal infections in cats. A hairy ear canal interferes with proper
drainage and aeration of the canal in chronic otitis exterma complicated by granulo-
matous lesions, leading to exacerbation of the condition.
6
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Fgure1-5
Structure of the ear canal. (Redrawn from Bojrab MJ: Current techniques in smaff animal
surgery I, Philadelphia, 1975, Lea & Febiger.)
CHAPIER 1 Anatomy of the Canine and Feline Ear
Annular Cartilage
The annular cartilage is part of the extermal ear canal. The pinna, formed by the cone-
shaped auricular cartilage, articulates with the annular cartilage. The annular carti-
lage is a ring-shaped structure attached to the bony orbit of the extermal acoustic
meatus of the temporal bone. A tubular cartilage piece, the annular cartilage
surrounds the osseous extemal acoustic meatus (see Figure 1-7). It is attached to the
bony rim of the extermal acoustic meatus by fibrous tissue that permits some degree
of movement of the extermal ear. The annular cartilage encloses the horizontal part
of the extermal ear canal.
Scutiform Cartilage
The scutiform cartilage is an L-shaped structure located over the temporalis muscle.
It does not contribute to the formation of the extermal ear or its canal. The scutifonm
cartilage is attached to the midline raphe of the head and neck by numerous muscles
(see Figure 1-2). Muscles also extend from the scutiform cartilage to the auricular
cartilage. The scutiform cartilage functions like a fulcrum, providing for efficient
movement of the auricle. It can be considered to function like a sesamoid cartilage.
It lies over a fat cushion (corpus adiposum auriculae) on the dorsal surface of the
temporalis muscle.
Structure of the Ear Canal
The extermal ear canal in the dog is 5 to 10 cm long and 4 to 5 mm wide (see
Figure 1-5). The ear canal consists of an initial vertical part, which may extend an
inch. The vertical canal runs ventrally and slightly rostrally before bending to a
shorter horizontal canal that runs medially and forms the horizontal part of extermal
ear canal. Because the extermal ear is elastic, the ear canal can be straightened enough
to permit otoscopic ex amination.
The vertical part and most of the horizontal part of the canal are cartilaginous, but
the deepest part is osseous. The ear canal is lined by skin containing sebaceous and
ceruminous glands and hair follicles. The ceruminous glands are modified apocrine
tubular sweat glands. The combined secretions of sebaceous and ceruminous glands
constitute ear wax (cerumen). Cerumen (1) protects the extermal ear canal by immo-
bilizing foreign objects and (2) keeps the tympanic membrane moist and pliable. The
extermal ear canal is separated from the middle ear cavity by the semitransparent
tympanic membrane.
Blood Supply to the External Ear
The extermal ear is generously vascularized by branches of the extermal carotid artery.
A large caudal auricular artery arises from the extermal carotid artery at the base
of the annular cartilage, medial to the parotid salivary gland and deep to the caudal
8
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
CLINICAL NOTE
Violent shaking of the head by the animal may contribute to fracture of the
   y o  (r   o  ss
surface of the ear, requiring surgical removal of the clot.
auricular muscles. This artery gives off the lateral, intermediate, and medial auricular
arteries, which pass along the convex surface of the pinna, wrapping around the
helicene margins as well as penetrating the scapha and supplying the skin covering
the cavum conchae. In addition to providing nourishment to the tissues of the exter
nal ear, the vascular supply to the pinna may also play a minor thermoregulatory
role. Venous drainage occurs via the caudal auricular and superficial temporal veins
into the maxillary vein.
Nerves of the External Ear
Sensory innervation of the pinna and extermal ear canal is provided by four nerves:
the trigeminal, facial, vagus, and second cervical.
The auriculotemporal branch of the trigeminal nerve provides sensory innervation to
the skin lining the horizontal part of the ear canal and to the tympanic membrane itself.
This nerve also provides sensory innervation to the rostral margin of the pinna and the
The facial nerve is related to the ventral surface of the annular cartilage, close to
the osseous extemal acoustic meatus. The facial nerve provides substantial sensory
innervation to the concave surface of the scapha and part of the cavum conchae via
the rostral, middle, and caudal intermal auricular branches (Figure 1 -6). Most of the
vertical along with part of the horizontal ear canal lining is supplied by the lateral
intermal auricular branch of the facial nerve, which may contain predominantly vagal
fibers.
Communication between the facial nerve and the vagal nerve takes place as the
facial nerve exits the stylomastoid foramen (see Figure 1-11). It is believed that these
vagal branches are given off as the lateral intermal auricular branch to the skin of the
extermal ear canal. Reflex gastric vomiting may be triggered if the sensory endings
of the vagus nerve are stimulated by mild ear canal irritation
The convex surface of the pinna is provided with sensory innervation mainly by
the second cervical nerve.All of the muscles of the extermal ear are innervated by the
facial nerve.
Tympanic Membrane
The tympanic membrane (eardrum) is a thin, slightly opaque, membranous partition
that separates the extermal ear from the middle ear. The tympanic membrane is
CHAPIER 1 Anatomy ofthe Canine and Feline Eai
6
Palpebral
Rostral
Rostral interior
nerve
auricular
auricular nerve
nerve
Middle interior
auricular nerve
Caudal interior
auricular nerve
Branch to platysma
Lateral interior
auricular nerve
-Caudal auricular nerve
Auriculopalpebralnerve
Dorsal
buccal
Ventral
nerve/
buccalnerve
Cervical
branch 
Fgure 1-6
 Schematic drawing of sensory branches of the facial nerve that supply the external ear Other
important motor branches of the facial nerve are also shown.
located at a 45-degree angle in relation to the central axis of the horizontal part of
the extermal ear canal (Figure 1-7; see also Figure 1-5). It is thin in the center and
thicker near the periphery. The small upper portion is the pars flaccida, and the larger
lower part is the pars tensa (Figure 1-8). With the exception of the pars flaccida, the
membrane is tense, being firmly attached to the surrounding bone by a fibrocarti-
 laginous ring, the annulus fibrocartilaginous. This ring is attached to the osseous ring
of the extermal acoustic meatus by fibrous tissue.
The pars flaccida is a loose, opaque, pink triangular region forming the upper
quadrant of the eardrum containing small branching blood vessels. Owing to its
flaccid nature and rich blood supply, the pars flaccida heals rapidly if injured.
The pars tensa is thin, tough, and glistening, usually pearl-gray and translucent,
although it may have opaque, radiating strands. The pars tensa, once broken, heals
slowly. The extermal aspect of the tympanic membrane is concave because of traction
On the medial surface by the manubrium of the malleus. The outline of the manubrium
of the malleus is usually visible through the tympanic membrane as the stria mallearis
(see Figure 1-8).
Opposite to the distal end of the manubrium, the depressed point on the
extermal surface of the tympanic membrane is called the umbo membrane tympani.
Histologically, the tympanic membrane is made up of four layers: an extemal
epidermal layer, an inner mucous layer, and two layers of intervening fibrous tissue.
The epidermal layer is made up of a thin hairless skin consisting of a flat basal layer
without any ridges, and a superficial layer only a few cells thick. This stratified squa-
mous epithelium is continuous with the epithelial lining of the extemal ear canal.
The thin dermis contains fibroblasts and a fine vascular supply. The thicker middle
10
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 1-7
Transverse section through the head of the dog at the level of the tympanic bulla. A, Osseous
external acoustic meatus covered by tympanic membrane. Note that the tympanic membrane
is placed at an approximately 45-degree angle in relation to the central axis of the horizontal
part of the ear canal. 1, Horizontal part of the ear canal; 2, vertical part of the ear canal; 3, annular
accommodating the internal carotid artery, postganglionic sympathetic nerves, and the ventral
petrosal venous sinus (the caudal continuation of cavernous venous sinus), which drains into
the internal jugular and vertebral veins; 8, cavity of the middle ear; 9, osseous labyrinth accom-
modating the internal ear.
fibrous layer consists of an outer layer of fibers that radiate toward the annulus fibro-
cartilaginous from the center of the eardrum. A layer of inner fibers are circular and
are found closer to the annulus. The manubrium of the malleus is buried in the
fibrous layer intercalated between the two epithelial surfaces. The arrangement of
fibers in the middle layer optimizes the vibratory faces. The arrangement of fibers in
the middle layer optimizes the vibratory response of the tympanic membrane to
incoming sound waves. The inner layer of the tympanic membrane is composed of
CHAPIER 1Anatomy ofthe Canine and Feline Ear
11
Fgure 1-8
Tympanic membrane anatomy in the dog as observed through an otoscope. a, Rim of the
otoscopic tube; b, flaccid part of the tympanic membrane; c, manubrium of malleus shining
through the tympanic membrane; d, umbo of tympanic membrane; e, pars tensa of the tympanic
membrane surrounding the manubrium: f skin of the external acoustic meatus raised by the
otoscopic tube. (Modified from DeLahunta A, Habel RE: Appfied veterinary anatomy, Philadelphia,
1986,wBSaunders.)
a single layer of respiratory epithelium. The epithelium lining the inner surface of the
tympanic membrane starts as columnar at the periphery, gradually becoming cuboidal
      s    s  p
membrane type of respiratory epithelium covering the middle ear cavity, auditory
tube, and nasal cavity. The underlying lamina propria is thin, with a fine vascular
supply
Middle Ear
The middle ear consists of the space within the osseous tympanic bulla, the opening
of the auditory tube, and the three ear ossicles with their associated muscles and
ligaments.
12
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Structure of the Osseous Tympanic Bulla
It is clinically relevant to appreciate the close relationships among the facial canal,
 e         s 
postganglionic sympathetic nerves to the eye; and the periorbital structures, structures
of the inner ear, and the middle ear cavity. The tympanic bulla has approximately
equal dimensions (8 to 10 mm) in width and depth. The wall of the bulla tympanica
is very thin and easy to remove.
The roof of the tympanic cavity presents a barrel-shaped prominence called the
cochlear promontory (Figures 1-9 and 1-10). The osseous bony cochlea is excavated
within the cochlear promontory. At the caudolateral end of this promontory, a
foramen called the cochlear (or round) window is located. The cochlear window is
covered by a thin membrane that oscillates to dissipate the vibratory energy of the
perilymph in the scala tympani. Immediately lateral to the barrel-shaped promon
tory, a narrow vestibular (or oval) window is present, which is covered by a thin
diaphragm. The footplate of the stapes is attached to the diaphragm over the vestibu-
lar window. The bony facial canal is closely related to the middle ear cavity.
Oval foramen
Musculotubal
canal
Mandibular fossa
Foramen
Retro-articular foramen
lacerum
External acoustic meatus
(opened ventrally)
Cochlear
Epitympanic recess
promontory
Vestibular(ovalwindow)
Facial canal
Stylomastoid foramen
Cochlear(round)window
Occipital
Hypoglossal
condyle
canal
Fgure 1-9
Internal anatomy of the left tympanic bulla, ventral view. The ventral wall of the bulla has been
removed
CHAPTER 1 Anatomyofthe Canine and Feline Eai
13
Semicircular
canal
Stapes over oval (vestibular) window
Ampulla
Epitympanic recess
/Incus
Malleus
Arachnoid
Chorda tympani
Dura mater
-. Tensor tympani
CSF-
Utricle
External acoustic
Endolymphatic duct in
meatus
vestibular aqueduct
Saccule-
Cochlear aqueduct 
Helicotrema
Stapedius
Scala tympani
Cochlear(round)window
Petro-occipital
Tympanic membrane
(carotid) canal
Cochlear
Cochlear promontory
Auditory tube
Tympanic bulla
Hgure 1-10
the location of the facial nerve in relation to the middle ear cavity (arrow). Also shown are the
relationships between subarachnoid space containing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the inner
ear via the cochlear aqueduct.
An open slit facing the vestibular window is present in the bony facial canal
(see Figures 1-9 and 1-10). This slit is the open part of the facial canal, which is
covered by mucous membrane lining the tympanic bulla. The other fossae close to the
extermal acoustic meatus accommodate the tensor tympani and stapedius muscles.
The small middle ear bones—the malleus, incus, and stapes—are accommodated in
an epitympanic recess located dorsal to the oval and vestibular window, immediately
medial to the opening of the extermal acoustic meatus.
At the caudal aspect of the tympanic bulla is a large fissure called the
tympanooccipital fissure, which is also called the petrobasilar or petro-occipital
fissure. A medial foramen in the tympanooccipital fissure that leads into a canal
between the occipital and temporal bones is called the caudal foramen lacernum.
The bony canal that extends rostrally from the caudal foramen lacerum is called
the carotid canal; it transmits the intermal carotid artery and postganglionic sympa-
thetic plexus from the superior cervical ganglion (also called the carotid plexus,
14
SMALLANIMALEARDISEASES
made up of the carotid nerves; Figure 1-11). The carotid canal in its caudal extent
also accommodates the ventral petrosal venous sinus (the caudal continuation of
the cavermous venous sinus), which drains into the intermal jugular and vertebral
veins.
Ear Ossicles
The auditory ossicles—-the malleus, incus, and stapes—are small movable bones that
extend like a chain from the tympanic membrane and functionally connect the
tympanic membrane with the vestibular (oval) window (see Figure 1-10). The ossicles
consist of compact bone formed by endochondral ossification. They form synovial
joints with each other.
Lingualnerve
Inferior alveolar nerve
Mylohyoid nerve ~
Buccal nerve
Masseteric nerve.
.To muscle pterygoideus lateral
Auriculotemporal nerve
-To muscle pterygoideus medial
-To muscle tensor
vel palatini
 Otic ganglion -.
Mandibular branch of vagus
Chorda tympani
-Major petrosal nerve
Tomuscle tensor tympani
Osseous auditorytube
Minor petrosal nerve .
To auditory tube wall
Foramenlacerum
Retroarticular foramen.
Muscle tensor tympani.
Carotid canal
External acoustic
Tympanic bulla (cut)
meatus, dorsal wall
Malleous
Minor petrosal nerve
-Internal carotid nerves
Incus-
-Petro-occipital canal
Stapes-
Tympanic plexus
Chorda tympani
Promontory
 Cranial cervical
ganglion
To nerves IX and X
Glossopharyngeal
Facial nerve, VlII
nerve,Ix
Cochlear window
Hypoglossal nerve, Xll
Auricular branch ofvagusnerve
Jugular foramen
Tympanic nerve
Distal ganglion of IX
Vagus nerve, X
Accessory nerve, Xl
Fgure 1-11
 Nerves in relation to the middle ear cavity, ventral view, with most of the tympanic bulla removed.
(From Evans HE, ed: Mfler's Anatomy of the dog. ed 3, Philadelphia, 1993, WB Saunders.)
CHAPIER 1 Anatomy of the Canine and Feline Ear 
The malleus is the most lateral bone. It consists of a head that articulates with the
incus, a thin neck, and a long manubrium, or handle. The lateral aspect of the handle
is concave and is embedded in the tympanic membrane, as described earlier.
Articulating with the medial part of the incus is the stapes. It is in direct contact
with the perilymph fluid through its footplate (base of stapes) attachment in the oval
window.
Vibrations of the tympanic membrane are transmitted through the chain of these
auditory ossicles to the perilymph fluid within the vestibule. The vestibular window
is approximately 18 to 20 times smaller in area than the tympanic membrane,
contributing significantly to the amplification of sound waves by the ear ossicles.
The middle ear ossicles are associated with two very small skeletal muscles (see
Figure 1-10). The tensor tympani muscle is a spherical muscle that attaches to the
malleus by a short tendon. It is supplied by a branch of the trigeminal nerve. The
stapedius, the smallest skeletal muscle in the body, is closely related to the facial
nerve at its origin. This muscle is supplied by the facial nerve. Reflex contraction of
these two muscles in response to loud noises results in fixation of the ear ossicles,
damping vibrations. This protective reflex is called the tympanic reflex. It takes
approximately 40 to 160 milliseconds for the tympanic reflex to occur.
Tympanic Bulla
The osteum of the auditory tube lies in a rostrodorsomedial location in the tympanic
bulla, coursing anteriorly. The auditory tube is lined by pseudostratified ciliated
columnar epithelium containing goblet cells. The auditory tube opens into the
nasopharynx and equalizes air pressure on either side of the tympanic membrane. On
the medial wall of the tympanic cavity is the promontory, a bony shelf that houses
the bony labyrinth (see Figure 1-10).
The central space of the labyrinth, called the vestibule, is continuous with the
subarachnoid space via the cochlear aqueduct (see Figure 1-10). It is filled with peri-
lymph, which is similar to cerebrospinal fluid. The vestibule connects to the three
semicircular canals and the cochlea.
or fenestrations. The oval or vestibular window lies on the dorsolateral surface of the
promontory immediately adjacent to the pars flaccida. It attaches to the base of the
stapes and connects to the vestibule. Vibrations are transmitted to the endolymph
contained within the cochlea from the tympanic membrane via the ear ossicle chain
to the oval window. The round window, an opening in the bony shelf of the osseous
cochlea, is covered by a secondary tympanic membrane. It is found in the anterior
end of the vestibule, just ventral to the smaller oval window. This membrane permits
vibrations that have already passed to sensory receptors to be dissipated into the air-
filled tympanic bulla.
The middle ear cavity of the cat is divided by a septum into two separate tympanic
cavities (Figure 1-12). In the small dorsolateral compartment lie the auditory ossi-
cles, the osteum of the auditory tube, and the eardrum. The larger ventromedial
compartment is an air-filled tympanic bulla. The two compartments of the tympanic
Opening
10"
11
12
10
12'
12
10
16
14
17
14
13
Canal
24
26-
10
25.
11
24-
20
20
21
1
Skull
9 Tympanic
15
 Osseous semicircular
2
M. temporalis
membrane
canals
3-6
External ear
10-12 Ear ossicles
16
Vestibule
3.4
Auricular cartilage
10
Malleus
7
Cochlea
3
Scapha
10′ Manubrium
18
External acoustic meatus
Concha
10" Head
19
Tympano-occipital fissure
Annular cartilage
11
Incus
20
Vestibular window
6
External ear canal
11′ Long crus
21
Cervical sympathetic trunk
vertical part
11" Short crus
22
 Cranial cervical ganglion 
External ear canal,
12 Stapes
23
Sympathetic rami
horizontal part
12′ Base
24
Facial n.
7-12 Micddle ear
13 Auditory tube
25
M. tensor tympani
Tympanic bulla
14 Petrous temporal bone
26
M. Stapediurs
8
 Septum bullae
15-17 Osseous labyrinth
Fgure 1-12
Schematic views of the cat middle and internal ear. (From Hudson LC, Hamilton WP: Atias of
feline anatomyforveterinarians,Philadelphia,1993,WBSaunders.)
CHAPIER 1 Anatomy of the Canine and Feline Ear
17
bulla communicate via a small passage located dorsally near the cochlear window.
This intervening bony septum should be perforated when necessary for proper
drainage of the middle ear cavity. Rough handling of the bony septum may result in
damage to the postganglionic sympathetic nerves. The nerves, which are visible
submucosally as fine strands over the cochlear promontory, should be avoided
during surgical removal of the septum in the cat.
Nerves
Two types of nerves should be considered in relation to the middle ear: (1) nerves in
transit in close association with the middle ear but destined for a distant location and
(2) nerves that play a role in normal function of the middle ear. All are susceptible
to injury by disease of or trauma to the middle ear.
Those nerves that are in transit in relation to the middle ear are as follows:
· The sympathetic postganglionic nerves to the eye and orbit from nerve cell bodies
located in the cranial cervical ganglion
· The facial nerve and a branch from it (chorda tympani)
·A branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve.
The sympathetic postganglionic nerve fibers are collectively called intermal carotid
nerves (see Figure 1-1l), and they travel as a perivascular nerve plexus along with
the intermal carotid artery in the petrooccipital canal, which is separated from the
middle ear cavity by a thin bony plate in the dog. Chronic infections in the middle ear
cavity can erode the bone separating the carotid nerves from the middle ear cavity.
cavity submucosally below the septum of the tympanic bulla over the cochlear
promontory. Damage to these nerves results in Homer's syndrome, consisting of
miosis (constriction of the pupil) and enophthalmos (recession of the eyeball), which
contributes to prolapse of the third eyelid. Ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelid) may
also be present.
 e          
mentioned before, the facial canal is incomplete, exposing this nerve to the middle
ear cavity. This can contribute to the involvement of the facial nerve in chronic
middle ear infections. Early symptoms of facial nerve involvement may include
blepharospasm. Other symptoms, such as drooping of the ear, paralysis of buccal
muscles, and spasms of the platysma behind the ear on the affected side, may also
be exhibited, depending on the degree of facial nerve involvement.
The chorda tympani, a branch of the facial nerve, runs through the middle ear
cavity. It courses medial to the base of the malleus in the dorsal compartment of the
middle ear (see Figures 1-10 and 1-13). The chorda tympani carries preganglionic
parasympathetic nerves that synapse in the mandibular and sublingual ganglia to
innervate the mandibular and sublingual salivary glands, respectively. This nerve
also carries gustatory fibers from fungiform papillae in the rostral two thirds of the
tongue. Because taste buds require neurotropic influences to remain functional,
damage to the chorda tympani may result in atrophy of fungiform papillae on the
affected side.
18
SMALLANIMALEARDISEASES
Vestibular
Facial
nerve
nerve
Cochlear nerve
Scala tympani
Internal acoustic meatus
Osseous spiral lamina,
Secondary spiral lamina
Scala vestibuli
Margin of cochlear window
Lamina of modiolus
Modiolus
Cupula
Cut edge
ofpromontory
Chorda
tympani
Tympanic bulla
Limbusoftympanicmembrane
Retro-
articular process
Manubrium of malleus
Tympanic membrane
(pars tensa)
Figure 1-13
Sculpted medial view of the right middle ear and cochlea. (From Evans HE, ed: Miller's
Anatomy of the dog. ed 3, Philadelphia, 1993, WB Saunders.)
The tympanic nerve of the glossopharyngeal nerve supplies the mucous
membrane lining of the tympanic bulla. The tympanic nerve gives off the tympanic
plexus, which innervates the middle ear cavity (see Figure 1-11).
These nerves may be involved in sensing pressure changes across the tympanic
membrane. They may also carry pain sensations from the middle ear cavity. The
tympanic nerve itself runs through the middle ear cavity submucosally as the minor
petrosal nerve, which mainly carries preganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers
to the otic ganglion. Postganglionic nerve fibers from the otic ganglion innervate
the parotid and zygomatic salivary glands. Injury to the tympanic nerve may thus
lead to partial loss of salivation on the affected side. The tensor tympani from the
CHAPIER 1 Anatomy of the Canine and Feline Ear
19
mandibular nerve of the trigeminal innervates the tensor tympani muscle. Stapedial
Imner Ear
The main functions of the immer ear are receiving auditory signals and maintaining
equilibrium. The inner ear is located within the osseous labyrinth of the petrous part
of the temporal bone. The membranous labyrinth consists of three primary parts: the
cochlea, vestibule, and semicircular canals. The vestibule is divided into an utricle
and a saccule. The vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIl) supplies the membra-
nous cochlea, vestibule, and semicircular canals (Figure 1-14)
Osseous Anatomy
The petrosal part of the tympanic bone has an intermal pyramid containing the inter-
nal acoustic meatus, the osseous and membranous labyrinths, and an extermal
mastoid process. The pyramidal part of the petrous (meaning "rocklike") temporal
bone is the hardest bone in the body. The rostrodorsal surface of the pyramid is in
contact with the cerebrum and hence is called the cerebral surface, whereas the
caudomedial surface contacts the cerebellum and is called the cerebellar surface.
The mid-part of the cerebellar surface of the pyramid ex hibits a foramen called the
internal acoustic meafus. The intermal acoustic meatus in tum presents two tiny
foramina: (1) a dorsally located foramen that leads into the osseous facial canal for
the seventh cranial nerve and vestibular component of the eighth cranial nerve, and
(2) a ventrally located foramen for the cochlear component of the eighth cranial
nerve (see Figure 1-13). Because of the close association of the facial and eighth
cranial nerves within the petrous temporal bone, the two nerves may be affected
simultaneously by the same lesion.
The excavation within the petrous temporal bone, called the osseous labyrinth,
is approximately 15 mm long. It is divided into three compartments: the cochlea,
vestibule, and semicircular canals. The osseous vestibule is continuous with the
subarachnoid space via the cochlear aqueduct (see Figure 1-10). Via this duct, the
perilymph is continuous with cerebrospinal fluid in the subarachnoid space
surrounding the brain. Chronic middle ear infections can thus travel via the vestibu-
lar or cochlear window to affect the inner ear and eventually can spread via the
cochlear aqueduct to the meninges. Within the osseous labyrinth, the membranous
labyrinth is suspended in perilymph.
Cochlea
The membranous labyrinth within the osseous labyrinth is an interconnecting system
of epithelium-lined tubules and spaces filled with a clear fluid called endolymph. As
20
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Scalavestbuli
Scala tympani
Cochlea of
internalear
Saccular
Posterior
Spiral
nerve
ampullary
ganglion
nerve
Lateral
cochlea
 armpullary
nerve
Scala
vestibuli
Cochlear
duct
Scalatympan
Cochlearnerv
Utricular
nerve
accular
Sermicircular
nerve
canals of
Vestibular
Ampullary;
internal ear
Facialnerve
ganglion
nerve
Vestibular
Vestibulocochlear
nerve
nerve
Fgure 1-14
   i       o  
of Corti). a, Tectorial membrane; b, vestibular membrane; c, spiral ganglion of the cochlea;
dscala media;e, stria vascularis,which primarily produces endolymph;f, outer hair cells,
which are sensory receptors for sound; g. basilar membrane. Lower panel shows innervation
of the inner ear complex by branches of the eighth cranial nerve.
CHAPIER 1 Anatomy of the Canine and Feline Ear 
mentioned before, the vestibule consists of the utricle and the saccule. These sacs
communicate directly with each other and also with the semicircular and cochlear
ducts. The cochlea is receptive to vibrations in endolymph, and the rest of the
membranous labyrinth is associated with the function of equilibrium. Problems
within the membranous labyrinth lead to signs of deafness and vestibular disease,
including vestibular ataxia, circling, head tilting, strabismus, and nystagmus.
The bony cochlea winds around a hollow central axis (modiolus) in a dorsoven-
tral direction. The modiolus accommodates the cochlear nerve (see Figure 1-14).
The osseous or bony spiral lamina is a bony shelf that projects from the modiolus
into the interior of the canal. Like the cochlea, it makes three and one quarter tums
to end at the apex, or cupula (see Figure 1-13). T'he bony spiral lamina reaches about
halfway into the lumen of the bony cochlea, partially dividing its cavity into two
parts, the dorsal scala vestibuli and the ventral scala tympani.
The membranous cochlear duct is an epithelium-lined and endolymph-filled
structure that extends from the osseous spiral lamina to the outer bony wall, completely
dividing the scala vestibuli and scala tympani. The scala vestibuli and scala tympani
are continuous with each other at the apex of the modiolus through a small foramen
called the helicotrema. The cavity of the membranous cochlea, called the scala
media, is filled by endolymph.
A specialized thickened epithelium in the basilar membrane constitutes the spiral
cells. The hair cells are exposed to a specialized leaflike structure, the tectorial
membrane. Vibrations of perilymph are transmitted to endolymph by the intervening
(vestibular) membrane between the scala vestibuli and the scala media. The tector-
 ial membrane in tum vibrates, touching the hair cells and initiating nerve impulses
that are carried by the cochlear nerve to the brain.
Damage to the hair cells leads to hearing deficits or loss. Congenital deafness
may be either perceptive (inner ear defect) or central (lesion of the auditory brain
center). Acquired deafness may be either central or peripheral, resulting from chronic
disease, normal aging, or drug use. Aminoglycoside therapy can lead to ototoxicity,
a leading cause of iatrogenic hearing loss. White cats with congenital deafness have
numerous cochlear abnonmalities, including lesions in the spiral ganglion of the
cochlear nerve.
Suggested Readings
Blauch B, Strafuss AC: Histologic relationships of the facial (7th) and vestibulocochlear (8th) cranial
nerves within the petrous termporal bone in the dog, Am / Vet Res 35:481, 1974.
Evans HE: Mitter's Anatomy of the dog, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1993, WB Saunders.
Getty R: Sisson and Grossman's The anatomy of the domestic animats, ed 5, vol 2, Philadelphia, 1975,
WBSaunders.
King AS, Riley VA: A guide to the physiotogical and ctinical anatomy of the head, ed 4, Liverpool, UK.
1980, University of Liverpool.
2
Examination of
the External Ear
Canal
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
24
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
ne of the most common ailments of dogs seen in a veterinary practice is ear
disease. Approximately 15% to 20% of all canine patients and approximately
6% to 7% of all feline patients have some kind of ear disease, from mild erythema
to severe otitis media. Many clients are unaware of their pets' otitis, and many pets do
not show clinical signs of ear disease until it has become quite severe. Determining
the cause of ear disease is often a difficult task.
Examination of the ear canals and tympanic membranes of dogs and cats can
be extremely frustrating for the veterinarian presented with a patient suffering from
ear disease. Simply manipulating the pinna or inserting the otoscope cone into the
 nnsa  u yand an on ss asn u  o op e go a [nu
aggressive behavior toward the examiner. Looking through an otoscope in a patient
that is shaking its head to relieve its discomfort gives the examiner a very quick,
superficial look, at best. Painful ears prevent thorough examination, so sedation or
anesthesia is required for a complete examination.
The Normal Ear
To become familiar with the appearance of the normal ear canal and eardrum, the
veterinarian should perform a thorough ear examination on every patient anes-
thetized for any reason (such as ovariohysterectomy or a dental procedure). It is
necessary to know (1) what the normal ear canal should look like, (2) where the
eardrum should be located, if it is not readily visible, and (3) how to distinguish
normal cerumen from otic exudates in order to determine whether the ear is affected
by disease.
Ear Canal
The normal ear canal epithelium should be light pink with small superficial blood
vessels visible (Figure 2-1). Small amounts of cerumen coating the epithelium give
the surface a glistening appearance. Cerumen is a nommal part of a healthy ear and
should not be regarded as pathological unless it is excessive. Hairs are seen along the
canal, being more numerous in the vertical canal (Figure 2-2).
The dog's ear canal gently bends approximately 75 degrees as it changes from
the vertical to the horizontal (Figure 2-3). With the dog in the standing position,
the examiner should gently place traction ventrally on the pinna; the ear canal will
straighten out, because the normal underlying cartilage is soft and pliable. The
Otoscope cone should be advanced into the horizontal canal as the canal straightens.
This technique enables the horizontal canal to be examined. In the anesthetized
patient in lateral recumbency, the examiner can straighten out the canal by lifting the
pinna vertically to the point of elevating the entire head.
Hairs are almost absent from the horizontal canal in most dogs. However, a clump
of long, bristly hairs is often found at the distal end of the horizontal canal and may
CHAPIER 2Examination of the External Ear Canal
25
Fgure2-1
Normal ear canal of the dog.
Fgure 2-2
Numerous hairs and wax found in the vertical canal of a poodle.
26
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Tympanic membrane
Pinna
(eardrum)
Auditory ossicles
Vertical canal-
Oticnerve
Horizontalcanal
Tympanic bulla
Facial nerve
Eustachian
External ear| Middle ear|
tube
Hgure 2-3
The anatomy of the dog's ear canal. The vertical canal bends at approximately 75 degrees to
become the horizontal canal.
Fgure 2-4
A tuft of long, thick, bristly hairs is sometimes found in the horizontal canal originating near the
annulus of the eardrum. These hairs can be irritating and may become the matrix for wax plugs.
CHAPIER 2 Examination of the Extermal Ear Canal
27
Figure2-5
Accumulation of wax along the ventral floor of the horizontal canal. This wax is helpful for
orienting the dorsoventral axis when examining the ear canals.
ventral floor of the horizontal canal (Figure 2-5). As the otoscope is advanced in the
horizontal canal, the tympanic membrane, if present, should become visible.
Tympanic Membrane
The normal tympanic membrane in both the dog and the cat appears as a thin, trans-
parent to translucent, reflective end of the horizontal ear canal (Figures 2-6 and 2-7).
The normal eardrum has been described as having a pale, "rice paper'’ appearance.
The outline of the footplate (manubrium) of the malleus is seen attached to the
medial side of the tympanic membrane, frequently bulging outward (pars tensa). The
malleus is seen as a thin rectangular white bone originating from the dorsal portion
of the tympanic membrane and extending ventrally halfway across the membrane.
The malleus is oriented dorsoventrally. The free distal end of the manubrium may
- n s  s    ,  n a a  
guishing the right ear from the left ear on photographs of the eardrum.
Examination of the dorsal portion of the tympanic membrane (pars flaccida)
reveals an opaque, pink or white, loose membrane often containing a network of
small blood vessels that extend across the tympanic membrane (Figure 2-8). This
"'vascular strip'" often has an edematous appearance, and this "pretympanic bleb'
may obstruct visualization of dorsal portions of the eardrum. In many cases of otitis
media, the vascular strip is destroyed, removing from the germinal epithelium of the
28
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Figure2-6
Normal canine left eardrum. The yellow wax is in the ventral portion of the horizontal canal. The
footplate of the malleus can be clearly seen through the rice paper-thin pars tensa. The malleus
has a "hook" that points rostrally. In the dorsal portion of the eardrum is the pars flaccida with
the blood vessels that supply the epithelium over the malleus.
Fgure 2-7
Normal feline eardrum.
CHAPIER 2 Examination of the Extermal Ear Canal
29
Figure 2-8
Prominent pars flaccida forming the "vascular strip." This provides the blood supply to the
eardrum. Radial collagen fibers can be seen in the pars tensa.
eardrum the blood supply that is required for the eardrum to heal. If the vascular strip
is unaffected by disease or trauma, the damaged eardrum has a much better chance
of completely healing with time.
The tympanic membrane in dogs is oriented at an acute angle of as much as
45 degrees to the long axis of the horizontal canal, making visualization of the entire
eardrum difficult.
 Often, the lower portion of the eardrum's attachment to the horizontal canal is
a formix. Some dogs may have negative pressure in the tympanic bulla, which causes
retraction of the eardrum into the bulla and makes examination difficult. A condition
known as a "false middle ear" has been described, in which the tympanic membrane
is actually stretched inward into the bulla from exudates or negative pressure and
becomes attached to the lining of the middle ear. In this condition, the entire middle
ear cavity is obliterated. When such an ear is examined with the otoscope, no
eardrum is visible, but a deep, dark hole can be seen.
In the anesthetized patient in lateral recumbency, the pinna is lifted vertically to
straighten the curved ear canal, which makes advancing of the otoscope cone easier.
The tip of the instrument can be advanced closer to the eardrum. The cat's tympanic
membrane is easily visualized because the eardrum is oriented in a plane forming a
90-degree angle with the short ear canal.
30
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Assessing the Ear Canals
With the otoscope, the examiner evaluates the ear canals for the following:
·Patency or stenosis
· Color changes
·Proliferative changes
·Ucerations
·Exudates (Figure 2-9)
· Foreign bodies
·Parasites
soun *
·Excessive hair or waxy accumulation.
The location of the lesion along the canal should be noted. If visibility is impaired
by hair or excessive cerumen or exudates, then either plucking the hair plug or flush-
ing the extermal ear canal is mandatory. Cytological and culture specimens of any
exudates or secretions should be collected with a small cotton-tipped swab, curette,
or catheter prior to initiation of cleaning by any method.
 In otitis exterma, proteolytic enzymes are produced that have a depilatory effect,
so hairs may be absent on examination. After therapy has resolved the ear disease,
hair regrowth is a good indicator that the treatment was successful.
Fgure 2-9
Otitis externa in a cocker spaniel. There is a yellow, creamy exudate present in the vertical
canal. This cocker had a ceruminous otitis externa with large numbers of Staphylococci.
CHAPIER 2 Examination of the Extermal Ear Canal
31
Flushing the Canals
Until a determination of the integrity of the eardrum is made, the choice of flushing
solutions should be limited to nondetergent, nonfoaming types of flushing solutions.
Tepid solutions (98° F) of saline or very dilute povidone-iodine solution are used to
soften and loosen wax and debris. For gentle flushing. a bulb syringe should be used
to irrigate the vertical canal, and a syringe and catheter should be used to irrigate the
horizontal canal. This should be repeated until the ear canal is clean
When ear disease is present, exudates accumulate along the ventral portion of the
horizontal canal and remain in contact with the eardrum. Proteolytic enzymes elab-
orated as a result of inflammation break down the eardrum and weaken it. Therefore,
even gentle flushing against a weakened membrane may cause it to rupture. Detergents
and alcohols, along with many organic acids contained in ear cleaners, which are
extremely irritating to the mucosa lining the bulla, may gain access to the middle ear
in this manner. If this should happen, the tympanic bulla should be copiously irri-
gated with normal saline.
If the eardrum is visible and is normal, detergent ear cleaners are safe to use for
flushing of the ceruminous ear canals. Various commercially available solutions
designed to flush the ear canals are also safe for removing pus and serum from the
ear canal where a detergent ceruminolytic is not required. Ear curettes of various
sizes can be used to scrape large pieces of exudates off the ear canal.
Otoscopy
The conventional otoscope is configured to project a bright light through a conical
tube. Objects in the ear canal reflect the light back to the examiner's eye. A large
magnifying lens at the eyepiece focuses on the end of the otoscope cone and aids in
-ae s! peau ,sugerado, ue adonsono ue susn sainpanoid oh 'seu au sugreua
able with a very small lens at the eyepiece. This allows the examiner to place small
instruments through the cone without having to move the lens. The disadvantages
of this system are that (1) the light may not be strong enough to transilluminate
the eardrum, and (2) when instruments are used, the view of the examiner is often
obliterated.
The Video Otoscope
A video-based otoscope (MedRx Video Vetscope, MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida) has
been designed to overcome the shortcomings of the hand-held otoscope. This is a
very useful instrument for examining, cleaning, and drying the ear canal because it
gives the examiner a clear real-time image on a video monitor (Figure 2-10). The
high-quality glass lens pack of the Video Vetscope probe begins with a 2-mm lens at
the tip of the 4.75-mm diameter probe. This lens configuration provides a 110-degree
angle of view and an infinite focus to the image ahead of the probe tip. Even in small
patients in which the ear canal diameter is smaller than the tip of the probe, the wide
32
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
0·00000
Figure 2-10
Video otoscopy allows the client and veterinarian to view the patient's ear canal on a video
monitor. (Courtesy MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida.)
viewing angle and the long focal length of this instrument allow examination of the
ear canal. Light fibers within the tip of the probe are connected to a powerful halo-
gen light source, providing excellent illumination. A 2-mm working channel is built
into the Vetscope probe, separate from the lens system. Instruments can be placed
through the working channel without obscuring the view of the procedure. The entire
 instrument is attached to a miniature color video camera (Figure 2-1l), which is
connected to a video monitor and a video printer.
MedRxIN
Fgure 2-11
Video Vetscope probe attached to a miniature video camera. (Courtesy MedRx, Inc., Largo,
Forida.)
CHAPIER 2 Examination of the External Ear Canal
33
EARIGATOR
A
Fgure 2-12
MedRx Earigator with independent flushing and suction. A, The free end of the trumpet valves
connects to the flared end of a catheter. B, The catheter is extended through the 2-mm working
channel. (Courtesy MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida.)
For flushing and suctioning of the ear canals, a 5 Fr feeding tube or a polypropyl-
ene urethral catheter can be inserted through the video otoscope's working channel.
Use of an irrigation/suction machine (Earigator, MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida)
(Figure 2-12) makes this procedure very efficient. The catheter is inserted into the
     a a   a a   
advanced into the ear canal with clear visualization (Figure 2-13). Small pieces of
epithelium, wax, hairs, and pus can be flushed away from the ear canal epithelium
and then suctioned out of the canal while the examiner views the procedure on the
video monitor. In this manner, even the smallest pieces of detritus can be removed.
 The examiner can extract large pieces of debris and concretions of wax and medications
from the ear canal under visualization with the Video Vetscope by using a grasping
type of endoscopic forceps inserted through the 2-mm working channel or an ear
curette (Figure 2-14).
The video otoscope also has documentation capability. When a lesion is encoun-
tered, the image on the video monitor can be "frozen"' and then printed out as a4- X
5-inch color glossy photograph with the use of a video printer. Thus, there is a photo-
graphic hard copy document of the ear disease to place in the medical record for
comparison on rechecks. These photographs are also helpful in counseling owners
and showing them the severity of the ear disease; they make the veterinarian's
medical or surgical recommendations more valid. Documentation capability is very
useful in a referral practice. The referring veterinarian can receive a color photo-
used to illustrate contributions to veterinary medical literature. The video otoscope
can be coupled to a videocassette recorder so that the examination and surgical
procedures can be videotaped and kept for documentation. A computer-based data-
base system is also available to catalog and store video examination records as both
digital photos and 30-second digital video clips (Figure 2-15).
34
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure2-13
The open-ended tomcat catheter is advanced through the 2-mm channel of the Video Vetscope
toward the flush solution. Advancing the catheter allows visualization of the suctioning
After cleaning and examining the ear canal, the examiner can gain a better under-
standing of the ear disease and better formulate therapeutic protocols.
Assessing the Eardrum
In many cases of chronic canine otitis media, the eardrum is ruptured as a result of
long-standing otitis exterma. Examination of the ears of a patient with chronic otitis
media often reveals the absence of the eardrum. The tympanic bulla may be filled
with a dark material composed of epithelial cells, keratin, and cerumen (Figure 2-16).
In acute suppurative otitis media, copious exudates resembling curdled milk are seen
along the floor of the horizontal canal. Flecks of material are often seen floating in
the liquid. After exudates and flush solution are suctioned from the extermal ear
canal, the eardrum may not be visualized, but the bony tympanic bulla can be visu-
alized beyond the annulus of the tympanic membrane. Many cases of otitis media
are suspected due to the presence of an opaque eardrum or a bulging eardrum.
It is difficult to assess the integrity of the eardrum if this structure cannot be
clearly seen. When stenosis or occlusion of the ear canal prevents visualization of
the eardrum, a rigid tomcat catheter can be advanced through the stenosis carefully.
As the catheter is slowly advanced, it encounters a spongy object, the eardrum. If the
eardrum is not ruptured and pressure is applied to the catheter, there is resistance.
CHAPIER 2 Examination of the External Ear Canal
35
B
Figure 2-14
 Using the working channel to work in the ear canal. A, An oval fenestrated endoscopic grasping 
forceps can be threaded through the Video Vetscope to remove foreign bodies, wax, polyps,
and other material in the ear canal. B, Buck ear curette threaded retrograde into the 2-mm
working channel of the Vetscope probe.
If the catheter advances, it will perforate the eardrum. If the catheter hits a hard
object and does not advance, the object usually is the bone of the medial wall of the
tympanic bulla, and the eardrum is not intact.
Sometimes when the eardrum is ruptured, using dilute povidone-iodine solution
or fluorescein dye in the flushing solution will allow the colored solution to flush
through the middle ear and out of the auditory tube. When this happens, the solution
will come out of the nose or out of the back of the throat; the color indicates that
there is a ruptured eardrum.
Fgure2-15
The Video Vetscope is assembled as a self-contained ear treatment station. (Courtesy MedRx,
Inc., Largo, Florida.)
Fgure 2-16
Appearance of otitis media. Otoscopic examination of this Toy Poodle revealed the absence of
most of the eardrum. The pars faccida can be seen in the dorsal portion of the annulus. The
tympanic bulla is filled with a dark waxy material composed of squamous epithelium, keratin,
andcerumen.
CHAPIER 2 Examination of the External Ear Canal
37
Altermatively, if there is a small hole in the eardrum, the ear canal can be filled
with normal saline with the patient in lateral recumbency and the affected ear facing
upward. The video otoscope is advanced through the saline toward the eardrum. Any
rising air bubbles indicate that air from within the tympanic cavity is escaping
through a hole in the tympanic membrane.
Pathological changes may be present in the bulla and eardrum as indicated by
opacity or discoloration of the intact eardrum (Figure 2-17). These findings signify
either an ascending otitis media, which is common in cats but rare in the dog, or an
otitis media in which the eardrum has healed over, leaving material within the
tympanic bulla. There may be tissue in the bulla indicating a tumor mass or polyp.
The eardrum may be reddened in response to inflammation or from accumulation of
blood in the bulla. Whitish opacity indicates pus or mucus in the bulla, and yellow
fluid indicates a serous effusion. A bulging membrane signifies fluid pressure behind
the eardrum. Retraction of the eardrum around the malleus indicates negative air
pressure. To relieve pressure gradients and obtain specimens from the middle ear for
cytological evaluation and culture, a myringotomy should be done (Figure 2-18)
(See Chapter 14, Otitis Media.)
Cytological Evaluation
Cytological examination of specimens from every infected ear should be a routine
cellular components of ear exudates becomes an integral part of the decision-making
process in treatment of ear disease.
Cytological specimens are obtained from the proximal horizontal canal to mini-
mize contaminants and are prepared as follows:
1. A small cotton-tipped swab is inserted into the ear without touching the ear canal.
 A plastic otoscope speculum to shroud the ear swab is helpful
2. The sample is obtained by pressing the applicator tip against the ear canal as the
swab is withdrawn. With this approach, packing of wax and exudates is minimal.
3. The swab is rolled onto a clean frosted-end microscope slide; the harvested mate
rial from the left ear is rolled onto the left side of the slide, and the material from
the right ear onto the right side of the slide.
4. The slide is labeled with the patient's name and the date of the sample (Figure 2-18).
 5. The slide is heat fixed and stained with a blood stain (Diff-Quik or Wright-
Giemsa stain).
6. After the slide is dried, a drop of slide-mounting medium (Cytoseal60, Richard
Allen Scientific, Kalamazoo, Michigan) is applied, and a coverslip is placed over
the material.
In this mammer, a permanent slide is made. A drop of mineral oil can be spread on
the slide if permanent slides are not desired. This standardized approach to making
slides allows uniform identification of organisms from each ear and allows compar-
ison of cytological findings from visit to visit.
Evaluation of slides should begin with a low-power (100x) overview of the cell
types. Look for clumps or clusters of cells. If there are large numbers of cormified
38
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
B
C
Fgure 2-17
Examine for any change in shape and color of the eardrum. A, Bulging eardrum in a Golden
Retriever puppy with purulent exudate behind the eardrum. B, Granulomatous exudate behind 
the eardrum of a cat. C, Bulging eardrum in a 6-year-old German Shepherd with otitis media.
epithelial cells or nonstaining sebaceous cells and few microorganisms, noninfectious
(400x) examination is needed to characterize bacteria and yeasts. Large numbers of
bacteria or yeast represent secondary invaders. When neutrophils are seen in addi-
tion to bacteria or yeasts, infection and inflammation of subcutaneous tissues must
be considered. Ear mites are not often seen on stained ear swabs, but the eggs may
be found. Clumps and clusters of vacuolated epithelial cells may indicate neoplasia.
Inflammatory cells and acantholytic cells may also signify autoimmune disease.
To look for ear mites under the microscope, the examiner rolls swabs onto a slide
containing a drop of mineral oil and applies a coverslip. Low-power examination
reveals mites scurrying around on the slide, along with typical long oval eggs in the
field.
CHAPIER 2 Examination of the Extermal Ear Canal
39
A
B
Figure 2-18
Using a 5 Fr polypropylene catheter to perfom a myringotomy. A, The catheter is positioned
under visualization at the 5 o'clock position. A gentle push on the catheter will make a small
perforation in the eardrum. The malleus and vascular strip are visible to the left of the catheter
in the dorsum of the eardrum. B, A small hole in the eardrum remains to allow exudates to drain
Skin Diseases Affecting the Ear
Pets with itchy ears may not have ear disease at all but may be responding to a local-
ized pruritus associated with an underlying pruritic skin disease. Because many
diseases found in the ear arise as a result of an underlying skin disease, the veteri-
narian should also carefully evaluate the pet's skin to determine the underlying cause
if possible. Often, treatment for atopy, food allergy, or hypothyroidism diminishes
the severity of the ear disease.
Suggested Readings
August JR: Evaluation of the patient with otitis externa, Dermatotogy Reports, Sotvay Veterinary 5(2),
1986.
Kwochka KW: Mites and related disease, Vet Ctin North Am Smalt Anim Pract 17: 1263-1284, 1987
Little CJL, Lane JG: An evaluation of tympanometry, otoscopy, and palpation for assessment of the
canine tympanic membrane, Vet Rec 124:5-8, 1989.
Reedy LM, Miller WH: Attergic skin diseases of dogs and cats, Fhiladelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
Simpson D: Atresia of the external acoustic meatus in a dog, Austr Vet J 75: 18-20, 1997.
Sirigu P, Perra MT, Ferelli C: Local immune response in the skin of the external auditory meatus: an
immunohistochemical study,Microsc Res Tech 38:329-334, 1997.
Stout-Graham M, Kainer RA, Whalen LR, et al: Morphologic measurements of the external horizontal
ear canal of dogs, Am J Vet Res 51:990-994, 1990.
3
Cytology and
Histopathology of
the Ear in Health
and Disease
John C. Angus, DVM
42
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Cytology
Otitis exterma is a multifactorial disorder affecting the quality of life of 10% to 20%
 e yn z, sa o sd s go g    o go
problem, management of otitis exterma is frequently challenging. Seemingly simple
cases can become complicated by treatment failure, recurrence, and progressively
reaction, parasites, neoplasia) and concurrent perpetuating factors (e.g., bacterial or
yeast infection, edema, glandular hyperplasia, loss of epithelial migration, otitis
media).
In addition to a detailed history and physical examination, otic cytology should
be considered part of the minimum database for all patients with clinical signs of ear
disease. Cytology is a simple, practical, and inexpensive diagnostic test that provides
rapid results indicating the presence and numbers of bacteria and yeast. Preparation
of a diagnostic-quality slide does not require any special skills or equipment, and the
slide can be quickly and easily evaluated during a standard office examination. The
immediate result allows for rational decision making at the time of the initial consul-
tation, prior to returm of culture and sensitivity results 48 to 72 hours later.
The value of cytology exceeds simple identification of organisms. Cytology can
characterize the severity of overgrowth or infection; also, in cases of mixed infection,
cytology assists in evaluating the relative significance of each organism, strengthen-
ing interpretation of culture and sensitivity data. When performed routinely on each
subsequent visit, cytology provides an accurate method for monitoring the patient's
response to therapy.
Observation of quality and odor of exudates found during physical examination
provides practitioners with a rough guide regarding potential organisms present in
the extermal canal. Classically, dry, grainy, black discharge is most often associated
with Otodectes cynotis infestations; waxy, brown exudates indicate Malassezia; and
yellow discharge indicates bacterial infection. Unfortunately these observations are
not consistent or reliable.56 Veterinarians should not make a diagnosis or select therapy
based on past experience, physical character of discharge, or odor. Instead, decision
making should be based on cytologic evidence established by careful microscopic
evaluation. Failure to do so may result in misidentification of the most relevant
 aas a   g us n  
often poor case management, prolongation of treatment, or even treatment failure
and progression of disease. Cytology should be viewed as a routine diagnostic test
Technique
In order to obtain the best diagnostic slide, be prepared to collect the sample prior to
introduction of any cleaning agent or other therapy. In most cases, material obtained
from the deeper horizontal canal is more clinically relevant than material obtained
from the superficial vertical canal.S/ In well-behaved or anesthetized dogs, the ideal
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
43
sample is obtained by inserting a cotton-tipped applicator through a disinfected
otoscopic cone positioned beyond the junction of the vertical and horizontal canals.
The cone shields the swab from contents of the vertical canal, which may contain
numerous, irrelevant commensal organisms. Once in position, the swab is extended
beyond the cone and pressure is applied laterally against the epithelium, collecting
the exudates; the swab is then pulled back into the cone and removed from the canal.
Unfortunately, with an awake patient, safely inserting a swab into a painful deep
horizontal canal can be challenging at best. The presence of stenosis, inflammation,
and voluminous exudate makes the exercise difficult and potentially dangerous if the
patient moves suddenly or unpredictably. Overaggressive insertion of the swab into
in further damage to irritated epithelium, or worse, in accidental perforation of the
tympanic membrane. To obtain consistent samples in awake or painful patients,
veterinarians should aim for the junction of the vertical and horizontal canals, where
canal, the bend should prevent the swab from advancing too deeply and damaging the
tympanic membrane. Veterinarians who are gentle, cautious, and quick can safely
specimen properly from the deep horizontal canal or in some cases the tympanic
cavity.
Although cotton-tipped applicators appear to be soft and gentle, when applied
with pressure to inflamed epithelium, the surface of the swab is actually quite abra-
in the deep horizontal canal; the curette is advanced beyond the cone and gently
scraped along the epithelium, collecting the exudate within the curette head. However,
if a neoplasia is suspected, exfoliative cytology is preferred. The best sample for
cytologic evaluation of a mass or polyp can be obtained by using a more traumatic
surgical curette, using the same method described previously.
A separate cytologic specimen should always be prepared from both the right and
the left ear canals, even if the patient presents for unilateral disease. Separate evalu-
ation allows for comparison between the diseased ear and the nonmal ear, as well as
early recognition of bacterial or yeast overgrowth in the less obviously affected ear.
In patients with bilateral disease, clinically relevant differences in bacteria and yeast
are common when comparing the two sides.8,9 Without independent evaluation,
documentation, or monitoring of each ear separately, veterinarians may fail to make
appropriate management decisions.
In the case of otitis media, systemic therapy and bulla infusions of antibiotics
should be directed at organisms colonizing the middle ear rather than the extermal
canal. In one study, isolates from the tympanic cavity differed from isolates from the
horizontal canal in 89.5% of cases. In the same study, the tympanic membrane
appeared to be intact in 71.1% of the ears with proven otitis media. If otitis media is
suspected and the tympanum appears to be intact, sample collection should be
performed by myringotomythe intentional perforation of the tympanic membrane
44
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
with a sterile swab, needle, or catheter. Because organisms from the middle ear may
be coated in mucus, which prevents adequate uptake of stain, cytology from the
middle ear should always be accompanied by a sample for culture and sensitivity
obtained at the same time. In the extermal canal, cytology has been shown to be more
sensitive than culture and sensitivitys,10; but this is not always the case in samples
collected from the tympanic cavity.8
Once the sample is collected, roll the swab or curette onto a clean glass slide,
evenly distributing a thin layer of material (Figure 3-1). Label each slide to identify
correctly which ear was sampled. Altermatively, using one slide with a frosted end,
holding the frosted end toward oneself, roll the sample from the left ear on the left
part of the slide and the sample from the right ear on the right part of the slide. The
precise method for marking slides is less important than consistency. Because ceru-
men has high lipid content, briefly heat the slide with an open flame to fix the mate-
rial to the glass. This precaution will prevent loss of valuable information into the
stain solvent. Avoid overheating the slide; excess heat will distort cells and organ-
isms. Stain selection is a matter of personal preference; however, the same stain
should be used for all samples in order to gain familiarity and produce consistent and
reliable results. A modified Wright's stain, such as Diff-Quik (Baxter Scientific
Products, McGraw Park, Ilinois) is recommended. Modified Wright's stains are
designed for evaluation of peripheral blood smears; therefore, leukocytes will retain
easily recognized characteristics. Both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, as
well as yeast, will appear blue or purple. Perfonming a gram stain is necessary to
obtain this additional information, but extra staining is often an unnecessary and time-
consuming task.In general,morphologically coccoid bacteria found in the ear canal
are gram-positive organisms (e.g., Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Enterococcus)
and the majority of rod bacteria are gram-negative (e.g., Pseudomonas spp., Proteus
spp., coliforms). Only Corynebacterium, a gram-positive coccobacillus, and less
 snu pu dds npon u saaouny s yns sso u
positive rod bacteria do not follow this rule.
Following staining, allow the specimen to air dry prior to microscopic examination.
If desired, the slide can be permanently preserved by placing a drop of slide-mounting
Archiving of otic cytology is not always necessary if a detailed description is written
into the medical record.
Scan the slide at low magnification to locate an area of interest. Cerumen and
ointment-based medications do not take up stain and are of little interest. Avoid areas
of thick, deeply stained debris, as the confluence will make characterization of indi-
vidual organisms and cells difficult. Select a field containing thinly spread cellular
or keratin debris for closer evaluation. Because different areas of the slide may yield
different results, evaluate several fields to be sure all clinically relevant findings are
discovered
The high-dry, 40x objective (400x magnification) is adequate for identification of
leukocytes, red blood cells, cormified epithelium, and neoplastic cells. Infectious
ining several fields with the high-dry objective, switch to the high-magnification.
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
45
Right
Left
Right
B
Left
Fgure3-1
Technique for staining a cytologic specimen from the ear. A, Roll swab along glass slide. Swab
with brown debris came from the right ear. Swab with purulent debris came from the left ear.
B, Both specimens applied to the same slide, the right ear on the right side of the slide, the left
earontheleft.
Continued
46
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
C
D
Hgure 3-1—cont'd
C, Briefly heat-fix specimen to the slide. D, Stain with modified wright's stain according to label
instructions (Diff-Quik) shown.
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
47
E
Fgure 3-1—cont'd
E, Rinse slide by placing unstained side of slide under gentle water stream; this pemmits laminar
flow of water to remove excess stain. F, Allow to air dry.
48
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
oil-immersion lens (100x objective, 1000x magnification) for detailed evaluation.
The higher magnification is necessary to identify smaller or lightly stained bacteria
that may be easily missed with the high-dry objective. The high-oil magnification
also permits detailed evaluation of the cytoplasm of neutrophils and macrophages for
phagocytized bacteria—another important indicator of that particular organism's
acting as a pathogen rather than a commensal.
 In order to maintain consistency in cytologic evaluation, each specimen should be
specifically evaluated for the presence, estimated number, and morphologic charac-
teristics of three specific features: yeast, bacteria, and leukocytes. To estimate the
numbers, evaluate five to 10 areas, and record the average count per high-powered
field (Figure 3-2). A complete record of all three cytologic features is necessary to
alone does not supply sufficient information for later comparison. Each cytologic
description should contain information regarding the morphologic characteristic of
bacteria (cocci or rod), the presence or absence of Malassezia and leukocytes, whether
bacteria were phagocytized by leukocytes, and a semiquantitative estimation of the
relative numbers of each type of organism seen. This level of detail permits either
the primary clinician or any colleague following the case to determine accurately
whether the “bacterial otitis" is resolving, changing, or worsening.
In addition to bacteria, yeast, and leukocytes, veterinarians occasionally identify
parasites such as Demodex or Otodectes cynotis on stained specimens prepared in
this mammer; however, this technique is unreliable for purposeful diagnostic evaluation
for parasites. Instead, prepare a separate slide using a direct mineral-oil technique.
Apply several drops of mineral oil to a clean glass slide. Collect a large quantity of
otic exudate from any level of the canal with a clean cotton swab and transfer the
debris to the mineral oil on the glass slide. Unlike stained cytology, debris from both
ears can be pooled onto the same slide. Place a coverslip directly onto the mineral
oil and examine the specimen with low magnification (4x or 10x objective).
Examine the entire area defined by the margins of the coverslip, using a consistent
back-and-forth sweep, similar to the technique used for fecal flotation specimens.
Patient name
Date
Left ear cytology
·Yeast
No []
Yes []
Estimated
per [40x/ 100x] field
· Cocci
No[]
Yes [］
Estimated
per [40x / 100x] field
·Rod
No []
Yes []
Estimated
per[40x/100x]field
·WBC
No[]
Yes []
Phagocytosis: No []  Yes [] 
Right ear cytology
·Yeast
No []
Yes []
Estimated
per[40x/100x] field
· Cocci
No[] 
Yes []
Estimated
per[40x/100x] field
·Rod
No[] 
Yes []
Estimated
per[40x/ 100x] field
·WBC
No[] Yes[]
Phagocytosis: No []  Yes []
Fgure 3-2
Suggested medical record insert for documenting cytologic findings.
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
49
Normal Cytology
Cytology is not perfonmed to identify the disorder otitis exterma; this diagnosis is
based on history and clinical signs. Instead, cytology is used to characterize the nature
perpetuating factors. Thus, cytology is rarely performed on normal asymptomatic
ear canals. However, since determining the relative significance of cytologic findings
requires a thorough understanding of what is and is not nonmally found in the extermal
ear canals of dogs and cats, a discussion of normal cytology is appropriate.
The epithelial lining of the normal ear canal is coated with a thin layer of cerumen,
the combined product of secretions by modified apocrine glands (ceruminous glands)
and sebaceous glands. Cerumen forms a protective barrier, which traps debris, organ-
isms, hair, and desquamated comeocytes. A sample taken from a normal ear canal
should yield minimal material consisting mostly of waxy, yellow cerumen, exfoliated
epithelium, resident microorganisms, and little else.
 Because cerumen is predominantly lipid, the sample does not take up much stain;
on gross examination a stained slide from a normal ear should be nearly colorless.
Normal cormified squamous epithelial cells are seen on microscopic examination as
sheets of lightly stained, basophilic keratin. The cells may roll up on themselves
during smear preparation, resulting in a deeper staining, shardlike appearance.
Desquamated keratinocytes may also contain melanin granules, which appear as tiny
yellow to brown ovoid or round structures. Recognition of these melanin granules as
a normal finding is important; otherwise, the structures may easily be misidentified
as cocci or small rods colonizing the surface of the keratinocyte. Melanin granules
do not take up stain; therefore, granules can be differentiated from purple-stained
bacteria by focusing up and down through the cell until the true color of the structure
is recognized.
The extermal ear canals of dogs and cats contain small numbers of normal resident
spp., and Streptococcus spp. are the most frequently isolated bacteria from normal
ear canals. With the exception of Corynebacterium, rod-shaped bacteria are rarely
found in normal ear canals.46,1 Any bacteria found in the presence of leukocytes
should be considered abnormal.?7 Because stain precipitate can resemble coccoid
bacteria, high-oil magnification is necessary to visualize morphologic characteristics
of bacteria. Clinically significant organisms should be symmetrical, have a distinct
smooth edge, and be uniformly stained; they are typically present in pairs or chains
of bacteria equal in size (Figure 3-3). In contrast, debris and precipitate vary in size
and may be asymmetrical, irregular, and granular in appearance.
Another common finding on otic cytology is basophilic staining yeast, ranging in
 au uos  z um o/ x u og o dn u ot x u oz uo azi
 g a so a a a  un  o   a so 
The most commonly encountered yeast exhibits unipolar budding, which creates the
n  sisan u a ss san rn e a) nass s a
canine and feline ear canal, under the appropriate circumstances Malassezia can
50
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
B
Fgure3-3
A, Cluster of paired coccoid bacteria photographed under high-oil immersion lens (100x
objective). B, Paired coccoid bacteria with neutrophils and an eosinophil (400x objective).
CHAPIER 3Cytology and Histopathology of theEar in Health and Disease
51
Fgure3-3—cont'd
C, Nurmerous rods and a keratinized epithelial cell (1ooox objective).
Fgure3-4
Malassezia pachydermatis with occasional paired coccoid bacteria in background. Note the
oval shape of nonbudding yeast and unipolar budding of actively replicating organisms.
52
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
become important opportunistic pathogens, contributing directly to the severity of
clinical signs, as well as to the progression and perpetuation of disease.
Because bacteria and yeast are considered normal inhabitants of the extermal ear
canal, veterinarians need to determine whether the bacteria present cytologically are
clinically relevant. In contrast, any finding of leukocytes on cytology is considered
abnormal. The finding of bacteria that have been engulfed by phagocytic neutrophils
and macrophages is one clear indication of relevance (Figure 3-5). The absence of
leukocytes does not rule out the role of bacteria or yeast as pathogens. In general,
heavy colonization of the canal by opportunistic pathogens is reflected in the number
of bacteria seen per high-powered field. This semiquantitative method for determin-
 ing clinical significance is discussed in detail in the sections on abnormal cytology.
Abnormal Cytology
Malassezia
J0 %e8 pue ssop Jo %96 01 dn uroy Asonoko uo punoy aq uea dds nzassn1pW
cats with normal ear canals.' Malassezia pachydermatis is widely recognized as
the predominant commensal yeast of dogs.12-15 However, the genus actually consists
of eight species, including seven distinct lipid-dependent species: M. furfur,
M. sympodialis, M. globosa, M.obtusa, M.restricta, M. sloofiae, and M.equi.12,13 In
dogs with otitis extema, Malassezia pachydermatis is present 83% of the time.16-18
Fgure3-5
phonuclear neutrophils are present. Rod bacteria can be seen intracellularly (phagocytosis) and 
extracellularly.
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
53
Recent studies have demonstrated M. furfur and M. obtusa in 4.5% of cases of
canine otitis exterma, whereas M. sympodialis and M. furfur were present in 8.9% of
diseased ear canals of cats.18,19 M. sympodialis,20.21 M. globosa,21 and M. furfur18,21
can be recovered from normal-haired skin, ear canals, and mucosa of healthy cats.
Of these, M. sympodialis is believed to be a normal resident of the feline ear canal.15
Because the different species may have variable morphologic features and
staining characteristics, veterinarians may notice unusually shaped yeast bodies on
cytologic preparations. Most likely these variations represent multiple species of
Malassezia. Current research demonstrates that different species have variable path-
ogenicity, virulence factors, and host responses; however, the clinical relevance of
 these differences has not been demonstrated.13 Unless there is a compelling reason
to differentiate between Malassezia species using laboratory techniques, cytologic
recognition of any member of the genus is sufficient for management of clinical cases
Because Malassezia can be found in normal patients or mixed in with predomi-
nantly bacterial infections, veterinarians need to determine the clinical significance
of Malassezia for each patient. Cytology is the most useful tool for differentiating
between normal resident colonization and overgrowth. Unlike bacterial infections,
suppurative inflammation is not a common feature of Malassezia otitis^ and there-
fore cannot be used to detenmine a pathologic state.
At what threshold does yeast become a contributing factor to disease rather than
an incidental finding? Precise breakpoints for maximum acceptable number of yeast
vary from patient to patient. Cytologic estimation of numbers can provide a guide
line for the clinician; in the end, however, the decision to treat Malassezia depends
on a combination of cytologic findings, severity of clinical signs, past history of
yeast otitis, and response to previous therapy in that individual patient. A recent
comparison of cytologic specimens from normal and diseased ears demonstrated that
up to an average of two yeast per high-dry field (40x objective, 400x magnification)
 in the dog and cat should be considered normal.22 Mean counts greater than 5 yeast
per field in dogs, and 12 yeast per field in cats are abnormal. Intermediate values are
considered a gray zone (Table 3-1). These criteria had a specificity of 95% in dogs
and 100% in cats. However, because the study included bacterial otitis, not all cases
of otitis exterma had yeast as a component; as a result, sensitivity was only 50% for
TABLE 3-1  Recommended Breakpoints for Numbers of Organisms
Identified Cytologically. Reported as Mean Number of Organisms per
High-Dry Field (40x Objective)
NORMAL
INTERMEDIATE
ABNORMAL
Malassezia
Dog
≤2
3-4
≥5
Cat
≤2
3-11
≥12
Bacteria
Dog
≤5
6-24
≥25
Cat
5-14
≥15
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
dogs and 63% for cats. A study by Tater et al'? evaluated otic cytology from 50
normal dogs and 52 normal cats; it found a range of 0 to 2.6 yeast per high-dry field
in dogs and 0 to 3.3 per high-dry field in cats. Diseased dogs were not included for
comparison, but these findings would be consistent with previously reported normal
breakpoints. The authors also demonstrated that ear conformation did not result in
differences in normal yeast numbers when comparing dogs with pendulous pinna
with dogs with erect ear carriage. Therefore, ear conformation should not influence
interpretation of cytologic findings.
Malassezia may also colonize the tympanic cavity, causing or contributing to
otitis media. In one study, Malassezia was recovered from 65.8% of extemal ear
canals and 34.2% of middle ears of dogs with chronic otitis." Yeast can be found
mixed with bacteria; however, in the study by Cole et al,* 23.7% of dogs had otitis
media associated with Malassezia infection alone. Malassezia is not a normal resi-
dent of the tympanic cavity; therefore, any finding on cytology from this space is
considered abnormal, and systemic antifungal therapy is indicated.
Candida
Candida albicans is a normal resident of the skin and gastrointestinal (GI) tract of
tunistic pathogen. Compared with Malassezia, Candida spp. are not common pathogens
in cases of otitis exterma. In a study by Ginel et al,22 three of 24 dogs (12.5%), and
two of 22 cats (9.1%) with clinical signs of otitis exterma had cytologic and culture
evidence of Candida spp. Cytologically, Candida are thin-walled, round to oval, and
approx imately 2 to 6 μm in diameter.23 A thin, clear capsule displaces stain and sedi-
narrow-based budding and can form short, tubular, septate pseudohyphae. In
contrast, Malassezia is unencapsulated, has broad-based budding, and never forms
pseudohyphae or hyphae.
Bacteria
One of the primary uses of otic cytology is detection of the presence of bacteria.
Unlike yeast, which can be readily identified using the 40x objective, proper evalu-
 s   a  r s n n 
objective, 1000x magnification). The diameter of most coccoid bacteria is typically
0.3 μm; coliform, rod bacteria are typically less than 1.5 μm in length.24 In spite of
this small size, and given quality equipment and practiced skill and ability, cytology
can actually be more sensitive than culture for detecting bacteria.5.10 In one study of
normal ear cytology, gram-positive cocci were identified in 42% of dogs by cytology
but only 25% by culture. The actual percentage of normal patients with cytologic or
culture evidence of bacteria may vary significantly based on geographic location and
humidity. Ear conformation has not been shown to influence cytologic findings.10
factors: morphology, numbers, and concurrent leukocytes. After bacteria have been
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
55
identified, the clinician should determine whether there is a monoculture of a single
morphologic type or whether a mixed infection is present, and then describe the
morphology of bacteria seen. The presence of larger cocci arranged in pairs or
tetrads is typical morphology for Staphylococcus spp; small cocci in short chains are
characteristic of Streptococcus and Enterococcus spp. Even with these guidelines,
laboratory culture is necessary to make a definitive speciation; clinicians should
record findings as pairs of cocci or chains of cocci rather than attempt to make a
specific diagnosis based on cytology. Coryne bacterium is a large plump rod that may
 be found in normal or diseased ears. The most common rod-shaped pathogens asso-
ciated with otitis exterma are Pseudomonas spp. and Proteus spp. In tropical climates,
gram-positive cocci are commonly observed in normal patients.
In addition to morphology, the number of bacteria present should be estimated
for each case. A semiquantitative cytologic criteria, similar to that proposed for
Malassezia, can be used for bacteria (see Table 3-1). Based on the results reported
by Ginel et al,22 fewer than five bacteria per high-powered dry field (40x objective)
should be considered normal; more than 25 bacteria per field supports the diagnosis
of an abnormally increased population. Using higher magnification, fewer than two
bacteria per high-oil field (100x objective) is normal, and more than 10 bacteria per
field is abnormal. For cats, fewer than four bacteria per 40x field (1.6 per 100x field)
(6 per 100x field) was abnormal. Intermediate numbers in a gray zone are subject to
interpretation. Using these mean-count breakpoints to differentiate normal from
diseased ears yielded 95% specificity and 50% sensitivity in dogs, and 100% speci-
ficity and 63 % sensitivity for cats.
An important concept in determining the clinical significance of bacteria seen on
In general, overgrowth refers to increased numbers of resident bacteria in the debris
and on the epithelial surface of the extermal canal. Overgrowth may contribute to
disease through the production of exotoxins that perpetuate inflammation; however,
Overgrowth does not typically warrant culture and susceptibility testing or expensive
systemic therapy. In these cases, systemic therapy may be less effective than topical
medications because the concentration of antibiotic achieved by topical medications
can far exceed that achievable by systemic routes. Overgrowth can usually be
antibiotics directed at the specific organism(s). Bacterial infections typically describe
cases with purulent response to bacteria, ulceration of epithelial lining, or coloniza-
tion of the tympanic cavity. These cases often require high-dose, long-term systemic
antibiotic therapy for successful resolution.
The most direct evidence supporting a diagnosis of infection instead of over-
growth is the presence of neutrophils on cytology. Leukocytes are not found in the
neutrophilic response as bacterial infection of the extermal canal or tympanic cavity.
The finding of bacteria within neutrophils (phagocytosis) strongly supports a diag
nosis of infection with a significant bacterium
56
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Cytology, however, is not the only test that should be performed when evaluating
bacterial otitis exterma. Although cytology can demonstrate the presence, number,
and relative significance of cocci or rods, it cannot be used to determine the species
of bacteria. Bacterial culture is performed to identify species and determine the
antimicrobial susceptibility of clinically relevant bacteria. Because culture does not
differentiate between normal resident bacteria, bacterial overgrowth, and bacterial
infection, cytology is the best tool to determine the relative significance of bacteria
present in the extermal canal. Similarly, because culture does not accurately evaluate
changes in numbers or the presence or absence of neutrophils, sequential bacterial
cultures are not useful for monitoring response to therapy. Cytology is necessary to
determine whether numbers of organisms are decreasing, if there is a change in the
predominant organism, or if there is a change in the presence or absence of neutrophils.
Bacterial culture in the absence of cytology is an inaccurate tool (Table 3-2).
When evaluating otitis media, a separate cytology should be performed from the
tympanic cavity. Veterinarians should not assume that the same organism contami-
nates both sites. In a study comparing isolates from the horizontal canal and the
tympanic cavity of dogs with chronic otitis exterma and media, differences were
noted in the species or antimicrobial susceptibility of bacteria isolated in 89.5% of
the cases.8 Therefore, samples for cytology and culture should be obtained from the
tympanic cavity rather than the extermal canal.
Leukocytes
Unlike bacteria and yeast, which may be found in the normal ear canal, white blood
cells are only present in cytologic specimens from abnormal ears. Leukocytes enter
the ear canal as the result of exocytosis across severely inflamed epithelial lining.
through ulceration of epithelial lining, or by extension from the tympanic cavity
 during otitis media. Therefore, practitioners should always examine slides carefully
for white blood cells, in addition to bacteria and yeast, and document the findings in
the medical record.
TABLE 3-2 Comparison of Cytology and Culture for Evaluation of
Otitis Externa
ATTRIBUTE
CYTOLOGY
CULTURE
Time to available results
Immediate
48-72 hours
 Sensitivity for yeast
High
Low
Sensitivity for bacteria
High
Moderate to high
Sensitivity for leukocytes
High
None
Estimation of numbers
Semiquantitative
Categorical data
 Rank significance in mixed infection
Yes
No
Monitor response to therapy
Yes
No
Detection of antimicrobial resistance
No
Yes
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
57
Because neutrophils rarely respond to bacterial overgrowth in debris, the presence
or absence of neutrophils is a reliable tool for differentiating overgrowth from true
infection. Phagocytosis of bacteria is also worth noting, particularly in mixed infec-
tions; the organism being targeted is more likely the significant pathogen compared
with bacteria free in the background. Extension of purulent exudate from the middle
ear to the extermal canal may be the only evidence readily available to clinicians that
a concurrent otitis media is present in a dog presenting for otitis exterma. Because
otitis media is present in 16% of dogs with acute otitis exterma and up to 82% of dogs
with chronic disease,68 any cytologic evidence of leukocytes in the extemal canal
should increase the clinician's suspicion for concurrent otitis media, warranting
an infection with suppurative or pyogranulomatous inflammation, systemic antibiotic
therapy is almost always indicated. Whenever appropriate, a culture and susceptibility
should be obtained to modify empirical antibiotic selection; in the case of otitis
n  a   p a s as a e
The presence or absence of leukocytes on cytology is a useful tool for monitor-
to otitis media, or progression from Malassezia otitis or bacterial overgrowth to
bacterial infection should not be missed due to failure to perform and document otic
cytology. When monitoring therapy in a difficult case of Pseudomonas otitis, the
disappearance of leukocytes during the first recheck is a strong indication of improve-
ment even if small numbers of bacteria remain; in contrast, bacterial culture would
simply identify Pseudomonas on both visits, leading the veterinarian to believe the
helps veterinarians avoid inappropriate therapeutic decisions.
Parasites
Heat-fixed, stained cytologic specimens from otic debris will occasionally contain
evidence of parasites, but direct mineral-oil preparation is a more reliable method for
specific parasite evaluation. Low-magnification (4x objective) microscopic exami-
nation of a mineral-oil preparation is sufficient for identifying ear mites. In all cases
the presence of any insect or mite in the extermal ear canal is considered abnormal
and should be pursued accordingly.
In both dogs and cats the most common parasite associated with otitis exterma is
Otodectes cynotis.67,25 When large numbers of mites are present in the extermal ear
canal, the diagnosis can be easily confirmed by direct visualization of the mites with
a magnified operating-head otoscope or video otoscope. O. cynotis has a psoropti-
form body type, similar to Sarcoptes, but is larger and has short, unjointed pedicles
extending from the legs. The larger adult female mite is approximately 280 μm wide
and 450 μm long?°; the rudimentary fourth pair of legs does not extend beyond the
body. The slightly smaller adult males (250 × 320 μm) are frequently observed
protonymph (160 × 240 μm) and six-legged larva (115 × 240 μm). Numerous large
58SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
eggs (100 × 210 μm) are commonly found lodged in the keratin debris. Identification
of a single egg or mite of any life stage provides a definitive diagnosis. However, ear
treatment trial with appropriate miticidal therapy is strongly recommended for all
cases of chronic otitis exterma.
Other mites occasionally found on cytologic preparations include Demodex spp.,
Sarcoptes scabiei, Notoedres cati, Eutrombicula alfreddugesi, and Neotrombicula
autumnalis.
Demodex, the follicular mange mites of dogs and cats, can colonize any hair follicle,
including those of the extermal ear canal. In normal dogs, Demodex rarely causes any
significant problems; however, in patients with juvenile-onset or adult-onset demo-
dicosis, overpopulation and colonization of hair follicles of the ear canal may cause
secondary bacterial infections, folliculitis, furunculosis, inflammation, and edema.
resulting in clinical otitis exterma. Although Demodex is considered a normal resident
organism, these mites are very rarely found in ear cytology from normal dogs.
Therefore, if Demodex mites are found on microscopic evaluation of otic exudate,
demodicosis should be suspected, and a thorough ex amination and skin scrapings of
multiple regions of haired skin are indicated.
Sarcoptes scabiei and Notoedres cati, the sarcoptic mange mites of cats, most
commonly affect the host's pinna, rarely causing inflammation of the extermal canal.
Chiggers, or harvest mites, Eutrombicula alfreddugesi, and Neotrombicula autum
Occasionally the parasitic larval stage is found tightly adhered to the skin around the
entrance to the extermal ear canal. The large (500 pm), six-legged larvae are easily
distinguished from Otodectes cynotis by their different body type and bright red-
orange color.
Neoplasia
Although not common, the extemal ear canal can be a site for development of many
different types of neoplastic and non-neoplastic masses. Symptoms of masses in the
ear canal such as otorrhea, head shaking, and malodor are similar to presenting
signs for other causes of otitis. The presence of secondary bacterial or yeast infec-
tions and subsequent debris may also obscure the actual cause of disease. Not all
tumors exfoliate on normal cytology, but the finding of large sheets of epithelial
cells is one cytologic finding that should always prompt further investigation for
neoplasia
Any nodule found in the extermal canal should be evaluated for neoplastic poten-
tial. Under sedation, cytologic samples can be obtained by fine-needle aspirate or
curettage. Fine-needle aspirate is most useful for masses easily visible in the verti-
cal canal. For nodules in the horizontal canal, curettage can be performed through an
           os
sharp-edged curette. The curette is positioned over or just beyond the tumor and then
angled and dragged back across the surface. The cells collected are spread gently
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
59
across two or three glass slides and allowed to air dry prior to staining; heat fixing
is not recommended because this will distort cellular features. Occasionally small
tumors may be removed and submitted for histopathology by this method; for larger
tumors the goal is to differentiate inflammatory hyperplasia, benign neoplasia, and
malignant neoplasia
If the predominant cell type is inflammatory, appropriate antinflammatory ther-
cells may be indicative of an epithelial tumor such as ceruminous gland adenoma or
adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell tumor, lymphoma, histiocy-
fibrosarcoma, or other nonepithelial tumor. Mast cells are more easily recognizable.
Cytology from nasopharyngeal polyps may be characterized by epithelial cells with
cytologist is concermed about either epithelial or nonepithelial tumors, specimens
should be submitted for laboratory evaluation by a clinical pathologist and an inci-
sional biopsy for histopathology should be obtained to confinm the diagnosis.
Conclusion
Cytology is a simple, rapid, and practical diagnostic test that should be performed
should be evaluated for the presence, numbers, and characteristics of three key
features: yeast, bacteria, and leukocytes. More than five yeast or 25 bacteria per
high-powered field is suggestive of significant microbial activity, warranting thera-
peutic intervention. The presence of white blood cells on cytology indicates true
infection, warranting systemic therapy, as opposed to bacterial overgrowth in debris,
which can often be managed successfully with topical therapy. Cytology improves
all aspects of case management, including diagnosis of secondary infections, moni-
toring progression of disease, and evaluating response to therapy.
Histopathology
Despite the frequency with which otitis exterma occurs in veterinary patients,
minimal attention has been paid in the veterinary literature to the histologic features
of normal and abnormal ear canals. Most of what is known is derived from a sparse
collection of early anatomic studies from the 1950s,27 1960s,28-30 and a few more
recent publications. Indeed, only four articles addressing this topic have appeared in
peer-reviewed joumals since 1980.31-34 In the available literature, the majority of
work is focused on the canine ear, with remarkably little scientific investigation of
the histopathology of the feline ear. Familiarity with the normal histoanatomy and
abnormal pathologic changes associated with otitis is useful for veterinarians
seeking better understanding of the causes of otitis, progression of disease, and
therapeuticintervention.
60
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Normal Histoanatomy
External Canal
The extermal ear canal consists of two telescoping tubes of cartilage lined by normal
squamous epithelium (analogous to epidermis) and normal subepithelium (analo-
gous to dermis). The epithelial lining transitions with normally haired skin at the
opening to the pinna. This tissue continues along the entire length of the vertical and
horizontal canal, where it intersects with the tympanic membrane, forming a closed-
ended tube. Similar to nonmal haired skin, the lining of the ear canal contains hair
follicles, sebaceous glands, modified apocrine glands, vessels, lymphatics, nerves,
collagen fibers, elastin fibers, and other cellular components common to dermis and
epidermis. Several important variations from normal skin are worth noting.
The epithelium is stratified squamous epithelium (like normal skin) but is much
thinner than that found on most areas on the body, consisting of only two to three cell
layers (Figure 3-6).28 In normal epidermis the terminally differentiated keratinocytes
are shed directly into the environment. If this occurred in the blind-ended tube of the
extermal canal, the lumen would fill with dead cells and debris. Because the ear canal
does not contain cilia to evacuate the accumulated debris, living epithelial cells
Lumen
SC
Fgure 3-6
Photomicrograph of normal vertical ear canal. Lumen of the ear canal is visible at the top. SC.
 Stratum corneum, normal “basket-weave" appearance of healthy end-differentiated epithelial
cells; Epi, epithelium, one to two cell-layer thick normal epithelial layer; Seb, sebaceous glands,
small normal cluster of sebaceous gland cells associated with every hair follicular unit; Cer
ceruminous gland, single cross-section of modified apocrine gland associated with every hair
follicular unit, Fof, follicle, cross-section of hair follicle with actively growing hair shaft visible in
center.
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
61
migrate centripetally from a point of origin on the tympanum, up and out of the ear
canal, depositing debris, cerumen, and desquamated cormeocytes onto the pinnae.35
 In the normal ear, this process of epithelial migration keeps the tympanum and ear
canal free of debris.
Hair follicles are sparsely distributed throughout the entire length of the ear canal.
Most breeds have simple follicles with single hair shafts, compared with compound
primary and secondary follicles found elsewhere in haired skin.28,32 In addition to
being sparse and simple, hair follicles in the ear canal are also miniaturized relative
to haired skin (Figure 3-7). Cocker spaniels are the exception; this breed has been
shown to have in the ear canal predominantly compound follicles that occupy a
larger cross-section of tissue than non-spaniel breeds .32
Each hair follicle is associated with two types of adnexal glands: (l) sebaceous
glands and (2) ceruminous glands. Sebaceous glands are similar in appearance to
those found in haired skin. These glands supply neutral lipids to the lumen of the ear
canal via a duct that opens in the hair follicle. The lipids coat the hair shaft, spread
to the surface, and diffuse into the stratum cormeum, contributing to the normal
barrier function of the epithelium. On histopathologic specimens, sebaceous glands
are easily recognized by the characteristic clustering of round to polygonal cells with
pale foamy cytoplasm and a small, centrally located nucleus (Figure 3-8). Variation
in sebaceous gland concentration occurs along the length of the canal. In general,
sebaceous glands are most prominent in the tissue toward the opening of the ear
Lumen
SC
Follicle
Fgure 3-7
 Photomicrograph demonstrating multiple small hair follicles that line the length of the external
ear canal. Note how thin the section of tissue is between the lumen of the canal and the cartilage
boundary. SC, Stratum corneum; D, dermis; C, cartilage.
62
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 3-8
 Photomicrograph close-up of sebaceous gland tissue.
canal and become less concentrated in proximal tissues closer to the tympanic
membrane.32
Ceruminous glands are modified apocrine, or sweat, glands that also have ducts
opening into the hair follicle. Typically they are positioned deeper in the dermis than
sebaceous glands.32 In contrast to sebaceous glands, ceruminous glands are most
 abundant near the tympanum, decreasing in size toward the opening onto the pina.32
Ceruminous glands are easily recognized as a single layer of cuboidal to columnar
glandular epithelium surrounding a large central lumen. Ceruminous glands are
actually coiled, so on cross-section a single gland may appear to be multiple adjacent
glands as the slide transects the same lumen multiple times (Figure 3-9).
In the normal ear canal the ratio of sebaceous glands to ceruminous glands varies
depending on location. As one moves farther away from the tympanic membrane, the
ratio transitions from predominantly ceruminous glands in the horizontal canal to
predominantly sebaceous glands in the vertical canal.32 On the epithelial surface,
sebaceous secretions mix with apocrine secretions to form a thin, tenacious layer of
cerumen. Since sebaceous secretions are thicker and contain primarily neutral lipids,
while ceruminous glands produce a thinner secretion containing phospholipids and
acid mucopolysaccharides, the variation in gland ratios may influence cerumen
composition in the horizontal canal compared with the vertical canal.34
Cerumen is vital for the normal function of the ear canal and protection of
the tympanic membrane. Cerumen traps debris and pathogenic organisms, contains
immunoglobulins and antimicrobial peptides that provide local protection, and
forms a barrier to transepithelial water loss, maintaining a moist, pliable tympanic
membrane and epithelium.
63
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
Fgure3-9
Photomicrograph close-up of ceruminous gland tissue. Note the multiple cross-sections of a
single, coiled gland give the appearance of multiple adjacent glands.
Beneath the cerumen and epithelium and between follicles, the tissue of the ear
canal is quite similar to the interfollicular dermis of the skin. This area contains
mumerous large collagen bundles, elastin fibers, blood vessels, capillaries, fibroblasts.
mast cells, and other cells of the immune system. Below this layer are the auricular
and annular cartilage tubes that define the boundaries of the ear canal.
Tympanic Membrane
The tympanic membrane consists of two sections: the pars tensa and pars flaccida.
The pars tensa is a tough, semitransparent, multilayered tissue stretched taut across a
fibrocartilaginous ring. The ring is in turm attached to the skull. Histopathologically,
the pars tensa consists of four distinct layers. The first layer is continuous and equiv-
alent to the epithelial surface of the extermal canal. The stratified squamous epithelium
   e  s  i n si a   
this layer. The second stratum is roughly equivalent to the dermis, containing a thin
layer of fibroblasts, fine nerves, and blood vessels. Hair follicles and glandular tissue
are totally absent from this layer. Next is a fibrous intermediate layer, which
connects to the fibrocartilaginous ring. This is the thickest layer of the pars tensa.
The first of the auditory ossicles, the malleus, is embedded in this layer. The arrange
ment of fibers is orderly, to maintain strength and maximize transmission of vibrations
The fourth layer consists of a single sheet of respiratory epithelial cells overlying a
thin lamina propria. Centrally, the cells of squamous morphology become more
cuboidal toward the margins and finally columnar as the layer becomes continuous
64
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
with the lining of the tympanic cavity. Unlike normal respiratory epithelium, this
layer contains no cilia or goblet cells.2728,36,.37
T'he pars flaccida is a soft, pliable portion of the tympanum located dorsal to the
pars tensa. This tissue contains a loose arrangement of collagen fibers covered by a
thin layer of epithelium. Unlike the pars tensa, the pars flaccida is highly vascular and
gives rise to the capillary branches that supply the germinal epithelium of the pars
tensa. With acute inflammation, such as that associated with atopy, the pars flaccida
may become severely erythematous and edematous.
Cocker Spanlels
histoanatomy. In the study by Stout-Graham et al, Cocker Spaniels with normal ear
canals were found to exhibit increased ceruminous gland tissue relative to non-spaniel
breeds (Greyhounds, mixed).32 In the same study, Cocker Spaniels were found to have
compound hair follicles rather than simple follicles seen in other breeds; furthermore.
Cocker Spaniel hair follicles were more densely packed
Chronic Inflammatory Otitis
Nearly all of the pathologic changes that occur in ear disease are associated with
alteration in form and function of one or more of these structures: cerumen, epithe-
lium, sebaceous glands, ceruminous glands, fibroblasts, or cells of the immune system.
Without repeating a detailed analysis of the pathogenesis of otitis exterma, the
primary causes of disease can be summarized as chronic inflammatory diseases (atopy.
adverse food reaction, parasitism), transient inflammatory diseases (parasitism, viral,
contact hypersensitivity), obstructive diseases (neoplasia, foreign objects), and hyper-
keratotic diseases (hypothyroidism, primary keratinization defects). Secondary bacte-
rial and yeast infections can be associated with any of these causes, contributing to
inflammation, worsened clinical signs, and perpetuation of the disease state. This
section focuses on the histopathologic changes associated with chronic inflammatory
diseases such as atopy and adverse food reactions.
In response to acute inflammatory stimulus, three principal changes occur: (1) dila-
tion of blood vessels and increased vascular permeability, resulting in dermal edema;
(2) alteration of epidermal barrier function; and (3) changes in cerumen composi-
tion. Grossly, edema and vascular dilation are seen as erythema and stenosis of the
canal with inflamed but still pliable tissue. Loss of barrier function increases pene-
tration of microorganism antigens and exotoxins, exacerbating local inflammation.
Cerumen production tends to increase as the result of inflammation. Alterations in
composition may also affect antimicrobial function, but the precise changes and
effects are not well understood.29,32,38 Narrowing of the canal and occlusion with
ceruminous debris provide a better environment for microorganism overgrowth. This
cycle amplifies both primary inflammatory disease and secondary infection, resulting
in progressive worsening of clinical otitis extema. Early ceruminous gland dilation
or hyperplasia may be seen at this stage. This can be observed grossly as dilated
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
65
ceruminous glands throughout the ear canal appear slightly raised over the surround-
ing epidermis, contributing to what is described as a "cobblestone" appearance of the
ear canal.
ing cells to hyperplastic stratified squamous epithelium, characterized by multiple
layers of cells, increased cellular turmover, and orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.30-32
Normal epithelial migration is disrupted, resulting in greater accumulation of debris
and shedding of keratin sheets directly into the lumen. If bacteria colonization or
infection is a significant component of otitis, neutrophils may infiltrate the dermis,
migrate through the epidermis, and form a purulent exudate in the lumen. The
combination of bacterial exotoxins and neutrophil proteases can result in significant
damage to the epithelium, causing erosion and ulceration. This is particularly true of
infectionsbyPseudomonas aeruginosa.
Ongoing inflammatory stimuli from hypersensitivity to envirommental allergens,
dietary antigens, and bacterial or yeast products, result in hyperplasia of the three
prominent cell types in the dermis: sebaceous glands, ceruminous glands, and fibro-
blasts. The precise mechanism for hyperplasia of these tissues is not well described
but likely involves cytokines and growth factors associated with inflammation. With
glandular hyperplasia there is a dramatic change in the volume of tissue occupying
the limited diameter of the cartilage boundaries.28,30,32 As glandular tissue increases, the
lumen of the ear canal decreases, leading to severe stenosis of the canal. Frequently,
large hyperplastic folds of tissue are visible on gross and otoscopic examination;
occasionally folds completely fill the canal, and no obvious opening can be found.
 In one study comparing histopathologic specimens from the horizontal ear canal
of dogs undergoing total ear canal ablation surgery for end-stage otitis exterma, three
primary tissue reaction patterms were observed: (1) predominantly sebaceous glandu-
lar hyperplasia, (2) predomimantly ceruminous glandular hyperplasia, and (3) fibro-
sis.33 Interestingly there is substantial variation in the predominant tissue response
pattem, depending on the breed of dog affected. Cocker Spaniels were found to have
predominantly ceruminous gland response, while non-Cocker Spaniels exhibited
fibrosis most often. Less commonly observed tissue reactions included lichenoid
interface dermatitis, eosinophilic infiltration, and ulcerative otitis.
A separate study reported similar findings. The area covered by sebaceous glands
was not significantly different in a comparison of spaniel dogs with or without otitis
exterma.32 However, the area covered by ceruminous glands was markedly increased
with otitis exterma. Increases in glandular tissue occurred by both hyperplasia and
marked dilation of the central lumens (ectasia). Grossly, this may be seen as hyper-
plastic folds with a cobblestone surface or in some cases dilated purple, blue, or clear
cystic structures.
Hyperplasia and dilation of ceruminous glands is frequently accompanied by
inflammation, resulting in ceruminous gland adenitis (Figure 3-10). The resultant
destruction of glandular epithelium and leakage of glandular contents into the inter-
stitial space results in large amounts of lipid. Macrophages filled with lipofuscin.
a wear-and-tear pigment associated with oxidative stress, were observed around
66
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 3-10
Severe ceruminous gland hyperplasia, ectasia, and inflammation. Large numbers of neutrophils
are present both around the glands, in the gland walls, and in the dilated gland lumens. Note the
patterm, and osseous metaplasia (unpublished data). Lipofuscin cannot be broken
down by the body; as a result, the large amounts of lipofuscin-laden macrophages
may create a chronic granulomatous inflammation that cannot be resolved. Continued
cytokine and growth factor production from these macrophages may contribute to
perpetuation of glandular hyperplasia, fibrosis, osseous metaplasia and other changes
observed in end-stage otitis exterma.
In addition to macrophages, ear canal tissue may be infiltrated with large numbers
of neutrophils, T-lymphocytes, and plasma cells. With chronicity, lymphoid nodules
may develop in the deep dermis.
One of the most clinically significant histopathologic changes associated with
chronic inflammatory otitis is calcification. A common misconception of this process
is that the cartilage tube transforms to calcified tissue. In fact, the majority of calci-
fication occurs in the soft tissue outside the cartilage boundaries (Figure 3-12). The
process is true osseous metaplasia, where the resident fibroblasts transform to
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
67
Fgure3-11
Photomicrograph of lipofuscin-laden macrophages. Lipofuscin is the yellow-brown granular
pigment in the tissue adjacent to the ceruminous gland.
Cana
Bone
Fgure3-12
Osseous metaplasia. Figure shows a cross-section of vertical ear canal from a dog with
of theear canal.
68  SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
produce bonelike tissues in an inappropriate location. Palpation of the para-aural
space reveals rigid calcification, usually surrounding the dorsal, lateral, and ventral
canal in a semicircular formation. The new bone is easily visible on computed
tomography (CT) scans or radiographs of the skull (Figure 3-13). This change is irre-
versible and represents progression toward an end-stage canal, which is less likely to
respond to medical therapy.
Progression from edema to epidermal hyperplasia, glandular hyperplasia and
ectasia, deposition of lipofuscin, lymphoid nodules, fibrosis, and osseous metaplasia
represents a spectrum of histopathologic changes associated with otitis extema.
Understanding these changes and the mechanisms driving them can assist in diag-
nosis, prognosis, and appropriate therapeutic decision making in the management of
chronic inflammatory otitis.
Cocker Spaniels
In a review of 80 dogs undergoing total ear canal ablation for end-stage inflamma-
tory otitis exterma, 48 of the dogs were Cocker Spaniels (60%).33 Over the same time
period, Cocker Spaniels represented only 4.2% of the general hospital population.
The next most commonly represented breeds were six mixed-breed dogs (7.5%). No
other pure breed was represented by more than two dogs (2.5%). Cocker Spaniels do
not have a higher incidence of atopy, food allergy, or ear mites, which would have
ONE
Hgure 3-13
CT scan of a Cocker Spaniel with osseous metaplasia. The skull is visible centrally. Both
tympanic bullae can be seen. Contrast the air-filled bulla on the left with the fluid-filled bulla on
the right. Bone lining the bulla is thickened and irregular New bone is visible in the soft tissue
on both sides of the skull
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
69
explained the 24-fold increase in incidence of end-stage otitis over the next most
represented pure breed or a 14-fold increase over the incidence predicted by breed
popularity. The most likely explanation for the observed overrepresentation is that
histopathologic findings from the horizontal ear canal. Most notably, 72.9% of
Cocker Spaniels had changes dominated by ceruminous gland hyperplasia and ecta-
sia (Figures 3-14 and 3-15). By comparison, only 28.1% of all other breeds demon-
strated this tissue response pattem. The most common patterm observed in other
breeds was fibrosis, seen in 40.6% of other breeds and 8.3% of Cocker Spaniels
(Figure 3-16).33
Cocker Spaniels were also found to have a higher incidence of lipofuscin-
laden macrophages infiltrating the tissue than other breeds of dogs; this feature was
observed in 70.8% of the Cocker Spaniels, compared with 25% of other breeds.
Osseous metaplasia in the soft tissue surrounding the horizontal canal was
observed in 60.4% of the Cocker Spaniels but only 21.9% of non-Cocker Spaniel
breeds.33
Overall, these differences in histopathologic changes in end-stage otitis exterma
suggest that American Cocker Spaniels have different physiologic responses to inflam-
matory stimuli. The differences in tissue response result in more severe expression
of disease, confirming previous observations that Cocker Spaniels have more frequent
and more severe otitis exterma than other breeds
Fgure 3-14
Cocker Spaniel with ceruminous gland tissue response, characterized by hyperplasia of
ceruminous glands, dilation of glands, and inflammation.
70
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 3-15
Close-up of single-hair follicular unit from same dog as in Figure 3-14.
Neoplasia
In general the ear canal is an uncommon site for tumor development. The true inci-
dence of ear canal tumors in dogs and cats is not known, but based on surveys of
total submissions to pathology laboratories, less than 1% of all tumors in dogs and
less than 2% of all tumors in cats occur in the ear canal.39 Tumors can arise from
epithelium, ceruminous glands, sebaceous glands, fibroblasts, mast cells, and virtu-
ally any other cell type found in the lining of the extermal canal.
Any nodule, mass, or polyp found in the ear canal should be biopsied for
histopathologic diagnosis. Biopsy of nodules deep in the canal can be difficult due
to the limited confines of the canal and diminished visualization due to debris. Care
should be taken not to crush the tissue with hemostats, alligator forceps, or other
 blunt, grasping instruments. A diagnostic sample can best be obtained using biopsy
forceps (Figure 3-17). If available, video-otoscopic guided CO, laser can be a prac-
tical altermative to grasping and pulling.
Because neoplasia can occur due to transformation of chronically inflamed tissue,
histopathology should also be obtained of any tissue removed during lateral ear
canal resection or total ear canal ablation, even if the patient has a history of long-
standing disease. Do not section the ear canal prior to submission; the entire canal
should be submitted in situ, so that the pathology laboratory personnel can trim ear
canals using a standard method.
The most common tumors of the ear canal in both cats and dogs are ceruminous
gland adenoma and adenocarcinoma. Contrary to early reports indicating that tumors
Fgure3-16
Example of fibrosis tissue response pattern. Note the absence of inflammation and sparse
follicular units in the deep dermis, which is replaced by large amounts of collagen tissue.
Fgure3-17
72
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
of ceruminous gland origin were more frequently benign in dogs and malignant
in cats, this distinction may not be entirely accurate or reliable. In a large review of
124 ceruminous tumors, 61% of dogs and 69% of cats had adenocarcinoma.39 The
frequency of malignancy is high enough that any tumor of the ear canal should be
treated suspiciously until proven otherwise by histopathologic diagnosis.
of polypoid cuboidal-to-columnar epithelium. The neoplastic tissue forms acini and
secretory ducts. Mitotic figures are rare. Individually cells have minimal atypia, ovoid-
to-round nuclei, and a single prominent nucleolus. Glands tend to retain normal
myoepithelial basement membrane boundaries and do not invade connective tissue
parenchyma.39
In contrast, adenocarcinoma is characterized by moderate or marked nuclear
atypia and common mitotic figures. Neoplastic tissue fails to form normal-appearing
secretory gland patterms. Orientation of the apical surface to the myoepithelial base-
ment membrane is absent. Squamous differentiation, characterized by individual
necrotic keratinocytes, dyskeratosis, and keratin pearl formation, can be seen. As
tumors outgrow effective blood supply, central necrosis can be observed. Most
significantly, adenocarcinoma frequently invades connective tissue parenchyma,
 Occasionally penetrating the auricular or anmular cartilage.39
Other tumors diagnosed by histopathology include squamous cell carcinoma,
mast cell tumor, malignant melanoma, hemangiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, lymphoma.
and basal cell carcinoma
Nasopharyngeal polyps are a common tumorlike disease in cats. Polyps are
fleshy, nodular masses of fibrous connective tissue that develop from respiratory
epithelial tissue of the nasopharynx, eustachian tube, or tympanic cavity. Some
patients present with respiratory signs such as nasal discharge, sneezing, and stertor
 Or with dysphagia and recurrent gagging. If the polyp fills the tympanic cavity, it
may rupture the tympanic membrane and protrude into the extermal canal, resulting
in obstructive otitis. Biopsy should be taken to rule out neoplasia. Histopathologically,
polyps are characterized by an irregular mass of fibrous connective tissue covered
by a layer of respiratory epithelium. The pathognomonic finding is respiratory cilia
on the surface of the mass. Less commonly, dogs can also develop benign fibrous
polyps arising from the extermal ear canal, tympanic membrane, or respiratory
epithelium.
Cocker Spaniels
Not only are Cocker Spaniels more likely to have more severe histopathologic changes
represented in studies of ear canal tumors.31,40 In a large review of 81 dogs with ear
canal tumors, Cocker Spaniels were found to represent 17% of all cases of malig
nant tumors, and 27% of the benign tumors.4 In the same review, 35% of dogs with
malignant neoplasia had a prior history of chronic otitis. This finding is not surprising.
since chronic inflammation and ceruminous gland hyperplasia are suspected risk
factors for neoplastic transformation.42
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
73
Conclusion
The extermal ear canal of a dog is lined with tissue that in many ways is very simi-
lar to normal epidenmis and denmis elsewhere on the body. However, tissue response
to inflammatory stimuli is unique to the ear canal. Familiarity with the changes that
occur in cerumen volume and content, epithelial migration, glandular activity, fibro
sis, and osseous metaplasia contributes to a better understanding of the progression
of chronic inflammatory otitisfromacute edematoirreversibleend-stagedisease
Findings such as ceruminous gland adenitis and lipofuscin-laden macrophages may
provide clues to further understanding of the transformation of hyperplastic glands
to cerumen gland adenocarcinoma.
Important breed differences in histopathology support clinical observations that
Although Cocker Spaniels are less likely than other breeds to ex hibit severe fibrosis
of the ear canal, they have a demonstrated predisposition for ceruminous gland ecta-
sia, proliferative ceruminous gland hyperplasia, osseous metaplasia, and lipofuscin-
containing macrophages. These changes result in increased risk for end-stage otitis
exterma requiring total ear canal ablation surgery. In fact, Cocker Spaniels are 24 times
more likely to require this surgery than any other breed and 14 times more likely
than would be predicted based on breed popularity.
References
1. Baba E, Fukata T, Saito M: lncidence of otitis externa in dogs and cats in Japan, Vet Rec l08:
393-395, 1981.
2. Griffin CE, Song M: Otitis workshop. In Kwochka K, Willemse T, von Tscharner C, eds: Advances
in veterinary dermatotogy, vol 3, Boston,1996, Butterworth-Heinermann.
3. Rosychuk RA, Luttgen P Diseases of the ear. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds: Texbook of veterinary
internat medicine: diseases of the dog and cat, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
4. Kowalski Jl: The microbial environment of the ear canal in health and disease, Vet Ctin North Am Sm
Anim Pract 18:743-754, 1988.
5. Harvey RG, Harari J, Delauche Al: Diagnostic procedures. In Harvey RG, Harari J, Delauche AJ,
eds: Ear diseases of the dog and cat, Ames, lowa, 200l, lowa State University Press.
6. Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Diseases of eyelids, claws, anal sacs, and ears. In Scott DW, Miller
WH, Griffin CE, eds: Mutter and Kirk's Smatl animat dermatotogy ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB
Saunders.
7. Chickering WR: Cytologic evaluation of otic exudates, Vet Ctin North Am Sm Anim Pract 18:
773-782, 1988.
8. Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski JJ, et al: Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns
of isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis media, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 212:534-538, 1998.
dogs with otitis media, Vet Dermatot 2000 11:235-239, 2000.
10. Tater KC, Scott DW, Miller WH, et al: The cytology of the external ear canal in the normal dog and
cat, J Vet Med A 50:370-374, 2003.
11. Harvey RG, Harari J, Delauche Al: The normal ear. ln Harvey RG, Harari J, Delauche Al, eds:
Ear diseases of the dog and cat, Ames, lowa, 2001, lowa State University Press.
74
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
12. Guillot J, Bond R: Matassezia pachydermatis: a review, Med Mycot 37:295-306, 1999.
13. Bond R: Pathogenesis of Matassezia dermatitis. In Thoday KL, Foil CS, Bond R, eds: Advances in
veterinary dermatology, vol 4, Oxford, UK, 2002, Blackwell Science.
14. Morris DO: Malassezia dermatitis and otitis, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 29(6): 1303-1310,
1999.
15. Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Fungal skin diseases. ln Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE, eds:
Mutter and Kirk's Smalt animat dermatology ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
dermatis at skin and mucosal sites on healthy dogs, J Smatt Anim Pract 36(4): 147-150, 1995.
17. Greene CE: Otitis externa. ln Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1998, WB
Saunders.
18. Crespo MJ, Abarca ML, Cabanes Fl: Occurrence of Malassezia spp. in the external ear canals of dogs
and cats with and without otitis externa, Med Mycot 40: 115-121, 2002.
19. Crespo MJ, Abarca ML, Cabanes Fl: Otitis externa associated with Matassezia sympodiatis in two
cats, J Ctin Microbiot 38: 1263-1266, 2000.
20. Bond R, Anthony RM, Dodd M, et al: Isolation of Malassezia sympodiatis from feline skin, J Med
Vet Mycot 34: 145-147, 1996.
21. Bond R, Howell SA, Haywood PJ, et al: Isolation of Malassezia sympodiatis and Malassezia globosa
from healthy pet cats, Vet Rec 14l:200-201, 1997.
pathological samples from the external ear canal of dogs and cats, Vet Dermatot 13: 15 1-156, 2002.
23. Baker R, Lumsden JH: The head and neck. 1n Baker R, Lumsden JH, eds: Cotor attas of cytology of
the dog and cat, St Louis, 2003, Mosby.
24. Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Morton RJ, et al: Diagnostic cytology: bacterial infections, Compend
Cont Ed 17(1):71-85, 1995.
25. Harvey RG, Harari J, Delauche AJ: Etiopathogenesis and classification of otitis externa. In Harvey RG,
Harari J, Delauche AJ, eds: Ear diseases of the dog and cat, Ames, lowa, 2001, lowa State University
Press.
26. Loshe J, Rinder H, Gothe R, et al: Validity of species status of the parasitic mite Otodectes cynotis,
Med Vet Entomot 16:133-138, 2002.
27. Getty R, Foust HL, Presley ET, et al: Macroscopic anatomy of the ear of the dog, Am J Vet Res
17:364-375, 1956.
28. Fraser G: The histopathology of the external auditory meatus of the dog, J Comp Pathot 7l:253-258,
1961.
29. Fernando SDA: A histological and histochemical study of the glands of the external auditory canal
of the dog, Res Vet Sci 7:116-119, 1966.
with otitis externa, Am / Vet Res 28:278-282, 1966.
32. Stout-Graham M, Kainer RA, Whalen LR, et al: Morphologic measurements of the external ear canal
of dogs, Am J Vet Res 51:990-994, 1990.
chronic severe otitis externa in dogs: 80 cases (1995-2001), J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(7): 1000-1006,
2002.
34. Chaudhary M, Mirakhur KK, Roy KS: Histopathologic and histochemical studies on chronic otitis in
dogs,Indian J Anim Sci 72(2):128-129,2002.
35. Gotthelf LN: Failure of epithelial migration: ceruminoliths. In Gotthelf LN, ed: Small animal ear
diseases: an illustrated guide,Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
36. Kumar A, Roman-Auerhahn MR: Anatomy of the canine and feline ear. In Gotthelf LN, ed: Smatl
animal ear diseases: an iltustrated guide, Fhiladelphia, 200o, WB Saunders.
37. Harvey RG, Harari J, Delauche Al: The normal ear. In Harvey RG, Harari J, Delauche AJ, eds: Ear
diseases of the dog and cat, Ames, lowa, 200l, lowa State University Press.
              o     
with Malassezia pachydermatis, J Vet Med Sci 62(11): 1177-1182, 2000
CHAPIER 3 Cytology and Histopathology of the Ear in Health and Disease
75
39. Moisan PG, Watson GL: Ceruminous gland tumors in dogs and cats: a review of 124 cases, J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 32:449-453, 1996.
40. Kirpensteijn J: Aural neoplasms, Sem Vet Med Surg (Sm Anim) 8: 17-23, 1993.
41. London CA, Dubilzeig RR, Vail DM, et al: Evaluation of dogs and cats with tumors of the ear canal:
145 cases (1978-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 208: 1413-1418, 1996.
42. Rogers KS: Tumors of the ear canal, Vet Ctin North Am Sm Anim Pract 18(4):859-868, 1988.
Diagnostic
Imaging of
the Ear
Mauricio Solano, MV, DACVR
78SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
and accurately interpreting the examination are the key steps in imaging ear
disorders in dogs and cats. Conventional screen-film radiography (including positive
contrast canalography), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) should be considered complementary techniques, since no single imaging
modality perfectly depicts the complex anatomy of the ear. The physics and instru-
mentation that form the basis of these diagnostic procedures will not be discussed.
This chapter provides an overview of the indications for and limitations of different
modalities, emphasizing the key points in selecting and performing the appropriate
studies and interpreting the images. Readers will find the information needed to
decide which modality will be most effective in a specific clinical setting. One
guideline applies to all imaging described here—general anesthesia is required for a
full assessment of the middle and inner ear. Attempting to evaluate these areas with
sedation alone or without chemical restraint is an exercise in futility.
Conventional Radiography
The five radiographic projections needed to visualize the soft tissue of the extermal
acoustic canal and the bone of the tympanic bullae and petrous temporal bones are
referred to collectively as a bulla series. These views are: lateral, two opposite
obliques (left 20-degree ventral-right dorsal oblique and right 20-degree ventral-
left dorsal oblique), open-mouth (rostral 30-degree ventral-caudodorsal open-mouth
oblique), and a ventrodorsal (VD) or dorsoventral (DV).
Technique and Normal Radiographic Findings
High-detail film screen combinations (Kodak Lanex fine screens with Ektascan M
film or 3M SE plus film with Assymetrix detail screens) are required to provide the
contrast and spatial resolution needed to recognize the typical abnormalities seen in
the canine and feline ear.
LateralView
The animal is placed in lateral recumbency with the nasal septum parallel and the
hard palate perpendicular to the tabletop cassette (Figure 4-1, A and B). The primary
beam is centered on the extermal acoustic canal. A foam wedge or gauze roll placed
beneath the rostral third of the nose is needed to maintain proper alignment. The head
should be slightly extended to avoid superimposition of the bullae on the pharynx.
Portions of the larynx and pharynx should be included in this view (Figure 4-1, C)
to assess the temporomandibular joints and the nasopharynx because as some diseases.
such as nasopharyngeal polyps and craniomandibular osteopathy, can also affect the
middle ear. This author prefers a subtle rostral offset of one bulla from the other to
compare them. To achieve this, the primary beam can be centered just rostral to the
extermal acoustic meatus, or the rostral third of the nose can be elevated slightly from
CHAPIER 4 Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
79
A
B
Fgure 4-1
A, Patient positioning to obtain a lateral view of the middle ear. The asterisk indicates the point
where the primary x-ray beam enters the patient. A foam wedge under the maxillary bones
ensures the nasal septum is parallel to the table. B, The arrow indicates the trajectory of the
Continued
parallel to the cassette (Figure 4-1, D). In animals with a large pinna covering the
acoustic canal, such as hound or spaniel breeds, the pinna should be unfolded and
placed dorsal to the skull to avoid allowing skin artifacts to obscure the area of inter-
est. The endotracheal tube can be left in place. The extermal acoustic meatus is a
circular to oval, gas-filled structure with well-defined inner borders. The tympanic
bullae have smooth, thin-walled bone margins and a gas-filled lumen (see Figure 4-1, C
80
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
大
D
Figure 4-1—cont'd
C, Lateral radiograph of the middle ear. The left and right tympanic bullae are superimposed
(white arowheads). The petrosal portions of the temporal bones (asterisk) are located dorsal to
the bullae. The soft palate is indicated with black arowheads. The external acoustic meatus
(arrows) is dorsal to the tympanic bullae. D, Lateral radiograph of the middle ear with one bulla
rostrally positioned (arrowhead). The petrosal portions of the temporal bones (asterisk) are
located dorsal to the bullae. The stylohyoid bones (white arrow) overlie the caudal aspect of
the nasopharynx. The external acoustic meatus (black arrows) is also visible.
CHAPIER 4 Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
81
and D). Thickness of the wall varies between breeds. There is less variation in the
thickness of the bullae walls between breeds in cats. The petrosal portions of the
temporal bones are highly radiopaque and superimposed on each other in this view;
therefore, they cannot be fully assessed. In cats the bullae appear larger in propor-
tion to the head than in dogs.
ObliqueViews
Two opposite oblique views are taken. With the animal in lateral recumbency, the
bulla to be imaged is placed closer to the cassette. The thoracic limbs, stermum, nasal
cavity, and mandible are rotated 20 degrees from the horizontal plane and are held
in position with foam wedges (Figure 4-2, A and B). The mouth is closed to avoid
superimposition of the mandible on the area of interest. The primary beam is
centered at the base of the ear, ventral to the tragus. The primary beam travels
through the patient in a lateral 20-degree ventral-left dorsal oblique direction. The
tympanic bulla to be assessed is projected ventrally, while the contralateral bulla is
superimposed over the caudal third of the calvarium and therefore cannot be
assessed fully (Figure 4-2, C). Portions of the stylohyoid bone may be superimposed
Over the bulla of interest. The tympanic bullae have smooth, thin-walled bone
margins and a gas-filled lumen. The extermal acoustic meatus is projected on the
bulla as a circular to oval, gas-filled structure with well-defined inner borders.
VD and DV Projections
Choosing between a DV and VD projection is more a fumction of hospital protocol or
personal preference than clinical need. To obtain the VD view, the animal is placed in
dorsal recumbency. The primary beam enters the patient in a VD orientation at the
B
Fgure 4-2
A, Patient positioning to obtain an oblique view of the middle ear. The resultant radiograph is
named the left 20-degree ventral-right dorsal oblique view, which describes the entrance and
s
radiograph. The arrow indicates the trajectory of the primary beam.
Continued
82
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
C
Fgure 4-2-cont'd
C, Left 20-degree ventral-right dorsal oblique radiograph of the middle ear The right bulla is
displaced ventrally (white arrowheads). Only a faint outline of the wall of the left bulla can be
seen (black arrowheads) with the left external acoustic meatus located dorsally (black arrows).
There is superimposition of the right stylohyoid bone over the right tympanic bulla. The angu-
ar process of the right hemimandible (white arow) is visible ventral to the right temporo-
mandibularjoint(curvedarrow).
 midline halfway between the extemal acoustic meatuses (Figure 4-3, A). The animal
is placed in stermal recumbency to obtain a DV view. The primary beam is directed
vertically centered at a point where an imaginary line connecting the bullae inter-
sects with the midsagittal plane. The body of the mandible should be parallel to the
cassette, to avoid distortion. The tongue should be pulled forward and maintained on
the midline. These views are used to assess the ear canals and to compare symmetry
of the bullae and the petrosal portion of the temporal bones. The tympanic bullae
cannot be evaluated fully in this view because they are superimposed over the
petrosal portions of the temporal bones (Figure 4-3, B). There is no specific bone
patterm associated with the petrous temporal bones, however; they should exhibit a
symmetrical shape, size, and opacity on these projections. Reducing the milliamp
seconds (mAs) by half to highlight the soft tissues allows visualization of the
CHAPIER 4Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
83
A
B
C
Figure 4-3
A, Patient positioning to obtain a VD view of the middle ear. The asterisk indicates the entrance
point of the primary x-ray beam. Choosing between a VD and a DV view is more a function of
hospital protocol or personal preference than clinical need. B, VD radiograph of the middle ear.
The most caudal walls of the tympanic bullae (black arrowheads) are noted caudal to the more
radiopaque petrosal portions of the temporal bones (asterisks). Rostral to the mastoid process
(white arrowheads) lies the external acoustic meatus. The paracondylar process (white arrows)
projects caudally. C, DV radiograph of the middle ear. The soft tissue exposure technique
allows visualization of the external ear canals (arrows). The walls of the tympanic bullae (arrow-
horizontal portion of the extermal acoustic canals (Figure 4-3, C), which are noted as
well-defined lucent structures. The canals tend to be wider laterally as the auricular
cartilage expands to forn the pinna. The average diameter of the proximal end of the
annular cartilage is 4.1 ± 0.7 mm in dogs in which the tympanic membrane is visible
otoscopically.'
84
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Open-Mouth View
A commercially available U-shaped acrylic head rack can be used to facilitate
positioning (Figure 4-4, A). Without a positioning device, medical-grade adhesive
tape can be used to separate the mandible from the maxilla (Figure 4-4, B). With the
animal in dorsal recumbency, the head is acutely flexed toward the thoracic inlet.
The vertical primary beam is directed rostroventral to caudodorsal and centered
immediately ventral to the hard palate. The hard palate and mandible are 30 degrees
from the vertical plane. This will highlight both tympanic bullae with minimal super-
imposition from the surrounding structures. The endotracheal tube should be removed
or secured against the mandible. To avoid increased bullae opacity due to superim-
position, the tongue should be pulled rostrally and secured to the mandible on the
midline. The normal bullae are noted as thin-walled structures with a lucent center
ventral to the base of the skull (Figure 4-4, C). Increasing the angle of the hard palate
relative to the primary beam can be used as an altermative to the open-mouth projec
tion (Figure 4-4, D). This projection is easier to perform because it is a closed-mouth
view that highlights the most caudal surface of the tympanic bullae. Caution should
be taken in assessing abnormal findings on this projection because its clinical value has
not been studied as extensively as the open-mouth view.? Normal bullae are thin-walled
B
Fgure 4-4
A, Patient positioning to obtain a rostral 30-degree ventral-caudodorsal open-mouth oblique
projection. The arrow indicates the trajectory of the primary beam. The positional device is
known as an acrylic head rack, which is radiolucent on radiographs. B, Patient positioning to
obtain a rostral 30-degree ventral-caudodorsal open-mouth oblique projection without the aid
of a positional device. Medical-grade adhesive tape is used to keep the mouth open. The arrow
indicatesthetrajectory of theprimarybeam.
CHAPIER 4 Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
85
C
Figure 4-4—cont'd
C, Rostral 30-degree ventral-caudodorsal open-mouth oblique radiograph of a normal dog.
The tympanic bullae (arrowheads) are located ventral to the petrosal portions of the temporal
bones (asterisks). The external acoustic meatus (arrows) is partially obscured by the overlying
coronoid process of the mandible. D, Patient positioning to obtain a rostroventral-caudodorsal
closed-mouth oblique radiograph. There is an increased angle of the hard palate in relationship
to the primary beam represented by the arrow. This projection is technically easier to perform,
but its clinical value has not been studied as extensively as the open-mouth projection. It high-
lights the caudal aspect of the tympanic bullae. E, Rostral 30-degree ventral-caudodorsal
rates the dorsolateral compartment (white asterisk) from the larger ventromedial compartment
(black asterisk). The white arrows indicate the walls of the medioventral compartment. The exter-
nal acoustic meatus (black arowheads) is visualized overlying the dorsolateral compartment.
86
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
structures with a lucent center ventral to the base of the skull (see Figure 4-4, C).
 Their walls are of uniform thickness. They are symmetrical in size, shape, and opacity
when compared with one another.
In cats an osseous septum divides the bullae into two separate but communicat-
ing tympanic cavities—a smaller dorsolateral compartment and a larger ventrome-
dial compartment (Figure 4-4, E). There is less variation in the thickness of the bulla
walls between breeds in cats. The extermal acoustic meatus is sometimes superim-
posed on the dorsolateral compartment.
Abnormal Radiographic Findings
Otoscopic evaluation is the method of choice to evaluate the extermal ear canal.
However, radiographs can reveal narrowing of its lumen by soft-tissue proliferation
from extraluminal masses in cases of neoplasia or by inflammatory tissue, exudates,
or debris in cases of otitis exterma or trauma (Figure 4-5, A). Dystrophic calcification
can be seen associated with chronic otitis exterma (Figure 4-5, B).
Diseases affecting the middle ear, such as otitis media, neoplasia, and cranio-
mandibular osteopathy, as well as polyps can be evaluated with a bullae series.
Radiographic findings are nonspecific; therefore the list of differential diagnoses
A
*
R
Fgure 4-5
A, VD radiograph of a 4-year-old Doberman diagnosed with chronic bilateral ear infections.
Both external acoustic canals (arrowheads) are narrowed and somewhat tortuous. The right
canal is smaller and less defined than the left. There is an increased opacity associated with
canals with the normal external acoustic canals depicted in Figure 4-3,C.
CHAPIER 4DiagnosticImaging of theEar
87
Fgure 4-5—cont'd
B, VD radiograph of a 2-year-old Bulldog diagnosed with chronic bilateral otitis. Radiographs
were taken prior to a total ear canal ablation. There is exuberant bilateral dystrophic calcifica-
tion of the external acoustic canals (asterisks). The visible walls of the tympanic bullae (arrow-
heads)appear nomal.
s oydeoi nou pue Arsy eoun au jo nuail u pau aq pnous 
alone.
Common findings in otitis media include thickening of the wall of the bullae,
increased soft tissue opacity within the bullae, and increased size of the bullae
(Figure 4-6). In the large majority of cases it is not possible to differentiate a fluid-
filled bulla from one with a thickened wall. If the process is chronic, the increased
opacity is likely the result of both thickening and fluid accumulation. Rare mineral
concretions within the bullae, also known as middle ear otoliths, have been reported
in four dogs.34 Middle-ear otolithiasis may be associated with nonactive or active
cases of otitis media. If the otitis media is secondary to otitis exterma, narrowing and
mineralization of the extermal acoustic canal can also be seen.
Common findings associated with neoplasia affecting the middle ear include
soft-tissue swelling, which may or may not obliterate the extemal acoustic canal;
lysis of the wall of the bullae; and increased opacity of the bullae without lysis
(Figure 4-7). Less commonly, ill-defined periosteal reactions arising from the
bullae and surrounding bones can be seen. Neoplasia of ceruminous glands, squa-
mous cell carcinomas, and anaplastic carcinomas have been diagnosed among
Others.5,6
Increased opacity of the bulla as the result of thickening of the walls can
also occur in cases of invading nasal polyps? and craniomandibular osteopathy
(Figure 4-8).
88
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
B
R
Figure 4-6
A, Rostroventral-caudodorsal closed-mouth oblique radiograph of a 14-year-old cat diagnosed
with a nasopharyngeal polyp. There is bilateral thickening of the caudal aspect of the walls of
the bullae (arrowheads). The left bulla is increased in opacity, which can be the result of fluid or
a mass within the bulla or the result of the sclerosis and thickness of the wall. B, Rostroventral-
which presented with right-sided head tilt and circling. The right bulla is mildly enlarged with a
generalized increase in opacity, which is compatible with a diagnosis of otitis media. However.
fuid or a mass within the bulla. Otoscopic examination reveals generalized thickening of the
external and middle ear.
CHAPIER 4 Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
89
B
Fgure4-7
A, Ventrodorsal radiograph of a 10-year-old cat diagnosed with a ceruminous gland carcinoma.
There is lysis of the caudal aspect of the occipital bone (white arrowhead), thinning and lysis
of the caudal aspect of the wall of the bulla (black arowheads), and an increased soft tissue
opacity obliterating the external acoustic canal (asterisk). B, Oblique radiograph of a 10-year-old
cat diagnosed with a ceruminous gland carcinoma. There is lysis of the most caudal aspect of
the tympanic bullae (black arrowhead).
06
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Figure 4-8
Lateral radiograph of the middle ear of a 1-year-old Scotish Terier diagnosed with cranio-
mandibular osteopathy. There is marked increased opacity associated with the tympanic bullae
(asterisk), which is the result of thickening of the walls. The visible cortex of the mandibular
body (arrows) is also thickened. VD radiographs (not shown) confirmed bilateral bullae thick-
ening. Compare the bullae with the nommal bullae in Figure 4-1, C.
Positive Contrast Canalography
This technique uses nonionic iodine-based contrast material to assess the integrity of
the tympanic membrane as well as the anatomy of the extemal acoustic canal.1,8 The
technique is more accurate than otoscopy for detecting iatrogenic rupture of the
tympanic membrane in normal dogs and can be used to assess stenosis of the exter-
nal acoustic canal. Its usefulness in cases of otitis media remains uncertain, as
inflammatory secretions may block the flow of contrast material and prevent it from
filling the canal completely.8
Technique and Normal Radiographic Findings
The canals should be gently cleaned before the study. The animal is placed in stemal
recumbency, and 1 cc of iohexol (300 mg iodine per cc) is placed within the lumen
of the canal. After a massage of its vertical and horizontal portions, the canal is
slowly filled with contrast until it reaches the level of the tragus. A final massage is
then perfonmed to ensure adequate distribution of the contrast in the canal. To avoid
leakage of contrast, a cotton swab is placed to plug the vertical portion of the ear
canal. A DV view is taken, followed by the rostrocaudal open-mouth projection. The
resultant radiographs (Figure 4-9) are compared with the precontrast survey study.
CHAPIER 4Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
91
大
Figure 4-9
complete filling of the canal by contrast material. The proximal (black arrow) and distal borders
(white arow) of the annular ligament are noted as slight indentations in the diameter of the
bulla represents the tympanic membrane (arrowheads). It is oriented at an oblique angle to the
After the study is completed, the ear is flushed with saline solution and dried. No
side effects have been reported as the result of the procedure.1.8
 The diameter of the proximal end of the annular cartilage tends to be smaller
than the distal end of the annular cartilage. On the DV view these ends can be noted
as minor indentations in the wall of the canal (see Figure 4-9). The tympanic
membrane is a straight or slightly concave border overlying the tympanic bullae. It
is oriented at an oblique angle in relationship to the longitudinal axis of the hori-
zontal ear canal.
Abnormal Radiographic Findings
An intact tympanic membrane should prevent the flow of contrast material into the
tympanic bullae; therefore, any leakage of contrast into the middle ear is considered
diagnostic of a ruptured tympanic membrane. Stenosis of the ear canal has been
documented in Shar-Peis and in Pugs. Although canalography can effectively
determine the degree of ear canal stenosis, additional studies are needed to
establish fully stenosis as a predictor of chronic inflammatory ear disease. The
average diameter of the proximal end of the annular cartilage in stenotic canals is
2.6 ± 0.8 mm. In dogs in which the tympanic membrane is visible otoscopically, the
range is 4.1 ± 0.7 mm.'
92
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Computed Tomography (CT)
CT provides cross-sectional imaging of the ear. By eliminating superimposition
of surrounding bone, CT can clearly depict the anatomy of the inner, middle, and
extermal ear. The CT anatomy of the middle and inner ear has been described by
comparing transverse CT images in reference to a standard anatomy textbook.9 CT
is slightly more sensitive than radiography in the diagnosis of otitis media.10 CT can
detect subtle soft tissue changes before they are apparent on radiographs, due to its
higher soft-tissue contrast resolution. However, CT is more expensive and less avail-
able to general practices than radiography. It requires a higher degree of technical
expertise to operate a CT unit than a routine x-ray room, as well as a complete
s
Technique and Normal CT Findings
As with conventional radiography, assessment of the images relies on symmetry;
therefore, careful positioning of the patient under anesthesia in the CT gantry is
crucial. Most new units have laser-positioning guides to ensure that the longitudinal
axis of the head enters the gantry at a 90-degree angle to the primary beam. Head-posi-
tioning devices can also facilitate positioning the hard palate parallel to the CT table
ographs are used to reduce artifacts and noise. In dogs, a kVp of 120 and an mA of 200
are used with a full field of view and a 512 matrix. In cats, an mA of 150 with a half
field of view and a 512 matrix are used. Contiguous or overlapping transverse slices 1
to 3 mm thick extending from the middle third of the nasal cavity to the foramen
magnum are generated. Either the helical or axial mode of scanning can be used. A
contralateral anatomical landmarks in the head (Figure 4-11). Both frontal sinuses,
temporomandibular joints, zygomatic portions of the temporal bones, occipital brain
lobes, and atlantooccipital joints should appear similar in size and shape when they are
being imaged in a slice (see Figure 4-1l). Two different window settings, which
determine the range of tissues that will appear gray on the image, are used to depict
fully the anatomy of the middle and inner ear. Wide window-width settings are used to
highlight bone, whereas narrow window widths centered at a soft tissue level are used
to highlight soft tissues (Figure 4-12).11 A typical window for bullae is 3200 at a level
of 500, whereas a soft-tissue window width is 375 with a level of 40. Subtle changes
commonly noted in cases of otitis media such as sclerosis and thickening of the bulla
could be missed if a wide window width is not used. On the other hand, small amounts
of fluid within the bulla can be missed if a narrow window width centered at soft-tissue
settings is not used. Intravenous injection of iodinated contrast material, such as
meglumine diatrizoate, should be performed to enhance inflammatory and neoplastic
lesions, at a dose of 1 cc per pound of body weight (375 mg iodine per cc).
Like conventional radiography, CT can identify the major anatomical landmarks of
the extermal and middle ear. A major advantage of CT over conventional radiography
CHAPIER 4Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
93
Figure 4-10
Scout image generated by the CT unit. The head of the cat is positioned in a U-shaped head
holder (arrowheads) that facilitates positioning. The holder elevates the head over the CT table
(arrows), maintaining the area of interest in the center of the unit's gantry. Each numbered line
is the detailed visualization of the structures of the middle and inner ear, such as the
tympanic membrane, the auditory ossicles, the cochlea, the vestibular aqueduct, and
the semicircular canals (Figure 4-12, C). An artifact known as beam hardening,
however, often obscures the area of the pons. This artifact can be identified as streak-
like black bands generated by the petrosal portions of the temporal bones. Beam
hardening is the result of absorption of low-energy x-ray photons by the highly dense
bone. Visualization of the middle and inner ear structures requires careful patient
positioning, generation of thin slices, wide window settings, and reconstruction of
images using bone algorithms.
Abnormal CT Findings
Evaluation of CT images follows criteria similar to those of conventional
radiography; both techniques use x-ray absorption in tissues to generate images.
Figure 4-11
Transverse CT image at the level of the temporomandibular junction. A well-positioned patient
should show symmetry between the right and left halves of the skull. Both temporomandibu-
lar joints show simultaneously in the image. The zygomatic portions of the temporal bone
(arrow) and condyles of the mandible (white arrowhead) are similar in size and shape. The oval
foramina (biack arrowhead) are also symmetric.
Fgure4-12
A, Post-contrast transverse CT image of a normal cat at the level of the bullae using a soft-
tissue window. The septum bulla divides the bulla into a smaller dorsolateral (2) and a larger
ventromedial (asterisk) compartment. The anatomical detail of the petrosal portion of the tempo-
ble malleus (4) is seen. However, cerebral landmarks such as the falx cerebri (3), contrast
enhanced meninges (5), and portions of the lateral ventricles can be identified. There is a small 
amount of cerumen overlying the horizontal portion of the extemal acoustic canal (6).
CHAPIER 4Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
95
3
2
B
6
C
Fgure4-12—Gont'd
B, Transverse CT image depicted in 4-12, A, with a bone-tissue window. Compare the detail of
the middle ear with image 4-12, A. The epitympanic recess (3), cochlea (2), and carotid canal
(1) are now visualized. By using the proper window, structures such as the external acoustic
meatus (5), noted here with a small amount of cerumen, become apparent. The endotracheal
tube is indicated with the number 4. C, Transverse CT image at the level of the inner ear in the
patient depicted in images 4-12, A and B. There is a small amount of cerumen overlying the
horizontal portion of the external acoustic canal (arowhead). The septum bullae (1) and
tympanic membrane (2) are faintly visible as linear areas of increased density. The carotid canal
(3) is medial and ventral to the cochlea (4). The vestibular window (5) is medial to the incus (7)
and malleus (8), which are located within the epitympanic recess (6). The petrosal portion of the
temporal bone (asterisk) also contains the vestibular aqueduct and semicircular canals (not
pictured).
96
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
lar osteopathy can be assessed with CT
Common findings in otitis include thickening of the extemal acoustic canal, with
Or without mineralization (Figure 4-13). Also, enlargement, thickening, and sclero-
sis of the walls of the bulla (Figure 4-14), as well as sclerosis of the petrosal portion
of the temporal bone, can be seen (Figure 4-15). Unlike radiography, CT can differ-
 entiate fluid within the bullae from thickening of the walls (Figure 4-16). An excep-
tion to the latter arises when the bullae are completely obliterated by soft-tissue
density. Use of contrast can help differentiate whether the density is fluid or mass
because masses tend to enhance with intravenous injection of contrast material.
However, this author has seen inflammatory exudates associated with otitis extema
and media that have enhanced after contrast medium administration. An inflamed
Figure 4-13). If the enhancement is limited to the canal, it is possible to be more
confident in a diagnosis of otitis than when the enhancement extends out of the
canal, such as in cases of neoplasia.
Abnormalities noted in otitis can also be seen associated with neoplasia or
Osteomyelitis. Therefore, findings should be interpreted in light of the clinical history.
However, neoplasia can be placed at the top of the list of differential diagnoses w hen
A
Fgure 4-13
A, Transverse view of the bullae of a 5-year-old male Beagle diagnosed with chronic otitis
externa imaged with a bone-tissue window. Otoscopic examination of the middle ear was not
possible. The diameter of the right external acoustic canal (arowheads) is increased. A soft-
tissue density has completely replaced the air in the canal. Scattered foci of dystrophic miner
there is a bulge at the level of the right tympanic membrane (black arrow), which suggests a
compromise of its integrity.
CHAPIER 4 Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
97
Figure 4-13—cont'd
B, Soft tissue window after injection of contrast material of the dog imaged in image 4-13.
A. The obliteration of the lumen is the result of severe thickening of the walls, which exhibit
well-defined contrast enhancement, likely the result of the chronic inflammatory changes
(arrowheads). Cerumen or inflammatory exudates are also noted lateral to the left tympanic
membrane (arow).
Fgure 4-14
CT image of a 6-month-old cat diagnosed with otitis media. There is generalized thickening of
the walls of the right bulla. The bulla is filled with dense material, which represents fluid. The
normal. The petrosal portions of the temporal bones are symmetrical.
Fgure4-15
CT image at the level of the bullae of an 18-month-old-male cat diagnosed with a polypoid
mass. The mass (arrowheads) is noted as a homogeneous space-occupying dense structure
at the level of the external acoustic meatus and extending into the middle ear The petrosal
portions of the left temporal bone (arrow) as well as the bulla wall are thicker and sclerotic when
the epitympanic recess (asterisk) is wider, likely the result of pressure bone atrophy caused by
themass.
Fgure4-16
CT image at the level of the bullae of a castrated male cat diagnosed with otitis and a fibrosar-
coma of the most rostral third of the mandible. There is a minimal volume of dense fluid (arrow)
on the dependent portion of the right bulla. The corresponding radiographs of the bullae were
considered within normal limits. The black streaks (arrowheads) are known as beam hardening.
which is a common CT artifact generated by the petrosal portions of the temporal bones. The
artifact hampers full visualization of the pons.
CHAPIER 4 Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
66
Fgure 4-17
Transverse CT image of a 7-year-old Chihuahua. There is a large homogeneously dense mass
lateral to the right bulla (arrowheads). Lysis of the medial aspect of the petrosal portion of the
temporal bone is also noted (arrow).
there is a space-occupying lesion (Figure 4-17) of variable enhancement character-
istics, extension of the lesion into the caudal fossa, and lysis of the tympanic bullae
(Figure 14-18).
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRl)
The reader is referred elsewhere!l for an overview of the basic concepts of MRI tech-
nology. MRI does not use ionizing radiation (x-rays); therefore, it is considered a
noninvasive imaging modality. MRI manipulates the spinning behavior of hydrogen
protons within a strong magnetic field to produce an image. Changes in this behav-
ior are achieved by sending radio-frequency pulses to the hydrogen protons. The
hydrogen protons in turm send radio frequencies back to a receiver antenna. A
computer uses the signal from the hydrogen protons to fonm a gray-scale image.
MRI provides cross-sectional imaging of the ear. By eliminating superimposition,
the area of interest can be imaged in an infinite number of planes without relying on
slice reconstruction and without changing the position of the animal in the gantry.
The image quality of the CT reconstructions is less desirable (Figure 4-19, A) than
the equivalent MRI plane. MRI offers better soft-tissue contrast resolution than CT
or conventional radiographs.14 Assessment of the pons is not hampered by the pres-
ence of beam-hardening artifacts commonly noted on CT (Figure 4-19, B). On the
other hand, tissues with minimal hydrogen protons such as bone, air, or areas of
100
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 4-18
A, Transverse CT image of a 10-year-old spayed female cat presented with a unilateral persis-
tent drainage from the ear. There is a space-occupying mass of heterogeneous enhancement
(asterisk) causing enlargement of the left bulla. There is ringlike enhancement associated with
the temporal bone (arrow). The beam-hardening artifact overlying the caudal fossa lesion
precludes full assessment of the pons. B, CT of the cat depicted in Figure 4-18, A, imaged with
a bone-tissue window. Permeative lysis (arrowheads) of the medial wall of the left bulla as well
as thickening of the ventral wall (arrow) become apparent. The aggressive process not only
extends into the caudal fossa but also medial to the affected bulla. No further diagnostics were
performed due to the poor prognosis.
CHAPIER 4 Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
101
Fgure 4-19
A, CT dorsal plane reconstruction of the dog depicted in Figure 4-17. There is a hypodense
mass (arrowheads) located lateral and rostral to the right bulla (asterisk). The mass extends
laterally to the right hemimandible. The spatial resolution of this image is poor compared with
the MRl image of another dog in Figure 4-23, A. B, Transverse CT image at the level of the
bullae. The beam hardening artifact (arowheads), generated by the dense petrosal portion of
fuid filled. MRl images offer a better view of the area due to the lack of artifacts as well as to
higher soft-tissue contrast resolution.
calcification will have little signal on MRI and are represented as a signal void or
black on the resultant image. Therefore the normal petrosal portion of the temporal
bone, the bulla wall, and the air within the bulla will appear black on MRI images
and cannot be assessed with the same degree of detail as with CT (Figure 4-20).
Ferromagnetic foreign material such as gun pellets, hemoclips, and identification
102
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Figure 4-20
A, T1-weighted transverse image of the nommal bulla of a dog. There is a large signal void, which
bone are also represented as irregular structures without signal (white arrowheads). Portions of
the external acoustic canal (arrow) and the basisphenoid bone (black arrowheads) are also
signal of the intralabyrinthine fluid associated with the cochlea and semicircular canals is noted
(arrows). Low cellular fluid such as the cerebrospinal fluid is hyperintense on this sequence
(arrowhead). The arrows are overlying the bullae.
CHAPIER 4Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
103
chips close to the areas of interest may render the study nondiagnostic due to abrupt
is less available and significantly more expensive than CT or conventional radiogra
phy. Obviously, a higher degree of expertise and training is required to run an MRl
unit than an x-ray room.
Technique and Normal Findings
Patient motion causes severe degradation of the MRI signals; therefore, general anes-
thesia is required.14 All equipment brought inside the MRI room should be approved
MRI-compliant equipment because metal objects attracted to the strong magnetic
longer than the equivalent CT examination because several different sequences are
produced to highlight tissues of different characteristics. A typical examination may
a p sannbas go qnu a u udap 'san 0 m og uamg is
number of planes generated. Transverse sequences known as Tl-weighted spin-echo,
T2-weighted spin-echo, fluid-attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR), and fluid-
attenuation spoiled gradient echo (FLASH) can be performed for the examination of
the middle ear. Additionally, T1-weighted sequences after injection of contrast mate-
rial in transverse, sagittal, and dorsal planes are also generated. The contrast material
used is gadopentetate dimeglumine, a paramagnetic agent that appears hyperintense
(white) on the T1-weighted sequence. Obtaining 5-mm transverse slices, as commonly
performed for the brain, may obscure the fine structures of the membranous labyrinth
due to partial volume averaging with surrounding bone.7 Thin slices of 1 to 2 mm
thickness, generated by volume acquisition protocols, have been used to detect the
intralabyrinthine fluid.16
On T1- and T2-weighted images the air and walls of the bullae and the petrosal
portion of the temporal bone are represented as black areas (signal void) and cannot
be evaluated '7 (see Figure 4-20, A). The intralabyrinthine fluid is isointense tissue (to
brain) on the T1-weighted sequence and hyperintense on the T2-weighted sequence
(see Figure 4-20, B). The signal resembles the lateral silhouette of a duct'& and repre-
appearance of the fluid has not been studied with the FLASH and FLAIR protocols.
This author has noted a hyperintense (white) signal on the FLASH sequence and
speculates that a low-intensity signal exists on the FLAIR protocol.
Abnormal Findings
Hyperintense thickening of the epithelium and a hypointense thick extermal ear canal
sequences.'9 The two most commonly reported abnormalities in otitis media are the
(Figure 4-21, A), which is compatible with accumulation of fluid, and enhancement of
the inner surface of the bulla, likely due to inflammation, on T1-weighted sequences
after injection of contrast material (Figure 4-21, B). MRI is the first imaging modality
?
R
Figure 4-21
A, T2-weighted transverse image of a 13-year-old spayed female cat with a diagnosis of bilat-
eral otitis. There is bilateral hyperintense volume of fluid associated with the tympanic bullae
hyperintense signal of the intralabyrinthine fluid (arrowhead) is well visualized. B, T1-weighted
sagittal image of a bulla of the cat depicted in Figure 4-21, A, obtained after injection of
contrast material. There is a well-defined rim of enhancement (arowhead) associated with the
inner surface of the wall of the bulla. The curvilinear thin black signal void representative of the
wall of the bulla is better defined because the air in the bulla has been replaced by isointense
fluid. The globe (asterisk) and the petrosal portion of the temporal bone (arow) are also noted.
CHAPIER 4Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
105
C
D
flash
Fgure 4-21—cont'd
C, Corresponding FLASH transverse image of the cat depicted in Figure 4-21, A. The fluid
portion of the temporal bone and the intralabyrinthine fluid (arows).
available to veterinarians that has the potential to diagnose otitis interma based on
the detection of the intralabyrinthine fluid surrounding the semicircular canals.
Preliminary studies suggest that MRI findings in otitis interma include absence of
the hyperintense signal on T2-weighted spin-echo images of the intralabyrinthine
fluid.16 The appearance of the intralabyrinthine fluid on additional sequences other
than T1- and T2-weighted protocols needs further study before this sign can be used
as a predictor of otitis interma in small animals.
MRI excels in depicting changes in the soft tissues surrounding the middle ear
as well as in the caudal fossa because no artifacts hampering evaluation of the pons
are produced. MRI has proven to be valuable in the diagnosis of dogs with vestibu-
lar disorders.16 By generating multiple sequences with different acquisition parame
ters, it is possible to further characterize the diseased tissue (Figures 4-22 and 4-23).
Low-cellularity fluids, such as cerebrospinal fluid or true cystic lesions, appear
hypointense (dark) on FLAIR sequences. Highly cellular or proteinaceous fluids,
such as those present in inflammatory exudates in otitis, are hyperintense (white) on
T2-weighted and FLAIR sequences. Blood and mineral appear as a signal void
(black) on FLASH sequences.
106
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
A
t1c
B
flair
Figure 4-22
A, Transverse T1-weighted spin-echo image obtained after injection of gadolinium of a 7-year-
old spayed female Chihuahua depicted in Figure 4-17 after an attempt to perform an ear canal
ablation was aborted due to uncontrollable bleeding. The nonenhancing hypointense mass 
(arrowheads) is surrounded by heterogeneous enhancing tissue (asterisks) representative of
inflamed muscle. The right bulla is completely obliterated by isointense tissue, and most of the
petrosal portion of the temporal bone is absent. The mesencephalic aqueduct (arrow) is mildly
defined perilesional edema associated with the right half of the pons (arows). The mass
(arrowheads) is a combination of fluid at the periphery and a more solid content in the center.
 Extensive inflammatory changes associated with the surrounding musculature (asterisks) are
alsonoted.
C
flash
Hgure 4-22—cont'd
C, Corresponding transverse FLASH image of dog depicted in Figure 4-22, A. The mass
(arrowheads) is mostly blood, as indicated by the large signal void surrounded by a rim of fluid.
The mass within the right bulla is also a combination of blood, solid tissue, and inflammatory
fluid. Inflamed surrounding musculature is again detected (black asterisks), with a more hemor-
magic component noted dorsolaterally (white asterisk).
Fgure4-23
A, T1-weighted dorsal image at the level of the bullae of a Labrador-Golden Retriever mixed
breed after injection of contrast material. There is a large mass of heterogeneous enhancement
effacing the left tympanic bulla (arowheads) and extending rostrally medial to the mandibular
condyle. Nonenhancing areas within the mass suggest lack of blood supply to the center of the
mass (arrow). There is a moderate volume of homogeneous fuid in the contralateral bulla
dorsal plane reconstruction depicted in another dog in Figure 4-19, A.
Continued
108
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
B
+
flain
Figure 4-23—cont'd
B, Transverse T2-weighted image of the dog depicted in Figure 4-23, A. The increased inten-
sity in the right bulla (asterisk) is fluid, which is considered the result of otitis media. Within the
mass (arowheads) several foci of increased intensity (arrows) may also represent fluid or
tissue. C, Transverse FLAlR image of the dog depicted in Figure 4-23, A. The fluid within the
   u e  e sis m  s  s
mass (arrowheads) is of more homogeneous intensity than the corresponding T2-weighted
image, as the intense foci noted on Figure 4-23, B, are now isointense (arrows). These foci are
likely made out of more solid tissue than originally suspected. No biopsy of the mass was
performed.
CHAPIER 4 Diagnostic Imaging of the Ear
109
Conclusion
Conventional radiography remains the most commonly available imaging modality
to the general practitioner. Not only it is relatively easy to perfonm, but it remains the
least expensive altermative in practice. However, it is less sensitive than CT and MRI
for the diagnosis of middle-ear disease and has little value in the diagnosis of otitis
interma. Both CT and MRI are effective in outlining a disease process by eliminating
superimposition of surrounding structures as they generate tomographic imaging of
the middle ear. CT offers better anatomical detail of the middle ear than MRI because
it excels in imaging bone. However, artifacts often obscure the pons, limiting its value
for the diagnosis of vestibular disease, compared with MRI. Otitis intema cannot be
diagnosed with CT. MRI does not use ionizing radiation and its tissue-contrast reso-
lution is superior to that of CT. It also has the ability to image the animal in infinite
planes; it can assess the pons more effectively than CT, and preliminary studies have
shown good potential in the diagnosis of otitis interma. However, MRI is the most
expensive and least available of the imaging modalities discussed in this chapter.
MRI scanning takes longer and cannot image the normal bullae and petrosal portions
of the temporal bone with the detail achieved with CT. The practitioner should viev
CT and MRI as complementary techniques rather than competitive imaging modali-
ties. Finally, imaging of the ear is an evolving field. Ultrasound of fluid-filled bullae in
an experimental setting has been reported.? However, this author speculates that MRI
of the inner ear could become a more active area of research than ultrasonography.
References
1. Eom K, Lee H, Yoon J: Canalographic evaluation of the external ear canal in dogs, Vet Radiot
Ultrasound 41(3):231-234, 2000
2. Hofer P MN, Bartholdi S, Kaserhotz B: A new radiographic view of the feline tympanic bullae, Vet
Radiot Uttrasound 36(1):14-15, 1995
3. Ziemer LS, Schwarz T, Sullivan M: Otolithiasis in three dogs, Vet Radiot Uttrasound 44(1):28-31,
2003.
4.Farrow CS: Known case conference, Vet RadiotUttrasound 33:262-263,1992.
5. Little CJ, Pearson GR, Lane JG: Neoplasia involving the midle ear cavity of dogs, Vet Rec
124(3):54-57, 1989)
6. Rogers KS: Tumors of the ear canal, Vet Ctin North Am Sm Anim Pract 18(4):859-868, 1988.
 7. Garosi LS, Dennis R, Schwarz T: Review of diagnostic imaging of ear diseases in the dog and cat,
Vet Radiot Uttrasound 44(2): 137-146, 2003
8. Trower ND, et al: Evaluation of the canine tympanic membrane by positive contrast ear canalogra-
phy, Vet Rec 142(4):78-8 1, 1998
9. Russo M, et al: Computed tomographic anatomy of the canine inner and middle ear, Vet Radiot
Uttrasound 43(1):22-26, 2002.
10. Love NE, et al: Radiographic and computed tomographic evaluation of otitis media in the dog, Vet
Radiot Uttrasound36(5):375-379,1995
11. Tidwell AS, Jones JC: Advanced imaging concepts: a pictorial glossary of CT and MRl technology,
Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 14(2):65-111, 1999.
12. Forrest LJ: The head: excluding the brain and orbit, Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract 14(3):170-176,
1999.
110
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
cats, Vet Radiot Ultrasound 37(2): 99-104, 1996.
14. Kaplan P, et al: Basic principles of musculoskeletal MRl. In Musculosketetat MRl, Philadelphia,
2001,WB Saunders.
15. Chaljub G, et al: Projectile cylinder accidents resulting from the presence of ferromagnetic nitrous
oxide or oxygen tanks in the MR suite, A/R Am J Roentgenotogy 177(1):27-30, 2001.
16. Garosi LS, et al: Results of magnetic resonance imaging in dogs with vestibular disorders: 85 cases
(1996-1999), J Am Vet Med Assoc 218(3):385-391, 2001.
17. Allgoewer 1, Lucas S, Schmitz SA: Magnetic resonance imaging of the normal and diseased feline
middle ear, Vet Radiot Ultrasound 41(5):414-418, 2000.
18. Garosi LS, Lamb CR, Targett MP: MRl findings in a dog with otitis media and suspected otitis
interna, Ve Rec 146(17):501-502, 2000.
19. Dvir E, Kirberger RM, Terblanche AG: Magnetic resonance imaging of otitis media in a dog.
Vet Radiot Uttrasound 41(1):46-49, 2000.
20. Griffiths LG, et al: Ultrasonography versus radiography for detection of fluid in the canine tympanic
bulla, Vet Radiot U/ttrasound 44(2):210-213, 2003.
Primary
Causes of
Ear Disease
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
112
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
R y definition, otitis exterma represents a spectrum of inflammatory changes that
occur to the extermal acoustic canal in response to any insult to the ear canal
epithelium. But what actually causes ear diseases? Can putting a bacterium or a
yeast organism into a normal ear canal result in disease? Although there may be
bacteria or yeasts found in the patient with otitis exterma, these organisms are not the
cause of the ear disease. The real reason for the ear disease is often overlooked.
Primary causes of ear disease are those diseases of the skin that also have a direct
effect on the skin lining the ear canal. Cutaneous diseases such as atopy, food
hypersensitivity, parasites, foreign bodies, hypothyroidism, and seborrheic diseases
frequently result in ear disease.
Trauma
Trauma to the ear canal from injury or inappropriate use of instruments in the ear
can lead to primary inflammatory changes within the ear. Hair plucking with curved
hemostats can result in traumatic inflammation of the ear canal and resultant infec-
tion. A more common reason for trauma to the ear canals is the use of cotton-tipped
applicators to clean the ear. Cotton-tipped applicators (Q-tips) and applicators with
synthetic materials are very irritating to the epithelium when pushed into an ear
canal. Their abrasive effect essentially debrides the layer of surface keratinocytes,
which is nonmally very thin. This results in ulceration of the ear canal and exposure
of the denmal elements to the resident bacteria and yeasts in the ear, leading to infec-
tion. A Q-tip can also push accumulated material ahead of it as it goes deeper into
the decreasing diameter of the ear canal. This may result in a hydraulic effect, with
be used to acquire a cytology sample and as an absorbent material. The cotton tip is
laid onto liquid in the ear canal; the cotton absorbs the liquid and is then removed.
Q-tips should never be used in a "'mopping' motion, going in and out of the ear canal.
Atopic Dermatitis
The ear canal is an invagination of epidermis forming a hollow skin tube in the inside
of the head that begins at the eardrum. Pathological mechanisms affecting the skin
of the animal have the same effect in the epidermal tube lining the ear canal. Since
many diseases found in the ear arise as a result of an underlying skin disease, the
veterinarian evaluating the patient with otitis exterma should also do a careful evalu-
ation of the pet's skin to determine the underlying etiology of the ear disease, if
possible. Often, proper diagnosis and appropriate treatment of the underlying skin
disease diminish the severity of ear disease. The veterinarian should evaluate every
otitis exterma case for the primary underlying skin disease that has led to the otitis
exterma. Sometimes something as simple as Otodectes infestation acts as the inciting
factor for the patient's ear disease. Sometimes a much more complicated, multiple-
allergen atopic skin disease incites the otitis.
CHAPIER 5 Primary Causes of Ear Disease
113
Ithasbeenestimated that almost75%of all canineeardiseaseis related to atopic
dermatitis. Atopy seems to be prevalent in many breeds, giving evidence that this
disease may have a genetic origin. Most dogs show clinical signs after the first year
of life. Atopic patients probably have a high immunoglobulin E (IgE) response from
B-lymphocytes when exposed to individual allergens. IgE antibody binds to mast
cells resulting in their degranulation and subsequent release of inflammatory medi-
ators on subsequent exposure to that specific antigen. Often there will be a history
of foot licking or chewing, face rubbing, and licking the groin area, in addition to
scratching the ears. Many dogs with light-colored coats have the telltale red-orange
saliva staining typically found with atopy. Cats may manifest their atopic dermatitis
with miliary dermatitis, facial pruritus, or barbering of their hair on the belly and
bacterial and yeast infections on their skin and in their ears.
Allergies can be seasonal or nonseasonal. In a seasonal allergy, the clinical
signs are most intense during the period of high pollen counts and disappear with
the reduction of the pollen. Atopic dogs and cats are not allergic to only one type
of pollen, mold, or insect, so most allergic ears tend to be nonseasonal, with the
severity extending for a long period from the spring to the fall, depending on
which pollens, molds, or insects the patient is exposed to. In indoor-only dogs or
cats with a nonseasonal history, or in a patient that flares up only during the winter,
the atopic otitis may be due to indoor allergens such as house dust mites or molds.
It is important to ask the owners about the times of the year in which the ear
disease flares up. When clients move or relocate to a new geographical area,
changes in pet environment may also cause flareups as the patient is exposed to
new antigens.
Atopic dermatitis results from an inflammatory overreaction of the skin to anti-
genic stimulation. The antigens that remain on the surface of the skin maintain the
reaction. In dogs, areas like the feet, face, pinnae, and ventrum have increased mast
cell density than other parts of the skin. In cats, the mast cells are concentrated
behind the ears and over the dorsum. The areas that are constantly contacting envi-
ronmental allergens are more often involved in the inflammatory process. Unlike
dogs, atopic cats tend to have allergies that also affect the respiratory system (bron-
chitis and asthma) and the eyes (conjunctivitis) as well as the skin.
Frequent bathing or rinsing of atopic patients with water helps to remove antigens
physically from the surface of the skin and hair coat. Ear cleaners, flushes, and wet
wipes help to remove antigens from the surface of the pinnae and ear canal. Many
cats with ceruminous otitis are atopic, so ear cleaners help remove both the antigens
and the cerumen from the ears.
Many patients get rapid relief from their ear disease when the atopic dermatitis is
treated with corticosteroid therapy, systemically and/or topically. Most combination
otic formulations contain corticosteroids to relieve the inflammation and pruritus in
i  s s o n     
capsules (Atopica, Novartis) relieves the pruritic clinical signs without the side effects
114SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
often seen with corticosteroids. Other dogs and cats get long-tenm benefit from
successful immunotherapy to specific antigens identified through allergy testing. It
is important to discuss atopic dermatitis as a cause of ear disease with clients so that
they understand the value in pursuing a proper diagnosis. After the otic inflamma-
tion resulting from atopic dermatitis is controlled, the ear canal epithelium is not as
likely to support bacterial or yeast growth, and the patient can remain comfortable.
FoodAllergy
Another common primary cause of canine and feline ear disease is food allergy.
Termed "cutaneous adverse food reactions," many components of this syndrome
have a direct effect in the ear canal. Allergies in animals tend to become additive
that is, the severity of the clinical signs increases as the patient is exposed to more
and more allergens, such as pollens, molds, insects, and foods. When the total
antigen exposure is in excess to the tolerable antigen load, clinical sigms develop.
Some allergic animals can be controlled with a reduction in allergens. It is not
uncommon to do a food trial with a hypoallergenic diet for 2 or 3 months with result-
ant reduction in otic signs. See Chapter 6 for a discussion of cutaneous adverse food
reactions.
Ear Mites
Ear mites are the most common parasites found in the ear canals of dogs and cats.
We are all too familiar with Otodectes mites causing severe damage to the lining of
the ear canal, with the resulting "coffee grounds'" exudate composed of wax, blood,
and epithelial cells. The ear mite has been identified in a number of animal species,
 both domestic and wild. A nonburrowing psoroptic mite, the ear mite feeds on epithe-
lial cell lymph and blood. They have chewing mouthparts that can cause damage to
the epithelium. In dogs and cats, ear mites can cause a severely pruritic parasitic
otitis that is commonly associated with a bacterial infection and otitis media
A unique result of Otodectes infestation in the cat is a systemic hypersensitivity
reaction. Known as otodectic mange, this skin disease resembles miliary dermatitis,
a papular, crusty eruption found around the neck and head, dorsolumbar area, and
inguinal area. When an ear mite-infected cat sleeps with its ear in the flank, the ear
mites can leave the ear canal and get on the skin. A similar transfer occurs when an
infected cat scratches the ear and the mites get on the paw. Those mites in an ectopic
location migrate along the skin and feed. This results in a hypersensitivity reaction
to the mite antigens absorbed across the damaged epithelium. Experimentally.
infected cats showed an immediate hypersensitivity reaction to an intradermal mite
extract. Cats infected for 35 days showed an Arthus (Type Ill) reaction. Serum
precipitating antibodies were noted 45 days after infection. When cats with miliary
dermatitis do not respond to systemic steroids, such as methylprednisolone acetate
(DepoMedrol, Pfizer), or to flea-control measures, otodectic mange should be
CHAPIER 5 Primary Causes of Ear Disease
115
considered and the cat should be treated for Otodectes using a systemic acaricide
such as ivermectin, fipronil, or sealmectin.
A cat affected with ear mites shakes its head violently and scratches at the ears.
Facial abrasions and hair loss may be evident between the lateral canthus of the
eyelid and the ear. When examined, the ear canals display the typical reddish-brown
to black, dried, crusty exudates. The brown color is presumed to be from dried wax
mixed with blood products. On otoscopic examination, the mites can be seen as
white insects crawling on the surface of the exudates.
If the otoscope is held very steady, the mite activity increases, because the light
arouses the mites and makes them more active. When viewed with a video otoscope
(Video Vetscope, MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida), which has a high magnification and
a bright light source, the mites can often be seen in colonies, with thousands of mites
scurrying about (Figure 5-1).
In cases of ear mites in dogs, only a few mites may inhabit the ear canal. They
often elude otoscopic or microscopic detection. It has been theorized that either
severe inflammation in the ear drives the mites out of the ear or the exudates in the
ear canal destroy them. In either case there is a local immune response to mite anti-
gens in the dog's ears that makes the environment hostile to the mites. The severity
of the symptoms associated with Otodectes may be due to the Arthus-like immedi-
ate hypersensitivity reaction provoked by the presence of very few mites.
One useful technique for diagnosing ear mite infection in patients in which
Otodectes is suspected but no mites are seen otoscopically is a mineral-oil roll smear.
Fgure 5-1
Otoscopic view of a cat's ear filled with hundreds of Otodectes mites. The dry, flaky ceruminous
exudate is forming a crust in the ear canal.
116
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
A small cotton-tipped applicator is saturated with mineral oil and is used to swab out
the exudates in the ear canal. The cotton tip is then placed into a drop of mineral oil
on a microscope slide, and the tip is rolled back and forth to remove most of the
harvested material from the cotton tip onto the slide. The slide is then coverslipped
and examined under low-power (40x to 100x) magnification. Adult mites individu-
ally, or often in duos representing breeding pairs, can easily be seen crawling through
the microscopic field. When few mites are present in the ear canal, the typical long
oval brown eggs of Otodectes may be the only evidence of infection (Figure 5-2).
The ear mites live primarily in the ears, where they feed with their chewing
mouthparts on epithelial cells and blood. Female Otodectes mites lay solitary eggs
in the ear canal, and within 2 or 3 weeks of maturation adult mites begin feeding.
 Ear mites are very prolific, and in a short time after infection the mite infestation
may be severe.
Although ear mites can live in the environment for a short time, direct transmis-
sion of Otodectes from animal to animal is accepted as the usual mode of trans-
 mission. Mites can jump onto any part of the body and then migrate into the ear
canal. Many affected 6-week-old kittens have severe ear disease because they
acquired Otodectes from their queens during the neonatal period. In situations of
high animal density, such as shelters, pet shops, and breeding colonies, ear mites
can affect the entire population. It is rare for a noninfected, solitary, indoor cat to
acquire ear mites.
Fgure5-2
Otodectes mites in a mineral-oil swab of otic exudates. The presence of typical dark brown
oval eggs of Otodectes may be the only indicator of infection in the absence of adult mites.
CHAPIER 5 Primary Causes of Ear Disease
117
The aggressive feeding habits of Otodectes cause damage to the epithelium of the
ear canal and the tympanic membrane. Ceruminous gland secretion is increased and
contributes to the quantity of the exudates. Secondary bacterial infection may result
from the loss of the protective epithelial barrier in the ear canal; a contributing factor
is the high serum-protein substrates that are made available to the bacteria as a result.
Damage to the germinal epithelium on the surface of the eardrum from ear mites
prevents these cells from sliding across the eardrum as a cleansing mechanism. This
results in the accumulation of waxy material on the eardrum, producing a wax plug.
Ear mites at the eardrum can actually chew their way through the thin tympanic
membrane and invade the middle ear, resulting in otitis media. Whether ear mites
that reach the middle ear can be involved in the formation of nasopharyngeal polyps
has yet to be determined.
Treatment of Otodectes has traditionally involved the use of ear drops containing
a variety of insecticides in a number of different vehicles. Thorough cleaning of
the ear canal, preferably with the patient sedated prior to the use of any topical
medication, hastens the therapeutic effects of the topical medication. All ear mite
medications contain insecticides, which are placed in the ear to kill the mites. Some
preparations contain additional ingredients such as (1) ceruminolytics to help loosen
the inspissated ceruminous material, (2) antibiotics to treat secondary bacterial
infection, and (3) mineral oil, which is used as a vehicle to float the debris to the
pinnal surface so it can be removed. Mineral oil may also have the beneficial effect
of blocking the breathing tubes of the mites and suffocating them. Drops for ear mite
infections need to be used for at least 14 days so that the mites hatching in the canal
are killed before the life cycle starts over. Retreatment at monthly intervals has been
recommended for free-roaming cats with chronic mite infestations.
Because the anthelmintic ivenmectin has been demonstrated to be a good acaricide
as well, it has been used for treatment of ear mites in dogs and cats. Ivermectin is
only approved for use in dogs as a heartworm preventative. Injectable ivermectin
(Ivomec 1% injection, Merial, Ltd.) is used at a dose of 250 μg/kg or 0.1 ml/10 1b of
body weight. It is injected subcutaneously every 10 days to 2 weeks for two or three
injections. Because it is well established that ear mites can live on the skin, these
treated concurrently. Ivermectin can also be placed in each ear canal as a topical
treatment for ear mites, but this preparation contains propylene glycol, which can be
irritating to the ear canal.
Some severe neurological reactions and even deaths have been reported in
cats treated with injections of ivermectin. Kittens under 12 weeks old treated with
 injectable doses that exceed 250 μg/kg may be more susceptible to the fatal reactions
than adult cats. The reason for this may be linked to the age at which the blood-brain
barrier develops in kittens. It is hypothesized that without an adequately mature
blood-brain barrier, ivermectin can gain access to the brain in affected kittens and
interact with gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors in the brain, causing
neurological signs to develop. Because of this, a topical aqueous ivermectin 0.01%
solution (Acarexx, Idexx) has been developed for use in the ears of kittens 4 weeks
             
118
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
is a 0.1 % milbemycin oxime solution (Milbemite, Novartis). These aqueous topical
ear mite preparations are packaged in individual foil packs containing 0.5 ml of solu-
tion in two premeasured plastic applicator ampules.
Fipronil (Frontline TopSpot, Merial, Ltd.) and selamectin (Revolution, Pfizer) are
monthly flea-control topical preparations that have demonstrated miticidal activity
in both dogs and cats. In areas with high flea infestation rates, the use of either of
these flea-control products may also aid in treatment of Otodectes. Free-roaming
pets with these insecticides on their skin may acquire new Otodectes mites on their
skin, but the mites will be killed by the residual insecticide prior to reproducing. This
may act as a preventative against ear mites.
Treatment for otitis exterma secondary to Otodectes infection must not be over-
looked. Antibiotic and antibiotic-steroid ear drops are used until the epithelial
surface heals and the infection subsides. If otitis media is present, the ear canal and
the tympanic bulla should be flushed and suctioned carefully to remove any debris
that may have gained access to the tympanic bulla.
Ticks
Ticks, with their deeply piercing, blood-sucking mouthparts, attach themselves
in the ear canal and result in local inflammation and pain at the attachment site
(Figure 5-3). Dogs with ticks on the body should be examined to see whether there
are ticks in the ear canals.
Fgure5-3
Ticks in the ear canal. A, Rhipicephalus tick attached to the epithelium.
CHAPIER 5 Primary Causes of Ear Disease
119
B
Fgure 5-3cont'd
B, Otobius tick in the ear canal. (Courtesy Dr. Richard Burrows, Kingman Animal Hospital,
Kingman, Arizona.)
Demodectic Mange
Due to the high density of sebaceous glands in many breeds, Demodex mites can be
found within the ear canal in ceruminous otitis cases, leading to both inflammation
and secondary infection. The mites may be found using the mineral oil sampling
technique described previously (Figure 5-4). Both Demodex folliculorum and
Demodex cati have been reported as inhabitants of the ear canals. Amitraz in mineral
oil has been advocated for topical treatment of Demodex mites in the ears.
Other Insects
Sarcoptes mites can be found anywhere along the ear canal from the pinna to the
horizontal canal, resulting in severe pruritus.
Chiggers (Trombicula) are also found in the ears of dogs in some geographi-
cal areas.
Fleas are not generally thought of as a primary cause of ear disease, but the pres
ence of fleas and the cutaneous sensation that they stimulate can cause a dog or cat
to scratch the ears raw (Figure 5-5). Other types of insects can find the ear canal
and can become lodged there, resulting in irritation or even a blockage of the ear
canal.
120
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure5-4
Demodex folficulorum in mineral oil.
Fgure 5-5
Dog and cat fleas can cause severely pruritic ears, although the fleas are rarely found in the ear
canal.
CHAPIER 5 Primary Causes of Ear Disease
121
Foreign Material
Patients presented with ear disease may have acquired foreign material in their
ears that contributes to otitis. Foreign materials that get into the ear canal can
cause local irritation and may be a primary cause of ear disease. Plant material that
makes its way into the ear canal can migrate along the ear canal and even penetrate
the eardrum, leading to otitis media. Small woody stems, plant awns, foxtails, and
seed packets have been found in the ear canals and middle ears of dogs and cats
(Figure 5-6). Plant material is often conical in shape, and the bases are smooth and
round, so entrance into the ear canal is fairly easy. However, the other side of a plant
awn or foxtail has a sharp, radiating crown of spikes; movement of the plant mate-
rial out of the ear is prevented because the diameter of the clump of radiating spikes
tends to increase with the outward directional movement. The plant awns migrate
oneway
y—deep into the ear canal—and gain access to the middle ear through a
ruptured eardrum. Significant otitis media results. The ear canal may fill with a copi-
ous amount of mucus and pus, and the plant awns or foxtails are difficult to visualize
through the material.
Good cleaning of the ear canals aids in uncovering and identifying the presence
of plant material in the ear canal. A video otoscope helps facilitate the removal
of plant awns and foxtails. Such an instrument allows clear visualization and good
s q o s osa g a     
through the working channel of the instrument so that the plant awn or the foxtail
Fgure 5-6
Plant awns (seed packets) retrieved from the middle ear of a Cocker Spaniel with otitis media.
122SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
can be removed. Gentle traction on the plant material collapses the radial spikes and
allows its easy removal from the bulla or the ear canal.
Outdoor dogs that rub their ears into the ground may pick up sand and dirt that
can fill the canal. Many medications applied into the horizontal canal can dry out,
resulting in impaction. Thick ointment or cream otic formulations containing oils
and particulate matter in drying agents (silicon dioxide) seem to result in more
impactions when applied into the horizontal canal than do aqueous medications
(Figure 5-7). These hardened concretions of medication remain in contact with the
ear canal epithelium. When they are identified, these concretions can be gently
flushed out of the ear canal using warmed water or warmed saline under pressure.
They may also be curetted from the ear canal epithelium or removed with the use of
a grasping-type endoscopic forceps to seize and remove the concretion.
Ectopic Hairs
Some dogs have very thick, ectopic bristly hairs emanating from a ring surrounding
the eardrum. These bristles dig into the horizontal canal or move along the skin
within the horizontal canal, resulting in cutaneous sensation and therefore itchiness
to the ear. Plucking these hairs seems to relieve the itch and generally results in cure,
as the hairs do not usually grow back. Often wax plugs develop surrounding these
Fgure 5-7
Dried medication causing a concretion to fomm in the horizontal canal. Oily and thick medications
contribute to concretions more often than aqueous medications.
CHAPTER 5 Primary Causes of Ear Disease
123
hairs resulting in large concretions, many of which harbor large numbers of
Malasseziaorganisms.
Pets with itchy ears may not have ear disease seen on otoscopic examination at
all but may be responding to a localized pruritus associated with an underlying
pruritic disease. Mast cells degranulate in the extermal ear canal, as does the skin of
the rest of the body, releasing vasoactive substances that exacerbate inflammation
and pruritus. In addition, referred sensations from the throat may cause itchiness in
the ear canals.
Otitis exterma is not always complicated by an infectious organism. Many dogs and
cats with itchy ears have only otic inflammation, which will respond to a topical corti-
costeroid alone, so in these cases the use of antibiotics and antifungals may not be
appropriate. Bacterial and yeast infections within the ear canal occur secondarily to
the primary skin disease and are considered to be perpetuating causes of ear disease
(see Chapter 8). When infections are present, the intemal environment of the ear
canal becomes hospitable to these organisms. For example, the hyperemia associated
with atopy increases the watery, lipid secretions from the ceruminous glands. The
increased humidity allows attachment of yeasts to the macerated keratinocytes. They
can actively reproduce and metabolize the fats within the ear, leading to an otitis
exterma complicated by yeasts.
Treatment of infections within the ear canals may give the patient temporary
relief of its disease. However, without addressing the underlying mechanism respon-
sible for the infection, the disease will retum shortly after the antimicrobial treat
ment is stopped.
Dther Causes
Other dermatological conditions can affect the skin lining the ear canal, making
it susceptible to otitis extema. Examples of less common skin diseases that may
also affect the ear canal include juvenile cellulitis; endocrine disorders, such as sex
hormone imbalances; Cushing's disease; hypothyroidism; autoimmune diseases
such as pemphigus and systemic Iupus erythematosus; keratinization disorders, such
as idiopathic seborrhea and sebaceous adenitis; and erythema multiforme, a systemic
drug reaction.
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism may be a common primary cause of otitis exterma in breeds that are
more prone to this disease.
Hypothyroidism is perhaps the most common endocrine imbalance found in
dogs. It is responsible for many changes in the skin and ear canal that allow colo-
nization by secondary invaders such as bacteria and yeasts. Lymphocytic thyroiditis
is the most common type of thyroid deficiency in dogs. It has been proven to be a
heritable disease in some dog breeds; many breeds are predisposed to hypothyroidism,
124SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
suggesting a genetic predisposition. It seems to be a progressive disease that starts at
a young age and progresses to destruction and fibrosis of the thyroid parenchyma.
When thyroid hormone production is significantly impaired by fibrosis, the clinical
signs of hypothyroidism begin to appear. As the disease progresses, destruction of
the thyroid gland proceeds until the thyroid tissue is replaced by fibrosis.
Thyroglobulin autoantibody assays may be useful in determining which patients
may be at risk for developing hypothyroidism due to lymphocytic thyroiditis. Even
before the serum thyroxine levels fall, and prior to the onset of clinical disease, the
destruction of the thyroid follicles results in increased levels of serum thyroglobulin
autoantibodies.
Discussions concerming thyroid honmone assays and interpretation of thyroid test
results can be found in numerous intermal medicine and endocrinology references.
The current standard of thyroxine measurement in the dog is the free or unbound
thyroxine (T4) by equilibrium dialysis (fT4) or total thyroxine (tT4). An increased
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level coupled with a low or borderline T4 leve]
is often used to separate thyroidal from nonthyroidal illness.
Clinically, hypothyroidism is often misdiagnosed based solely on laboratory
results because of the influence of nonthyroidal factors on the amount of thyroid
hormone available to the test reagents. Many dogs with low serum thyroxine levels
are not truly hypothyroid. Dogs that are being treated with corticosteroids or sulfa
drugs may have a low total T4 level and yet may be euthyroid, as confinmed by a
normal TSH level. When a dog is truly hypothyroid, the T4 level is low and the TSH
value is elevated. Response to thyroid supplementation in true hypothyroid dogs is
dramatic.
Certain breeds seem to be predisposed to hypothyroidism and also seem to pose the
greatest challenge to the veterinarian dealing with their otitis exterma. The Shar-Pei,
Poodle, Cocker Spaniel, Golden Retriever, Chow Chow, and German Shepherd seem
to be hypothyroid-prone breeds in which otitis exterma is frequently a feature of their
hypothyroid condition.
Hypothyroidism results in seborrheic dermatitis as well as seborrheic otitis. In
the ear, the lower level of thyroid hormone alters the fatty acid composition of the
lipids in the cerumen. When a dog is hypothyroid, the sebaceous glands may become
Overactivated, resulting in ceruminous otitis. On cytologic examination, there is a
predominance of cormified epithelial cells, along with the presence of nonstaining
sebaceous cellular debris. Yeasts and cocci bacteria are often found in the ears of
hypothyroid dogs.
The bacterial degradation of the increased lipids found in seborrheic plaques
results in more free fatty acids on the skin. Malassezia can utilize the free fatty acids
as metabolic substrates. Malassezia can induce profound erythema and pruritus
through the chemoattractant cytokines produced as well as their metabolic by-
products, resulting in localized inflammation. Often the first presenting sign in a
hypothyroid dog is the presence of a severely pruritic otitis extema, complicated
withMalassezia.
Low circulating thyroid hormone levels are also associated with decreased activity
of the B-lymphocytes responsible for humoral immunity. This diminishes the ability
CHAPIER 5 Primary Causes of Ear Disease
125
of the skin to respond to cutaneous bacteria. The effect of the bacterial colonization
in concert with the altered lipid layer is that staphylococci normally held in check by
the immune mechanisms have the ability to reproduce unc hecked, causing staphylo-
coccal pyoderma. Bacterial otitis extema with staphylococci is fairly common in
hypothyroid dogs.
Proper diagnosis and treatment of hypothyroidism essentially removes this primary
cause of otitis exterma. Treatment for secondary bacterial and yeast infections reduces
the perpetuating inflammatory reaction.
Thyroid testing should be done in dogs with otitis exterma that have not responded
to treatment for other primary causes of otitis, especially in the breeds prone to
hypothyroidism. If this disease is diagnosed, future exacerbations of otitis exterma
can be prevented.
Without attention to the primary causes of ear disease, the veterinarian treating
ear diseases in dogs and cats will find them very frustrating diseases to deal with.
Successful management of ear cases depends on finding and correcting the primary
causes of ear disease. When a case of otitis is presented for examination, the veteri-
narian should, rather than getting the otoscope, step away from the patient and look
at the entire skin and take a good dermatological history from the owner before
proceeding.
Suggested Readings
paw aa raod '(sd[od [euiudosu pue pau s) enq suedui aui yo Aaams H aog
3:254-269, 1991.
 Fingland RB, Gratzek A, Vorhies MW, et al: Nasopharyngeal polyp in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
29:311-314, 1993.
Adverse Food
Reactions (AFR)
Paul Bloom, DVM, DACVD, DAB VP
(Canine and Feline Specialty)
128
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Background
An adverse food reaction, specifically food allergy, is a phenomenon that has been
studied in depth in humans. Unfortunately, very little scientific data have been
collected for this disease in dogs and cats. Studies that have been performed in animals
have not proven an immunologic mechanism. In addition, these studies were not
consistent in their choice of an elimination diet (home prepared versus commercially
prepared), the length of the trial, and whether rechallenging with the original diet was
performed at the end, making interpretation of results and comparisons difficult.
Since it is possible that canine and feline food allergy is analogous to the human
disease, it is important to review what is known about the pathophysiology in humans
Immunopathogenesis in Humans
In humans, adverse food reactions may be either nonimmunologic or immune-
mediated.2,3 Nonimmunologically mediated reactions consist of toxic reactions and
food intolerance. Toxic reactions typically are dose related and may affect many
tion is food poisoning. Food intolerance is mediated by a variety of nonimmunologic
mechanisms, including metabolic, pharmacologic, and idiosyncratic mechanisms.
This reaction, like toxic reactions, does not require previous exposure and is typi-
cally dose related. In contrast to toxic reactions, food intolerance affects only a small
population of individuals in a group. Examples of food intolerance include humans
with lactase deficiency (metabolic mechanism), histidine conversion to histamine in
poorly preserved fish, or reactions to foods that contain caffeine (pharmacologic
mechanisms).3
  a    s   
described in humans.34 They are Type I hypersensitivity (including both immediate
and late-phase reactions), Type MI hypersensitivity (immune complex), Type IV
hypersensitivity (delayed or cell-mediated immunity), and lastly a combination of
Before hypersensitivity reactions are described, there are a few concepts that need
to be understood. Lymphocytes are small round cells found in blood, lymph,
lymphoid organs, and tissues. They are responsible for recognizing foreign antigens
and mounting immune responses, both antibody mediated and cell mediated.6
Lymphocytes are a heterogeneous group of cells that may be defined by their cell
surface proteins. These proteins include cell surface receptors (e.g., CD4, CD8) and
adhesion molecules (integrins, selectins or immunoglobulin superfamily). CDs
(clusters of differentiation) are cell-surface molecules that have been detected with
monoclonal antibodies. Adhesion molecules are cell-surface structures that mediate
cell-to-cell or cell-to-matrix binding and interaction. These molecules help regulate
cell-to-cell signaling and are also responsible for the movement of lymphocytes in
tissues. Lymphocytes may also be differentiated by the types of cytokines they
produce when activated (e.g., IL-2, IL-4). Cytokines are proteins or glycoproteins
CHAPTER 6 Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)
secreted from cells that function in cell-to-cell communication. They regulate the
immune response by cells by controlling cellular interactions, cell growth, secretion.
and function. Lymphocytes may also be segregated based on their organ of origin.
Those that originate in the thymus are called T-cells, whereas those that originate in
the bone marrow (bursa of Fabricius in birds) are known as B-cells.6
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules are specialized cell-surface
glycoprotein receptors that are involved in antigen presentation to T-cells. MHC I
receptors are present on most nucleated cells, while MHC II receptors are constitu-
 dendritic cells). The presentation of antigen to T-cells must be in the context of antigen-
MHC II in order to activate the T-cell.6
Type I hypersensitivity is biphasic, with an immediate reaction that is followed by
a late-phase reaction. The immediate hypersensitivity Type I reaction is immunoglob-
ulin E (IgE) mediated and requires prior exposure (sensitization phase). When a
susceptible individual is exposed a second time to a complete antigen (elicitation
phase), this antigen cross-links two IgE molecules that are bound to mast cells. This
causes release of preformed molecules (histamine, serotonin, tryptase, chymases,
carbox ypeptidases, kallikreins, proteoglycans [chondroitin sulfate], eosinophilic
chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis [ECF-A], neutrophilic chemotactic factor of
anaphylaxis [NCF-A], and heparin) within seconds from the mast cell granules.4
These preformed mediators, having vasoactive properties, are responsible for the
wheal and flare associated with degranulation of mast cells. There are lipid metabo
lites (LTB4, LTC4, PAF, PGD2), which are synthesized and secreted in minutes.
Lastly, there are cytokines (IL2, IL6, IL13, TNFo), which are synthesized and
secreted, but this occurs hours after the initial mast cell degranulation. These
these inflammatory mediators include pruritus, urticaria, and anaphylaxis.46.7
reaction, and it is also dependent on mast cell degranulation. However, in contrast to
the immediate reaction that occurs within minutes and resolves within an hour, this
reaction occurs 2 to 8 hours after mast cell degranulation. The cytokines that are
released from mast cells activate and attract neutrophils and eosinophils to the skin
about 6 hours after exposure. Eight to 24 hours after cytokine release, the influx of
inflammatory cells changes to primarily mononuclear cells. These are primarily
CD4+ T-cells, specifically Thz αβ cells and CD1+ dermal dendritic cells.4.6.7
Type III hypersensitivity (immune complex deposition, serum sickness) involves
deposition of circulating antigen-antibody complexes. Soluble antigen needs to be in
circulation for prolonged periods (typically more than 6 days) so that when the anti-
body is produced there is circulating antigen to bind. The immune complex typically
involves immunoglobulin G (IgG) or immunoglobulin M (IgM), which are able to
fix complement. The immune complexes are then deposited in tissues (blood vessels,
kidneys, joints), and there is activation of complement, which attracts neutrophils.
Neutrophils cause tissue damage by releasing proteases and reactive oxy gen metabo-
lites. Clinical signs may include arthralgias, fever, edema, and maculopapular or
urticarial lesions.4,6,7
130
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Type IV (delayed) hypersensitivity reaction is the only one of the hypersensitivi-
ties that does not involve antibody formation. Instead, it involves primarily
hapten) combines with a host molecule (frequently a protein) and forms a complete
 a sh   a si  s 
presenting cells process the antigen and then present the antigen on their surfaces via
MHC II molecules. These antigen-bearing, antigen-presenting cells are poor stimu-
lators of unprimed T-cells. These cells leave the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and
 migrate to the regional lymph node. During this joumey they undergo profound
phenotypic changes, thereby acquiring the ability to evoke a strong antigen-specific
present it on its cell surface complexed with a MHC II molecule. The antigen-
presenting cell then presents this antigen-MHC Il molecule to an antigen-specific,
primed T-cell. This complex is very effective in activating primed T-cells. T-cells that
have cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA—a glycoprotein receptor on T-cells that
is responsible for the migration of the T-cell through the skin) on their surfaces are
then attracted to and migrate through the skin. These activated T-cells (CD4+ Th1-
cells) release cytokines that damage the tissues (lFNy and TNFo) and also help acti-
vate cytotoxic T-cells (CD8+) by up-regulating MHC I molecule expression on cells
(IFNy). Whether the first phase of a Type IV hypersensitization reaction (sensitization
phase) occurs in the intestinal mucosa or to an absorbed antigen is unknown.
 Cutaneous signs include erythema, exudation, erosion, and ulceration.4.6.7
As in the skin, the Gl tract has many defense mechanisms to prevent absorption
 of potential antigens.34.7 These include the following:
· Intestinal mucosal barrier
· Seal formed by epithelial cells
· Digestion and breakdown of antigens by gastric acid and gastric, intestinal, and
pancreatic enzymes
· Intestinal peristalsis
· Rapid cell turmover
· Surface (secretory) immunoglobulin A (IgA) binding of antigens
Many antigens that penetrate the GI tract elicit oral tolerance.34 Tolerance is the
immunologic unresponsiveness of an individual to an antigen.° Oral tolerance may
involve active cellular suppression via T suppressor cells or suppressor cytokines
(IL10, TGFβ). Tolerance may also occur via clonal anergy. Clonal anergy is the
presenting cell to activate a T-cell, the T-cell must receive multiple signals. One
signal is the binding of the antigen-presenting cell via its MHC II-antigen complex.
Second signals are provided by the binding of CD80 or CD86 on the antigen-
presenting cell to CD28 on the T-cell. If an antigen-presenting cell only binds its
MHC II-antigen complex to the T-cell receptor without supplying a second signal,
or if an antigen alone binds to the T-cell receptor without its MHC II molecule,
anergy occurs. When low doses of antigen are present, active cellular suppression
Occurs. High doses of antigen exposure will provoke clonal anergy.4.6
CHAPTER 6 Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)
tion or digestive ability of the GI tract and subsequent absorption of foreign antigens
Complete digestion of food protein results in the production of free amino acids and
small peptides, which are probably poor antigens. Thus an incompletely digested
food protein has a greater potential to incite an allergic response. In the susceptible
individual, one with a defective immune system, sensitization to these antigens then
 as- a r  a  s a go s s
teins that are heat, acid, and protease stable. Multiple factors determine whether
a substance is able to elicit an immune response. These include the following:
·Molecular characteristics. For a molecule to be immunologic, it must have a large
are usually between 10,000 to 60,000 daltons. A dalton is one-twelfth the mass of
a carbon 12 atom, or ~1.66 × 10-24 of a gram.3.4.8
genetically controlled.
Food allergy in humans most commonly occurs in infancy and early childhood.3
Factors in humans in this age group that may contribute to food allergy include the
following:
· Lower gastric pH
· Lower proteolytic enzyme activity
· Immature intestinal barrier function
· Immaturity of the intestinal immune system (low levels of immunoglobulin A
[IgA]production)
In humans, food allergy 0ccurs in 33% to 38.7% of infants and young children
with atopic dermatitis.13 Food allergy, especially in children, is associated with a
Type I (IgE-mediated) hypersensitivity reaction.1.3,7,9 Not surprisingly, this reaction
is characterized by an acute onset of symptoms (urticaria, angioedema, and anaphy-
laxis). There is also a subset of patients with a Type IV (cell-mediated) reaction that
is characterized by subacute or chronic symptoms (eczema).3
Since the occurrence of food allergy—that is, an immunologically based reaction
to food—has not been well documented in dogs and cats, cutaneous adverse food
reaction is a more accurate term.' Even though there have been a few reports of natu-
rally occurring IgE-mediated food allergy in dogs,10.11 the immunologic pathogene-
sis of food allergy in dogs and cats has not been well established. Whether dogs and
cats have the same immunologic basis for cutaneous adverse food reaction as occurs
with food allergy in humans awaits determination.
Signalment and History
Whether the disease is called cutaneous adverse food reaction or afood allergy in
dogs and cats, many things are known about this disease. The following discussion
addresses the facts that are known concerming cutaneous adverse food reactions.
In dogs, there is no age, sex, or breed predilection.4 The age of onset in dogs
varies from as young as 4 months to as old as 12.5 years.? However, neonatal puppies
132
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
exhibiting otitis extema due to a cutaneous adverse food reaction may be "cured'
before seeing a specialist for their skin disease. The index of suspicion for cutaneous
adverse food reactions exceeds environmental allergen-induced atopic denmatitis
(atopy) when the onset of clinical signs occurs in geriatric dogs.
 In cats, the Siamese may be predisposed, but any breed can be affected.4,$ The age
of onset ranges from 3 months to 11 years (mean 4 to 5 years).
Historical information that would be consistent with cutaneous adverse food
reaction would include nonseasonal pruritus, recurrent or unresolved otitis exterma,
bacterial pyoderma, and Malassezia dermatitis. Responsiveness of pruritus to antiin-
flammatory doses (/4 mg/pound q 12 hours orally) of prednisone or prednisolone
corticoids, diseases such as uncomplicated environmental allergen-induced atopic
dermatitis (atopy) are very unlikely, while cutaneous adverse food reaction would still
be likely. If a pruritic dog responds well to glucocorticoids, both envirommental
allergen-induced atopic dermatitis (atopy) and cutaneous adverse food reaction
would be ruled out. The only consistent sign of cutaneous adverse food reaction is
pruritus. The distribution of the pruritus is not much different than that of dogs with
environmental allergen-induced atopic dermatitis (atopy) (face, feet, flexor surfaces
of the limbs and folds) or with flea allergy dermatitis (rump and tail head). However
some dogs have a propensity for otic and perineal pruritus. As with environmental
allergen-induced atopic denmatitis (atopy), dogs with cutaneous adverse food reac-
tion may only have otic disease. In one study, 20% of dogs with cutaneous adverse
there were a number who had only unilateral disease. Otitis exterma as the only
presenting sign is more common in dogs with cutaneous adverse food reaction
with otitis exterma may show very little, if any, clinical signs, in which case the
diagnosis is established only by otoscopic examination. This occurs most commonly.
in the author's experience, in dogs or cats having previous episodes of otitis exterma.
It appears that some animals become somewhat tolerant of otitis exterma if they have
experienced it previously. More commonly, dogs and cats show (any or all of) the
following clinical signs:
· Odor or discharge from the ear(s)
· Scratching the ear(s)
· Shaking the head
· Otic pain or tendermess (this may be most apparent when the owner pets or
manipulates the animal's head and ears).
In contrast to IgE-mediated food allergy in humans, systemic anaphylaxis from
cutaneous food reaction has not been reported in cats or dogs.
Physical Findings
Physical examination findings in dogs may vary from normal (alesional) to the pres-
ence of primary and secondary lesions, including papules, pustules, plaques, wheals,
angioedema, erythema, ulcers, excoriations, urticaria (associated with eosinophilic
CHAPTER 6 Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)
133
vasculitis), lichenification, hyperpigmentation, posttraumatic alopecia, scale, crusts,
and erosions. Otic findings may include discharge ranging from mild to copious; it
may be black, tan, yellow, or cream colored. There may be hyperplasia of the ceru-
minous glands resulting in a "cobblestone" appearance of the vertical and/or hori-
zontal ear canal. The extemal ear canals may also have erosions, ulcerations,
hemorrhage or sanguineous discharge; fibrosis or calcification of the cartilage of the
extermal ear canals; or proliferation of the epithelium of the vertical or horizontal
canals, manifested as otic "masses." If there is involvement of the middle ear, the
tympanum may be absent (ruptured), bulging, or necrotic in appearance. However,
it has been reported that dogs may also have concurrent otitis media even in the pres-
ence of an intact and normal-appearing tympanic membrane.3a Pinnal marginal
vasculopathy has also been associated with cutaneous adverse food reaction. As
previously mentioned, the distribution of lesions may be focal or generalized, but the
ears and rump are commonly affected. Due to the disruption of the normal barrier
function of the epithelium that occurs with cutaneous adverse food reactions,
secondary bacterial pyodenma, Malassezia dermatitis, bacterial or Malassezia otitis
exterma, and seborrheic skin disease are common.47
Cats, like dogs, vary in their physical examination findings. They too may be normal
(alesional); more commonly, they have excoriations, papulocrusts, alopecia, crusts,
erosions, ulcers, or exfoliative erythroderma. Miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic plaques,
eosinophilic granulomas, and indolent ulcers have all been associated with cutaneous
food reactions. Pruritus typically affects the face and neck (especially the pinnae and pre-
aural region) but can affect any location.457 Cats may have the same otic signs as dogs.
Adult humans may be affected by the oral allergy syndrome.? This occurs in
reactive with pollens. An immediate hypersensitivity response causes pruritus,
tingling, and angioedema of the lips, tongue, palate, and throat. Occasionally there
is otic pruritus.? Whether this may occur in dogs and cats is currently unknown.
The differential diagnosis of cutaneous adverse food reaction may include
(depending on the presenting clinical signs) environmental allergen-induced atopic
dermatitis (atopy), cutaneous drug reaction, flea-bite hypersensitivity, pediculosis,
intestinal parasite hypersensitivity, scabies, and primary seborrhea.
Diagnosis
placebo-controlled food challenge.? When food allergy is caused by a Type I (IgE-
mediated) immediate hypersensitivity, an in vitro serum testing for food-specific IgE
antibodies is of diagnostic value. Intradenmal testing with food extracts is not recom-
mended in humans because of the poor specificity and the potential to induce systemic
reactions. Skin-prick testing may also be positive in the cases of IgE-mediated food
allergy. This is performed by applying drops of suspected antigen to the forearm of
the patient and then scarifying the skin surface. A positive reaction is manifested as
a wheal and flare. It has been reported that skin-prick testing has a positive predic-
tive value (percentage of positive reactions that are true positives) of 5o% and
1348
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
a negative predictive value (percentage of negative reactions that are true negatives)
of 95%. Therefore a negative test greatly decreases the likelihood of food allergy.
whereas a positive skin-prick test is more difficult to interpret. When food allergy is
caused by a Type IV (delayed-onset) hypersensitivity reaction, patch testing with the
testing is performed by applying the suspected antigen to intact skin for 48 hours.
The site is covered during this time. The site is evaluated 20 minutes and again
72 hours after removing the patch. A positive reaction will have erythema and
induration at the site of the antigen.'
In contrast to the case with humans, serological testing or intradermal testing for
cutaneous adverse food reaction is of no value in dogs and cats.4> A previous study
revealed that serum testing had a 40% positive predictive value (percentage of positive
test results that were true positives) and a 60.9% negative predictive value (percentage
of negative test results that were true negatives).'5 In a study performed with normal
dogs, dogs with cutaneous food reactions, and those with skin diseases other than cuta-
neous food reactions, all the healthy dogs and 75% of the dogs with cutaneous food
reactions had positive serum tests for food antigens. Unfortunately, the antigens iden-
tified by the serum test were not the antigens that were confirmed by a food trial.16
Such a finding may indicate that in dogs and cats cutaneous food reaction is not
an IgE-mediated disease, or that the antigens tested are not the same as those that are
causing the reaction. This may be due to changes in the antigens that occur during
manufacturing and digestion. Also, test antigens for animal proteins, whether used
for serologic or intradermal testing, are frequently derived from skeletal muscle,
while chicken by-product meal is used in commercial dog and cat food. Chicken by-
product meal from tissues from the neck, back, and viscera are antigenically different
from skeletal muscle."
Therefore, as in humans, the gold standard for diagnosing cutaneous adverse food
reaction is an elimination-diet trial followed by a provocative challenge. Currently
there are two schools of thought regarding how an elimination-diet trial may be
performed. One group believes that a home-prepared diet consisting of a novel
protein and novel carbohydrate is the only proper way to diagnosis cutaneous
adverse food reactions. There is also a group that believes that a commercially
prepared diet is appropriate to diagnosis cutaneous adverse food reactions. There are
two types of commercially prepared "hypoallergenic" diets available on the market:
novel protein source foods, and hydrolyzed proteins. The author believes that the
commercially available diets may rule in adverse food reaction but cannot rule it out.
Novel protein diets contain such unique ingredients as venison, rabbit, duck,
salmon, catfish, and kangaroo as protein sources, and either potato, rice, oat, or barley
as carbohydrate sources. The basis of these diets is that individuals are allergic only to
antigens to which they have been exposed previously. However, in one study of 40 dogs
proven to have cutaneous adverse food reaction based on a home-prepared diet,
recurrence of pruritus occurred in 52.5% fed a commercial chicken/rice dog food
47% on a catfish/rice dog food, and 85% on venison/rice dog food, even though these
ingredients were thought to be novel to them.'7 In another study, 50% of eight dogs
with cutaneous adverse food reaction (also identified with home-prepared diets) were
CHAPTER 6 Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)
intolerant of a commercial catfish/rice diet.18 In a double-blinded study of
20 cats with cutaneous adverse food reaction, the authors evaluated two commercial
hypoallergenic diets.!9 The cats were diagnosed as having cutaneous adverse food
reactions based on resolution of clinical signs when fed a home-prepared diet. The
clinical signs then recurred after a challenge with their previous dietary components,
and then resolved after the home-prepared diet was resumed. The cats were then
challenged with two commercial hypoallergenic diets. Relapse of the clinical signs
was seen in eight cats (40%) on a lamb and rice diet and in 13 cats (65%) on a
chicken and rice diet (P > 0.05). Neither of the commercial diets was as effective in
controlling the clinical signs as the home-prepared diet.
Hydrolyzed protein diets use common protein sources such as soy, chicken liver.
or casein, which have been enzymatically hydrolyzed to such short peptide chains
that, theoretically, the immune system should not be able to recognize them as the
parent proteins. In food-allergic people, most major food allergens are water-soluble
glycoproteins with molecular weights ranging from 10,000 to 70,000 daltons and are
stable to treatment with heat, acids, and proteases. However, some proteins have
been reported not to become antigenic until they are heated or digested.$4 In humans
it has been reported that the immune system cannot recognize a molecule smaller
than 12,000 daltons.? Although characterization of the physiochemical properties of
most major food allergens in dogs and cats has not yet been performed, hydrolyzed
products currently available in veterinary medicine have used a 5000- to 10,000-dalton
gens that may cause immunologic reactions in dogs may be smaller than in humans.3
 It has been reported that in a group of three casein-hypersensitive dogs, the antigen
that was responsible for the reaction was between 1100 and 4500 daltons. Products
currently available use hydrolyzed chicken/chicken liver (Hill's Prescription Diet
     ) o   o 
casein and liver (DVM Exclude). The Hill's brand also has taken the potato and
substituted it with potato starch to decrease the carbohydrate antigenicity (Hill's
Prescription Diet Z/D Ultra Allergen Free). Along the same theory, Purina
substituted com with cormstarch (Purina CNM HA Formula). Of the products
mentioned, only the Hill's Prescription Diet Z/D product is formulated for cats. In
the cat product, the carbohydrate is rice. This is a concerm since rice is a common
ingredient in many maintenance cat foods.
 The author is a firm believer that the only proper way to rule out a cutaneous
adverse food reaction is by a home-prepared diet (Box 6-1). A certain percentage
(not established, based on double-blinded, placebo-controlled trials) of dogs and cats
respond to the novel protein or hydrolyzed diets. However, failure to respond to these
diets does not rule out a cutaneous adverse food reaction. An explanation as to why
adverse food reactions may include these factors:
· Sources of animal fats added to the diets may be from sources (e.g., beef or pork)
other than those used for the hydrolyzed or novel protein.3
· The size of the antigen is still large enough to trigger an immunologic reaction
(applies to hydrolyzed diets).
136
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
B0X 6-1
Home-Prepared Elimination Diet
We believe that your pet may have a food allergynot an allergy to a particular brand
of food, but to one of the individual ingredients. We therefore want to feed a diet that
your pet has not eaten before. For this diet we will use ostrich, rabbit, goat, duck, of
venison as the meat and potatoes, sweet potatoes (yams), or oats as the starch. It is very
important that you adhere to the following guidelines:
1. The meat must be pure without any additives (e.g., spices, other meats [such as
beef]). Be sure to mention to your butcher it must be pure meat. Make sure that
if the butcher grinds the meat he uses a clean meat grinder.
 2. The meat should be trimmed of any excess fat and then boiled or baked. If using
duck, either skin it before cooking or poke large holes through the skin to allow
the excessive fat to drain. If boiling meat, the water and fat should be drained.
You can skim the fat off the water and let it harden into lard. This can then be
used to help give your pet a pill. Nothing should be added to it (seasoning, etc.).
Larger quantities may be prepared and then frozen for daily feeding.
 3. Mix the meat and starch together and let them simmer, as you would stew. Large
quantities may be prepared and then refrigerated for daily feeding.
4. Occasionally we will use pinto or kidney beans instead of or in addition to meat.
To prepare them, soak beans in water overnight. Throw out this water and put in
fresh water. Boil until cooked—typically approximately 1 hout.
 5. Feed a one-quarter meat/three-quarters starch mixture daily. If using beans, mix
50/50 with the starch. You will need to feed 1 or 2 cups for a 10-pound dog per
day. For cats we will only feed the meat, no starch!
6. It is very important that your animal not be allowed to put anything in his mouth
except the home-cooked diet and water. This means no vitamins, chew toys,
biscuits, rawhides, or table food—nothing! (If your pet is on any medication,
however, please check with us before discontinuing.) If your pet is on a chewable
form (i.e., beef-flavored biscuit) of heart worm medicine, please have your
referring veterinarian change it to a nonchewable form.
7. Occasionally a change in diet may cause a digestive upset—either vomiting or
diarrhea. Your pet may refuse to eat the above diet. If he/she does not eat for 2 days
or a digestive upset occurs, please call us for instructions before giving up.
Frequently they will only have a bowel movement every other day because the food
is so well digested. Please call if your pet goes more than 2 or 3 days without
a bowel movement.
 8. In order to determine whether your pet has a food allergy, this diet must be
strictty maintained for 4 to 12 weeks. You may not see complete relief from
itching, scratching, or licking, but you should see some improvement. It is very
important that you keep a daily "itch" calendar. Please contact us before you
change your pet's diet, regardless of whether improvement is noted.
 9. Your pet will not be on the elimination diet for the rest of his life. Once we have
established that your pet has a food allergy, we will outline procedures to deter-
mine which foods cause an allergic response. When we know which pure foods
cause a problem and which do not, we can choose a commercial preparation that
your pet will tolerate.
10. Please schedule a reexamination/evaluation for 30 days from now. Bring your
"itch" calendar with you.
CHAPIER 6 Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)
137
Other explanations may be extrapolated from lessons leamed about humans with
food allergies. These explanations include the following:
used equipment or even aerosolization of antigens20-23
· Contact with humans (or even cats or dogs) that have recently eaten the offending
POOJ
Whatever method is used for the elimination-diet trial, it should be fed for a
minimum of 8 weeks in dogs and 12 weeks in cats. One possible explanation
for the need for such a prolonged trial is the presence of histamine-releasing
factors. Histamine-releasing factors are a heterogeneous group of cytokines
generated by chronic antigenic exposure that may cause histamine release in the
absence of an antigen. This release may continue for weeks after the antigen is
removed.4
Of 265 dogs reported collectively by 12 different studies, beef, dairy products,
and wheat accounted for two thirds of reactions. Reactions to corm, pork, rice, and
fish were rarely reported in dogs. Of 56 cats reported collectively by 10 studies, beef,
dairy products, and fish accounted for 80% of reactions.8
Treatment
Elimination of the sensitizing antigen(s) may not be the only treatment necessary
for dogs and cats with cutaneous adverse food reaction. During the early stages of
the food trial, many dogs and cats require a short course of glucocorticoids to break
the itch-scratch-itch cycle. Also it is essential that secondary bacterial pyodenma,
Malassezia dermatitis, or otitis extema/media be resolved during the initial portion
of the food trial. The patient should be able to maintain the test diet alone, without
any ancillary therapy, for 3 or 4 weeks before ending the trial. If the clinical signs
(e.g., pruritus, otitis exterma) have resolved during the trial, a challenge with the
former diet should be performed (Box 6-2). Pruritus or otitis exterma should recur
within 14 days of exposure to the original diet. The diet is then changed back to the
test diet, at which point all clinical signs should resolve. At that time, the dog or cat
is placed on a commercially prepared restricted diet for 14 days. If clinical signs do
not recur during this time, this diet is used as the base diet. Individual ingredients
(beef, chicken, egg, pork, cottage cheese, dairy, wheat, soy, com, fish) are fed for
up to 14 days. If a recurrence of clinical signs occurs when the new ingredient is
added, the ingredient is removed from the base diet and the patient is fed only the
base diet until the clinical signs resolve. At that time, a new ingredient is added to
the base diet. If after 14 days the patient's clinical signs do not recur, this ingredient
is placed on the “safe to feed" list (see Box 6-2). After all ingredients have
been tested, the owner is able to feed whatever commercial diet is preferred as
long as it avoids ingredients that cause a reaction in the dog or cat. However, it has
been reported that up to 20% of dogs cannot be managed on any commercial
fo0d.25,26
138
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
B0X 6-2
Guidelines for Determination of Specific Food Allergies
Your animal has shown improvement on the home-prepared elimination diet. We must
now continue with the next phase of the program.
made diet. We are doing this to establish that there is a definite food allergy and
that the improvement was not due to other factors. If after feeding the original diet
for 14 days the itching has not increased, please call us for the next step. However,
if the itching increases, immediately stop the pet food and reinstitute the home
made elimination diet. Continue this homemade diet trial until the itching has
again reduced, then proceed to the next step. If after 14 days the itching does not
decrease, please call us.
2. Now we want to try [
J commercial "hypoallergenic" pet food for 14 days.
' das 01 oa suyol yo sseru ue soueuedxe pou soop ped 1nok 11
3. Now that we have established for certain that your pet has a food allergy, we must
determine what individual ingredients are causing the problem. Make a list with
week add a new ingredient to the above commercial pet food as directed below. If
no increase in itching is noted after l week, list this food in the column labeled
"safe." You may immediately start on the next food mixture on the list, following
the same procedure. If your pet's itching increases, list the new food in the
"unsafe” column. Stop that food and resume feeding [
_] commercial pet
food (only) until the animal is as itch-free as prior to adding the offending food.
Once the itching has subsided, resume feeding as directed below. When you have
 completed the list, schedule a follow-up examination and evaluation (please bring
your list of "safe"” and "unsafe” foods), and one of the following (depending on
the week):
Weeks 1& 2
Ground beef
Weeks 3 & 4
Chicken
Weeks 4& 5
Pork
Weeks 5& 6
Cottage cheese
Weeks 6&7
 Boiled egs (one egg per 25 pounds)
Weeks 7&8
Ground whole wheat flour
Weeks 9 & 10
Corn oil (half-tablespoon per 25 pounds)
Weeks 1l & 12
Soybean
When you return for your reevaluation, please do not forget to bring your list of safe
and unsafe foods.
References
1.Hiller A, Griffin CE: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (X): is there a relationship
between canine atopic dermatitis and cutaneous adverse food reactions? In Olivry T, ed: Veterinary
Task Force on Canine Atopic Dermatitis, Oxford, UK, 200l,Elsevier.
2. Ring J, Vieluf D: Adverse reactions to food, Curr Probt Dermatot 20: 187, 1991.
CHAPIER 6 Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)
139
3. Nowak AW: Pathophysiotogy of food attergy, 18th Proc Ann Meeting AAVD/ACVD, Monterey, CA,
2003, Hill's Pet Nutrition, lnc.
3a. Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Lowalskin Jl, et al: Microflora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis media, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 212:534-538, 1998.
4.Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE, eds: Muetter and Kirk's Smalt animat dermatology ed 6,
Philadelphia, 200l, WB Saunders
5. Guaguere E, Prelaud P: Food intolerance. In Guaguere E, Prelaud P, eds: A practical guide to fetine
dermatotogy Paris, 1999, Merial.
6. Tizard 1R: Veterinary immunotogy: an introduction, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
7. Reedy LM, Miller WH, Willemse T: Attergic skin diseases of dogs and cats, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1997,
WB Saunders.
8. Roudebush P: lngredients associated with adverse food reactions in dogs and cats, Adv Smatt Anim
Med Surg 15(9):1-3, 2002.
von Tschamer C,eds: Advances in veterinary dermatotogy, vol 3, Oxford, UK, 1998,
Butterworth-Heinemann.
10. lshida R, Masuda K, Sakaguchi M, et al: In vivo and in vitro evidence of Type 1 hypersensitivity to
food allergens in atopic dogs, Vet Dermatot 1 1:32, 2000.
11. Jackson HA, Cates C, Hammerberg B: Total and allergen specific serum and fecal IgE responses to
12. Griffin CE: Otitis externa and otitis media. In Griffin CE, Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM, eds:
Current veterinary dermatotogy: the science and art of therapy, St Louis, 1993, Mosby.
13. Muse R, Griffin C, Rosenkrantz WS: The prevatence of otic manifestations and otitis externa in
altergic dogs, 12th Proc Ann Meeting AAVD/ACVD, Las Vegas, 1996.
14. Bigler B, Merchant SR: Otitis externa. ln von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW, eds: Advances in
veterinary dermatology vol 1, London, 1990, Bailliere Tindall.
15. Jeffers JG, Shanley KJ, Meyer EK: Diagnostic testing of dogs for food hypersensitivity, JAm Vet Med
Assoc 198(2):245-250, 1991.
16. White SD, Mason IS: Dietary allergy. ln von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW eds: Advances in
veterinary dermatology vol 1, London, 1990, Bailliere Tindall.
17. Leistra MH, Markwell PJ, Willemse T: Evaluation of selected-protein-source diets for management
of dogs with adverse reactions to foods, J Am Vet Med Assoc 219(10): 14 11-14 14, 2001.
18. Tapp T, Griffin C, Rosenkrantz W, et al: Cormparison of a commercial limited-antigen diet versus
home-prepared diets in the diagnosis of canine adverse food reaction, Vet Therap 3(3):244-25 1, 2002.
19. Leistra MH, Willemse T: Double-blind evaluation of two commercial hypoallergenic diets in cats
with adverse food reactions, J Fetine Med Surg 4(4): 185-188, 2002.
20. Gonzalez-Galan 1, Garcia-Menaya JM, Jimenez-Ferrera G, et al: Anaphylactic shock to oysters and
white fish with generalized urticaria to prawns and white fish, Attergot-/mmunopathot 30(5): 300-303,
2002.
21. Furlong TJ, DeSimone J, Sicherer SH: Peanut and tree nut allergic reactions in restaurants and other
food establishments, J Attergy Ctin /mmunot 108(5):867-870, 2001.
22. Jeebhay MF, Robins TG, Lehrer SB, et al: Occupational seafood allergy: a review, Occup Environ
Med 58(9):553-562, 2001,
an open-air fish market, J Altergy Ctin /mmunot 105(1): 166-169, 2000.
24. Steensma DP: The kiss of death: a severe allergic reaction to a shellfish induced by a good-night kiss,
Mayo Clin Proc 78(2):221-222, 2003
25. Rosser EJ: Diagnosis of food allergy in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 203(2):259-262, 1993.
26. White SD: Food hypersensitivity in 30 dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 188(7):695-698, 1986.
Factors that
Predispose the
Ear to Otitis
Externa
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
142
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Mareful examination of a clean, dry ear canal in a dog or cat with otitis exterma
may reveal many conditions that affect the ear canal. Because the ear canal lining
is actually modified skin, the same basic types of lesions found on the skin of the
trunk may be found in the ear canal. Certain conditions, called predisposing factors,
are responsible for altering the anatomy and physiology of the ear canal and increas-
ing the likelihood of otitis extema. These factors increase the susceptibility of the ear
canal to support bacteria and yeast growth.
For example, excessive skin folds at the base of the tail may predispose the
English Bulldog to a tail fold pyoderma. In the ear of this breed, excessive skin folds
also predispose to otitis. The presence of a predisposing factor in a patient makes the
ears more susceptible to otitis exterma even when the patient is not exhibiting symp-
toms of otitis exterma. By analogy, not all English Bulldogs with excessive tail folds
suffer from tail fold pyoderma. Because such dogs have the predisposing factor
(the excessive folds), tail fold pyoderma is more likely to occur in this breed than in
the Beagle, which has no tail folds.
The floppy ear carriage common to many dog breeds may predispose them to
otitis because of inadequate ventilation of the ear canal, which ultimately leads to
higher humidity there. The dark, warm, moist area increases the chance that bacte-
ria and yeasts will have a more favorable environment for growth and reproduction.
It is not surprising that the incidence and severity of otitis exterma are greater in dog
breeds with floppy ears. However, there are many floppy-eared breeds that do not
have increased incidence of ear disease. The decrease in cosmetic ear trimming
in recent years has not resulted in increased otitis in the Miniature Schnauzer or the
Dobenman Pinscher. Some of the predisposed floppy-eared breeds such as the
Cocker Spaniel, the Labrador Retriever, and the Springer Spaniel have increased
densities of glandular tissue, also contributing to the increased humidity. Many of
the floppy-eared breeds have the predisposing factor of excessive hair growth in
their ears. Excessive hair can matt or knot and seal the ear canal. Hairs can also
accumulate wax, creating a plug. Cats and many dog breeds have erect ears that are
well ventilated, and these pets have a lower incidence of otitis extema.
In developing a therapeutic plan for otitis exterma, the veterinarian must give
attention to the treatment of predisposing factors that effectively reduce the likeli-
hood that the patient's ear disease will become chronic or recurrent. Some treatments
to remove predisposing factors are very simple, such as plucking the excessive hairs
found in a Poodle's ears to reduce the humidity within the ear canal. Some breeders
and veterinarians advocate taping or fixation of the ears of a Cocker Spaniel over the
top of its head to allowear canal ventilation. Lateral canal ear resection in a nondis-
eased ear opens it up and provides ventilation as well as prevents accumulation of
as e ns nou si s sdsd r go ga n   snxa
matter. Diffuse cerumen gland adenocarcinoma, for example, requires total ear canal
ablation to resolve.
to be predisposing factors favoring the development of otitis exterma are the following:
·Stenosis
· Excessive hair
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
143
· Excessive cerumen production
· Any trauma to the ear canal
· Obstruction by tumor, polyp, or excessive granulation tissue
These anatomic and physiologic alterations create favorable climates for the
proliferation of infectious organisms. High temperature and humidity in the ear
canal, greater amounts of substrates for growth of bacteria and yeasts, and damaged
epithelium result in the failure of the ear's normal immune mechanisms. Commensal
bacteria and yeasts may be induced to reproduce in the favorable climate created.
Otitis exterma is the eventual result.
How does the presence of a predisposing factor in a patient's ear canal affect the
course of otitis exterma? Some pathophysiologic mechanisms have been explained,
but other mechanisms remain a challenge. An understanding of the mechanisms
involved in how these predisposing factors affect the normal physiology of the ear
canal helps clinicians formulate more complete therapeutic plans for the treatment
of otitis exterma.
The normally smooth epithelial surface of the ear canal has a mechanism for
clearing surface debris out of the ear canal; the process has been termed epithelial
migration. Surface keratinocytes slowly slide along the epidermal layer of the ear
canal, carrying cerumen and microorganisms out of the ear canal. When the anatomy
of the epithelium of the ear canal is altered by the presence of abnonmal tissue, the
movement of kerotinocytes is also altered. The smooth surface of the normal ear
canal becomes roughened or obstructed, and the debris accumulates at the point
    a  ss  a n 
microorganisms occur at these points.
Fgure 7-1
Dry wax accumulating in the ear canal. when the skin cells lining the ear canal do not migrate
toward the facial opening of the ear canal, wax and other debris accumulate.
144
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure7-2
Stenotic ear canal as the result of trauma.Swelling from inflammation or increased tissue mass
from fibrosis in the ear canal closes off the lumen.
Stenotic Ear Canals
A common finding in dogs with otitis exterma is a narrowed ear canal. Within the
tube of skin that makes up the extermal ear canal, any swelling translates to decreased
lumen diameter. When the lumen of the ear canal becomes narrowed or occluded,
stenosis results (Figure 7-2). The stenosis magnifies the severity of the ear disease,
making examination and treatment of the otitis exterma more difficult.
A brief review of the anatomy of the extermal ear canal is helpful in delineating
 the mechanisms involved in creating the stenotic ear canal. The ear canal of the dog
 is lined by keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium.
Vertical Ear Canal
The skin of the vertical canal is approximately l mm thick and contains a well-
developed dermis and subcutaneous layer. Numerous long, coarse hairs are present
along the vertical canal. Surrounding the hair follicles are numerous sebaceous and
ceruminous glands (modified apocrine glands). No eccrine sweat glands are located
in the extermal ear canal. Hairs are most numerous toward the opening of the
ear canal; they decrease along the ear canal toward the eardrum. Conversely, the
ceruminous glands increase in density in the vertical canal distally.
The extermal acoustic meatus and the skin on the pinna contain numerous
adnexal structures and have a significant subcutaneous layer, which can respond to
disease. Frequently, the stenotic portion of the ear is limited only to the extermal
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
145
Fgure 7-3
ssd aq  dn aos an us  un ( a) s o
through the stenosis, revealing a normal vertical canal beyond it.
The ear canal of the Shar-Pei has an abundant mucinous dermis under the epithe.
lial layer that increases the thickness and folding of the dermal-epidermal layer.
Owing to the anatomically normal thick lining, the lumen diameter in this breed is
decreased. The Shar-Pei's ear canal is thus predisposed to higher humidity and
greater glandular secretions, promoting bacterial and yeast colonization.
Anatomically, the vertical canal is more prone to becoming stenotic because of the
vascularity and glandular structures found there. The inflammation and edema lead to
marrowing of the ear canal. The stenosis prevents drainage of exudates out of the ear
canal and complicates therapy by preventing topical medications from achieving ther.
apeutic levels beyond the stenotic portion. Increases in fluid and air pressure beyond
the stenosis can cause excessive pressure on the eardrum, predisposing it to rupture.
Inflammation and edema increase the thickness of the subcutaneous layer of the
ear canal, leading to stenosis. Chronic otitis exterma leads to progressive pathologic
changes of the lining epithelium such as hyperkeratosis and hyperplasia (Figure 7-4).
The marked thickening of the epithelial layer may significantly reduce ear canal
diameter. Increases in the number and size of sebaceous glands (Figure 7-5) and
dilated apocrine glands also reduce lumen diameter (Figure 7-6). In addition, patho-
logic changes that lead to calcification (Figure 7-7) and thickening of the auricular
cartilage (especially in American Cocker Spaniels) or to fibrosis and formation of
u n  os  rn  s ss  s
of the ear canal lumen (Figure 7-8). Tumors such as ceruminous adenocarcinoma
may also occlude the ear canal lumen (Figure 7-9).
146
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure7-4
Histopathologic section of an ear canal with extensive fibrosis below a hyperplastic epithelium.
Fgure 7-5
Sebaceous hyperplasia usually results in a smooth, stenotic canal. In this Shetland Sheepdog's
ear, the epithelium is also hyperplastic.
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
147
Fgure7-6
Ceruminous gland hyperplasia causes a stenosis in the vertical ear canal of this Cocker Spaniel.
Fgure 7-7
Radiograph of a stenotic, calcified ear canal in an American Cocker Spaniel. This radiographic
148
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure7-8
Fibrosis and granulation tissue can result from chronic otitis externa.
Fgure 7-9
Cerumen gland adenocarcinomas in an American Cocker Spaniel. This ear was also second-
arily infected with Staphylococcus intermedius, which remained until surgery was performed.
Laser ablation of these tumors opened up the ear canal.
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
149
Horizontal Ear Canal
Fortumately, the skin of the horizontal canal is often spared the devastating effects of
inflammation associated with otitis exterma. The thin epidermis lining the horizontal
canal firmly attaches to the underlying auricular cartilage in the lateral aspect of
the horizontal canal (cartilaginous portion) and is approximately 0.2 mm thick. The
ventral portion of the horizontal canal has an extension of the pertrous temporal bone
underlying the thin epidermis (bony portion). The thin epithelium of the bony hori-
zontal canal is continuous with the epithelium on the lateral aspect of the tympanic
membrane, which is one or two cells thick. Epidermal rete ridges, skin adnexal struc-
tures, and a subcutaneous layer are absent in the skin of the horizontal canal. Because
the skin is adherent to the underlying cartilage and to the periosteum of the bony
portion of the horizontal canal, pathologic changes of the horizontal canal are usually
limited to hyperplasia. The exception to this anatomic feature is the American Cocker
Spaniel. This breed supports much more glandular tissue in the horizontal canal than
other breeds. This has been verified by an analysis of histopathologic specimens from
the horizontal canal of several breeds.
Overtreatment
Long-standing overtreatment of ears with ear cleaners may macerate the epithelium,
causing swelling and greater folding of the epithelial surface. Ear cleaners usually
contain a combination of several ingredients, including alcohols, acids, detergents,
propylene glycol, and water. Prolonged contact of these substances with the ear
canal causes the cells to swell as the ear canal skin loses its waterproof properties.
Drugs such as neomycin and silver sulfadiazine are known to trigger a contact
denmatitis within the ear canal, leading to erythema and swelling in the ear canal.
If any of these causes is suspected, suspending all topical treatment for 1 or 2 weeks
may decrease the tissue reaction and relieve the swelling.
Stenosis
Stenosis presents a special problem in examination of the ear canal. Instruments
cannot be inserted through the narrowed canal, and the integrity of the eardrum
cannot be detenmined otoscopically. Occasionally, a short course of potent cortico-
steroids, applied topically, injected directly into the stenotic tissue, or administered
parenterally, decreases the inflammatory infiltrates and reduces edema (Figure 7-10).
In addition, corticosteroids decrease the amounts of glandular secretions, making
them less viscous so that they are easier to flush out of the ear canal; they also reduce
the secretion and dilation of ceruminous glands. If corticosteroids successfully
increase the lumen diameter, adequate visualization of the ear canal and tympanic
membrane becomes possible.
150
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 7-10
ear canal to reduce inflammation.
When medical therapy for stenosis is ineffective because of severe pathologic
changes to the ear canal, surgical ablation of the vertical canal, horizontal canal, or
both is required. Surgical treatment of stenotic ears relieves the pain associated with
chronic otitis and allows the remaining ear canal to be ventilated
Hair in Ear Canals
In some of the haired breeds, such as the Poodle and many of the terriers, long hairs
mormally grow from the skin of the ear canal. The number of hair follicles in predis-
posed breeds gradually decreases along the length of the extermal ear canal. The
highest density of hair follicles occurs at the entrance to the ear canals at the pinna
and along the proximal portion of the vertical canal. Occasionally hairs may be
found along the deeper parts of the canal.
Excessive hair or knots of ear hair may occlude the ear canals and interfere with
adequate drying of the canal. The excessive moisture created by hair plugs predis-
poses these breeds to otitis exterma. Certain bacteria such as Pseudomonas and
Proteus thrive in a humid ear canal. When long hairs become matted and tangled in
the ear canal, cerumen, exudates, and other secretions mold to the hair mass and
fonm an occlusion.
Routine plucking of hairs by groomers may not be necessary in a dog whose ears
are nonmal, and it can sometimes be detrimental. Plucking the hairs with curved
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
151
hemostats can create an inflammatory reaction that can predispose the ear to infection
In a dog that has recurrent ear infections and excessive hair growth in the ear canal,
however, the hair should be routinely removed to prevent a mass of tangled hairs
from blocking the ear canal lumen. Plucking the excessive hairs from the ears in
patients predisposed to otitis exterma is recommended for the prevention and
management of otitis exterma.
Excessive Cerumen Production
The extermal ear canal is lined with both sebaceous and apocrine glands. The seba-
ceous glands are relatively superficial, surround hair follicles, and have ducts that
open into the hair follicle below the surface of the epithelium. The apocrine (tubular)
glands are located in the deeper dermis, are unassociated with hair follicles, and are
often referred to as the ceruminous glands (Figure 7-11).
Cerumen is primarily a lipid-containing material produced by the secretory prod-
ucts of both of these types of glands. The sebaceous gland is a holocrine gland. Its
secretion is composed of disintegrating desquamated glandular epithelial cells. The
apocrine glandular secretion is a waxy acellular liquid. Cerumen, then, is composed
 of a mixture of sebaceous epithelial cells suspended in apocrine lipid secretion.
Fgure 7-11
Ceruminous gland hyperplasia in its early stage. Polka dots indicate the glands with their ducts
above the level of the ear canal epithelium. Clumps of the apocrine lipid secretion accumulate
in this ear.
152
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Increased ceruminous gland secretion in response to inflammation results in a more
watery, humid cerumen. Imbalances in the ratio and concentration of the secretions
of these two types of glands may play a role in allowing otitis exterma to provide
substrates necessary for infectious organisms to grow. That is why the use of ceru-
minolytic ear cleaners alone can result in effective treatment for otitis exterma.
As the number of hairs decreases along the length of the vertical ear canal, the
number of sebaceous glands also decreases. The ceruminous glands are numerous
along both the haired and nonhaired portions of the vertical ear canal.
Some authorities suggest that there are actually two types of cerumen, liquid
and dry. In humans, it is thought that residents of arctic climates favor the dry
cerumen, whereas those who reside in temperate or equatorial climates tend to have
 more liquid cerumen. The author has observed both dry and wet cerumen in dogs
and cats (Figures 7-12 and 7-13). Whether this is a genetic predisposition, as is
 suggested in the case of humans, or a feature of certain ear diseases, has not been
determined.
The hydrophobic properties of normal cerumen make it an important barrier to
the entry of excessive moisture to the epithelial cells of the extermal ear canal.
Certain components of normal cerumen such as lysozyme and interleukins are
thought to provide an antibacterial and antiviral characteristic to cerumen. Routine
ear cleaning in normal dogs and cats, which removes these important immunologic
factors, is not necessary and may even predispose to otitis exterma.
Fgure7-12
As the thick liquid lipid secretion from the apocrine glands dries out, it darkens. This is a dry
cerumen.
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
153
Fgure 7-13
Wet cerumen tends to stay moist in the ear canal.
transported laterally along the canal wall toward the pinna in conjunction with
normal epithelial migration and is subsequently extruded. If cotton-tipped applica-
tors are used to clean an ear canal full of cerumen and other debris, the material can
be pushed toward the horizontal canal and eardrum, resulting in cerumen impaction.
This condition is best treated with ceruminolytic agents or curettage of the inspis-
sated cerumen.
A condition known as failure of epithelial migration results when the normal
cerumen clearance mechanism is disrupted. Normally, keratinocytes originating
from the central portion of the eardrum slide along the basal epithelium in the super-
ficial layers along the entire ear canal and carry cerumen from the eardrum to the
pinna. Damage to the eardrum prevents the migration of these cells, allowing layer-
ing rather than promoting clearing of cerumen. The resulting accumulation can
become quite large (Figure 7-14). Such ceruminoliths may be removed from the
surface of the eardrum with a grasping forceps. Occasionally, soft cerumen makes
grasping the entire cerumen plug impossible. These plugs are best prepared for
removal by using warm flushing solution to soften the wax. Curettes and large-bore
catheters conmected to suction aid in their removal.
Certain breeds predisposed to otitis exterma, such as the Cocker Spaniel, Springer
Spaniel, and Labrador Retriever, have a higher number of apocrine glands in the
dermis of their ear canals than other breeds. A greater area of apocrine glands may be
a predisposing factor in otitis exterma. The density of glandular tissue is significantly
154
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 7-14
Cerumen plug extends from the eardrum into the vertical ear canal in this Miniature Schnauzer
with vestibular disease. The plug put pressure on the eardrum resulting in circling. Removal of
the wax plug resolved the vestibular signs immediately.
higher in the vertical (distal) ear canal, with a scarcity of glandular tissue and hair
follicles in the horizontal (proximal) ear canal. In the presence of otitis exterma,
however, the proximal ear canal may also become infiltrated by distended apocrine
glands. Cystic ceruminous glands called apocrine cysts are sometimes found in the
ear canal (Figure 7-15)
Apocrine tubular glands are the major secretory glands in otitis exterma. These
glands increase substantially in size in response to the severity of otitis (Figure 7-16).
The sebaceous glands apparently do not proliferate in otitis exterma and do not
increase in size. In fact, in chronic otitis the sebaceous glands are less active and are
displaced by distended apocrine tubular glands. The apocrine tubular glands secrete
their lipids and often dilate, but the total amount of cerumen produced may not
increase because of the reduction in sebaceous secretions.
The secretion of the apocrine tubular glands may provide a nutrient-rich medium
for microorganisms. It has been speculated that the presence of excessive apocrine
tubular gland secretion coupled with the decreased sebaceous secretion in predis-
posed breeds facilitates growth of microorganisms. Many endocrinologic skin condi-
tions affecting the ear stimulate the secretion of the apocrine tubular glands. Many
of these same diseases are also immunosuppressive and may encourage the growth
of microorganisms.
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Exterma
155
Fgure 7-15
Ceruminous cysts in a Persian cat. Often seen as dark blue to black cystic structures on the
pinna and in the ear canal, cystic apocrine glands may have a genetic predisposition in this
breed.
tissues. Bacteria, yeasts, proteolytic enzymes, and other vasoactive substances in
exudates remain sealed under the thick lipid coating. Treatment of bacterial or yeast
otitis exterma must include the use of ceruminolytic flushes to remove this lipid cover-
ing, to allow the topical antimicrobial agent to contact the organisms inhabiting the
infected epithelium. Ear flushes also serve to remove (1) the pro-inflammatory fatty
acids produced as a result of bacterial degradation of ceruminous lipids and (2) the
proteolytic enzymes released by inflammatory cells.
After the ceruminous glands enlarge, they rarely returm to pre-otitis size, and the
ears produce excessive cerumen. Routine ear care must include frequent home ear
flushes. Flushing the ears of affected patients to remove excessive cerumen becomes
a preventive treatment. If the excessive cerumen is not removed, ceruminous otitis
results. This condition is characterized by excessive buildup of ear wax, with bacte
rial degradation of the lipids. The resultant free fatty acids become triggers for
inflammation, leading to erythema and pruritus. They are also the substrates that
favor Malasseziagrowth.
156
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 7-16
Apocrine cyst completely occluding the vertical ear canal. when this cyst was decompressed
using a laser, there was significant debris accumulation between the cyst and the eardrum that
had to be removed.
Trauma
Trauma from any extermal cause can affect the ears. Whether due to fight wounds,
trauma to the pinna from being hit by a car, or surgical trauma, a tissue reaction trig-
gered by a traumatic injury may lead to problems in the ear canals.
Wounds
Underlying the ear canal epithelium is a subcutaneous layer of dermis and a cy lindrical
to conical layer of elastic cartilage surrounded by muscles, blood vessels, and nerves.
Trauma to any one of these tissues causes intense inflammation and bleeding, and may
lead to acute stenosis of the ear canal from the edema that follows inflammation. In
most cases the stenosis resolves when the tissue in the damaged portion of the ear canal
heals. In other cases, especially in traumatic injury to the cartilage, the healing may be
very slow and returm of nonmal anatomic architecture incomplete. The stenotic canal
that remains is the result of contracture of fibrous connective tissue or deformation of
cartilage during healing. An example of the deformity of cartilage can be seen in an
untreated aural hematoma in which the shape of the pinnal cartilage has been perma-
nently changed. When the cartilaginous cylindrical shape has been compromised, the
lumen of the ear canal may be obliterated. Fistulous tracts may appear around the site
of facial trauma that may communicate with the ear canal (Figures 7-17 and 7-18).
CHAPIER 7Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
157
Fgure7-17
Traumatic facial wound of a Beagle resulted in a communication from the facial wound to the
ear canal. A red rubber catheter has been placed in the ear canal and dilute povidone-iodine
is being flushed into the ear canal. As the ear canal is being flushed, the flush solution exits
Fgure 7-18
Radiograph showing infusion of iodinated contrast medium into the facial wound shown in
Figure 7-17. Contrast material can be seen filling the facial wound site, the ear canal, the
tympanic bulla, and the subcutaneous region in the occipital area.
158
SMALL ANIMALEARDISEASES
Surgical trauma from ear canal surgery can also lead to postoperative complica-
tions. Procedures such as total ear canal ablation often result in fistulous tracts
emanating from the incompletely removed lining of the middle ear with unresolved
infection. Vertical ear canal ablation or the Zepp lateral ear resection surgery
requires cutting through cartilage. Suturing through cartilage incites an inflamma-
tory reaction. Hyaluronic acid, which is released into the surrounding tissue from the
cut cartilaginous matrix, stimulates intense inflammation and swelling; therefore,
suturing skin to skin over the cartilage is advised.
Trauma induced by blunt force injury to the head and neck can result in a ruptured
eardrum (Figure 7-19). Fresh bleeding from the ear may be seen on examination.
The ear canals in such cases must be examined for the presence of an eardrum and
accumulation of blood behind the eardrum.
Trauma from Cotton-Tipped Applicators
Cotton-tipped applicators (Q-tips) are often used for removal of ear wax in humans.
The dog's ear canal is long, bent, and tapered, so the tip of an ear swab inserted into
the vertical canal quickly approaches the diameter of the ear canal as it is advanced.
Trauma from the cotton-tipped applicator occurs as the ear canal is plugged by
the cotton tip. The ear canal is "scraped" by the abrasive cellulose or synthetic fiber.
Fgure 7-19
The patient, a mixed terrier, was hit by a car and had blood coming out of the ear. Examination
showed that the patient had a ruptured eardrum. The manubrium of the malleus is prominently
displayed.
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
159
Fgure 7-20
A cotton-tipped applicator used in this ear resulted in denuding the epithelial surface with the
abrasive material. Acid-type ear cleaners will cause severe pain when they contact the ulcer.
In an infected ear, the epithelium is edematous and very often friable, so that only
mild pressure from a cotton-tipped applicator can result in ulceration (Figure 7-20).
When the ear canal becomes ulcerated, microorganisms can flourish as growth-
enhancing nutrients, such as blood components and serum proteins, are released into
the ear canal.
Cotton-tipped applicators also tend to push any material that may be ahead of the
cotton tip farther down the ear canal, packing cerumen into the horizontal canal. If
enough pressure is applied, this material may be pushed right through the eardrum.
Cotton-tipped applicators themselves may perforate the eardrum if they are pushed
Cotton-tipped applicators are available in a variety of tip sizes. Veterinarians
should use only the small applicators in the ears of small animals. Obtaining roll-
smear cytologic samples (see Chapter 2) for determining the organisms present in
otic exudates can be accomplished by inserting the small cotton-tipped applicator
into the horizontal ear canal through an otoscope cone and pulling the swab slowly
along the ear canal toward the pinna.
 Use of cotton-tipped applicators should be restricted to removal of liquids. The
absorptive capacity of the cotton tip allows liquid to be absorbed. Simply inserting
the tip very carefully into an ear filled with liquid (e.g., flush solutions, pus, mucus)
160
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure7-21
This cat's ear was filled with wax and debris associated with ear mites. The material was
fushed out, but when a cotton-tipped applicator was put into the ear, it popped the eardrum.
Trauma from Instrumentation
Many instruments are used in the ear canal by veterinarians, groomers, and pet owners.
Curettes are used to remove wax and tenacious material from the epidermal layer.
Various rigid catheters are put into the ear canals for flushing and suctioning debris;
sharp edges on cut urethral or feeding tubes will cut the epithelium of the ear canal.
Curved hemostats are used for pulling hair from the ear canals; hemostats tend to crush
tissue and, when improperly used, may cause damage to the ear canal. Water pumps,
such as the Water Pik, provide a forceful stream of ear cleaning solution; increased
water pressure in the ear canal can rupture an already macerated, friable eardrum.
Because most procedures done in the ear canal are performed without good visi-
bility, trauma invariably occurs. Instruments and catheters are fairly small, and some
bleeding and discomfort may be evident after the procedure. Various medications
and ear cleaners may bum the ear tissue when applied. Most traumatic injuries from
instruments heal rapidly. The exception is perforation of the eardrum (Figure 7-22).
When traumatic perforation of the eardrum occurs, it is intensely painful. The
patient exhibits clinical signs and pain that were not previously present. The amount
of exudates in the ear canal may rapidly increase, and the otitis exterma being treated
iatrogenic otitis media has not been created. In the presence of an otitis exterma,
however, pushing exudates into the middle ear predisposes to otitis media.
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
161
Fgure 7-22
Ulceration and iatrogenic perforation of the eardrum in a Poodle's ear. This large hole in the
eardrum may never completely heal. Medications that may be potentially ototoxic should not
be used in this ear.
Neoplasia of the Ear Canals
When a dog or cat with chronic otitis exterma that does not respond to routine ther-
apy is presented to the veterinarian, the clinician should be alert to the possibility of
a tumor or growth in the ear canal. Medical treatment for otitis exterma may offer
palliative relief, but the chronic recurrent nature of the disease is indicative of an
underlying condition.
When cytologic examination of otic exudates reveals large sheets of epithelial
cells, neoplasia must be considered as a diagnosis. Chronic purulent otitis compli-
cated by bacterial or yeast infection may also be obvious. Tumors occlude the
ear canal and prevent drainage of exudates and therefore are often complicated by
infection.
Symptomatology
Tumors arising in the extemal ear are often diagnosed only when they become large
enough to be obvious. A tumor in the more distal portions of the ear canal may be
obscured by wax (Figure 7-23), or the examiner may not look past the bend in the ear
canal to see a tumor in the horizontal canal. Many tumors are extremely small, and in
an ear canal with a very small diameter, they predispose to infection. The tumors
162
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure7-23
Many cerumen gland tumors are functional, producing wax in great quantities (top). The wax
obscures the tumors until the ear is cleaned with a ceruminolytic (bottom).
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
163
Fgure7-24
Ulcerated cerumen gland adenomas. This Golden Retriever had recurrent aural hematomas.
The dog had been operated on three times previously for aural hematoma. when this dog was
presented to the author for the fourth aural hematoma, a careful examination of the otherwise
of aural hematoma surgery cured this dog of its head shaking.
often have an ulcerated tip (Figure 7-24). Occlusion of the ear canal by a tumor can
cause pain and discomfort. If the patient shakes the head excessively, aural
hematoma may result. It is difficult to examine the horizontal canal for tumors with
out an instrument such as a video otoscope (Video Vetscope, MedRx, Inc., Largo,
Florida), but if a tumor is found in the horizontal canal, it may explain the extreme
discomfort the patient evidently experiences (Figure 7-25).
A tumor of the middle ear may present as vestibular disease with head tilt or
nystagmus. If visualization is possible, as with a video otoscope, the tumor mass can
be seen and samples taken for further diagnostic testing. Open-mouth rostrooccipi-
tal radiographs or lateral views of the tympanic bullae (Figure 7-26) showing opac-
ity of the osseous tympanic bulla may indicate a tumor or polyp of the middle ear.
Osteolysis or fluid densities may also be seen. Computed tomography scans are also
used to identify lesions within the middle ear.
Routine cleaning of the ear canal and careful examination of the skin surface
of the ear canal may reveal small tumors. Good visualization and magnification
are mandatory in identifying these very tiny early growths. Larger tumors may be
confused with stenoses because they are large and occlude the lumen of the ear
canal. Flat tumors may look like edematous ear canals, and sessile tumors have
164
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 7-25
In addition to the tumors in the vertical ear canal of this Labrador Retriever, small cerumen
gland tumors can be seen in the horizontal ear canal near the intact eardrum. These small
a cobblestone appearance (Figures 7-27 and 7-28). Some tumors are seen only when
the otoscope is placed beyond a stenotic portion of the vertical ear canal.
Secondary infection is common in ears that harbor tumors. An obstructive tumor
mass allows accumulation of cerumen and debris beyond it. Because the smooth,
unifonm epithelial surface has been permanently changed, accumulations of wax and
serum are found in the deep recesses created by the uneven surface. These crevices
promote bacteria and yeast growth. Continued antibiotic or anti-yeast treatment is
warranted in the presence of tumors because of the secondary infections and inflam-
mation commonly associated with aural neoplasms. If the eardrum is intact, flushing
the ear canal with detergent ear cleaners is beneficial for removing the cerumen and
debris. If the eardrum cannot be visualized, however, caution in selecting a non-
ototoxic ear cleaner is warranted.
Gross Examination
On gross examination, tumors of the ear canal can have a variety of topographic
features. They may be raised (Figure 7-29), pedunculated, broad based, lobulated,
irregular (Figure 7-30), or ulcerated, or they may have a combination of these
features.
Fgure7-26
Open-mouth rostrooccipital radiograph of a cat with a unilateral nasopharyngeal polyp and
otitis media. Notice the thickened tympanic bulla and the opacified bulla lumen (oointer).
(Courtesy Dr. Gary Lantz, Purdue University.)
Fgure7-27
Flat, broad-based cerumen gland adenomas can be confused with edema or tissue maceration.
166
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure7-28
Protruding cerumen gland adenoma and cobblestone adenomas in the same ear canal as in
Figure 7-27.
Fgure 7-29
Solitary cerumen gland adenoma in an otherwise normal ear canal.
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
167
Fgure7-30
Irregular broad-based cerumen gland adenoma. Smaller tumors surround the larger tumor
mass.
For small tumors, tissue for histopathologic evaluation may be obtained by curet-
ting the tumor with a sharp-edged curette (Figure 7-31). An endoscopic biopsy tool
may be used to grasp and remove a section of tumor (Figure 7-32). In the case of a
large solitary tumor or a diffuse spreading tumor mass, a portion of the ear canal is
removed surgically, and the entire section of ear canal is submitted to the patholo-
gist. Tissue architecture is preserved in this manner, and the pathologist can better
characterize the lesion as benign or malignant. Fortunately, the circumferential carti-
lage of the extermal ear canal provides a limiting barrier to the spread of most malig-
nant tumors. If the ear tumor and the cartilage can be submitted to the pathologist,
the invasiveness of the tumor can also be determined.
Exfoliative cytologic evaluation is often adequate for differentiating inflamma
tory from hyperplastic and neoplastic lesions. A curette is used to obtain scrapings
from a suspected tumor. If the cells indicate an inflammatory lesion (neutrophils,
macrophages, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils), appropriate antinflam-
matory treatment may be instituted. If, however, clumps and clusters of large round
cells are found, an epithelial neoplasm is a diagnostic possibility and the slide should
be submitted to the pathologist for evaluation. Single spindle-shaped cells may indi-
cate fibrosis or a nonepithelial type of neoplasm.
It has been theorized that chronic inflammation, more common in the dog than in
the cat, may initiate progression of otic lesions from hyperplasia to dysplasia to
neoplasia. It has also been speculated that bacterial degradation of the apocrine
168
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 7-31
 Removal of the tumor mass shown in Figure 7-29. A 6-mm dermal curette with a sharp edge
has been placed over the mass. Angling the curette to cut the base of the tumor allows its
removal.
secretions from the cerumen glands that become inspissated in the ear canal during
episodes of otitis exterma may result in increased carcinogenesis. Whether the pres-
ence of a tumor leads to the chronic inflammation or chronic inflammation leads to
dysplastic changes and eventually to neoplastic changes is not known.
Ear canal tumors can develop in any of the skin structures lining the ear canal,
including the squamous epithelium, ceruminous or sebaceous glands, and the
mesenchymal structures (Figure 7-33). Tumors arising from the extemal ear canal
and pinna are much more common than tumors arising from the middle or inner ear.
Much controversy exists concerming the incidence of the various tumors reported
in dogs and cats. Because of the difficulty in obtaining samples from the ear canal,
most samples submitted to diagnostic laboratories are submitted from university
or referral surgeons and not from general practitioners. The number of tumors of the
ear submitted for evaluation is therefore low.
     s un n nn a   a  so
of all tumors found in cats, only 1% to 2% were derived from aural tissue. In a
second report, of all the canine aural tissue sent to different laboratories for
histopathologic evaluation, 2% to 6% contained tumors. Generally, tumors of the ear
 aq on pun o an un  a a go s pu uua aq on pan sop un d
malignant. Fortunately, malignant neoplasms of the ear canal rarely metastasize.
Failure to remove a wide en bloc section of the ear canal, however, often results in
Fgure7-32
A 1.8-mm endoscopic biopsy tool was placed through the 2-mm working channel of the Video
Vetscope to take a "bite" of the tumor for histopathologic evaluation.
Fgure7-33
vertical ear canal ablation. The mass was described by the pathologist as a liposarcoma.
170SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
local recurrence of tumor. Total ear canal ablation may be the best surgical solution
to ear neoplasia.
Most reports indicate that benign cerumen gland adenoma is the most common
tumor of the dog's ear and that malignant ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma is the
most common neoplasm of the cat's ear. However, histopathologic differentiation of
the two types of ceruminous neoplasms is not always clear. Other benign tumors
found in the ear canal of dogs are polyps, papilloma, sebaceous gland adenoma,
histiocytoma, plasmacytoma, benign melanoma, and fibroma. Malignant canine
neoplasms of the ear that have been reported are ceruminous gland adenocarcino-
mas, carcinoma of undetermined origin, squamous cell carcinoma, round cell tumor,
sarcoma, malignant melanoma, and hemangiosarcoma.
Benign tumors of the cat's ear include polyps, cerumen gland adenoma, and papil-
lomas. Malignant tumors of the cat's ear are ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma,
squamous cell carcinoma, carcinoma of undetermined origin, and sebaceous gland
adenocarcinoma.
Tumors found in the middle ear are rare and include fibrosarcoma (Figure 7-34)
and lymphoma.
Treatment of neoplasia found in the ear canals of dogs and cats requires surgical
intervention so that the tumor mass can be completely excised. Newer modalities
such as electrosurgery and laser surgery through a video otoscope (Video Vetscope,
MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida) make removal of ear canal tumors easier.
Fgure 7-34
Middle ear fibrosarcoma. A fleshy mass was seen in the middle ear Myringotomy revealed a
arge infiltrating mass filling the tympanic bulla. Histopathologic analysis of a biopsy specimen
revealedfibrosarcoma.
CHAPIER 7 Factors that Predispose the Ear to Otitis Externa
171
Histopathologic evaluation of removed tissues helps in providing a prognosis of
the disease. For malignancies, follow-up radiation therapy has been shown to be
effective in preventing recurrence of many ear canal tumors, especially cerumen
gland adenocarcinoma of cats.
Suggested Readings
Gotthelf LN: Secondary otitis media: an often overlooked condition, Canine Pract 20: 14-20, 1995.
Logas D, Rosychuck RAW, Merchant SR: Diseases of the ear canal, Vet Ctin North Am Smatt Anim
Pract 24(5):905-980, 1994.
145 cases (1978-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 208: 14 13-14 18, 1996.
 Moisan PG, Watson GL: Ceruminous gland tumors in dogs and cats: a review of 124 cases, J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 32:449-453, 1996.
Rogers KS: Tumors of the ear canal, Vet Ctin North Am Smalt Anim Pract 18:859-868, 1988.
Theon AP, Barthez PY, Madewell BR, et al: Radiation therapy of cerurminous gland carcinomas in dogs
and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:566-569, 1994.
8
Perpetuating
Factors and
Treatment of
Otitis Externa
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
174
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
titis extema is a common malady, occurring in 15% to 20% of dogs and 5% to
7% of cats seen in veterinary practice. Otitis exterma is also one of the most
frustrating diseases for veterinarians and owners to treat effectively. Treatment regi-
mens vary widely, and a myriad of products containing a variety of ingredients are
available for the treatment of ear disease.
Effective treatment of otitis exterma often varies from one patient to another; treat-
be considered individually, and treatment regimens must be tailored to the specific case.
In addition, dermatologic conditions often affect the ear canal, making it suscep-
tible to otitis exterma. The ear canal is an invagination of epidermis forming a hollow
e s  a a  s     a s
the skin of the animal also affect the epithelial tube lining the ear canal. For exam-
ple, a dog with atopy may also show inflammation of the ear canal, resulting in
redness, swelling. heat, and pain (Figures 8-1 and 8-2). In a cylindrical tube such as
Fgure 8-1
Top, Red, hot, itchy ear in a Miniature Poodle with otitis externa. Bottom, Salivary staining on
the foot of the same dog indicates atopic dermatitis as the cause of the otitis. Often there is
concomitant Malassezia dermatitis between the toes of these dogs.
CHAPIER 8 Perpetuating Factors and Treatment of Otitis Externa
175
Fgure 8-2
Underlying skin disease predisposes the ear to secondary bacterial or yeast infection. The
patient, a 5-year-old Yorkshire Terrier with severe allergic skin disease complicated with
Malassezia dermatitis, also had severe Malassezia otitis externa.
the ear canal, inflammation decreases the lumen diameter, tending to reduce both the
ventilation and drying of the ear canal. Without ventilation, the humidity level of the
ear canal rises, a factor favorable for bacterial growth.
Papules, pustules, crusts, ulcers, and alopecia that may occur on the skin of the
trunk may also occur on the skin of the ear canal. Because the ear canal is L-shaped,
exudates from these lesions tend to accumulate in the horizontal portion of the ear
canal (Figure 8-3). In the treatment of skin disease, shampoo therapy, using a varj-
ety of compounds formulated for specific purposes, acts to remove irritating
substances and improve healing. In the ear canal, ear flushing solutions containing a
variety of ingredients are also used for adjunctive therapy of disease of the ear canal.
New approaches to the medical management of otitis exterma in dogs and cats
 xa    (    a ao 
identify disease processes and determine the type of disease organisms that may be
present; (2) flushing products to remove exudates and to disinfect the canal epithelium;
and (3) elucidations of pathophysiologic mechanisms showing that otitis exterma is
a secondary manifestation of underlying skin disease. New combinations of topical
medications have been formulated to be effective against bacteria, fungi, and inflam-
mation. The fluoroquinolone antibiotics, injectable ivermectin, and topical fipronil
176
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
R
Fgure 8-3
Left and right ear canals from a dog with atopic dermatitis. Top, The left ear canal (feft) and
eardrum (right) are normal. Bottom, The right ear canal (left) is severely inflamed and ulcerated
and there is a thick exudate composed cytologically of rods and neutrophils. Culture revealed
moved through the eardrum into the tympanic bulla, resulting in secondary otitis media.
Hyposensitization of this dog allowed complete resolution of this dog's otitis after 1 year
for ear mite infestations have reduced the use of potentially ototoxic antibiotics, oils,
and insecticides in the ear canal.
Cytologic Evaluation
The first stop in approac hing ear disease is to examine a cytologic preparation of the
 Otic exudates. Examination of a prepared ear smear gives the clinician a starting
point for treatment based on the presence of yeasts, cocci, or rod bacteria.
Obtaining samples and preparing a slide to examine constitute a simple procedure
that should be a part of the minimum approach to every case of otitis presented to
the veterinarian. A sample is obtained with the use of a small cotton-tipped applica-
tor. The swab is inserted through a disinfected otoscope cone positioned near the
horizontal canal. The swab is extended beyond the plastic cone, and pressure is
applied to the ear canal epithelium as the swab is drawn back through the cone.
Every attempt is made to sample from the horizontal canal epithelium only because
CHAPIER 8 Perpetuating Factors and Treatment of Otitis Exterma
177
the vertical canal is often contaminated with a number of commensal organisms
unrelated to the ear disease
The material collected on the swab is rolled onto a clean microscope slide, with
the exudates from the left ear on the left part of the slide and the sample from the
right ear on the right side. The slide is appropriately labeled with the patient's name,
the date of the collection, and which sample is from which ear. It is then heat fixed
and stained with a modified Wright's blood stain. A drop of slide-mounting medium
is placed over the dried, stained material. Then a coverslip is placed on top of the
drop, and the glue is allowed to set. The use of slide-mounting medium makes a
permanent record of the cytologic characteristics, which can be stored for compari-
the stained slide and examined
Examination of the slide under low-power magnification allows an overall view
ble for secondary infection. Normal commensal bacteria may be found, but in otitis,
abnormal increases in numbers of organisms to the point of almost a pure culture,
the presence of neutrophils, or both indicate secondary bacterial infection. Often only
ear. Sometimes each ear of the same animal has a different organism and needs a
different treatment. The severity of the otitis may also be different in the two ears
When infectious organisms are seen under high-power (400x) magnification,
cocci are usually Staphylococcus, and rods are usually Pseudomonas or Proteus.
Budding yeasts of Malassezia may be seen individually in the background on a roll
secondary yeast infection. Staphylococcus and Malassezia are often found together
in the same ear, and there is evidence to suggest that Malassezia growth is stimulated
byStaphylococcus.
Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing of exudates may be useful in cases of
resistant otitis exterma. Many organisms have developed resistance to the routinely
used antibiotics, and they should be identified. A limitation of bacterial sensitivity
testing is that the organism's sensitivity or resistance is reported by the laboratory on
the basis of the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the antibiotic in the
blood required to kill the bacteria. Topical antibiotics can achieve significantly
higher concentrations in the ear canal than systemic antibiotics can in the blood. The
high topical antibiotic concentration may actually be effective at killing a bacterium
that was reported as resistant. Samples for culture should be taken from the hori-
zontal canal if possible, so that contaminant bacteria are not mistaken for the offend-
ing organism. Routine culture of exudates in all cases of otitis is often unrewarding
and extremely misleading because four or five bacterial isolates are often reported.
Roll-smear cytologic evaluation becomes useful in determining the etiology of
cases of otitis exterma without secondary infection. Sheets of epithelial cells may
 indicate neoplasia as the cause of otitis exterma, and the presence of numerous intact
nonstaining epithelial cells may indicate a seborreic condition. Parasites such as
Otodectes and Demodex, which may be present in the ceruminous exudates, may be
178SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
found on cytologic preparations, but these parasites are better viewed on a direct
mineral oil preparation; this type of preparation is made by rolling the ear swab
 cate the need for antinflammatories only, without the antibiotic or antifungal therapy.
Flushing of the Ear Canal
After the class of disease and the type of infection are determined, the next step is to
sedate or anesthetize the animal so that a thorough flushing and suctioning of the ear
canal can be done. It is imperative that exudates and dried medications that have
accumulated in the ear canal be removed so that the canal epithelium itself can be
evaluated. Good visualization of the ear canal after flushing helps to ensure that the
vertical and horizontal canals are clean and free of debris (Figure 8-4). The efficacy
of otic medications is enhanced when they are applied directly onto the cleaned
epithelial surface.
Care must be taken in the selection of a flushing agent because so many ear
cleaners contain materials that are potentially ototoxic when the eardrum is not intact
(see Chapter 17). Prior to using an ear cleaner, the veterinarian should read the label
to see whether it can be used when the eardrum is damaged. Many manufacturers are
now placing a warming about this issue on their labels
Fgure 8-4
Chronic otitis externa is characterized by permanent pathologic changes to the glands and the
epithelium. Epithelial proliferation, cerumen gland hyperplasia, and fibrosis result in an uneven
surface contour. This photo was taken after the ear canal was cleaned and dried.
CHAPIER 8 Perpetuating Factors and Treatment of Otitis Externa
179
Mechanical Ear Cleaning
When the ear canal is full of liquid exudates such as pus, warmed saline or warmmed,
very dilute povidone-iodine solutions (not iodine scrub, which contains detergents)
are safe flushing materials to use. Many types of high-pressure irrigation systems are
available that can be used to loosen the exudates, but the pressures in such instru-
ments can be very high, necessitating extra caution to avoid rupturing the eardrum.
Many of these new irrigation instruments have controls to adjust the flush pressure.
Ear curettes, designed to remove debris firmly attached to the epithelium, are useful
for scraping the ear canal to dislodge large pieces of wax and epithelial shreds.
Curettes are also useful for harvesting cells for cytologic evaluation when a tumor
mass is suspected.
After the extermal ear canal is flushed, it is cleaned with a catheter attached to
suction. With good visualization, small pieces of wax, epithelial flakes, and foreign
material can be removed. Flushing and suctioning may need to be repeated several
times to ensure that the ear canal is thoroughly cleaned.
Cotton-tipped applicators should never be used to clean ears! When a cotton-
tipped applicator is pushed into an ear canal full of exudates, the exudate is pushed
farther toward the eardrum, making cleaning more difficult and possibly rupturing
a weakened eardrum. Cotton swabs are also very irritating to a friable epithelium,
and their use may result in painful abrasion or ulceration of the canal epithelium.
Chemical Cleaning
After it is established that there is an eardrum present, ceruminous exudates can
be emulsified by using ceruminolytics. Most of these agents are detergents, which
require an aqueous medium to function. Many combination ear cleaners contain
dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DSS) as a wax remover. Detergents can be very irritat-
ing to ulcerated ears, and they should not be used in ulcerated ear canals. In addition,
most detergent ear cleaners are ototoxic.
Only after the ear canal has been cleaned and dried can a determination of the
integrity of the eardrum be made. Unfortunately, severely stenotic ear canals often
prevent adequate visualization of the eardrum through the otoscope.
Examining the Ear Canal
For examination of the cleaned, dry ear canal, it is helpful to determine whether the
otitis exterma is acute or chronic. Chronic otitis exterma is characterized by epithelial
hyperkeratosis, glandular hyperplasia, fibrosis, stricture, and inflammatory cell infil-
tration of the dermis of the extermal auditory canal. The changes in surface contour
of the ear canal caused by chronic otitis lead to the formation of folds; routine flush
ing helps uncover offending organisms hidden deep in these folds so that topical
antibiotics can gain access to the deeper epithelium.
 a a sa     s sr 
of the ear canal and may affect the tympanic membrane. One report involving
1808
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
histopathologic evaluation of postmortem specimens from dogs with chronic otitis
demonstrated that hair and keratin originating from the extermal ear were often found
in the middle ear. The tympanic membrane in these specimens could not be identi
fied histologically in a significant number of cases, and when it could be identified,
it was often thickened.
When the eardrum is ruptured, exudates drain from the extermal ear canal into
the tympanic bulla. The mucous membrane lining the bulla, the mucoperiosteum,
becomes inflamed and can produce copious exudates, complicating the continued
treatment of otitis exterma. Liquid medications placed into the extermal ear canal
cannot reach the bulla if the canal is already filled with mucus and pus
Perpetuating Factors
The perpetuating factors that prevent the ear canal from effectively healing include
infections with bacteria and yeasts, improper treatment of the ear, overtreatment of
the ear with ear cleaners and medications, and otitis media.
Because of the changes in the ear canal that occur as a result of disease, bacteria
and yeasts colonize and reproduce. Otitis exterma is complicated by the growth
of these infectious organisms, which is secondary to a primary disease process.
Although antimicrobial therapy may temporarily relieve the symptoms of otitis
exterma, they may recur unless the underlying disease is identified and treated as
well. Concomitant growth and colonization by these organisms are considered to be
perpetuating factors in ear disease.
Improper treatment of infectious organisms is a problem and may be the most
important reason for treatment failures. Applying ointment medications directly into
an ear full of wax results in the ointment being layered on the wax and not penetrat-
ing through to the skin of the ear canal, where the infection is present. Treatment of
a yeast infection with an antibiotic alone results in failure. Treatment of pseudomonal
ear infections with drugs such as cephalexin, clindamycin, and neomycin also results
in failure. Treatment with effective systemic antibiotics and antifungals that cannot
get into the ear canal to affect the organisms will result in failure.
Colonizing organisms associated with otitis exterma include bacteria and yeasts.
Members of the genera Malassezia, Staphylococcus, and Pseudomonas are the
organisms most commonly isolated from the ears of dogs. Corynebacterium,
Enterococcus, and Proteus are also frequently isolated. The prevalence of one organ-
ism over another is determined by a variety of factors. For example, excessive ceru-
men production from cerumen gland hyperplasia permits Malassezia growth. Water
in the ears often leads to Pseudomonas infections, whereas the decreased immune
function seen with hypothyroidism allows colonization by Staphylococcus.
Epidemiologic reports from investigators around the world indicate a wide vari-
ety of prevalent organisms found in the ears of dogs with otitis exterma. Malassezia
pachydermatis is commonly found in the author's Alabama practice, but a report
ism isolated there. Interpretation of the literature concerming the most prevalent
CHAPIER 8 Perpetuating Factors and Treatment of Otitis Exterma
181
organisms isolated from ear disease may therefore need to be regionalized. In
addition, prevalent organisms may be determined by breed susceptibility to certain
primary disease states that result in otitis. For example, acute otitis exterma or otitis
media in German Shepherds frequently is perpetuated by a secondary Pseudomonas
infection.
Isolates from the extermal ear canal do not always correlate with the isolates from
the middle ear. Pseudomonas may be found more often in the middle ear than the
extermal ear, whereas Malassezia is rarely found in the middle ear when the eardrum
in intact. Some organisms rarely isolated from the extermal ear canal of dogs, such
as B-hemolytic streptococci, may be found as the prevalent organism in otitis media.
Frequently, otitis exterma resists topical treatment because infection extends
through the tympanic membrane into the tympanic bulla, causing otitis media. This
secondary otitis media occurs in approximately 16% of cases of acute otitis exterma
and in as many as 50% of cases of chronic otitis exterma. Primary otitis media (exten-
sion of infection from the nasopharynx through the auditory tube to the tympanic bulla)
 is rare in the dog but is often seen in cats with nasopharyngeal polyps.
Studies in dogs have suggested that otitis media may be more common than
icant bacterial populations may also be isolated from the middle ear. These dogs may
q uai a ui eg sudn peau  anu a py a
Treatment
Corticosteroids have a definite place in the treatment of otitis exterma. Systemic
corticosteroids reduce both the intense pruritus associated with acute otitis extema
and the inflammation in the epithelium of the ear canal. High-dose systemic corti-
costeroids (prednisone, 1 mg/lb daily for 2 weeks, then reduce) are used for several
days to reduce the edema and stenosis that prevent adequate examination of the ear
canal. If the ear canal is patent, a potent topical corticosteroid such as dexametha-
sone, triamcinolone, betamethasone, or fluocinolone may be used to relieve the
intense pain and itching. Otic corticosteroids can be absorbed systemically from
the ears, especially if they are severely inflamed or ulcerated, and they can depress
the pituitary-adrenal axis, resulting in iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. As the otitis
resolves, a less potent corticosteroid such as 1% hydrocortisone may be used in the
Antibiotics that kill Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, and other gram-negative bacte-
ria are used in many otic preparations. They may be formulated with other topical
phanmaceuticals such as antifungals, corticosteroids, insecticides, and topical anes-
 thetics. Antibiotics such as gentamicin, neomycin, and polymyxin B are potentially
ototoxic, so if the patient has no eardrum, these antibiotics should be avoided. In addi
the ear becomes worse with neomycin treatment, the antibiotic should be stopped
immediately. Although an aminoglycoside antibiotic, ophthalmic tobramycin solution
can be safely instilled into the extermal ear canal to treat resistant bacterial infections.
182
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fluoroquinolones are used in otic formulations, but their use should be reserved
for Pseudomonas infections that do not respond to other antibiotics. Because of the
resistance problem emerging due to the improper use of fluoroquinolones, they
should not be the first choice for bacterial otitis exterma. Enrofloxacin/silver sulfadi-
azine (Baytril Otic, Bayer) is an effective formulation for otitis exterma. The ototox-
icity of silver is unknown at this time, but it has been known to cause inflammation
and flaking of the skin of the ear canal and pinna. Although not labeled for otic use.
injectable fluoroquinolones are used by the author in a variety of forms. The drug
may be instilled directly into the ear as a bulla infusion to obtain very high tissue
levels quickly. An enrofloxacin topical otic solution can be made by mixing 2 ml of
injectable enrofloxacin with 13 ml of artificial tears. Also, 2 ml of injectable
enrofloxacin (Baytril Inection, Bayer) mixed in an 8-ml bottle of dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) with fluocinolone (Synotic) provides a potent antibiotic, antinflammatory
combination. This solution is unstable and should not be used for more than 5 days.
Ciprofloxacin 0.3% eye drops can also be used in the ear. A new topical otic fluoro-
quinolone, ofloxacin, has been shown to be safe and effective in children with suppura-
tive otitis media. In Europe, a marbofloxacin/clotrimazole/dexamethasone combination
veterinary product is available to treat otitis exterma (Aurizon, Vetoquinol).
Ticarcillin has been used in severe cases of Pseudomonas otitis extema, both as
a topical infusion into the tympanic bulla and as an intravenous antibiotic. This
antibiotic is very expensive, and the intravenous route of administration requires the
patient to be in the hospital for treatment. A treatment regimen is described using
1 to 2 mg/kg prednisolone orally once daily and a cleansing and drying ear cleaner,
 followed by topical administration of injectable ticarcillin solution four times daily.
The patient with a ruptured eardrum receives 15 to 25 mg/kg ticarcillin three times
daily intravenously until the membrane heals. Topical ticarcillin and the ear cleaner
are continued twice daily for 14 days after clinical resolution. The duration of treat-
ment ranges from 14 to 36 days. Reactions to intravenous ticarcillin have been seen
indogs.
Silver sulfadiazine cream has been used to treat resistant Pseudomonas infections
A small amount of the cream is dispersed in a volume of normal saline to make a 1%
solution and is used as an ear drop twice daily. T'his compound has the potential to
cause inflammation in the ear canal and may be ototoxic.
Another useful compound for resistant ear infections is ethylenediamine
tetraacetic acid-tris (tris-EDTA) in alkaline solution. The solution can be mixed up
in the veterinary hospital and dispensed fresh (Box 8-1). This mixture is also avail-
able commercially for the treatment of otitis exterma (TrizEDTA, DermaPet, Inc., T8
negative bacteria. It affects the cell membranes of bacteria by chelating minerals
such as calcium and magnesium, essentially "stripping off’ the outer membrane
layer, rendering the membranes more porous so that the antibiotic
can diffuse into the bacteria and kill them. Even if culture and sensitivity results indi-
cate that a gram-negative bacterium is resistant to a certain antibiotic in vitro,
pretreatment with tris-EDTA may render the organism sensitive to the antibiotic in
vivo. Tris-EDTA is used as a pretreatment in the extermal ear 5 minutes before the
CHAPIER 8 Perpetuating Factors and Treatment of Otitis Externa
183
B0X 8-1
Tris-EDTA Ear Solution for Gram-Negative Ear Infections
HOW TO MAKE
1. Mix:
EDTA (disodium salt) 1.2 g
Tris (tromethamine) (Trizma, Sigma Chemical) 6.05 g
Distilled water 1 L
Glacial acetic acid 1 ml
2. Adjust pH to 8.0 with additional glacial acetic acid.
3. Autoclave and store sterile.
4. Dispense in 4-ounce bottles. Keep reffigerated.
HOW TO USE (TWICE DAILY)
1. Fill ear canal with tris-EDTA solution.
2. Wait 5 minutes, then wipe out any excess with a cotton ball.
 3. Immediately instil antibiotic solution into the ear canal.
instillation of topical antibiotics, most of which require an alkaline medium for
maximum efficacy.
Alterations in cerumen lipid composition caused by underlying skin diseases such
exterma. Low levels of free fatty acids in surface lipids coupled with increased levels
of surface triglycerides favor Malassezia infections. Malassezia growth is inhibited
in an acid medium, so manufacturers of otic products directed against Malassezia
usually formulate them with organic acids that provide an intra-otic pH in the range
of 4.5 to 5.0. Lactic, acetic, salicylic, malic, citric, boric, and benzoic acids are all
used to acidify the ear canal. For otitis extema complicated by Malassezia, the
author prefers the use of a combination of acetic acid and boric acid solution
(Malacetic Otic, DermaPet). The cleansing and desquamating effects of the acetic
and reproduction of Malassezia. This organism produces a chemotactic factor for
neutrophils that is a hydrophilic protein. The presence of this factor may help explain
The cleansing effect of the acetic acid-boric acid solution removes this chemoat-
tractant and may account for the reduction in inflammation. Boric acid, which is
hygroscopic (drying out the humid ear canal), removes moisture necessary for this
hydrophilic chemoattractant. Boric acid also dehydrates the surface of the epithelial
cells lining the ear canal so the Malassezia yeasts cannot reattach to them. Wiping
the ear cleaner on the lower part of the concave pinna also aids in decreasing the
numbers of yeasts in the ear canal.
It has been demonstrated that more than 50% of atopic dogs with pruritic skin
disease may have increased cutaneous Malassezia populations. Humans with atopic
184SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
dermatitis also demonstrate Malassezia infections.With Malassezia otitis exterma,
treatment failures are frequent even though there appears to be temporary resolution
of symptoms. Presumably, these "relapses"' are often related to the initial diminution
of inflammation due to the corticosteroid used in the ear medications or administered
parenterally in atopic patients. The reduction in inflammation reduces clinical symp-
toms, but when the topical medication is discontinued and the infectious organism is
Follow-Up
         sa 
protocols, time spent explaining proper ear care to clients helps them treat their
animals' ears as prescribed. Clients should understand the need for frequent rechecks
to monitor the progress of the pet with otitis exterma. Too often patients are sent
home with ear drops and then are not seen again until the otitis exterma flares up.
Scheduling a recheckvisit allows theveterinarian to change therapy if there is no
response.
The extermal canal can be cleaned by the owner at home to facilitate removal of
excessive exudate accumulation associated with otitis exterma or otitis media. The
author prefers an acetic acid-boric acid solution for Malassezia infection and tris-
EDTA for bacterial otitis for home use, because they are antiseptic and non-ototoxic.
The procedure is as follows:
· The ear canal is filled with the cleaning solution until it overflows.
· The canal is extermally massaged for 5 minutes.
· The loosened debris is wiped off the extermal opening of the ear canal and pinna
with a dry cotton ball.
· Limit the daily use of ear cleaners to 14 days. After the ear is clean, a mainte-
epithelium.
antibacterial medication can be applied after the ear cleaning.
A 2-week recheck is required to determine the success of the therapy. If there is
is free of symptoms. If there are bacteria, yeasts, or white blood cells on subsequent
recheck, the therapy needs to be changed accordingly.
Overtreatment of otitis exterma with ear cleaners and liquid medications may
indeed clear up the infection, but because the surface epithelium is macerated from
all of the liquid, the ear canal remains swollen. If the cytology is negative and the
inflammation has subsided, intensive ear cleaning should be stopped completely, or
a maintenance schedule should be provided to the owner. Overcleaning of the
providing a moisture barrier for the ear.
  si asa si xa so p  uis so  
regrowth of hair in the vertical canal. Most of the exudates formed in the acute phase
CHAPIER 8 Perpetuating Factors and Treatment of Otitis Externa
185
of otitis exterma have a depilatory effect on the hair, so the hair falls out. When the
 inflammation subsides and the exudates are not dissolving hairs, hair regrowth can
occur.
Frequently, after the otitis exterma has resolved, the client is willing to allow the
veterinarian to look for the underlying cause of the ear disease with a hypoallergenic
food trial, allergy testing, or endocrine assays. Failure to identify and treat any
underlying disease results in chronic otitis exterma.
Suggested Readings
Foster AP, DeBoer Dl: The role of Pseudomonas in canine ear disease, Compend Cont Ed 20:909-918,
1998.
Gotthelf LN, Young SE: New treatrment of Malassezia otitis externa in dogs, Vet Forum 14:46-53, 1997.
Harvey RG: Aspects of theinteraction between skin and staphylococci, Bayer Selected Proceedings of
the North American Veterinary Conference, January 1998.
Kiss G, Radvanyi S, Szigeti G: New combination for the therapy of canine otitis externa: microbiology
of otitis externa and efficacy in vivo and in vitro, / Smatl Anim Pract 38:51-60, 1997.
Merchant SR, Bellah Jl: Otitis symposium, Vet Med 92:517-5S50, 1997.
Nuttall Tl: Use of ticarcillin in the managerment of canine otitis externa complicated by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa,J Smalt Anim Pract 39:165-168, 1998.
Powell MB, Weisbroth SH, Roth L, et al: Reaginic hypersensitivity in Otodectes cyanotis infestation of
cats and mode of mite feeding, Am J Vet Res 4l:877-882, 1980.
Trevor PB, Martin RA: Tympanic bulla osteotormy for treatrment of middle-ear disease in cats: 19 cases
(1984-1991), J Am Vet Med Assoc 202: 123-128, 1993)
Microbiology of
the Ear of the
Dog and Cat
Sandra R. Merchant, DVM
188
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Otitis Externa
Otitis extema is a very common problem in the dog. It is seen less often in the cat.
The prevalence of disease in the dog has been reported to be between 10% and 20%
of total patient admissions, with the prevalence in the cat being 2% to 10%. Many
factors may predispose an animal to ear disease, including allergy, disorders of kera-
tinization, parasites, foreign bodies, autoimmune diseases, treatment errors, nutritional
factors, hormonal factors, and any process that interferes with epithelial migration and
desquamation, including benign and malignant tumors. All of these factors serve to
alter the microenvironment of the ear canal
Successful treatment relies on proper diagnosis and correction of any primary.
 predisposing, or perpetuating factors. It is important to evaluate and correct, if possi-
ble, any alterations in the microclimate of the extemal ear canal. The normalization
of the microclimate aids in keeping an ear disease free, after all other factors have
been identified and addressed
Structure of the External Ear Canal
The epidermis of the ear canal is similar in structure to that of the interfolliculan
epidermis of the skin. However, from a gross anatomic standpoint, this epidermis is
rolled into a tube, forcing the glandular secretions of the sebaceous and apocrine
glands into a canal instead of to the skin, where the secretions can be more easily
removed by the normal keratinization and desquamation process of the epidermis.
Further modifications of the anatomy such as pendulous ears or excessive ear canal
hair result in significantly more otitis exterma than that seen with other ear types.
Dogs with erect ears, regardless of the amount of ear canal hair, have less risk of
presumably in the dog and cat, the superficial epidermis and keratinized stratum
cormeum migrate laterally from the tympanum. This process keeps the proximal ear
canal and tympanum free from cerumen and debris
Microclimate of the External Ear Canal
The principal factor affecting the microflora within the extermal ear canal is the
microenvironment. In several studies the temperature within the extermal ear canals
of dogs measured between 38.2° to 38.4°C (100.7° to 101.1°F). There was no
significant difference between breeds of dog or whether the pinnae were pendulous.
The temperature within the extermal ear canal rises if otitis exterma is present, to
a mean of 38.9°C (102°F). Even when envirommental temperature increased,
there was only a small rise in the temperature of the extermal ear canal, illustrating
how the enviromment within the ear canal is buffered to a degree from the extermal
environment.
The relative humidity of the extemal ear canal in one study of 19 dogs was 80.4%.
This was stable through the day, rising only 2.3%, compared with the 24% rise in the
humidity of the extermal environment. However, this increase in average humidity
CHAPIER9 Microbiology of the Ear of the Dog and Cat
189
from a relatively high baseline may predispose the canal epithelium to becoming over-
hydrated and macerated, creating a more ideal environment for bacterial proliferation
The pH of the extermal ear canal in normal dogs is 4.6 to 7.2, with a mean of 6.1
in males and 6.2 in females. The pH is seen to change in otitis exterma, with a mean
of 5.9 (range 5.9 to 7.2) in acute cases and 6.8 (range 6.0 to 7.4) in chronic cases.
The data from this study were analyzed by another author, who showed that in cases
of otitis exterma associated with Pseudomonas spp. the pH was significantly higher
(mean of 6.85) than in cases of otitis extema in which no Pseudomonas was isolated
(mean of 5.7). Thus pH either seems to play an important role in the predominant
type of bacteria colonizing the ear canal, or the bacteria and its products alter the pH
of the environment.
Cerumen coats the lining of the extermal ear canal. It is composed of lipid secre-
tions from the sebaceous gland and apocrine (ceruminous) glands mixed with
sloughed epithelial cells. The lipid content of cerumen from a nonmal ear canal of a
dog can vary widely (18.2% to 92.6%), as does the type of lipid within the cerumen.
The types of cerumen lipids found in normal dog ears were cholesterol, 100%;
cholesterol esters, 93.8%; free fatty acids, 93.8%; fatty aldehydes, 93.8%; waxes,
93.8%; triglycerides, 68.8%; lecithin, 56.3%; and sphingomyelin, 18.8%. The
methodology used in the study was not able to detect small amounts of lipids; there-
fore this list of lipids accounts for only the major lipids found in the canine ear canal.
The total amount of lipid in the cerumen also varies considerably in dogs with
otitis exterma (4.3% to 69.6% of cerumen) and is significantly lower than that from
healthy ears. This may be due to pathologic changes in the glands responsible for the
formation of cerumen. The apocrine glands are thought to maintain the consistency
of the cerumen, although they probably contribute little in the way of lipids. Lipids
excreted by sebaceous glands probably constitute a large proportion of cerumen
lipids. In chronic otitis extema the apocrine glands become hyperplastic and cystic,
whereas the sebaceous gland can vary from hypertrophic to atrophic. This may cause
pathologic changes of the cerumen in otitic ears, producing a generally lower lipid
yield. The high lipid content of normal cerumen helps maintain normal keratiniza
tion of the epidermis and aids in the capture and excretion of debris that is produced
within. The high lipid content also results in a relatively lower humidity within the
lumen of the ear canal. With a decrease in secretion by the sebaceous glands or
a dilutional effect by increased production by the apocrine glands, humidity within
the ear canal rises, and maceration, followed by otic inflammation and infection,
results.
Microbiology of the External Ear Canal
Common diagnostic tests used to evaluate an animal with ear disease include
Otoscopy, cytology, and bacterial culture and sensitivity. Since the normal ear canal
is not a sterile environment, cytologic results, as well as results from culture and
sensitivity testing, must be viewed in conjunction with information obtained from
a thorough otoscopic examination. On otoscopic examination of the normal ear
canal, a small amount of yellowish-brown wax may be seen. There should be no
190
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
erosion, ulceration, or inflammation of the epidermal lining. The ear canal should be
able to accommodate an average-size otoscopic cone without undue pressure on the
sides of the canal. The tympanic membrane should be easily visualized in a willing
patient.
A cytologic examination of exudate from the ear of a patient with otitis exterma
should be performed during each examination. Samples can be taken with a dry,
cotton-tipped swab placed as far into the canal as is comfortable and safe—usually
to the junction of the vertical and horizontal canals. Obtained exudate is placed on
a slide and mixed with mineral oil to examine for ear mites. A second sample should
be rolled on a slide and stained with either a Wright-Giemsa stain, modified Wright-
Giemsa stain, or Gram's stain. If the exudate is greasy or waxy, heat fixation before
staining may be helpful. The stained slides should be examined with the low- (100x)
and high- (1000x) power objectives of the microscope. A low-power scan permits
rapid evaluation of the smear and identification of the best area(s) of the slide
for high-power examination. Otic parasites will be seen at low power (Figure 9-1).
High-power oil immersion (1000x) evaluation permits quantitation of yeast and
examination for bacteria.
Smears should be evaluated for (l) the number and morphology of bacteria,
(2) the number of yeasts, (3) the presence of fungal elements, (4) the presence of
parasites, (5) the number and types of leukocytes and whether they contain phago-
cytized microorganisms, (6) the presence of excessive cerumen, (7) the presence of
excessive keratinaceous debris, and (8) the presence of neoplastic cells.
Fgure 9-1
CHAPIER9 Miorobiology of the Ear of the Dog and Cat
191
The physical characteristics of the material collected from the extermal ear canal
may provide clues as to the underlying cause. The normal ear canal should have
small quantities of yellowish to light brown nonodiferous ceruminous discharge.
Dark yellow to light brown discharge is seen in ears infected with gram-positive
cocci. Pale yellow, thick, sweet, or sewer-smelling purulent exudates are noted
in ears infected with gram-negative rods. Copious, dark brown, waxy, or "yeasty"
smelling exudates are seen with the yeast Malassezia canis. Dark brown or black,
crumbly exudate resembling coffee grounds suggests the presence of the parasitic
mite Otodectes cynotis. A white exudate with no odor, resembling melted candle
wax, is often seen after resolution of infection in cases of chronic otitis exterma.
continued excessive oily or waxy cerumen of hyperplastic ears. Combinations of the
various etiologic agents lead to alterations of the characteristics listed previously.
On microscopic evaluation, gram-positive cocci, most often staphylococci, occur
singly, in pairs, or in short chains. Streptococci will also be gram positive, but the
cocci are usually smaller. Streptococci do not commonly fonm chains when observed
in smears from ear infections. Medium sized gram-negative rods are most likely to
be Pseudomonas, Proteus, or Escherichia coli. Small beaded or club-shaped gram-
positive rods are likely to be Corynebacterium. The presence of large gram-positive
terpart Clostridium. Malassezia canis occurs as an oval-shaped yeast in which the
 buds are broad based. As a result of budding the M. canis often appear peanut-shaped.
In the Gram's stain, M. canis is gram variable.
The normal cytology of the extermal ear canal is characterized by the presence of
squamous epithelial cells and low numbers of commensal but potentially pathogenic
microorganisms, including M. canis and Staphylococcus intermedius. There is some
debate as to whether M. canis is a primary pathogen; however, it is found three times
more frequently in ears with otitis exterma than in normal ears. M. canis is the most
common organism demonstrated in ear specimens. It has been isolated in up to 49%
of normal dogs and 23% of normal cats. In dogs, M. canis has been isolated in up to
80% of otitis extema cases and is probably the most common complicating factor of
allergic otitis. In one study it was proven that M. canis in the presence of extraneous
influences of atraumatic manipulation or moisture enhanced the conditions neces-
sary for proliferation of the organisms and gross and microscopic evidence of otitis
exterma, establishing this organism as an opportunistic pathogen.2 On cytologic
examination, there are usually few to no leukocytes unless bacteria are also present
with the broad-based budding yeasts.
The significance of numbers of M. canis or bacterial organisms found on cyto-
populations of bacteria and yeast residing in the extermal ear canal are published in
the veterinary literature
A semiquantitative cytologic evaluation of the exudate from normal ears and from
ears with otitis exterma in the dog and cat has been performed.3 In this study it was
shown that numbers of cormified squamous cells are not consistently correlated
with clinical findings, as animals with high counts may not show any clinical sign of
192SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
otitis exterma. In the above mentioned study, the results indicated that two or fewer
M. canis yeast cells per high-power dry field (400x) should be considered normal in
the dog or cat. Mean counts of greater than or equal to five yeast cells per high-
power dry field in the dog and greater than or equal to 12 yeast cells per high-power
dry field in the cat should be considered abnormally increased. It was theorized that
Malassezia otitis may be a more common clinical entity in the cat than previously
reported in the literature and that clinical signs are associated with higher mean yeast
counts than in the dog.3
In reference to bacteria, mean counts per high-power dry field (400x) less than or
equal to five bacteria per field in the dog and less than or equal to four bacteria per
field in the cat should be considered normal, whereas mean counts greater than or
equal to 25 bacteria per field in the dog and greater than or equal to 15 bacteria per
field in the cat were abnormally increased.? Degenerating neutrophils are seen most
often with significant bacterial disease and may indicate the need for systemic
antibiotic therapy.
Relying on bacterial culture alone without considering the results of cytologic
evaluation to determine the significance of bacteria or yeast in an inflamed ear may
lead to inappropriate use of antimicrobials, because normal and acutely infected ears
may harbor the same organisms. It is the opinion of many authors that cytologic
evaluation of otic exudate provides greater diagnostic information about the signifi-
cance of bacteria and yeast in ear disease than do culture results, especially since it
is unlikely that pathogenic organisms will be cultured if they are not seen on cyto-
logic examination. However, cultures should be considered in recurrent or refractory
cases, especially those involving gram-negative bacteria and when otitis media is
suspected.
The most common gram-positive organism isolated from cases of canine otitis
exterma is Staphylococcus intermedius (Figure 9-2). Other gram-positive bacteria
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Corynebacterium spp., and Bacillus spp. Gram-negative
organisms isolated from cases of canine otitis exterma include Pseudomonas spp.,
organisms, particularly Pseudomonas, are seen more commonly in chronic cases of
otitis exterma (Figure 9-3).
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is perhaps the most difficult to manage of the bacteria
that infect the ear canal. Pseudomonas is intrinsically insensitive to many antimi-
crobial drugs because of the low rate of passage of antibiotics across its outer
membrane. There is evidence accumulating that P aernginosa isolates from dogs
with otitis exterma are becoming resistant to a number of antibacterial agents, includ-
ing the fluoroquinolones. Pseudomonas thrives in an environment created by chronic
inflammatory changes of the ear canal.
The most common yeast agent cultured from canine ears is M. canis (Figure 9-4).
Other yeast organisms isolated from cases of canine otitis exterma include Candida,
Cryptococcus, Rhodotorula, Trichosporon, and Saccaromyces. Malassezia sympodialis
has been isolated from the extermal ear canals of both normal cats and those with
mild otic pruritus.
CHAPIER 9Microbiology of the Ear of the Dog and Cat
193
Fgure9-2
Modified Wright-Giemsa stain of staphylococci from a dog ear smear (magnification 10o0x).
Fgure9-3
194
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 9-4
Modified wright-Giemsa stain of Maiassezia from a dog ear smear (magnification 1000x).
Many qualitative studies have been published concerming the microflora of the
dog's ear canal in health and disease. Tables 9-1 and 9-2 summarize the studies in
the literature performed to evaluate qualitatively the microbial flora in dogs with
 normal ears and dogs with otitis exterma.
Few studies have been performed to evaluate the microflora of the cat's ear canal
in health and disease. The most common bacteria recovered from otitis exterma in
cats’ ears are coagulase-positive staphylococci. Gram-negative bacteria such as
Pseudomonas and Proteus spp. are only rarely recovered from cats with otitis exterma.
 Unfortunately, neither cytology nor culture are perfect diagnostic tests. In a recent
study, cytology agreed with culture results only 68% of the time, but even more
disturbing is that samples taken simultaneously from the same area of the ear canal
gave different culture results 20% of the time.4
From a clinical standpoint, determining the significance of a yeast or bacterial
population in animals with otitis exterma is difficult because of the multifactorial
origin of otitis exterma. Many dogs and cats with otitis exterma do not have increased
numbers of microbes in the extermal ear canal. In addition, it has been theorized that
microbes in the ear canal cannot proliferate unless inflammation or maceration
occurs within the ear canal. Because of this, August considered microorganisms
as perpetuating causes rather than primary or predisposing causes of otitis extema.3
In the semiquantitative cytologic evaluation study cited previously, the conclusion
was that the pathogenic role of these organisms always depends on considerations
other than only their numbers.
CHAPIER 9 Microbiology of the Ear of the Dog and Cat
195
Pathophysiology of Otitis Externa
Otitis exterma has many etiologies. However, after the acute inflammatory stage has
been initiated, there is a common pathway for the development of chronic otitis
exterma, regardless of the inciting cause. In the acute stage the ear canal becomes
decrease the self-cleansing function. The epidermis continues to thicken, and the
sebaceous glands initially appear to become hyperplastic. These changes result in an
increase in sebaceous secretion and desquamated cells, causing excessive wax
production. As the otitis becomes more chronic, the apocrine glands begin to dilate
and secrete. The addition of this low-lipid material decreases the concentration of the
decreases and the humidity in the ear increases.
Utimately, the ear canal microclimate can be permanently altered. Stenosis of the
canal and increased cerumen production can continually favor microbial overgrowth.
Connective tissue proliferates in the dermis and subcutis, leading to fibrosis and addi-
tional thickening of the integument. The auditory cartilages may undergo calcifica-
tion and possibly ossification, which further decrease the expansibility of the ear. All
of these changes continue to cause further occlusion of the ear canal, which further
impedes the normal cleansing function. It is likely that these altered ear canals will
suffer from intermittently to constantly increased numbers of microbes, with atten-
dant inflammatory changes, thus continuing the vicious cycle of chronic otitis.
OtitisMedia
Otitis media is a recognized cause of recurrent otitis exterma. The presence of bacte-
ria in the middle ear acts as a source of reinfection of the outer ear canal. The pres-
ence on examination of an intact tympanum does not rule out the possibility of
previous rupture and repair of the tympanic membrane in the presence of otitis
media. Conversely, the most common cause of otitis media is infection extending
through a compromised tympanic membrane from an infected extermal ear canal.
Hematogenous spread of bloodbome pathogens to the middle ear and extension of
infection from the nasopharynx through the auditory tube to the tympanic bulla are
rare. Obstruction of the eustachian tubes in cats and dogs has been shown experi-
mentally to result in a middle ear effusion. Cats can develop otitis media via exten-
also occurs infrequently. Foreign bodies, trauma, and tumors may also induce otitis
media.
Middle ear defense mechanics include a mucociliary system and a cellular
defense system. The epithelium in the middle ear can function actively in clearing
foreign material. In addition, these cells also secrete lysozymes to aid in defense
mechanisms. Fibroblasts, when activated, secrete increased amounts of collagen and
ground substance, which participate in protection and repair. A surfactant that lowers
surface tension has been found in the auditory tubes of dogs. This substance may be
Tex continued on p. 200.
196
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
ND
ND
35.9
8.
20.7
14.3
5
16
3
9
42.7
6
D
Z
2
PSEUDO-
MONAS
口
SPP.
N000046
S
SPP.
00:
6
STREPTO-
SPP.
6
0
M239
3
020
BACILLUS
CORYNE-
SPP OR
25.8
11.0
COAGULASE-
NEGATIVE
STAPHYLO-
Combined 
Combined 
Combined
Combined
6
3
32
ND
3
COAGULASE-
POSITIVE
42.9
6.
6
6.
19.0
9.8
4
9
28
一
2
5
6
ND
2
26.2
4
ND
45.5
61.7
NUMBER
of Ear Disease
156
7
6
5
7
130
6
8
coccobacilli).
DU
12
3
CHAPTER 9
Microbiology of the Ear of the Dog and Cat
197
Gedek B, Brutzel K, Gerlach R, et al: The role of Pityrosporum pachydermatis in otitis externa of dogs: evaluation of a treatment with miconazole, Vet Rec
   p s   so no n  o d u e o     a      
Sampson GR, Bowen RE, Murphy CN, et al: Clinical evaluation of a topical ointment, VMSAC 68:978-982, 1973.
Gustafson B: Otitis externa hos hund, Nordic Veterinaermedicin 6:434-442, 1954.
Grono LR, Frost AJ: Otitis externa in the dog, Aust Vet J 45:420-422, 1969.
Anim Pract 15:401-410,1974.
HarrisAM,
Marshall MJ, E
2
3
4
198
SMALL
ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
FORMS SEZIA
ND
2
14.3
51.5
19.3
6
2
0
23
86
ND
8
COLI-
2
ND
25.9
15.6
16
ND
ND
ND
13.8
2.5
ND
ND
3
2
7
PSEUDO-
MONAS
34.6
18.1
16.4
ND
11.3
ND
14.9
12.6
SPP.
3.4
0'6
2
3
S
3.4
20.8
0
3
ND
3
14
SPP.
16
6.5
12.6
6
4
SPP.
6
CORYNE-
BACTERIA
ND
19.4
3
会
会
2
ND
0
NEGATIVE
STAPHYLO-
Combined
Combined
ND
0
ND
27.7
ND
8.0
ND
ND
3
80.6
6
19.0
51.8
6
3
41.6
7
3
6
7
3
S
GROWTH
9
ND
ND
2
会
2
2
2
ND
ON
NUMBER
OtitisExterna
EARS
2
6
5
二
coccobacilli).
STUDY
CHAPTER9
Microbiology of the Ear of the Dog and Cat
199
ws r ses pue saop u euixa so jo jue a joi oedad au e jo juussse ua pue [eooiq su ar uo
Hallu RE, Gentilini E, Rebuelto M, et al: The combination of norfloxacin and ketoconazole in the treatment of canine otitis, Canine Pract 2l:26-28, 1996.
171:362-363, 1977.
, 1975
ses,J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:442-450, 1977.
Gustafson B: Otitis externa hos hund, Nordic Veterinaermedicin 6:434-442, 1954.
ermatitis and otitis: a review of 195
Grono LR, Frost AJ: Otitis externa in the dog, Aust Vet J 45:420-422, 1969.
de
Nesbitt GH, Schmitz JA: Chronic bacterial (
Webster FL, Whyard BH, Brandt RW, et al: T
Marshall MJ, Harris AM, 
Krogh HV, Linnel A, 1
104: 138-140, 1979.
Baxter
Blue JL
2
4
0123
6
200SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
important in decreasing cohesive forces between the coapting walls of the auditory
tube. In otitis media, the auditory tubes may be more resistant to opening during the
act of swallowing, which results in a lack of aeration of the middle ear.
When otitis media is present, the lamina propria of the middle ear cavity often
thickens and forms loose vascular and edematous granulation tissue, sometimes
maturing into dense connective tissue. Occasionally spicules of bone can be found
within the connective tissue. New bone or bone remodeling can be seen on the intra-
luminal and extraluminal aspect of the tympanic bulla.
Microbiology of the Middle Ear
Cytology and culture should be performed from exudate retrieved from the middle ear.
The exudate can be retrieved via myringotomy or the more invasive bulla osteotomy.
The most common pathogens cultured from the middle ear include Staphylococcus
intermedius and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Streptococcus spp., Escherichia coli,
Proteus mirabilis, Enterobacter spp., Pasteurella spp., Corynebacterium spp.,
spp., and anaerobes have also been cultured from the middle ear. Yeast (Malassezia,
Candida) and Aspergillus spp. have also been cultured from the diseased middle ear.
Otodectes cynotis will occasionally cause middle ear disease.
In a study comparing the microbial flora of the horizontal ear canal and middle
ear of dogs with otitis media, a difference in types of isolates and/or susceptibility
           
time. Therefore, it is important that specimens for bacterial culture be taken from
the horizontal ear canal and the middle ear in dogs with chronic otitis exterma in
which otitis media is suspected.
Conclusion
Otitis exterma is a very common problem in the dog. It occurs less often in the cat.
Otitis media is most often a sequela to chronic otitis exterma. Many factors have been
identified as predisposing an animal to ear disease. All of these factors alter the
microenvironment of the ear canal. Successful outcome of treatment relies on proper
diagnosis, correction of any primary predisposing or perpetuating factors, and
restoration of the microclimate of the ear canal to nonmal.
References
1. Huang HP, Fixter LM, Little CJL: Lipid content of cerumen from normal dogs and otitic canine ears,
Vet Rec 134:380-381, 1994,
2. Mansfield PD, Boosinger TR, Atfleberger MH: Infectivity of Matassezia pachydermatis in the exter-
nal ear canal of dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:97-100, 1999.
3. Ginel Pl, Lucena R, Rodriguez JC, et al: A semiquantitative cytological evaluation of normal and
pathological samples from the external ear canal of dogs and cats, Vet Derm 13: 151-156, 2002.
CHAPIER9 Microbiology of the Ear of the Dog and Cat
201
4. Graham-Mize CA, Rosser EJ: Comparison of microbiat isotates and susceptibiity patterns from the
externat ear canat in canines with otitis externa, 18th Proceedings of AAVD/ACVD Meeting.
Monterey, CA, April 2003.
5. Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski JJ, et al: Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns
 of isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and midle ear in dogs with otitis media, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 212:534-538, 1998.
Suggested Readings
August JR: Otitis externa,Vet Ctin North Am Smalt Anim Pract 18:731-742, 1988.
Colombini S, Merchant SR, Hosgood G: Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns from
dogs with otitis media, Vet Derm 1l:235-239, 2000.
Logas DB: Disease of the ear canal, Vet Ctin North Am Smatl Anim Pract 24:905-919, 1994.
10
eruminous
Diseases of
the Ear
Norma White-Weithers, MS, DVM
204
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Histopatholog y of the External Ear Canal
The epithelium of the extermal auditory meatus is composed of components similar
make up this layer of squamous anuclear cells. There are no rete ridges in the epithe-
lium of the ear canal. The sebaceous glands are the outermost glands; they become
progressively more numerous deeper into the meatus. Underlying the sebaceous glands
are simple, coiled, tubular, apocrine glands called ceruminous glands, with ducts
that open directly into hair follicles or onto the surface of the ear canal (Figure 10-1).
 During inflammatory reactions, sebaceous glands become hyperactive and hyper-
plastic; the ceruminous glands become dilated, thickened, and filled with secretions
(Figure 10-2). Under normal physiologic conditions, ceruminous secretions (cerumen)
combine with sebum produced by the sebaceous glands and epidermal debris to form
earwax, the normal secretion of the ear.
Etiolog y of Ceruminous Otitis
When ceruminous glands and sebaceous glands of the ear canal become chronically
irritated, the results are cystic dilation of ceruminous glands, hyperplasia, and
imcreased activity of the overlying sebaceous glands. The excessive amount of cerumen
produced by ceruminous glands forms a favorable medium for the growth of second-
ary bacteria and yeast. These organisms are normal flora of the ear and include
 a) s ass  d s s s
Fgure10-1
Multiple openings of the cerumen glands along the ear canal.
CHAPIER 10 Ceruminous Diseases of the Ear
205
Fgure 10-2
Many diseases cause increased blood supply to the ears, increasing the metabolism within the
using the glandular secretions as their nourishment.
aos u sea snonpuad o an) uonegno ie jo yel u aup rdo ym
breeds), excessive growth of these organisms may occur within the ear canal.
In most cases of ceruminous otitis, the epidermal hyperplasia and inflammatory
reaction occlude the extermal ear canal, making visual examination difficult. In both
the dog and cat, hyperplasia of the ear canal can simulate neoplastic conditions that
may lead to misdiagnoses and improper treatment. When hyperplasia does not
respond to treatment and hardening of the ear canal ensues, surgical intervention is
often the treatment of choice. Surgical opening of the ear canal allows proper
drainage. The identification and treatment of underlying infections are important for
surgical success
Ceruminous otitis is inflammation of the glandular structures of the ear canal,
medical or surgical management. The causes of ceruminous otitis are many, and each
condition is accompanied by other dermatologic or systemic manifestations.
Disorders of Keratinization
Primar   y Idiopa    thic Seborrhea
Ceruminous otitis can be due to an inherited or acquired keratinization defect.
Inherited disorders include idiopathic primary seborrhea, commonly seen in West
206SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Basset Hounds, Irish Setters, Dachshunds, Chinese Shar-Peis, and German Shepherds
Primary idiopathic seborrhea, epidermal dysplasia of West Highland White Terriers.
and lichenoid-psoriasifonm denrmatosis of English Springer Spaniels are examples of
primary keratinization defects with ceruminous otitis exterma. Secondary or acquired
keratinization defects include vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, zinc-responsive
dermatosis, and fatty acid deficiency.
The epidermis of the canine ear canal undergoes proliferation, differentiation, and
desquamation with renewal of the viable epidermis in approximately 22 days. In
American Cocker Spaniels that have idiopathic primary seborrhea, the proliferative,
differentiative, and desquamative stages take an average of 8 days. This rapid turmover
as seborrheic dermatitis, ceruminous otitis, or both). This defect in differentiation
includes hyperkeratosis or hypokeratosis and dyskeratosis.
Clinical Signs. The clinical signs of primary and secondary ceruminous otitis are
the same and can only be diagnosed on the basis of response to therapy. In-depth clin-
ical and diagnostic evaluations are mandatory for animals that present with chronic
ceruminous otitis. These animals usually present with other primary or secondary
dermatologic manifestations.
Clinical signs can be mild or chronic, with secondary bacterial or Malassezia
infections complicating the primary problem. Ears with ceruminous otitis are
malodorous, and there is often secondary epidermal hyperplasia of the ear canal and
pinna that may occlude the auditory meatus. Other presenting signs are usually
generalized, focal to multifocal, seborrheic denmatitis with secondary bacterial
and/or Malassezia infections.
In the author's experience, animals with moist vertical canals due to pendulous
ears and poor ventilation are presented more often with chronic ceruminous otitis
that requires general anesthesia for proper ear examination. Examination under
general anesthesia allows the clinician to visualize thoroughly, clean, and obtain
biopsy specimens from the ear.
A biopsy is often necessary to differentiate chronic epidermal hyperplasia with
chronic ceruminous otitis from ceruminous gland tumors. Secondary bacterial and
Malassezia infections respond when the underlying cause is properly treated. If
there is no response, evaluation should consist of bacterial and fungal culture and
sensitivity testing.
Diagnosis. Histologic evaluation of noninfected seborrheic areas usually
supports a diagnosis of primary seborrhea. After identification of secondary invaders
response to treatment.
Treatment. Because ceruminous otitis is only the manifestation of a more seri-
ous problem, finding the underlying cause should be the clinician's primary goal.
Treatment of primary seborrhea should attempt to control the disease rather than
produce a complete cure. Treatment of the ears should focus on (l) control of
secondary infections and of production of scales and crust, and (2) reduction of
inflammation. Frequent ear cleaning with appropriate topical medication can control
the odor associated with this condition. Steroids, cytotoxic drugs, and retinoic acid
CHAPIER 10 Ceruminous Diseases of the Ear 
207
have variable effects. Results with the use of synthetic retinoid (etretinate) in Cocker
Spaniels and other breeds to treat idiopathic seborrhea are disappointing. In the
Cocker Spaniel, for example, there is a reduction of scales, crust, and alopecia, but
the ceruminous otitis is not responsive to this therapy. It is less effective in other
breeds affected with this condition.
Endocrine Dermatosis
The most common endocrine diseases associated with ceruminous otitis are
hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism.
Hypothyroidism. Breed predilections for hypothyroidism include Golden
Retrievers, Alaskan Malamutes, Chow Chows, Boxers, English Bulldogs, Chinese
Shar-Peis, Great Danes, Afghan Hounds, Doberman Pinschers, Newfoundlands,
 Dachshunds, and Cocker Spaniels. Hypothyroidism in cats is extremely rare.
Etiology. The causes of hypothyroidism are classified as primary, secondary,
tertiary, and congenital. Examples of causes of primary hypothyroidism include
lymphocytic thyroiditis, thyroid atrophy, thyroid gland hyperplasia, neoplasia, and
thyroid cell destruction due to radioactive iodine treatment or antithyroid drug therapy.
Secondary hypothyroidism in the dog is the result of pituitary destruction and
malformation or suppression of thyrotropic cell function. There are no known causes
of canine tertiary hypothyroidism. Defects in iodine organification and thyroid gland
dysgenesis are the two most common causes of congenital hypothyroidism in the dog.
Chinical Signs. Thyroid hormone is an important regulator in the body's meta-
 bolic function. A deficiency causes a decrease in the normal cellular metabolic func-
tions of the body. The clinical signs of hypothyroidism in the dog are extremely
variable, being those of metabolic, dermatologic, reproductive, neuromuscular,
ocular, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, hematologic, and behavioral disorders.
Serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentrations are affected by thyroid hormones.
Thyroid hormones stimulate the synthesis, mobilization, and degradation of lipids,
with the most dramatic effect being a decrease in degradation. This may present as
an increase in serum low-density lipoprotein (LDL).
Thyroid hormone increases the sebum production necessary for the normal lipo-
genesis and synthesis of sterol by keratinocytes and increases cutaneous linoleic
acid, with a decrease in gamma linolenic and arachidonic acid concentrations. The
decrease in arachidonic acid concentration alters epidermal proliferation. This alter-
ation is responsible for the seborrhea, seborrheic dermatitis, and ceruminous otitis
so often present in hypothyroid dogs. This may be the only presenting sign in a hypo-
thyroid dog. The dryness or greasiness associated with the alteration of cutaneous
fatty acid levels can manifest as a dry or a greasy form of seborrhea.
Secondary bacterial and Malassezia infections are complicating factors in ceru
minous otitis and can be a denmatologic nightmare if not treated properly. Other
dermatologic abnormalities in dogs with hypothyroidism are myxedema, thin skin.
alopecia, and various degrees of hyperpigmentation. Otic pruritus is often present
with secondary bacterial or Malassezia infection.
208SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Diagnosis and Treatment. The resolution of the ceruminous otitis largely depends
on the proper diagnosis and control of hypothyroidism. History and physical exami-
nation findings are important in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism. A complete blood
count, serum biochemistry profile, urinalysis, and thyroid stimulation test are some
of the few laboratory tests used to diagnose hypothyroidism.
Because the availability of thyroid-stimulation honmone is limited due to factors of
price and supply, in most cases the interpretations of total tetraiodothyronine (T4), free
T4, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) in combination with clinical manifesta-
tions are the only diagnostic tools at the clinician's disposal. For this reason, it is impor-
are not performed. Drugs such as glucocorticoids, anticonvulsants, trimetoprim/
sulfamethoxazole, phenylbutazone, quinidine, salicylates, and radiocontrast agents can
adversely affect thyroid levels in the body. It is recommended that these medications be
withdrawn, if possible for up to 2 weeks, before a thyroid test is performed. These drugs
can reduce the conversion of T4 to triiodothyronine (T3), inhibit thyroxine synthesis in
the gland, inhibit TSH secretion from the pituitary gland, and interfere with the binding
of serum thyroxine to binding proteins. Thyroid testing should not be performed imme-
diately after anesthesia. Due to its adverse effect on serum thyroid levels, a waiting
period of up to 1 or 2 weeks is recommended before performing a thyroid profile on
these animals. A free T4 using the equilibrium dialysis (ED) method is recommended
in veterinary medicine. This test measures the quantity of T4 in the dialysate and does
not use the thyronine-binding globulin as a high-affinity binding protein, as in the
radioimmunoassay (RIA) test. The level of this binding protein is low in the dog.
compared with humans. The free T4 by the ED method as compared with the RIA
method is a more specific and sensitive test in the dog.
Epidermal hyperplasia and pain often occur in the treatment of ceruminous otitis.
Topical steroid preparations are useful in controlling pain and inflammation and
reducing epidermal hyperplasia. Because steroids affect baseline thyroid levels,
thyroid profiles should be performed before or 1 or 2 weeks after discontinuing any
topical otic medications with steroids.
Hyperadrenocorticism. Bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia due to pituitary
adenoma is the most common cause of hyperadrenocorticism in the dog. The excessive
production of cortisol by the adrenal gland results in systemic as well as dermatologic
abnormalities. The prolonged exogenous use of oral, intramuscular, or intravenous
(and possibly otic and ophthalmic) corticosteroids may also cause iatrogenic hyper-
adrenocorticism. Other causes are adrenal adenomas and carcinomas.
The cutaneous manifestations of excessive serum cortisol are as follows:
·Alopecia
· Failure or slowness of hair growth after clipping
·Thin skin
· Pyodenma
·Seborrhea
· Comedone fonmation
·Bruising
· Striae formation
CHAPIER 10  Ceruminous Diseases of the Ear  209
Seborrhea dermatitis may manifest as ceruminous otitis with secondary bacterial
or Malassezia infections
Glucocorticoids inhibit epidermal proliferation and sebum production through
antimitotic, protein-catabolic, and antienzymatic effects. The decrease in hair growth
is manifested clinically through bilateral symmetrical or "moth-eaten" alopecia. The
antimetabolic and antiproliferative effects on fibroblasts are evident as poor wound
healing. There is also an increase in susceptibility to infections. Because animals
of seborrhea and skin infection may be exaggerated due to the dermatologic effects
of low thyroid levels.
The combination of seborrhea and bacterial or Malassezia infections can be
manifest as ceruminous otitis, which is not as common in the cat as in the dog.
history, complete blood count, serum biochemistry, urinalysis, adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) stimulation test, low- or high-dose dexamethasone suppression
tests, and ultrasonographic and radiographic findings. Because steroids affect
thyroid levels, a thyroid stimulation test, if available, or a thyroid profile (T4, free
T4 [ED], and TSH) is part of the diagnostic plan. However, a thyroid profile should
be performed after hyperadrenocorticism has been diagnosed and controlled to mini-
mize the adverse effects of steroids outlined previously. Treatment of otitis exterma
secondary to hyperadrenocorticism depends on proper diagnosis and treatment of
the hyperadrenocorticism. Any secondary bacterial or Malassezia infection should
also be treated.
         
animals with this disease are presented with other problems such as a secondary
bacterial, parasitic (Demodex), or fungal skin infection, as well as otitis. When these
are encountered, individual treatment modalities are recommended for each specific
problem. Therefore, in treating an animal with hyperadrenocorticism, secondary
problems can complicate the picture, making therapy prolonged and complicated
at times.
Other Endocrine Dermatoses. Other causes of endocrine dermatosis include
Sertoli cell tumors, seminoma, interstitial cell tumor, estrogen-responsive dermatoses,
and hyperandrogenism in intact male dogs.
Nutritional Deficiency
Nutritional keratinization disorders that can cause ceruminous otitis are fatty acid
deficiency, vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, and zinc-responsive dermatosis.
Fatty Acid Deficiency
Fatty acid binds water into the stratum cormeum of normal skin, helping to main-
tain the permeability properties of the skin barrier. Fatty acids also function as
antioxidants.
210SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Prolonged storage of dry dog and cat food causes degradation of fatty acids, fatty
acid deficiency, and reduced levels of antioxidants. Animals fed home-cooked diets
or reduced-fat diets may develop fatty acid deficiency. Gastrointestinal diseases that
cause poor absorption will result in fatty acid deficiency in spite of an adequate diet.
In dogs, the essential fatty acids linolenic and arachidonic acid, can be synthesized
from linoleic acid. Cats lack the enzyme omega-6-desaturase, so they cannot convert
linoleic acid to arachidonic acid. Therefore, cats require linolenic and arachidonic
acid in their diets. Fatty acid deficiency in cats does not become clinically apparent
until many months of feeding a fatty acid-deficient diet.
Deficiency of fatty acids, especially arachidonic acid, in the diet may result in
abnonmalities in keratinization with microscopic epidermal changes (hypergranulosis,
epidermal hyperplasia with orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis).
Clinically, animals with acute fatty acid deficiency produce a dry, dull hair coat
with generalized fine scaling of the skin. This also affects the ear, with involvement
of the pinna and horizontal ear canal. In chronic conditions, there is epidermal thick-
ening with concurrent greasiness of the ear pinna and canal and of the intertriginous
and interdigital areas. The ceruminous otitis that accompanies this condition is made
worse by secondary bacterial and Malassezia infection. Without appropriate treatment,
pruritus and seborrhea become progressively worse.
Diagnosis and Treatment. Diagnosis of fatty acid deficiency is based on
sure that an animal's diet contains the recommended amount of fat for proper health
and that an animal on a reducing diet is given follow-up and routine veterinary care.
Commercially prepared and balanced veterinary omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acid
supplementations are available. They contain linoleic acid and eicosapentaenoic and
docosahexaenoic acid. The latter two are marine lipids that modulate arachidonic
acid metabolism, thus reducing inflammatory responses in the skin through
prostaglandin and leukotrienes. They also mediate epidermal proliferation. The role
of linoleic acid in controlling seborrheic dermatitis in dogs is well established. The
 proper storage of food at room temperature and in airtight containers away from
direct light is important to ensure that an adequate level of linoleic acid is present in
the diet. Diets should not be stored for prolonged periods.
Supplementation with sunflower, safflower, or vegetable oil at a dose of 5 ml per
cup of dry or can of dog food should elicit a response in 3 to 8 weeks. Similar results
should be seen with commercially prepared veterinary supplements. Any secondary
bacterial or Malassezia infection should be treated.
Vitamin A-Responsive Dermatosis
Epithelial cells require vitamin A to maintain their integrity. Vitamin A is necessary
for the proliferation and differentiation of keratinocytes. The Cocker Spaniel has a
predisposition to this condition. However, it has also been reported in the Labrador
Retriever and Miniature Schnauzer. Cats lack the metabolic capability to convert
carotene tovitaminA.
CHAPTER 10 Ceruminous Diseases of the Ear
211
Clinical Signs. The effects of vitamin A deficiency on the skin include marked
hyperkeratosis of the epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands. The hyper-
keratosis of the sebaceous glands results in the blockage of the sebaceous secretion,
giving rise to a papular-type skin eruption. In a generalized patterm, severe follicular
plugging and hyperkeratotic plaques are usually secondarily infected with bacteria or
Malassezia organisms. In the ear, ceruminous otitis is usually present, and severity
depends on the chronicity of the condition. In most cases an otic secondary bacterial
or Malassezia infection is present.
Diagnosis and Treatment. The follicular changes present in dogs with vitamin
A-responsive dermatosis and the histologic findings of markedly disproportionate
follicular orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis are enough to warrant treatment of this
condition. The final diagnosis, however, depends on response to therapy. The condi-
tion responds to 400 to 800 IU/kg of vitamin A orally once daily with a high-fat
meal. Animals on such a high leve] of supplementation should be monitored for
signs of toxicity.
Zinc-Responsive Dermatosis
Zinc-responsive dermatosis is a chronic keratinization disorder of dogs. Predilection
for the disease is observed among the Alaskan Malamutes and Siberian Huskies,
with a few reports in Doberman Pinschers and Great Danes. There are two forms of
this disorder: syndrome I and syndrome II.
Syndrome I. This syndrome affects mainly Siberian Huskies and Alaskan
Malamutes, with reported cases in Bull Terriers. A genetic defect in the Alaskan
Malamute causes a decreased ability to absorb zinc from the gastrointestinal tract.
Chinical Signs. Despite a balanced diet, clinical signs usually appear in animals
between 1 and 3 years of age. Clinical signs include alopecia with crusts and scales
around the eyes and on the pinnae and horizontal canals of the ears. There is
erythema with some form of erosion in these areas. Excessive sebum production and
secondary bacterial and Malassezia infections are common; this is noticeable on the
pinna of the ear and in the horizontal ear canal. Secondary bacterial and Malassezia
infections of the ear canal cause the foul odor of the otitis present in this condition.
Syndrome Hl. Rapidly growing puppies fed diets high in plant protein (phytate)
or calcium or diets low or deficient in zinc will develop zinc-responsive denmatosis.
Doberman Pinschers, Labrador Retrievers, Great Danes, Standard Poodles, and
German Short-Haired Pointers are some of the breeds affected by this syndrome.
predominant lesions seen. Hyperkeratosis of the footpads and planum nasale is
frequently present. Secondary bacterial infections are common.
Diagnosis. A thorough history, diet analysis, physical examination, and skin
biopsy are important in the diagnosis of zinc-responsive dermatosis. A histologic
follicular parakeratosis suggests this condition.
 si dns  I as  ns sop  
mended (oral zinc sulfate or zinc methionine). For dogs with syndrome II, the
212SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
correction of the diet usually produces a favorable response in 2 to 6 weeks.
If dietary adjustment resolves the condition, there is no need for supplementation
Allergic Dermatitis
Allergic dermatitis in the dog and cat is a dermatologic manifestation of the immune
response elicited when an animal is exposed to allergens in the environment, food,
insect saliva, or drugs. Allergic inhalant dermatitis (atopy), food hypersensitivity.
and flea-allergy dermatitis are the three most common hypersensitivity reactions in
the dog and cat.
Allergic Inhalant Dermatitis (Atopy)
Allergic inhalant dermatitis (atopy) is a type I hypersensitivity reaction to environ-
mental allergens in dogs and cats. Predisposition to develop immunologic reactions
to allergen-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) or immunoglobulin G (IgG) is inher-
ited. Genetic predisposition for canine atopy exists in dogs but not in cats.
Etiology and Pathogenesis. The causes of atopic dermatitis are various; they
include weeds, grasses, tree pollens, molds, insect antigens, and other environmen-
tal products. The plethora of theories about the pathogenesis of atopy have in
common the sensitization of animals to environmental allergens that results in a
disease process.
Clinical signs are mediated by the degranulation of mast cells. When IgE fixed to
mast cells reacts with specific allergens in the skin, the mast cells degranulate. When
mast cells degranulate, they release vasoactive substances that cause vasodilation,
edema, inflammation, smooth muscle contraction, and pruritus. Although the reac-
tion occurs in cats, the exact pathogenesis of atopy in the cat is unknown.
Clinical Signs. Age of onset is between 1 and 3 years in the dog and between 6
and 24 months in the cat. The clinical sign of otitis exterma is often the only present-
ing sign of atopy in the dog. Other signs of atopy include foot licking and chewing.
anmpit and inguinal pruritus, face rubbing with conjunctivitis, focal-to-truncal alope.
cia depending on chronicity, secondary seborrhea, and secondary bacterial or
Malassezia infections.
Ceruminous otitis exterma is rare in cats and when present may be an indicator of
atopy. Eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions and miliary denmatitis are the most
common clinical manifestations of atopy in the cat. Cats also have varying degrees
of head and neck pruritus and self-induced alopecia. Chronic ceruminous otitis
occurs in cases of atopy that either go untreated or fail to respond to therapy.
Diagnosis and Treatment. Identifying the offending allergens should be the
focus of a diagnostic plan. However, history and physical examination findings are
very important factors in the diagnosis of atopy. Every effort should be made to rule
out parasitic diseases and food hypersensitivities before allergy testing is performed.
Both in vivo and in vitro allergy tests are available. The intradermal skin test (in vivo)
is the most widely accepted test for atopy. The in vitro tests (radioallergosorbent
CHAPIER 10 Ceruminous Diseases of the Ear 
213
test [RAST] and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) measure the leve]
or concentration of allergen-specific IgG in the serum. The disadvantage of these
tests is their high level of false-positive reactions. They do not correlate well with
intradermal skin tests. More clinicians are employing these tests because of their
ease of use. Nevertheless, the intradermal test is the most acceptable and preferred
test for the diagnosis of atopy in the dog and cat.
the allergens are identified and hyposensitization is initiated. Topical and systemic
therapies for the otitis should be considered in chronic cases. Therapy should be
targeted to reduce inflammation and hypersecretion and hyperplasia of the cerumi-
bacterial or Malassezia infection, concurrent treatment of this condition is necessary
to effect a good response. Avoiding offending allergens is the ideal treatment proto-
management should be initiated. Therapy in some animals is lifelong. Avoidance of
the offending allergens, medical management of clinical signs, and hyposensitization
are the keys to a successful management program for atopic animals.
Some animals are subjected to surgical intervention due to chronic otitis exterma
stressed that ceruminous otitis extema with bacterial and Malassezia infection is
sometimes the only presenting sign in an animal with an allergic dermatitis. This can
either be atopy, food hypersensitivity, or a parasitic dermatosis.
In treating animals with ceruminous otitis due to atopy or any other forms of
allergic denmatitis, the underlying allergic dermatosis in most cases will respond and
all clinical signs will be completely controlled long before the otitis exterma is
cleared. Therapy for ceruminous otitis exterma can be prolonged and unrewarding.
depending on its chronicity.
Food Hypersensitivity
 Food hypersensitivity is a type I, Il, or IV hypersensitivity reaction (see Chapter 6).
It is a nonseasonal, pruritic skin condition of both dogs and cats. An affected animal
may have received the same diet for years or may recently have been introduced to
a new diet. Dogs and cats of all breeds are susceptible.
Chinical Signs. Clinical signs of food allergy are variable. In the dog, there are
atopic-like signs. Bilateral otitis exterma, generalized pruritus, generalized secondary
Although gastrointestinal signs are uncommon, vomiting, diarrhea, and excessive
flatulence may be present. In the cat, miliary dermatitis, pruritic head and neck
dermatitis, eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions, and induced pruritus are common
presentation signs.
Diagnosis and Treatment. History and physical examination play major roles in
the diagnosis of food hypersensitivity. Food elimination diets, preferably home
cooked, are the best way to identify allergenic ingredients. If home cooking is not
feasible, however, several commercially prepared hypoallergenic diets are available.
214SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
The aims of a diet trial are to provide foods to which the animal has had no previous
exposure and to use diets that do not contain additives or preservatives. It is because
of the wide range of ingredients present in commercially prepared diets that the best
hypoallergenic diets are home cooked.
For proper diagnosis of food hypersensitivity, the recommended duration of the
diet trial should be 10 to 13 weeks for dogs and from 9 to 13 weeks for cats. Because
animals with food allergy usually have concurrent atopy or flea allergy dermatitis,
these conditions should be identified and treated before attempts are made to
Sr    n  od a o 
consist of avoiding the offending allergenic foods and controlling clinical signs with
topical or systemic medications.
Flea-Allergy Dermatitis
Flea-allergy denmatitis is the most common allergic dermatosis in the dog. Flea bites
can cause pruritus of the pinnal flap, but it rarely affects the ear canals of dogs and
cats. The cutaneous reaction in flea-allergy dermatitis is due to the body's reaction
to allergens present in the saliva of the flea. It can be a type I or type IV hyper-
sensitivity reaction. Pyotraumatic dermatitis and fibropruritic nodules may be pres-
ent in chronic flea-allergy dermatitis. This can be manifested in animals with other
underlying allergies where ceruminous otitis is present.
Diagnosis and Treatment. History, physical examination, identification of fleas
and "flea dirt" with flea combing, and intradermal skin testing with flea allergens
allow definitive diagnosis of flea-allergy dermatitis. Response to therapy is most
commonly used for the definitive diagnosis of flea-allergy dermatitis.
Various topical medications are available to kill both adults and developing larval
stages. Topical medications having residual effects for up to 1 month are now routinely
used to kill adult fleas. Other products available have insect growth regulators and
adulticides for pet, house, and yard treatments.
Parasitic Dermatosis
Otodectes cynotis
The most common parasite affecting the ear canals of dogs and cats, Otodectes cynotis
is transmitted by direct contact. Transmission among and between dogs and cats is
extremely common. These ear mites are also present on other parts of the body. The
sleeping habits of dogs and cats, where the head is in close contact with the tail,
make the "tail-head region' a common site of infestation. The adult mites live on the
skin surface of the horizontal ear canal, covered by a layer of debris. Mechanical irri-
tation by these mites causes the production of a waxy, brown cerumen. The cerumi-
nous glands become dilated with cerumen. Epidermal scales and debris combine
with cerumen to fonm a favorable medium for the growth of secondary bacteria and
Malassezia species. Otic discharge, complicated by secondary Malassezia or bacte-
rial infection, is usually malodorous, and patients will present for the control of the
CHAPIER 10 Ceruminous Diseases ofthe Ear  215
odor rather than for the symptoms of otitis. Secondary bacterial and Malassezia
infection can mask the primary underlying cause of the parasitic ceruminous otitis
and thereby delay diagnosis.
Toxic and allergic substances produced by Otodectes mites cause hypersensitiv.
ity reactions in dogs and cats. The saliva of mites contains potent allergens that are
responsible for this immune reaction. Ceruminous otitis exterma can also be a result
of Otodectes infestation.
Chinical Signs. Head shaking is common in animals with Otodectes infestation.
The head shaking often leads to the formation of auricular hematomas. Intense pruritus
of the ears is common, and animals can present with a noticeable head tilt, circling.
and sometimes, in chronic untreated infestation, convulsions
Otic examination may or may not reveal mites moving on hair shafts. Especially
in dogs, the inflamed ear canal is not a hospitable enviromment for mites, so the migra-
tion of mites to other parts of the body is common. Ceruminous gland hyperplasia may
make otic examination extremely difficult in cases of chronic Otodectes infestation.
When there is hyperplasia of the ear canal, general anesthesia is recommended for
otoscopic examination.
Histologic findings include hyperplasia of the ceruminous glands in acute cases,
along with epithelial parakeratosis and hyperplasia, an increase in inflammatory
infiltrate, squamous metaplasia of apocrine ducts, and atrophy of hair follicles.
Similar changes are present in chronic infections.
Diagnosis and Treatment. Diagnosis is by finding mites in the ears on otoscopic
examination, microscopic identification of the mites, determination of secondary
bacterial or yeast identification, and response to treatment. The ears should be
treated concurrently with the whole body. All animals that can come in contact with
the patient should be concurrently treated. Various commercially prepared topical
medications are available for the treatment of otic acariasis.
Sarcoptes scabie!
Although most commonly found on the pinnae of the ears, Sarcoptes scabiei mites
can migrate into the extermal ear canal. The mechanical irritation and toxic
substances produced by these mites lead to the hyperproliferation of the ceruminous
glands of the horizontal ear canal. Ceruminous otitis caused by sarcoptic mites
resolves when the primary problem and any secondary complications are treated.
Skin scrapes are not always positive for sarcoptic mites. If clinical signs and
physical examination findings indicate sarcoptic infestation, it is best to treat the
animal for the disorder and make a diagnosis by response to treatment.
Notoedres cati
The sarcoptic mite of cats, Notoedres cati, can also cause ceruminous otitis.
Mechanical irritation, combined with the toxic substances and salivary antigens
produced by the mites, results in glandular irritation and proliferation.
216SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Diagnosis and treatment are pursued by identifying the mite and implementing
proper treatment. Sarcoptic mites are not always picked up on skin scrapings in the
dog; in the cat, however, skin scrapings reveal numerous mites. In some cases,
however, diagnosis is confinmed by response to treatment.
Otobios megnini
Otobios megnini, the spinous ear tick, has been implicated in ceruminous otitis of
dogs and cats. Although this condition is rare, the larval and nymphal stages of this
mite feed on lymph and blood in the ear canal, resulting in irritation and subsequent
hyperplasia of the ceruminous and sebaceous glands of the ear.
Diagnosis is made by identification of the larval or nymphal stages in the ear
canal. Management of the tick population in the dog's environment is important to a
successful treatment plan.
Mechanical removal of ticks with forceps is recommended. Grasping the tick
on the head next to the skin is ideal. Care should be taken not to rupture the tick,
to prevent exposure to disease agents that may be present. If the tick is located
deep in the ear canal, a video otoscopic removal may be necessary. Environmental
treatment should be initiated and routinely maintained, especially in tick-infested
areas.
Demodex
Some dogs with generalized demodicosis test positive for the Demodex canis mite
on ear swabs. In some dogs with severe ceruminous otitis, Demodex mites may be
identified in the cerumen even before truncal lesions are found. Some cats with ceru-
minous otitis have also been identified as having Demodex cati in the secretions.
Microscopic examination of the exudates from ceruminous ears suspended in
mineral oil reveals the mites. Identification of mites from these animals can aid in
the treatment and management of demodicosis. The physical mechanical irritation
and irritation from toxins produced by these mites result in the cystic dilation of the
ceruminous glands of the ear. The result is hyperplasia of the ear canal in chronic
conditions. The excessive cerumen produced by these glands is irritating and predis-
poses to secondary bacterial and Malassezia infections. The treatment of generalized
demodicosis with topical solution (amitraz) should involve treatment of the ear canal
for complete cure and to prevent recurrence.
The use of systemic medication is now widely used, although it is not approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for demodicosis. Ivermectin and
milbemycin oxime, on an extra-label basis, are the systemic agents now being
used for the treatment of this disease. When these systemic medications are used,
treating the ear canal is not indicated. However, infected ears should be treated for
secondary infections.
Other Parasites. Other parasites implicated in ceruminous otitis are Eutrombicuia
CHAPIER 10 Ceruminous Diseases of the Ear
217
Tumors of the Ear Canal
Most tumors of the ceruminous glands of dogs are benign but in the cat are malig-
nant. Ceruminous and sebaceous gland adenomas, adenocarcinomas, basal cell
carcinomas, fibrosarcomas, chondrosarcomas, trichoepitheliomas, mast cell tumors,
ceruminous gland hyperplasia, and inflammatory polyps have been identified in the
ears of dogs and cats.
Nasopharangeal polyps have been identified in cats presented with otitis exterma
associated with ear masses. Tumors result in obstruction of the ear canal, with the most
common ones being of ceruminous gland origin. Ceruminous gland tumors are most
frequently diagnosed in older male cats; these tumors have a high malignancy rate.
Ceruminous gland adenomas (Figures 10-3 and 10-4) and carcinomas are the two
most common tumors in the cat. The adenomas are smooth, nodular, or pedunculated
 masses with intact epithelium. If secondary infection is present, the epithelium may
be ulcerated.
Histologically, adenomas are differentiated cystic or tubular growths with
cuboidal eosinophilic epithelium (Figure 10-5). Cystic contents are colloidal, orange
to eosinophilic secretions. The mass present in the ear canal may invade the parotid
salivary gland. Inflammatory polyps in dogs and cats may be misdiagnosed clini
cally as neoplasia. Histopathologic diagnosis is necessary for differentiation of these
masses.
Fgure 10-3
Small cerumen gland adenomas in the ear canal.
218
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 10-4
Fgure 10-5
Histopathology of an ear canal, showing huge dilated cerumen glands and inflammation.
CHAPIER 10 Ceruminous Diseases of the Ear
219
Chinical Signs. Purulent, malodorous discharges are common clinical signs asso
ciated with any type of tumor in the ear canal. Secondary bacterial and Malassezia
infections are common. Obstructions of the canal by these masses prevent drainage
and result in the accumulation of debris and cerumen. The accumulation of this
debris and cerumen causes irritation to the epithelium of the canal, resulting in
hyperplasia and hypersecretion of the ceruminous glands. Sinusitis and dysphagia
are often present in cats with nasopharyngeal polyps
under general anesthesia, is necessary to determine the extent of these tumors.
Although it is difficult to distinguish ceruminous gland hyperplasia from a neoplas-
tic condition, it is important to determine the extent of the condition to plan for
proper diagnostic procedures. For tumors of the ear, surgical intervention is the treat-
ment of choice. Microscopic evaluation is necessary to make a definitive diagnosis
of tumors in the ears of dogs and cats
Histologic evidence of tumors (benign or malignant) warrants surgical intervention
for tumor removal and proper ear drainage.
Environmental and Conformational Causes of Ceruminous Otitis
Moisture in the ear canal due to high humidity, high ambient temperature, improper
an excessive amount of water by the epithelium of the ear canal. This leads to severe
maceration of the ear canal with secondary infection. This condition is complicated
by the poor ventilation observed in some dogs with pendulous pinnae. Covering of
the extermal meatus by long pendulous ears prevents proper air circulation.
Improper ear medication, harsh medications, and the inappropriate use of instru-
ments in the ear cause irritation and abrasion, predisposing the ear canal to irritation
and subsequently otitis exterma with secondary infection and epithelial hyperplasia.
Proper ear drying after cleaning, avoidance of harsh medications, use of appro-
priate instruments for ear cleaning, and performance of routine otoscopic examina-
tion for early identification and treatment are mandatory for the successful treatment
of otitis extema.
Suggested Readings
Griffin CE, Kwochka KW, Mac Donald JM: Current veterinary dermatotogy: the science and art of
therapy St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
Marino Dl, MacDonald JM, Matthiesen DT, et al: Results of surgery in cats with ceruminous gland
adenocarcinoma, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30, 1994.
1998, Veterinary Learning Systems
Power HT, lhrke Pl: Use of etretinate for treatment of primary keratinization disorders in cocker
spaniels, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20 1:419-429, 1992.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE: Muetter and Kirk's Small animal dermatotogy ed 6, Philadelphia,
2001, WB Saunders.
11
Failure of
Epithelial
Migration:
Ceruminoliths
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
222SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
L dead cells, trapped foreign debris, and wax. Without a physiologic method of
debris removal, large accumulations of material would remain in the ear canal.
A number of different substances that may be found in the ear canal must be
removed or they will result in significant accumulations within the canal. The ear
glands produce ceruminous secretions, and in certain conditions, cerumen accumu-
ear canal such as exudates from otitis exterma also must be removed, as should
substances that gain access to the ear canal from outside the ear, such as plant mate-
rial and accumulation of ear medications. How does the normal ear canal remove all
of this accumulated debris?
Epithelial Migration
Fortunately, the ordered growth of the ear canal epithelium facilitates a clearing
mechanism termed epithelial migration. Simply stated, the epithelium in the ear
nal ear canal. As the surface epithelial cells move, they carry along any debris on
top of them. This physiologic epithelial movement process may be demonstrated
by placing India ink on the eardrum and observing its dispersal along the ear canal
over several weeks (Figure 11-1). The rate of epithelial movement is slow, and in
older animals and people the rate becomes even slower. When the rate slows to the
point of allowing accumulation of debris, the tenm failure of epithelial migration
applies (Figure 11-2). When this condition causes accumulation of substances within
the ear canal, ear flushes and ceruminolytic agents play important roles in its
management.
 A simple squamous germinal epithelium lines the lateral surface of the tympanic
membrane in the extermal ear canal, especially in the area of the handle of the
malleus (the pars tensa). It has been hypothesized that these germinal cells differen-
tiate into epithelial cells called basal keratinocytes, with very loose attachments to
the basement membrane.
Basal keratinocytes migrate radially on the surface of the eardrum, becoming
continuous with the epithelium of the extemal ear canal. Evidence of this phenome-
mon has been gained from studying the resultant migration of squamous epithelium
into the middle ear cavity following myringotomy performed at the periphery of the
eardrum.
Migration of epithelium from the (pars tensa of the) tympanic membrane toward
the annular region of the eardrum to the epithelium of the horizontal canal provides
a clearance mechanism for the migratory keratinocytes that result from normal strat
ified squamous epithelial physiology in the extermal ear canal. Cerumen, which
covers the keratinocytes, is cleared from the ear canal along with the migrating
epithelium.
CHAPIER 11 Failure of Epithelial Migration: Ceruminoliths
223
Besides playing a role in protecting the ear canal as a mechanical barrier to envi-
ronmental substances, the keratinocytes have been shown to possess immune functions.
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is stored in keratinocytes. When these cells are damaged, IL-1
is released, stimulating other cells to release more IL-1, and a cascade of immuno-
logic events results in the migration of granulocytes, monocytes, and macrophages
into the site of damage. When an area of the ear canal has been denuded by trauma
or ulcer formation, loss of this protective immune mechanism allows unchecked
bacterial colonization, favoring the development of otitis extema.
Failure of Epithelial Migration
Damage to the germinal epithelium of the eardrum from infection or ear mite infes-
tation results in damage to the keratinocytes on the surface of the tympanic
 membrane (Figure 11-3). During the healing process, fibrosis may cause permanent
B
Fgure 11-1
For legend, see p. 224.
Continued
224
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
D
E
Fgure 11-1—cont'd
A through E, Movement of India ink across the eardrum demonstrates epithelial migration.
India ink was placed on the eardrum at the junction with the horizontal canal. Photos are taken
at 2-week intervals. The entire series covered 2 months.
CHAPIER 11 Failure of Epithelial Migration: Ceruminoliths
225
Fgure11-2
Accumulation of ceruminous exudates in the ear. Epithelial migration is not able to remove the
waxymatter.
Fgure 11-3
gently flushed with a dilute povidone-iodine solution to remove the ear mite debris. After cleaning,
the eardrum can be seen to have a tear in it. It is here that epithelial cells that would migrate to the
ear canal will stop their journey. This will result in waxy accumulations on the eardrum in the future.
226
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 11-4
Soft wax ball seen attached to the eardrum. Part of the eardrum is visible at the ventral portion
of the wax ball between it and the horizontal canal.
changes to the tympanic membrane. Normal epithelial migration may be disrupted.
 Failure of epithelial migration may result in the accumulation of flakes of skin in the
ear canal. More often, however, wax and keratin accumulate at the base of the
eardrum and form either soft wax plugs (Figure 11-4) or large, hard concretions
called ceruminoliths (Figure 1 1-5). To find them when examining the ear canals with
an otoscope, the veterinarian should follow the bend in the ear cartilage and look in
the horizontal canal toward the eardrum. Ceruminoliths are found attached to the
eardrum lying along the floor of the horizontal ear canal.
Ceruminoliths
If the dog in which a ceruminolith is developing has a large number of hairs origi-
nating from around the annulus of the tympanic membrane, the hairs are included in
the matrix of the ceruminolith. As the concretion moves, in response to head move-
ment and gravity, these hairs are pulled and may cause significant discomfort.
Bristly, thick hairs, as found in some dogs, that become involved in ceruminolith
formation may irritate the ear canal lining and also cause discomfort (Figure 11-6).
In the author's experience, these conditions are often found in dogs and cats with
histories of previously resolved ear disease. When ceruminoliths occur, they are
usually seen in an ear without evidence of other disease.
CHAPIER 11Failure of Epithelial Migration: Ceruminoliths
227
Fgure 11-5
A hard concretion at the eardrum of a 15-year-old Poodle. Note the hairs included in the matrix
of the ceruminolith. Also notice the normal ear canal epithelium.
Fgure 11-6
This large ceruminolith in a German Shepherd illustrates the inclusion of bristly hairs in the wax
ball. In this photo, the thick hairs are touching the horizontal ear canal wall and causing
discomfort. The horizontal ear canal epithelium appears normal.
228
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 11-7
Soft wax ball. The owner of a 4-year-old cat presented the animal for diminished hearing and
head tilt. The history indicated that the cat had recurrent ear mites as a kitten.
When epithelial migration is prevented from continuing, the keratinocytes on the
eardrum form layers on top of each other and are pushed backward toward the eardrum.
Over time, the net effect is significant accumulation of desquamation products that
cannot clear away from the eardrum and out of the ear canal. Cerumen and hairs mix
into the heap. Cytologic smears of these concretions will show heavy growth of
Malasseziayeasts.
These waxy accumulations can become quite large, some of them measuring 1 or
 2 inches in length. Although innocuous in appearance, ceruminoliths plugging the
horizontal ear canal diminish hearing. In certain head positions, the weight of the
ceruminolith pushes against the eardrum and may cause increased air pressure
within the middle ear cavity, leading to signs of vestibular disease (Figure 11-7).
Otoscopic examination of a ceruminolith reveals that there is a base attached to
the eardrum, with the body of the mass freely movable and unattached to the
surrounding ear canal. The tips of long hairs may be seen on the surface. In many
cases the peripheral portion of the pars tensa can be visualized.
Removal
The softer wax balls can be curetted or flushed out of the ear canal with fluid under
pressure. If there is an eardrum present, treatment with a ceruminolytic agent such
as dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate may loosen the concretion. Warming the flush
Fgure 11-8
A, Removal of a wax ball from the ear canal from the cat in Figure 11-7. The mass was grasped
scopic graspers were ineffective at removing the wax. B, The ear canal was treated with a ceru-
minolytic agent and flushed with warmed dilute povidone-iodine solution. The soft wax was
flushed from the ear and small pieces of remaining debris were carefully suctioned off the
surfaceoftheeardrum.
230
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
solution helps to soften the waxy debris, and sometimes careful suction with a large-
bore suction catheter aids in their removal (Figure 11-8).
Removing a hardened concretion type of ceruminolith requires the use of a grasp-
ing forceps. The use of a video otoscope (Video Vetscope, MedRx, Inc., Seminole,
Florida) facilitates this process because the veterinarian can see the ceruminolith
clearly on the video monitor. The endoscopic grasping tool, which is inserted
through the biopsy channel of the video otoscope, can be carefully placed to grasp
and remove the mass (Figure 11-9).
After removal of these concretions, the tympanic membrane often looks abnor-
mal. Small holes in the tympanum may be present because the epithelium is eroded
along with the concretion as it is removed (Figure 11-10). These small holes heal
rapidly (Figure 11-11).
If the eardrum was previously ruptured and a ceruminolith developed as a conse-
quence, the healing tympanic epithelium may be in the middle of a ceruminolith.
When the concretion is removed, the eardrum is tom away, and a large direct
communication to the tympanic bulla results. If detergent flush solutions were used
for removal of the ceruminolith, copious saline flushes are used to remove these
ototoxic substances (Figures 11-12 and 11-13).
Fgure 11-g
Endoscopic grasping forceps are used through the working channel of the Video Vetscope to
extract the wax ball from the dog in Figure 11-5.
Fgure11-10
After removal of the wax plug from the cat in Figure 11-7, the eardrum was closely examined.
A roughened surface and a small hole in the 5 o'clock position can be seen.
Fgure 11-11
Close-up view of the eardrum from the cat in Figure 11-10 1 month after removal of the wax
ball. The eardrum has healed and is almost normal in appearance. The cat was asymptomatic
onthisrecheckvisit.
232
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Older animals may have large accumulations of waxy, cellular debris in the ear
canals because the epithelial migration process is quite slow. Occasional ear
flushes may be required to augment the physiologic cleaning process in these
patients.
B
Fgure 11-12
A, Bilateral ceruminoliths were identified in a 7-year-old mixed-breed dog with diminished hear-
ing. B, The ceruminoliths were grasped with the endoscopic forceps and carefuly removed.
Both eardrums were ruptured, which may have resulted because each eardrum was involved
in the matrix of the ceruminolith.
CHAPIER 11 Failure of Epithelial Migration: Ceruminoliths
233
A
B
Fgure 11-13
A, The patient, a 3-year-old German Shepherd, was examined because of a painful ear. The
affected ear was not being carried in an erect position. Examination of the ear canal revealed
a wax plug at the level of the eardrum. B, The wax plug was grasped with the endoscopic
forceps and carefully extracted. After the ear canal was flushed and dried, a partial tear of the
eardrum could be seen. Mucus and pus consistent with otitis media are present under the
cerumen plug.
234
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Suggested Readings
Michaels 1, Soucek S: Development of the stratified squamous epithelium of the human tympanic
membrane and external ear canal: the origin of auditory epithelial migration, Am J Anat 184:334-
344,1989.
Smelt G, Stoney P, Weinberger J, et al: Sequelae of experimental tympanic and inferior wall perfora-
tions: the double meaning of epithelial migration, J Ototaryngot 20: 171-176, 1991.
12
Diseases that
Affect the Pinna
Genevieve Marignac, DVM
236SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
to the pinnae. Dermatoses restricted to the pinnae include aural hematoma, physical
denmatoses (e.g., trauma, solar denmatitis, frostbite), arthropod bites, neoplasia,
vasculitis, contact dermatitis, fissure or seborrhea of the ear margin, pinnal alopecia,
and psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatitis of Springer Spaniels. Many other dermatoses
may induce lesions that begin or stay confined to the pinna for some time, but they
usually involve other body sites at some point of their evolution (e.g., sarcoptic
mange, dermatophytosis, atopic dermatitis, pemphigus complex).
This chapter focuses on these two groups of skin diseases from the point of view
of their pinnal involvement. A clinical classification based on the most common
and/or particular pinnal manifestation of each dermatosis has been used. However.
the author is aware that most diseases mentioned here could be included under more
than one heading. The reader is referred to updated specialized literature to find
details on their pathogenesis, diagnostic procedures, and treatment; they are beyond
the scope of this chapter.
Pinna Anatomy
The pinna, or auricle, consists of the flat part of the auricular cartilage, covered by
skin on both sides. The convex surface is haired, even in some hairless breeds such
as the Chinese Crested dog. Most of the concave surface is glabrous in cats and is
variably haired in dogs, depending on the breed. In the most hirsute breeds such as
the Cocker Spaniel the area around the ear canal opening is glabrous. The proximal
part of the auricular cartilage folds into different tubercles and ridges and forms the ear
canal opening, which includes the anthelix (medial), tragus (lateral), and antitragus
(caudal) (Figure 12-1). (See also Chapter 1.)
Nineteen muscles attached on the skull and the auricular, annular, and scutiform
cartilages allow the independent and complex pinnal movements observed in dogs
and cats. The evolutionary role of pinnae is not clear. It may be related to sound
collection (mobility of the pinna) or to prevention against foreign bodies (pendulous
Aural Hematoma
Aural hematomas can form within (intrachondrally) or along (subparachondrally)
the cartilage of the pinna. They are considered more common in pendulous-eared
breeds, but any dog or cat can be affected. There is no sex predilection, but affected
dogs are usually middle-aged or older.
Clinically, aural hematomas result in large fluctuant swellings of various sizes,
but usually they affect most of the ear pinna above the anthelix. During the first days,
the swelling is warm to hot to the touch, and the overlying skin is erythematous. The
animal is greatly bothered by the increased weight of the ear and sometimes seems
CHAPIER 12Diseases that Affect the Pinna
237
Apex
Rostral border ofhelix
Scapha
Caudal incisure
"Henry's pocket"
Fgure 12-1
Right pinna of a cat, concave surface.
to experience pain. Aspiration fluid obtained within hours of hematoma formation is
sero-hemorrhagic and usually rich in fibrin. The presence of fibrin can prevent aspira-
tion of any fluid later in the disease. The normal evolution of a hematoma is resorp-
tion of the fluid and healing. Fibrosis is always a major feature of the aural
hematoma healing process, especially if left untreated. The pinna becomes thick,
hard, and permanently distorted as the fibrosis in the wound contracts. Because aural
hematoma is rarely seen in dogs and cats with major trauma to their pinna, minor ear
Most studies reveal the following:
· Trauma seems a precipitating factor rather than an underlying factor in aural
hematoma.
· Aural hematoma is an uncommon finding in chronic skin diseases.
· Many dogs affected with aural hematoma do not have signs of any concurrent
auricular, cutaneous, or systemic disease.
In one study, results were in favor of an autoimmune cause.? Joyce and Day could
not confinm these results, even though they did find histopathologic evidence of
cartilage degeneration associated with fibrovascular granulation tissue filling the
cartilage defect. They presumed that their samples (incisional biopsies of affected
pinna) reflected the end process of cartilage degeneration that might have been
caused by the mediators released by macrophages earlier in the process. These
considerations are in favor of a process, most probably immune-mediated, that began
238SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
several weeks before the aural hematoma was observed by the owner. Diagnosis of
aural hematoma is usually straightforward and is based on history, clinical presenta-
tion, and fluid collection. Because the disease is self-limiting and heals sponta-
neously, some owners may choose not to treat their animal. Nevertheless, the
hematoma greatly bothers the animal. Cosmetic considerations are also in favor of
surgical treatment.
Several surgical techniques have been described. Fluid drainage (aspiration,
indwelling drain, partial or whole-length incision) and flushing are effective in reliev-
ing the animal but usually result in post-treatment deformity of the ear pinna. Griffin
sion (without necrosis) and at restoration of the pinna's initial shape and carriage are
the most cosmetically effective and have the least recurrences.? This can be achieved
by several techniques. The most commonly used are multiple mattress sutures placed
  )          
Mattress sutures may also be placed through a soft but rigid device (several types are
marketed that usually contain foam).
Because the healing of aural hematomas is highly fibrotic, glucosteroids are
flushed into the hematoma cavity. They are also given orally with antibiotics, at least
until the sutures are removed and the incision has healed.? Even though trauma is
probably only a precipitating factor, it should be avoided as much as possible to
prevent relapses. It is mandatory to identify and correct the cause. Otitis exterma and
pinnal skin diseases are most commonly encountered (Figure 12-2).6
Pinnal Trauma
The most common causes of pinnal trauma are pruritus or fight wounds; they also
may be related to common dog habits such as earth digging and chasing other
animals (Figure 12-3). Complications at the surgery site, including infection and
tearing of the stitches, are common where ear cropping is still allowed. Pinnal
trauma is usually associated with prolific bleeding. Routine wound cleaning and
topical hemostatic application (peroxide, epinephrine, or collagen) are usually suffi-
cient treatment. In severe cases, cauterization under anesthesia and/or compressive
bandage might be necessary. Due to the thin edges of the pinna, laceration of the ear
margin can be a permanent sequel.
Dermatophytosis is another possible consequence, which is often associated with
a history of cat fighting or soil digging. Both cat claws and soil can be a source of
various dermatophytes. The trauma associated with contact facilitates the inocula-
p ym payoos si euud au g o uy e sunp uaddey Aeu siui uny au jo uon
soil-covered paw during digging or shortly after.
Blood sampling from the ears of dogs and cats has been recently developed in
order to monitor blood glucose. Pinnal lesions may result from frequent sampling
The local ischemia associated with the vascular problems commonly associated with
diabetes mellitus probably predisposes diabetic patients to pinnal complications.
DHAPIER 12Diseases that Affect the Pinna
239
Fgure12-2
Fibrosis and folding of the pinna of a 13-year-old cat with a history of aural hematoma that was
leftuntreated.
Fgure 12-3
240
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Pruritic Dermatoses
Pruritus is probably the most common cause of pinnal lesions in dogs and cats. The
origin of the pruritus can be the pinna itself, as in arthropod-related dermatoses,
atopic dermatitis, or contact denmatitis.4 Nevertheless, pinnal pruritus is most
commonly caused by otitis exterma (e.g., otodectic mange, foreign body, Malassezia
dermatitis, conjunctivitis).4 Pruritus results in pinnal alopecia, excoriation, and crusting.
Sarcoptic Mange
Sarcoptic mange is a cosmopolitan, transmissible, nonseasonal, highly pruritic,
generalized dermatosis of dogs caused by Sarcoptes scabiei var cani. It is contagious
among dogs and can cause transient lesions on humans because sarcoptic mange is a
zoonosis. Other variants of Sarcoptes scabiei are found on most mammalian species.
The pinna is one of the favorite habitats of the mite. Early pinnal lesions are abun-
dant, with yellowish crusts that adhere between hairs. The entire border of the pinna
may be involved. Pruritus is usually intense and results in pinnal trauma, hair loss,
excoriation, and erythema. Because the pathogenesis of scabies involves a hyper
sensitivity reaction, some dogs may experience only mild pruritus. An anergic fonm
is described where affected animals are almost nonpruritic in spite of the presence
of hundreds of mites.? More commonly, clinical signs of scabies can be more subtle
or have a different localization in dogs treated for fleas and ticks with drugs used
against acarids (penmethrin, other pyrethroids, fipronil, amitraz) that are not
completely efficient due to their spectrum, the formulation used (spot-on, collars,
shampoo), the amount used, or the frequency of application.
Differential diagnosis includes otodectic dermatitis, trombiculosis, pediculosis,
cheyletiellosis, contact dermatitis, Malassezia dermatitis, and atopic dermatitis.
Definitive diagnosis is based on finding Sarcoptes scabiei mites. Multiple skin scrap-
ings are sometimes necessary and should involve at least both pinnae and
both elbows. Pinnae should be sampled preferentially in areas where thin crusts are
present. They feel like sand when the pinnal margins are palpated between the fingers.
Nevertheless, mites can be difficult to find. If sarcoptic mange is suspected, a
complete treatment should be instituted regardless of skin scraping results.
The pinnal-pedal reflex is often positive. When the pinnal margin is scratched
with a fingermail, a reflexive rear leg scratch is initiated. Most pruritic conditions
of the pinna and even pruritic otitis exterma can also induce a positive response.
 False-negative reactions are also encountered.
Treatment for scabies should involve the whole body, even if lesions are localized.
Systemic treatments (selamectin, ivermectin) are usually preferred because they are
easy to use, have minimal side effects, and are envirommentally safe. In case of treat-
ment failure or for cost considerations, especially in kennels, acaricidal rinses are a
good altermative (lime sulfur, amitraz, rotenone, phosmet). Hair clipping is mandatory
if the hair coat is thick and/or long. Lime sulfur rinses can be used on young dogs.
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
241
Notoedric Mange
Notoedric mange is a nonseasonal, transmissible, pruritic denmatosis of cats caused
by Notoedres cati. It can cause transient lesions on most mammals, including dogs
and humans. All in-contact cats, especially littermates, are more or less affected. The
incidence is reported to have greatly decreased, and notoedric mange is considered
rare in most countries. The distribution is epizootic; in a given country, it can be seen
commonly in one region and rarely in another.
The medial borders of both pinnae are affected first, then the whole pinna is
affected; the lesions then spread all over the face, eyelids, neck, and, infrequently.
the perineum and feet. Generalization is unusual. Papules are early transient
lesions. The skin rapidly becomes thickened and forms large wrinkles covered with
thick, adherent, yellowish to silvery crusts. Pruritus is intense and results in alope-
cia. Severe excoriation leads to infected wounds. Lymphadenopathy is a common
feature.
 Differential diagnosis includes otodectic dermatitis, cheyletiellosis, food allergy.
atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, and pemphigus foliaceus or erythematosus.
Mites are more readily found on skin scrapings than Sarcoptes scabiei. Nevertheless,
due to their small size, the scraping should be scrutinized under 10x objective,
closed diaphragm, medium light, and after good clearing of the sample.
Many acaricidal drugs are toxic in cats, particularly organochlorates, organophos-
phates, permethrin, and amitraz. Avermectins (selamectin, ivermectin) and lime
sulfur are effective.
Treatment of the premises is mandatory because the mite can survive for more
than 2 weeks in the environment.
Trombiculiasis
The six-legged larvae of the genera Trombicula (chigger mite, harvest mite) cause a
seasonal (in temperate or continental climates) and pruritic papular dermatosis both
in dogs and cats. Numerous species of Trombicula are associated with the disease in
various countries. The more commonly recogmized are Neotrombicula automnalis
(Europe) and Eutrombicula alfreddugesi (America).
Mites are often found on and around the pinna. The legs, interdigital areas,
ventrum, and face are often involved, too. Pruritus is almost always present. Crusts,
alopecia, and erosion are present on affected areas.
The diagnosis is usually easy because the larvae are visible to the naked eye
(0.5 mm), have a bright orange to red color, and are tightly adherent to the skin,
usually in clusters.
Treatment should aim at killing the mites present on the animal, relieving the
pruritus, and preventing subsequent infestation. If infestation is localized, topical
application of an otic ointment containing steroids and an insecticide is sufficient.
Otherwise, an acaricidal spray should be associated with a 5- to 8-day course of oral
prednisolone (1 mg/kg). If free roaming cannot be prevented, the prevention of
242SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
reinfestation is difficult. An acaricidal spray with a strong repellent effect such as
permethrin is an option for dogs but is toxic in cats. In one study on a small number
of animals, fipronil spray applications seemed to achieve a more effective and last-
ing result in dogs than in cats.° Trombicula autumnalis adults are found in the
outside environment. Compost areas should be enclosed so that the pet cannot access
them. Treatment of other favorable areas (under trees, under the house, in bushes)
with insecticides should be discouraged because of the toxicity to invertebrates
(pollinating insects, honeybees) and children and the presence of residue on fruits or
vegetables grown in the garden.
Louse Infestations
Pediculosis can be caused by sucking lice (Anoploura, such as Linognathus setosus
in dogs) or chewing lice (Mallophaga, such as Felicola subrostrata in cats and
Trichodectes canis or, in warm climates, Heterodoxus spiniger in dogs). Lice are
dorsoventrally flattened wingless insects. They cause few direct lesions but usually
cause intense pruritus. The whole body is often involved, but they particularly accu-
mulate on the concave surface and base of the pinna.
Nits (louse egg cases) are usually visible, adherent to the hair. The hair coat is
often matted and dirty. Lice infestation is associated with neglect (overcrowding.
poor sanitation), and affected animals are often debilitated. Anemia can be associ-
ated with heavy Linognathus setosus infestation because sucking lice feed on blood.
Asymptomatic carriers exhibit only mild pruritus and seborrhea sicca.
Differential diagnosis includes flea-allergy dermatitis, scabies, cheyletiellosis,
Dermanyssus or Trombicula infestation, Malassezia denmatitis, allergic skin diseases.
and seborrheic disorders. Acetate tape allows lice immobilization and identification
by microscopic observation. Hair coat observation with the video otoscope is another
possibility. Nits are visible both on macroscopic and microscopic examination.
They are larger and more tightly attached to the hair than Cheyletiella eggs.
In dogs and cats, most routine insecticides are active on adult lice (spray, sham
poo, powder, dips), which might explain the observed decrease in pediculosis preva
lence. Nevertheless, treatments are usually ineffective on eggs and have to be applied
repeatedly.
Msect Bite Dermatitis
Insect bite dermatitis can be caused by various hematophagous insects due to the
mediators or toxic products present in their saliva; it is sometimes associated with
hypersensitivity reactions. Cats are more commonly affected than dogs, perhaps
because they roam more and because of their "lie and wait" way of hunting. Papules.
The border and the dorsal side can also be affected. In dog breeds with pendulous or
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
243
broken ears, lesions are seen on the surface of the pinna where the ear folds down
 In severe cases, multiple small ulcers covered with hemorrhagic crusts are present.
The causative insects vary with the season, environment, and climate.
The rabbit flea (Spilopsyllus cuniculi) can infest dogs and cats that are in contact
at the time of rabbit parturition. This flea is found mainly in Europe and Australia
It stays tightly attached to its host's skin, usually at the tip of the pinna, and should
not be confused with a tick.
Mosquitoes (Aedes spp., Culex spp.), stable flies (Stomoxys calcitrans), and
blackflies (Simulium spp.) may cause lesions on the pinna. The bridge of the nose
and/or the periocular area can also be affected. T'heir presence is seasonal in endemic
areas. Because they do not stay on their host, the diagnosis is often putative.
Differential diagnosis includes actinic dermatitis, trauma, canine eosinophilic
pinnal folliculitis, and eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. Diagnosis is based on
history and clinical signs. Lesions are often infiltrated with eosinophils and show
secondary infection.
Treatment should be aimed at the lesions and at reinfestation prevention. Lesions
are cleaned and topical antibiotics are applied. Steroids are often used because of the
common hypersensitivity component of the disease. Steroids are not indicated if
ulceration is present because they slow the healing process. Elimination of the
animal's exposure to the insects is the only effective prevention but is usually difficult
to achieve. Measures include treatment of farmed or pet rabbits, prevention of
good repellent activity, as shown with a deltamethrin-containing collar against
phlebotomes, but they are toxic in cats. Vaseline mixed with citronella, DEET, or
Atopic Dermatitis
Erythema of the concave pinna is seen in more than 50% of atopic dermatitis cases in
dogs and is the only symptom for a year or more before the development of other symp-
toms in at least 3% of canine cases.10-12 Associated pruritus is intense (Figure 12-4).
Lichenification and thickening of the concave pinna usually occur. Seborrhea and
Malassezia dermatitis are common complications. This frequent feature might be
explained in part by the observation made on 10 normal dogs, where mast cell counts
were found to be highest in the medial and lateral pinna.7 Otitis exterma, cheilitis, and
conjunctivitis are also frequently encountered in canine atopic dermatitis and also
cause pinnal pruritus and trauma.
The clinical presentation of atopic denmatitis is very different in cats. Otitis
exterma and the related pinnal trauma caused by pruritus are uncommon, even rare.
Atopic dermatitis is a common underlying cause of the initially non-lesional pruri-
tus of the face, neck and pinma, even though Otodectes cynotis and food allergy are
the main differential diagnosis for this condition in cats.
244
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 12-4
Intense pruritus of the inner pinnae in a 5-year-old female atopic Labrador with secondary
Malasseziadermatitisandotitisexterna.
Food Allergy
Food allergy is commonly associated with auricular disease both in dogs and cats
(see Chapter 6). The pathogenesis of cutaneous nontoxic adverse reaction to food
can involve immune-mediated or non-immune-mediated mechanisms. They are
mechanisms are not elucidated in animals and are a point of controversy in humans.
 In cats, facial pruritus is probably the most common presentation of food allergy.
Excoriations caused by the intense self-mutilation are usually not restricted to the
pinna but also affect the preauricular area, face, and neck. As opposed to canine
cases of food allergy, otitis exterma is rare in cats.
In one study of 51 food-allergic dogs, Rosser? stated that 80% of cases had otitis
exterma and that it was the only symptom in 20%. Pinnal lesions mainly result from
otitis exterma-related pruritus (Figure 12-5). Improvements in pruritus and skin
lesions during the food trial may not be obvious if the perpetuating factors of the
otitis exterma are not treated initially (bacteria or yeast proliferation, inflammation
associated ear canal or pinna changes).
Contact Dermatitis
Contact dermatitis is a common cause of skin lesions on the concave surface of the
pinna, probably because it is hairless.? Topical ear treatments are a common cause.
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
245
Fgure 12-5
Erythema and lichenification on the inner pinnae of a female Bichon Frise with food allergy.
Typically, the animal is treated topically for otitis exterma; 1 to 3 days after the start
of treatment, the condition worsens. Almost any treatment can cause an allergic reac-
tion. In humans and animals, neomycin has been most commonly involved.9.10
Propylene glycol is a very common vehicle of topical auricular medications. It is
considered by Griffin to be the most common cause of contact dermatitis of the
pinma.11
Some ointments can be applied on the skin for transdenmal absorption such as
vasodilators for cardiac disease (e.g., nitroglycerine). The concave pinna is the usual
site because it is glabrous and vascular and the animal cannot lick the product easily.
The drug and its vehicle are potential causes of contact dermatitis. Erythema is
often observed after repeated application of medications, especially if applied on the
thyroidism has been evaluated in cats.'′ Contact denmatitis is also possible, so it is
recommended that pinnal application be altermated.
In contact dermatitis associated with topical ear ointments, the concave surface of the
pinna is erythematous and swollen. Erosion or even ulceration can be present, especially
if an irritant product (diethyl ether, toluene, essential oil) has been applied. Pruritus is
usually more severe, and ear scratching and rubbing cause alopecia and excoriation.
Ih some cases the ear is painful. A definite diagnosis can rarely be achieved because
drug challenge is usually not performed due to a possible worsening of the symptoms.
When symptomatic treatment is opted for, two points should be considered:
1. Steroids can be the cause of the adverse reaction.
2. The drug vehicle can also be implicated. Because it is identical in most
ointments, change of drug does not always resolve the symptoms.
246
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Ear flushing and pinna cleaning with saline (with or without systemic antiinflam-
 matory treatment) is a possible option.
Cutaneous Adverse Drug Reaction
Any drug. drug vehicle, or food product can cause an adverse reaction in the skin
(toxiderma) (Figure 12-6). Most authors agree that toxiderma can mimic any skin
 disease. Some specific drugs preferentially induce pinna lesions.
Self-induced mutilation of the head and neck has been reported in hyperthyroid
cats treated with carbimazole. The same symptoms have been observed less
B
Fgure 12-6
A, Sudden onset of ear and neck excoriation in an 8-year-old male domestic short-hair cat
2 months later.
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
247
commonly in cats treated with the carbimazole metabolite, methimazole.14,15 Facial
pruritus has also been associated with propylthiouracil and clavulanic acid and amox
icillin.16 Cephalexin-induced pemphigus foliaceus lesions on the whole ear pinna and
extending to the face have been observed in one cat.16 Vasculitis, causing necrotic
pinnal lesions and onychomadesis, was associated with penicillin injections.16
Dermatoses of the Ear Margin
Vasculitis
Extremities (pinna, digits, tail) have a vasculature that lacks anastomosis and is partic.
ularly susceptible to environmental injuries (trauma, temperature). Clinical manifesta-
ions of diseases causing vascular lesions such as inflammation (vasculitis) and
thrombosis often involve the extremities, particularly the pinna borders (Figure 12-7).
Nevertheless, some specific types of vasculitis induce local lesions such as rabies
vaccine-related vasculitis (lesions at the injection site) or lesions resulting from
perivenous injection of irritant substances.
Clinical manifestations of pinna vasculitis are quite stereotypic, regardless of the
cause of the vasculitis. The pinna borders are preferential sites, especially the apex
and its concave surface. Primary lesions include purpura, plaques, papules, pustules,
erythema because it does not blanch on diascopy (looking through a glass slide
firmly applied on the lesion). Punched-out ulcers and necrosis quickly result from
Fgure 12-7
Crusts and scales on the apex of a female Malinois Shepherd dog. The cause of the vasculitis
was not identified.
248SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
the lack of perfusion. The shape and disposition of the lesions clearly correlate with
the vascular pathways. As the disease evolves, the whole pinna border can become
involved. Differential diagnosis includes arthropod bite, fight wounds, cold agglutinin
diseases, frostbite, and coagulopathies.
Because necrosis occurs within hours of the infarct, biopsy should be taken
preferably on the most recent lesions. The biopsy should involve both diseased tissue
and the border of the lesions because the vascular event is situated there. The owner
should be aware that biopsy of the pinna can cause lifelong and visible deformation
and tissue defects. If the submitted sample includes the area where vascular injury
occurred, dermatopathology allows the diagnosis of vasculitis, but it usually does not
permit precise identification of the cause. This part of the diagnosis is mandatory if
an appropriate treatment regimen is to be chosen and relapse is to be prevented.
Underlying causes of vasculitis are divided into the following:
· Precipitating factors: Infection, drugs, low temperatures. Vaccines are reported to
cause injection site vasculitis as well as lesions on the apex of the pinna and often
on the concave surface. Other extremities, the face (periocular area), and bony
prominences can also be affected.
· Concurrent diseases: Infection, insect bite, neoplasia, food-related causes,
connective tissue disorders (e.g., lupus erythematosus), cold agglutinin diseases.
In one study, no underlying cause for vasculitis could be found in about 50% of
cases.14 Two idiopathic conditions have been described that can affect the pinnal
familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd dogs and proliferative
thrombovascular necrosis of the pinna. They are described in the following sections.
Cold agglutinin diseases are described under Frostbite.
The outcome and treatment depend on the suspected or diagnosed underlying
cause(s). Because vasculitis is a severe complication, it should be treated while the
umderlying cause is being explored or at the beginning of its correction.
Pentoxyfylline has many effects, including increased red blood cell pliability and
immunomodulation. It is considered the first-line treatment in vasculitis and other
ischemic diseases. Propentoxyfylline is licensed in many countries for geriatric dogs
with behavioral problems related to microvascularization disorders in the brain.
Pentoxyfylline itself remains in the peripheral circulation. This latter drug has not
been thoroughly evaluated in dogs, but the proposed dosage is 10 mg/kg q8h to q24h.
Side effects appear to be minimal and are considered to regress after treatment cessa-
tion. They include vomiting and diarrhea; the author has also observed a few cases
of rectal bleeding. An anecdotal report of thrombocytopenia indicates that care
should be taken when prescribing pentoxyfylline in affected dogs.
Steroids can be added to pentoxifylline. Topical treatment is usually suficient.
Systemic prednisolone (2 to 4 mg/kg, q24h, by mouth) can be necessary in the most
infectious process has been identified. Other possible treatments that have been
proposed include large doses of vitamin E (adjunct therapy), dapsone (to be
used with caution in cats), cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, and the association
tetracycline/niacinamide.
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
249
Familial Cutaneous Vasculopathy of German Shepherd Dogs
In German Shepherd puppies, a familial cutaneous vasculopathy has been recognized
with an autosomal, recessive mode of inheritance.7 Initial lesions include depig-
mented and swollen footpads. The pinnae, tail, and nasal planum are usually also
affected, displaying alopecia, crusts, and ulceration. Dermatopathology demonstrates
vascular degeneration and vasculitis, as well as other dermal changes: nodular dermati-
tis, collagenolysis, and cell-poor interface dermatitis with basal cell apoptosis.
Proliferative Thrombovascular Necrosis of the Pinna
This condition is recognized in the dog and differs from other types of vasculitis
affecting the ear by its histopathologic features—arterioles initially develop into
folds in the lumen. Sclerosis and hyaline degeneration are also observed, and even-
tually thrombosis. Clinical features are similar to those of other types of vasculitis
affecting the pinna border. Pentoxyfylline is usually partially to 100% effective.14,18
Topical steroids are an option. Because this condition is restricted to the pinna, more
potent immunosuppressive treatments with potential systemic side effects should be
avoided. If medical treatment is unrewarding, surgical removal of diseased tissue is
effective. Relapses are reported following excisions with a narrow margin.3
Solar Dermatitis and Actinic Keratosis of the Ear
Repeated exposure to direct or reflected sunlight (especially ultraviolet B [UVB] and
ultraviolet C [UVC]) on white skin causes actinic reactions (from the Greek actin,
ray) that can vary from the so-called sunburm (solar dermatitis) to actinic keratosis
and eventually squamous cell carcinoma. Animals with white ears or white spots that
include the pinna are at risk if they live in a sunny region; these include white cats,
Dalmatians,American Staffordshire Terriers,Bull Terriers,and white Bulldogs
In animals with erect ears, especially cats, the pinna borders are seldom protected
from sunlight by the fine pinnal hair coat. In white animals, erythema and fine
scaling (solar dermatitis) can appear as early as 3 months of age. As the lesions
aggravate, the erythema is more pronounced and associated with crust formation.
The lesions bother the animal and are usually painful; self-trauma aggravates the
condition. Careful observation shows that the border of the pinna is finely curled.
The nasal planum is usually also affected, especially in dogs, where it can be the
Only involved area. The lower eyelids and the lips may also be involved. Differential
diagnosis includes insect bites, fight wounds, vasculitis, and early sarcoptic or
notoedric mange. At this stage, keeping the animal indoors (including the prevention
of Iying in the sunlight) from 10 AM to 4 PM should be sufficient.
In the summer, lesions recur and worsen (Figure 12-8). The ear margins become
thickened, indurated, and hyperkeratotic. Atypia and dysplasia of the epidermis, as
well as follicular keratinocytes and solar elastosis, are observed on dermatopatho
logic examination. Sun avoidance is sufficient only in early cases. Systemic retinoids
250
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 12-8
Squamous cell carcinoma on the right ear of a white domestic short-hair cat. The right ear apex
or surgical excision of damaged tissue is usually necessary. If the lesions are pruritic
and/or painful, topical or systemic glucocorticoids are indicated.
Squamous cell carcinoma can result, especially if the disease is neglected or the
animal cannot be kept inside. The neoplasm can be proliferative or ulcerative, but
usually bleeds easily. Squamous cell carcinoma is considered to be mainly locally
invasive and slow to metastasize, so amputation of the pinna is effective in many
cases.
Frostbite
Frostbite is caused by prolonged exposure to temperatures below freezing (cold
climate, contact with cold objects). All extremities are predisposed to frostbite, but
especially the pinnae, which are very thin but have a large surface area (Figure 12-9).
Other predisposing factors include previous frostbite, vasculopathy, intermal illness,
insufficient acclimatization to cold weather, lack of shelter, freezing wind, and
wetting. All these factors decrease the time needed for lesions to appear. Frozen
skin is pale and cold, with reduced sensitivity. The skin should be thawed as soon as
possible to prevent necrosis. Warm water is gently applied on affected areas.
Thawing of the skin may be painful. In areas that are not necrotic, erythema and
edema are usually present.
In mild cases, frostbite may induce no lesions besides mild ear-border curling.
whitening of the hair, alopecia, and in more severe cases, necrosis. It may take some
time for the skin to reveal the total extent of the damage, so the affected tissue can
take some weeks to heal. Pentoxyfylline associated with aspirin has been shown to
improve tissue viability in rats.14
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
251
B
Fgure 12-g
A, Early lesions of cold agglutinin-related pinnal vasculitis (December) in a 1-year-old male
Pinscher cross: crusts and hyperpigmentation are present on the concave surface of the apex
of the auricle. B, In February, crusted, punched-out lesions are present on the same dog. Two
episodes of bleeding were associated with temperatures below O°C.
Cryoglobulinemia and Cryofibrinogenemia
 Different components of the serum (cryoglobulins) or the plasma (cryofibrinogens)
 may precipitate under cold temperature. The process is usually reversed when the
temperature rises again. These diseases were formerly tenmed cold agglutinin
diseases. At least three types of cryoglobulinemia have been identified. Symptoms
result from the anemia and/or hemagglutination associated with the process.
252SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Because of the lack of anastomoses on their margins, the ear pinnae are more
commonly affected.
Ear-Margin Seborrhea
Ear-margin seborrhea or denmatosis is most commonly observed in pendulous-eared
breeds such as the Dachshund, Springer and Cocker Spaniels, Beagles, Basset
Hounds, and Dobermans with uncropped ears. The pathogenesis of this condition is 
not established, even though predisposing factors have been proposed.
On both sides of the pinna but restricted to the margins, numerous follicular casts
("waxy plugs") can be seen adhering to the skin and hair. As the disease evolves,
lesions become confluent and involve the whole ear margin. Partial alopecia is
observed. Later on, the debris remains tightly adherent but becomes hard and thick.
Fissuring of both the aggregate and underlying skin results. This is painful and
bothers the dog so that it shakes its head even more and aggravates the process.
History and careful clinical observation are usually diagnostic early in the course
of the disease. As the lesions become fissured and crusty, the differential diagnosis
includes most other causes of ear margin lesions such as sarcoptic mange, vasculitis,
and some insect-bite dermatoses, especially stick-tight flea infestation. Severe
hyperkeratosis and follicular keratosis that may lead to a pseudopapillomatous
appearance are observed on dermatopathologic examination.
No underlying causes are usually associated, and the treatment is symptomatic:
removing the seborrheic aggregates and decreasing further production. Ceruminolytic
shampoos containing salicylic acid as well as sulfur are used regularly. Because tar
 n  n sns s un  a  s  s
be preferable to avoid dispensing tar-containing products; most clients do not wear
gloves when applying products to their animals. To initiate the dissolution of the
waxy aggregates, the lesions can be soaked 15 minutes before the shampoo with
warm water or a ceruminolytic ear solution. These solutions can be irritating.
especially those that contain toluene derivatives, but they are removed by the sham-
poo shortly after their application. Peroxide, vitamin A, or retinoids can be applied
Gel formulations are preferred because they penetrate the coat better and do not
frequency is based on the clinical appearance of lesions. When fissuring is extensive,
surgical ear cropping is indicated.
Acquired Folding of the Pinna
This benign condition is reported in adult cats. The apexes of both pinnae suddenly
fold rostrally and, usually, somewhat laterally (Figure 12-10). On palpation, the
cartilage is usually lacking in the folded apex. Most affected cats have a history of
long-term steroid treatment; when performed, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
stimulation test results are depressed. Stopping the glucocorticoid treatment may
improve the condition.
CHAPIER 12Diseases that Affect the Pinna
253
Fgure 12-10
Acquired folding associated with partial alopecia on both pinnae of a Siamese cat. No history
of steroid treatment could be found. One year later, the ears were back to normal without
treatment.
Crusty and Scaly Dermatoses
Crusts and scales are frequently associated with trauma, either caused by fights or
self-inflicted, as in pruritic dermatoses. Most dermatoses of the ear margin are also
associated with crusting. Scales are a common feature of dermatophytosis. In some
dermatoses that usually involve the whole pinna, including dermatophytosis,
pemphigus, and zinc-responsive dermatitis, these symptoms can be a main feature
(Figure 12-11).
Dermatophytosis
Dermatophytes live on keratin, and the most common dermatophyte found in
dogs and cats, Microsporum canis, invades mainly the hair; the primary lesions of
denmatophytosis are follicular casts and scales. Infected hairs are abnonmal and
fragile; they break easily, and alopecia quickly results. The classical presentation
of denmatophytosis in dogs and cats is annular alopecia associated with fine silvery
scales, central healing, and peripheral follicular papules and crust. This lesion is
commonly observed on the pinnae.4 In cats, pinnal lesions caused by dermatophytes
are more common than they are in dogs. In both species, lesions usually are not
symmetrical, as opposed to other causes of pinnal alopecia.
 Dermatophytosis is a complex disease and its clinical manifestations are variable.
They include seborrhea, localized folliculitis or furunculosis (especially on the face),
254
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 12-11
Generalized and severe scaling in a 5-year-old German Shepherd dog with advanced leishma-
niasis. The pinnae are also involved. The dog goes to Portugal each summer.
kerion or other granulomatous reactions, papular dermatitis, erythematous dermatitis,
pruritus, and even subcutaneous nodules (termed dermatophytic pseudomycetoma).
foliaceous or pemphigus erythematosus have been reported that are caused by a
dermatophyte (usually T. mentagrophytes or M. persicolor).
The clinician should consider dermatophytosis as a possible differential diagnosis
if the clinical features and the history are compatible:
· Age: Dermatophytosis is most commonly seen in young animals. Adults (more
commonly cats) can be asymptomatic carriers, especially Persian cats. Sylvatic
dermatophytosis (i.e., acquired from wild mammals) is usually seen in older
animals. In these cases the causative dermatophyte is not M. canis, and the clinical
signs can vary greatly.
· Breed: Persian cats in particular but also exotic short-haired cats, Yorkshire
 Terriers, and Pekingese are predisposed to M. canis infection. Yorkshire Terriers
may be susceptible to develop severe forms. Dogs and breeds used for hunting or
with hunting habits are predisposed to sylvatic dermatophytosis because of their
more frequent contact with wild mammals.
· Contagion: Dermatophytes are transmitted by contact with fungal elements
(infected hair or scales, soil); they also may be present on infected animals, in the
environment, or on fomites. Contact with infected animals is the most common
source for the most prevalent dermatophytes. Exact identification usually allows
identification of the source of infection.
Experimental diagnosis is mainly based on positive fungal culture. A recent study
has confirmed the importance of daily observation if dermatophyte test medium (DTM)
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
is used because contaminants can also cause the color to change from yellow to red.
Most dermatophytes do not develop fully on this medium, and they can be difficult
to identify precisely unless cultured again on Sabouraud's medium.
Microscopic observation of infected hair or scales in skin scrapings can be suffi-
cient if the clinician is experienced. Because infected hairs are fragile and break
easily and dermatophytes can infect the stratum comeum, skin scraping is probably
more favorable than trichography for sample collection (both microscopic examina
tion and fungal culture). Trichography can be performed under the Wood's lamp
to collect fluorescent hair (Figure 12-12). M. canis is the only commonly encoun-
tered dermatophyte that fluoresces. In order to reduce false positives, the clinician
should make sure that the fluorescence involves the hair shaft and/or the follicular
ostia. A diffuse positive reaction over the skin is probably caused by topical drug
application. False negatives are also encountered. Some cases of dermatophytosis,
especially atypical clinical presentations, can be detected on denmatopathologic
examination.
Treatment of dermatophytosis should always involve the whole body surface even if
the pinna is the only site with macroscopic lesions. Systemic and/or topical treatments
Fgure12-12
 Positive Wood's lamp examination of a cat with dermatophytosis caused by Microsporum
canis.
256
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
are widely available (griseofulvin, ketoconazole, itraconazole, econazole, terbinafine).
Dermatophytosis is zoonotic, and the practitioner has the responsibility to infonm
owners to seek medical attention if they develop lesions.
Pemphigus Complex
The classification of the pemphigus group of diseases is still controversial. They are
the most frequent autoimmune skin diseases in dogs and cats, the most common being
group, these two diseases have a characteristic facial and aural involvement.
Pemphigus complex diseases are primarily pustular in dogs and cats. Most pustular
dermatoses involve the hair follicle. PF and PE are almost the only diseases to cause
numerous pustules and crusts in the concave surface of the pinna (Figure 12-13). They
In PF, lesions usually also affect other areas of the skin: face (periocular area,
masal planum), feet, clawbed, footpads, and inguinal area. General involvement is
not uncommon. In PE, lesions are almost always restricted to the face and ears.
Because pustules are transient in dogs and cats, observed lesions in PF and PE are
usually secondary and include thick crusts, scales, and alopecia overlying oozing
and erosive skin bordered by epidermal collarettes. Pain and/or pruritus can be pres-
ent but are not primary features. Depigmentation is common in PE but occurs rarely
or late in the course of the disease in PF (Figure 12-14).
Differential diagnosis should include contact dermatitis, cutaneous adverse drug
reaction, denmatophytosis, demodicosis, bacterial folliculitis, discoid and systemic
lupus erythematosus, leishmaniasis, and zinc-responsive dermatitis. Both dermato-
phytosis and drug reactions can cause pustular acantholytic dermatoses.
Fgure12-13
Erosive and crusted lesions on the concave surface on the pinna of a cat with PF.
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
257
Fgure 12-14
Erythema and large, fluctuant, fragile pustules on the inner pinna of an 8-month-old Golden
Retriever with PF. These lesions are seldom seen.
Diagnosis is based on the elimination of other differential diagnoses, compatible
histologic examination of biopsy samples, and positive immunofluorescence and/or
immunochemistry results. Most pemphigus cases are considered spontaneous, but
some anecdotally reported cases have been identified or suspected to be paraneo-
plastic or food related.16
Treatment includes mainly immunosuppressive drugs such as prednisolone,
azathioprin (dogs), or chlorambucil.
Zinc-Responsive Dermatosis
Zinc-responsive dermatosis causes hyperkeratotic or crusty skin lesions on the
pinna. Other parts of the body are also usually involved, especially the face.
Two syndromes are recognized. A strong breed predisposition is observed in
syndrome I for Siberian Huskies and Alaskan Malamutes. Other breeds such as the
Bull Terrier have been mentioned. The early lesions occur at 1 to 3 years of age.
Erythema affects the ears, mouth, chin, eyes, and pressure points (elbows, hocks).
Alopecia, crusting, and scaling (with or without underlying suppuration) quickly
occur, often associated with secondary pruritic bacterial and/or Malassezia infection.
Otherwise, pruritus is variable. The hair coat is usually dull with a generalized sebor-
rhea. Other signs are less common (onychomalacia, modifications in the sense of
taste or smell). Stress of any kind could be a precipitating factor. The pathogenesis
of this syndrome is controversial, considering that in these dogs the zinc intake is
usually normal, but the condition responds to zinc supplementation.
Syndrome I is seen in rapidly growing dogs (mainly of large or giant breeds)
   n   s    
presence of elements in the diet that interfere with zinc such as phytates (zinc chelation)
258
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 12-15
Areas of alopecia, hyperkeratosis, and hyperpigmentation of both pinnae and the face of a dog
with generic food dermatosis.
and calcium (modification of zinc absorption). Oversupplementation with minerals
and vitamins can be sufficient to cause zinc-responsive dermatosis. Hyperkeratotic
plaques are seen on areas of repeated trauma on pressure points, including the pinna,
footpads, and nasal planum. Treatment should be aimed at correction of the diet.
Generic Food Dermatitis
Generic food dermatosis is often difficult to differentiate from zinc-responsive
denmatosis syndrome II because the causes, predisposed animals, clinical signs, and
treatment are similar (Figure 12-15).
Dermatoses of the Concave Pinna
Atopic dermatitis and contact dermatitis are the most common dermatoses affecting
the concave pinna. Severe diseases affecting the ear canal, whether they are primary
 Or secondary, can result in lesions of the concave pinna around the ear canal opening.
such as the following:
· Pain, erythema, erosion, ulceration and crusting in cases of bacterial otitis exterma
·Pruritus, seborrhea, and lichenification in cases of Malassezia otitis exterma
(Figure 12-16)
· Skin hyperplasia and lichenification in cases of hyperplastic changes secondary
to chronic ear inflammation
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
259
Fgure 12-16
Malassezia dermatitis in the inner pinna of a German Shepherd with hypothyroidism.
Symmetrical Pinnal Alopecia
Alopecia can be a primary or secondary lesion. Secondary alopecia caused by
trauma is the most common cause of alopecia of the pinna. Trauma includes fight
wounds, physical or chemical trauma, and self-inflicted trauma as in the pruritic
dermatoses detailed earlier.
The new classification of primary canine alopecia proposed by Mecklenburg
(personal communication, 2002) can be applied to the ear pinnae:
· Inflammatory alopecias, such as the immune-mediated (vasculitis, dermatomyo-
sitis) and infectious causes (dermatophytosis, bacterial folliculitis, demodicosis).
The infectious causes are usually not symmetrical.
· Noninflammatory alopecias, such as disorders of the hair-follicle cycle (patterm
alopecia, cyclic alopecia, postclipping alopecia, endocrinopathy, telogen/anagen
defluxion), dystrophic alopecia (traction alopecia), and alopecia caused by struc-
tural defects of the hair shaft (color dilution alopecia and other follicular
dysplasias, congenital alopecia)
 The noninflammatory causes of primary alopecia affecting the ear pinna are
described together because symmetrical alopecia is the main feature of these diseases.
Other causes are described previously.
Pattern Baldness
A type of patterm baldness restricted to the pinnae is described primarily in male
Dachshunds, but also in other breeds of dogs (Chihuahuas, Boston Terriers,
260SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Whippets, Italian Greyhounds, Staffordshire Bull Terriers); it has been reported in
cats as well.
Bilateral symmetrical hypotrichosis begins when the dog is about 1 year old and
can remain unnoticed for some years. As the alopecia evolves, the underlying skin
becomes hypopigmented. According to Scott,'4 pattem baldness restricted to the ear
results in complete baldness as the dog ages (8 to 9 years). In canine pinnal alope-
cia, a small vellus hair usually remains. In both cases the dermatopathologic features
are similar: normal epidermis and dermis, hair follicles in any phase of the cycle,
normal number but reduced size of hair (both length and diameter). The adnexae are
normal also. These features allow differentiation from other causes of bilateral
alopecia such as endocrine disease, follicular dysplasia, and alopecia areata.
Treatment is not necessary because the condition is purely cosmetic. If the owner
requires a treatment, melatonin or topical minoxidil can be tried; they are not
reported to cause any major side effects in dogs.
Periodic Alopecias
Griffin reports a periodic alopecia affecting adult Miniature Poodles. Alopecia of
one or both ears is followed by spontaneous hair regrowth within several months.?
The author advises ruling out telogen effluvium, drug reaction, and endocrine
diseases. Dermatopathologic features are unknown. No treatment is advised because
the condition is purely cosmetic and spontaneously resolves.20
In cats, a spontaneous periodic alopecia restricted to the pinna was described by
Scott in Siamese cats. Both ears are affected. The skin is normal, and the alopecia
affects the whole pinna or is patchy. Dermatopathologic features are unknown.
Spontaneous regression is observed without treatment after several months.
Melanoderma and Alopecia in Yorkshire Terriers
Melanoderma and alopecia are quite common in Yorkshire Terriers and occasionally
recognized in other breeds such as the Dobenman Pinscher.4 The alopecia begins
between 6 months to 3 years of age on the bridge of the nose and both pinnae. The
tail and feet may also be affected. Affected areas are markedly hyperpigmented
("melanoderma"), alopecic, smooth, and shiny, giving a leathery appearance
("leather ears").
Diagnosis is based on history, clinical features, and elimination of other diag-
noses. Denmatopathologic features are not specific. Carlotti21 demonstrated
decreased dermal elastin in eight cases and abnormal growth hormone response to
clonidine administration.
The disease slowly worsens as the dog ages; spontaneous recovery is rare in the
author's experience. In three Yorkshire Terriers, growth hormone supplementation
ssa a mn ns s    ns  sn
Due to the severe systemic side effects of growth honmone in dogs, such a treatment
is not advisable because alopecia and melanoderma are purely cosmetic problems
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
261
Fgure 12-17
Compared with the rest of the body, pinnal alopecia is moderate in this male Pinscher with
testicular tumor and elevated estradiolemia.
Endocrinopathy
Endocrine diseases are the most common cause of noninflammatory primary alope-
cia in the dog (Figure 12-17). But in a stereotypic manner, the extremities, including
the pinna, are usually spared. In the cat, endocrine diseases usually cause nonspecific
cutaneous signs (seborrhea, dull hair coat). Alopecia is a very rare feature of feline
endocrinopathy, except for the secondary alopecia associated with the overgrooming
behavior observed in some cases of hyperthyroidism.
Nodules and Plagues
Neoplasia is a common cause of cutaneous or subcutaneous nodular (>1 cm), papular
(<1 cm), or plaquelike (flat) lesions. The aspect of neoplastic lesions can mimic most
other causes; they cannot be distinguished with sufficient confidence on clinical
grounds solely. Cytologic evaluation may confinm the diagnosis. A positive Wood's
lamp test favors dermatophytosis (kerion) if no topical medication interfering with
the method has been applied (e.g., iodine). Nevertheless, histopathologic examina
tion of a biopsy or the excised nodule is strongly indicated in most cases. Any tumor
type can cause nodular lesions on the pinna, but papilloma, canine cutaneous
histiocytoma, and mastocytoma are probably the most common.
262
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Other diseases causing one or more papular to nodular lesions on the pinna
include granulomas and arthropod bites. Ticks and horseflies (Tabanus spp.) often
leave papules 1- to 5-mm wide at the sites of their bites; they can become ulcerated.
The same kind of lesion can be seen at the site of transmission of an insect-borme
disease such as leishmaniasis. This reaction at the inoculation site is often called
chancreofinoculation.
Because its anatomic location makes it prone to trauma, the pinna is prone to
granulomatous lesions. Causes are numerous and include the following:
· Foreign bodies
· Bacterial infection: Staphylococci, Nocardia, actinomycetes, mycobacteria
(both tuberculous and atypical)
· Fungal infection: Dermatophytosis, phaeohyphomycosis, cryptococcosis
·Algae: Prototheca
·Leishmaniasis
Granulomas may be multiple and are often exudative, if not ulcerative. Pruritus is
not a primary feature but can be observed if the animal is bothered by the lesion. The
ing and antiseptic applications on opened lesions, treatment should be specific to
each etiology.
References
1. Joyce J, Day M: lmmunopathogenesis of canine aural haematoma, J Sm Anim Pract 38:152-158,
1997.
observations, Am J Vet Res 47:2300-2308, 1986.
3. Griffin C: Pinnal diseases, Vet Ctin North Am Sm Anim Pract 24(5):897-904, 1994.
4. Harvey R, Harari J, Delauche A: Ear diseases of the dog and cat, Ames, 1A, 200l, lowa State
University Press.
5. Bussieras J, Chermette R: Parasitotogie veterinaire, entomotogie, Maisons-Alfort, France, 1991,
Service de Parasitologie, ENVA.
6. Nuttal T, et al: Treatment of Trombicula automnatis infestation in dogs and cats with a 0.25% fipronil
pump spray, J Sm Anim Pract 39(5):237-238,1998.
7. Auxilia S, Hill P: Mast cell distribution, epidermal thickness and hair follicle density in normal
canine skin: possible explanations for the predilection sites of atopic dermatitis? Vet Dermatot
11(4):247-254, 2000.
8.Rosser E: Food attergy in the dog: a prospective study of 51 dogs. In: Proceedings of the
AAVD/ACVD meeting, 1990.
9. August J: Otitis externa, a disease of multifactorial etiology, Vet Ctin North Am Sm Anim Pract
18(4):731-742, 1988.
10. Devos S, Mulder J, Vd.V. PGM: The relevance of positive patch test reactions in chronic otitis
externa, Contact Dermatitis 42:342-355,2000.
11. Griffin C, Kwochka K, Mac Donald JM: Current veterinary dermatotogy the science and an of
therapy, St Louis, 1993, Mosby.
12. Chetboul V: Personal communication, 2003.
13. Hoffmann G, et al: Transdermal methimazole treatment in cats with hyperthyroidism, J Fetine Med
Surg 5(2):77-82, 2003.
CHAPIER 12 Diseases that Affect the Pinna
263
14.Scott D, Miller W, Griffin CE: Muetter and Kirk's Smatt animat dermatotogy ed 6,Philadelphia,
200l,Saunders.
Kirk's Current veterinary therapy Philadelphia, 2000, Saunders.
16. Scott D, Miller M: ldiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the cat: literature review and
report of 14 cases, Fetine Pract 26(4): 10-16, 1998.
17. Weir J: Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherds: clinical, genetic and preliminary
pathologic and immunological studies, Can Vet J 35:763-766, 1994.
18. Marignac G: Atlas des otites chez les carnivores domestiques, Paris, 2000, Med'Corm.
general medicine,New York, 2003,McGraw-Hill.
20. Scott D: Observation on canine atopy, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:91-100, 1981.
21. Carlotti D: A propos des alopecies auriculaires, Point Veterinaire 25:8-13, 1993.
Suggested Readings
Casella M, Wess G, Reusch CE: Measurement of capillary blood glucose concentrations by pet owners:
a new tool in the management of diabetes mellitus, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38(3):239-245, 2002.
Chermette R, Bussieras J: Parasitotogie veterinaire, mycotogie, Maisons-Alfort, France, 1993, Service
de Parasitologie, ENVA.
Scott D: Canine sterile eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis, Companion Anim Pract 2(6): 19-22, 1988.
Scott D: Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20(4):585-589, 1984.
Scott D, et al: Pemphigus erythematosus in the dog and cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16(6):815-823,
1980.
Scott D, Miller M, Shanley Kl: Sterile eosinophilic folliculitis in the cat: an unusual manifestation of
feline allergic skin diseases, Companion Anim Pract 19(8-9):6-11, 1989.
13
Simple
e Diagnosis
and Treatment of
Pruritic Otitis
Steven A. Melman, VMD
266SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
when the ears are manipulated. The differential diagnosis for pruritus is extensive
and is dealt with in other textbooks on dermatology.
This chapter contains a "rapid-fire" clinical approach to the treatment of the itchy
pet with or without otitis exterma. Using this approach, treatment for several different
etiologic causes of pruritus are addressed at once. Not only does this regimen prom-
ise the best chance at fast and lasting relief from pruritus, but it also allows the
veterinarian to make a rapid clinical diagnosis based on the response to the various
elements involved in the trial. Protocols to treat most known types of ear problems,
including Malassezia and bacterial (e.g., Pseudomonas) otitis, follow the discussion
of treating pruritus.
Perhaps the most common etiology for acute otitis exterma is hypersensitivity.
The most common hypersensitivities encountered in small animal practice are flea
allergy, food allergy, and atopy. Dogs with atopic dermatitis are presented to the
veterinarian with a clinical history of pruritus of the feet, face, axilla, and ears. It has
been estimated that as many as 80% of dogs with atopy have otitis exterma and
pruritic ears. In dogs and cats with food hypersensitivity, otic pruritus may be the
 Only clinical sign. Flea allergy may contribute to overall pruritus, but rarely causes
otic pruritus singularly.
If the clinician suspects atopy, then prior to starting this pruritic clinical trial,
which involves the use of some corticosteroids, a pretreatment blood sample for
in vitro allergy testing should be drawn. The blood should be spun and the serum
frozen. Frozen serum can be submitted for in vitro allergy testing for as long as
60 to 90 days without affecting the results. Testing and therapy for atopy is both
tedious and expensive. The treatment is lifelong. The following clinical trial affords
test and hyposensitize easier.
Of course, a good physical examination and observational skills are not to be
neglected in attempting to sort out the etiology of dermatologic disease. It is prudent
to do skin scrapings, fecal analysis, heartworm testing, fungal culture, skin and ear
cytology, and other tests as indicated by clinical common sense during the initial
examination.
In addition, recheck visits and the observational skills of the client are crucial to
securing an accurate diagnosis. Have the client keep a daily diary of the pet's
response using a scale of 1 to 10 to quantify the intensity of pruritus, erythema, pain,
any discharge from the ear, and head shaking.
Clinical Treatment Trial for Pruritus
Here is an outline for the pruritic clinical trial. This clinical trial should be done in
Before starting the trial, which involves the use of corticosteroids, take serum
and freeze it. Allergy testing is variably adversely affected by the effects of
prednisone.
CHAPIER 13 Simple Diagnosis and Treatment of Pruritic Otitis 267
Step 1: Shampoo Therapy
Of the approximately 116 million dogs and cats in the United States, 12% to 20%
have allergy-induced skin problems that require frequent bathing, preferably with
"hypoallergenic'" shampoos.
Shampoo therapy has moved to the forefront as a component in the treatment of
all but the rarest skin disorders. It involves the use of cleansing, moisturizing, anti-
seborrheic, degreasing, antiparasitic, antibacterial, antifungal, and antipruritic sham-
poos. Specific products and protocols usually are selected on the basis of the
presenting morphologic characteristics such as dryness, oiliness, scaling, inflamma
tion, and associated pyodenma.
Generally, the use of a milder, more elegant product before a coarser, more potent
one increases compliance on the part of the pet owner and reduces the risk of side
effects such as irritation. Under the circumstances of a short-tenm clinical trial, where
concurrent infections with Staphylococcus and Malassezia may be present, use a sham-
yg guanbay og asn m ynoua pu a yoq gean on ynoua suons si e cod
Various issues should be considered when selecting therapeutic shampoos to
relieve pets′ specific symptoms.
Cleansers and Moisturizers. Cleansing and moisturizing shampoos are designed
a  a  g ssad g a  s  a  o 
alone) helps remove scales, crusts, organisms, dander, loose hair, and other debris. Al
such shampoos should be pH-adjusted for dogs, which, despite breed variation, have
the highest skin pH of any mammal (6.2 to 7.2), including humans.
Oils and Conditioners. Moisturizing agents such as bath oils, conditioners,
emollients, and humectants may be applied after bathing and rinsing to soften, lubri-
cate, and rehydrate the skin. They can be used on a more regular basis on dry
animals. When the patient has a concurrent infection, a "medicated’"' conditioner may
add moisture as well as medication to the coat. One such example is MalAcetic
Conditioner (DenmaPet, 2% acetic acid and 2% boric acid), used after a shampo0
Antiseborrheic Treatments. Seborrhea is the term used for any skin disease
involving dry (sicca) or greasy (oleosa) scaling. The tenm also encompasses disor-
ders in the formation of keratin, a complex protein unique to the skin, hair follicles,
and nails. Today, many experts prefer the term disorders of keratinization. This
subject is covered in detail in a separate section of this book.
The epidermis tums over every 22 days in the nonmal dog. Epidermal tumover
Spaniels, may be as little as 3 to 6 days. This fast turmover creates a defect in the
normal protective barrier, which may result in dry or greasy scales, comedones,
alopecia, inflammation, crusts, pyodenma, and pruritus. Any of these conditions, in
turm, may lead to skin damage. In these cases, it is important to slow the turmover
process and treat the secondary problems.
Bathing Procedure. Bathe the pet daily in a hypoallergenic or medicated sham
poo, as described previously. If the pet remains itchy after these baths, an oatmeal
268SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
shampoo or conditioner may help resolve mild pruritus. If pyoderma, Malassezia, 0r
seborrhea oleosa is present, the owner may also use a shampoo that is degreasing and
s in     r a 's    a 
(MalAcetic, DermaPet) followed by an acetic acid/boric acid conditioner. This
unique combination kills bacteria and yeasts on the skin. Shampoo therapy should
the owner should continue bathing.
Step 2: Food Elimination Diet
Follow a strict food elimination diet for a minimum of 30 days (some food-allergic
dogs may require 60 to 90 days to see a beneficial effect). Many diets that can be used
for the food elimination trial are commercially available. They contain either uncom-
mon, novel protein sources (venison, rabbit, duck, fish) or purified low-molecular-
weight polypeptides. The author prefers to use a home-cooked vegetarian diet.
Step 3: Fatty Acid Supplementation
acids) to help reduce the inflammation associated with pruritus. Antioxidants such
as vitamin E should be included in the supplement because they are depleted
more rapidly when there is fish oil (omega-3) in the diet. Because fish oil does not
contain any protein, it will not interfere with the hypoallergenic diet. The current
recommended dose is 1o00 mg of fish oil containing 180 mg of eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA) per 10 lb per day as found in EicosaDerm (DermaPet) or generic fish oil
ALL-VEGETABLE HYPOALLERGENIC DIET
1. Vegetable puree (multiple batch)
Three undrained #l cans of carrots, peas, green beans, and tomatoes, and greens
(kale, dock, spinach, or mustard).
One 10 oz. package of chopped, frozen, broccoli.
Boit the broccoli in 2 cups of water until tender Combine with other vegetables in a
large kette, mix, and puree untit smooth. Fill 18 I-pint plastic containers and freeze.
2. Rice (prepare as required)
2'/2 cups rice
 5 cups water
y2 cup sunflower oil
1 tsp salt
Mix ingredients, bring to boil, reduce heat, and simmer untit water is absorbed.
Allow to cool.
3. Thaw l pint of vegetable puree and add to rice; mix thoroughly.
4. Feed %2 to 74 cup per 10 1b body weight twice daily. Monitor weight weekly. Do not
add meat supplements.
From Byrne K: Food allergy. In Melman SA, editor: Skin diseases of dogs and cats, Potomac, MD, 1994,
DermaPet, Inc.
CHAPIER 13 Simple Diagnosis and Treatment of Pruritic Otitis  269
capsules. Most fish oils and all flaxseed oil do not contain the necessary EPA
content.
Step 4: Corticosteroids
Administer a low-dose corticosteroid for 12 days (e.g., prednisone at 0.5 mg/lb twice
a day). Use a declining dosing regimen that ends with 0.5 mg/lb every other day. The
rationale is to break the pruritic cycle and observe whether the case is corticosteroid
responsive.
Step 4a
A topical corticosteroid spray (Genesis, 0.015% triamcinolone, Virbac) has been
helpful in reducing the pruritic cycle. Some cases require less to no further systemic
corticosteroid supplementation.
Step 5
m ail gi on oi  uxaudan s yns e u asn aod s nad a s
a day for a minimum of 2l days. If the ear is also infected with bacteria, use
a fluoroquinolone such as enrofloxacin at 5 mg/lb twice a day or 10 mg/lb once daily.
If Malassezia dermatitis is present, bathe with the acetic acid/boric acid shampoo as
outlined in Step 1; antibiotic therapy usually controls the pruritus. On rare occasions,
or when there is very severe involvement of the skin with Malassezia, oral ketocona-
zole at 10 mg/kg once daily or itraconazole at 5 mg/kg once daily may be used.
Duration of treatment varies, but treat for at least 2 weeks. Systemics such as
itraconazole and ketoconazole do not work as effectively in the ear as they do in the
skin. When treating Malassezia dermatitis that does not respond to topical and
systemic antibiotic therapy, itraconazole is my preference because of its low level of
Step 6: Ectoparasites
Treat scabies, other ectoparasites, and some endoparasites with a trial of ivermectin.
In all breeds except Collies or their mixes, use ivenmectin (Bovine Ivomec,
MSD/AgVet), 0.1 to 0.2 ml per 10 pounds of body weight. Use every 7 to 10 days
for four treatments. The extralabel use of this drug requires the informed consent of
the client. Other methods of flea control are reported to control scabies. However,
for the purpose of this trial, in order to be sure scabies is eliminated from the differ-
ential diagnosis, the author prefers ivermectin.
Step 7: Endoparasites
Treat phantom endoparasites with a dewormer that kills whipworms.
Step 8: Flea Control
If not already on flea control, begin flea control program
270
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Analyzing the Results of the Trial
If the clinical signs stop during the time that the prednisone and ivermectin are
given and never returm, diagnose ectoparasites (most likely scabies) or ear mite
hypersensitivity. The ivermectin killed the parasites, and the prednisone reduced the
pruritus.
If the response is more gradual and the pruritus does not returm after bathing with
the acetic acid/boric acid shampoo and ketoconazole or itraconazole, cutaneous
Malassezia is the likely cause. Unfortunately, Malassezia is often a secondary
complication that perpetuates otic pruritus in many atopic dogs. An acetic acid/boric
acid ear cleaner (Malacetic Otic, DermaPet) may need to be used on a maintenance
basis once or twice a week to control otic Malassezia yeasts.
If the pruritus returms between days 12 and 21, a cortisone-responsive hypersen-
sitivity is most likely and allergy testing should be done. The frozen pretreatment
serum can then be submitted for in vitro allergy testing.
If itching remains controlled comfortably after the original pretreatment diet is
reinstituted, the possibility that this is a fatty acid/shampoo therapy-responsive
atopy is high. Suspect primary food allergy if the itching returms within 72 hours
after the hypoallergenic diet is withdrawn and the pet is returmed to the pretreat-
ment diet.
Unresponsive allergy cases have recently been described to respond favorably to
cyclosporine at 5 mg/kg. This may account for why some researchers have treated
unresponsive end-stage ear cases with cyclosporine, allowing dogs to become
comfortable while not reversing the progressive pathology.
Bacterial hypersensitivity is a disease entity that may be suspected if the itching
returms within 30 days of stopping the antibiotic, provided that the pruritus was
controlled during antibiotic therapy. If the itching disappears after a second course
of antibiotic therapy, the diagnosis is confinmed.
Keratinization disorders, including hypothyroidism, skin neoplasia, and other less
common primary skin diseases, will prevent the itch from fully resolving. Incomplete
treatment of Malassezia dermatitis or failure to treat all in-contact animals for scabies
may cause persistent pruritus. Biopsy of the skin may be helpful in many circum-
stances to identify the etiology of pruritic skin diseases.
In many cases of acute otitis exterma without progressive pathologic changes,
resolution of pruritic skin disease also decreases otic pruritus. However, the skin of
the ear is treated differently than the skin of the trunk, primarily with concentrated
topical medications.
Ear Therapy
ating these steps, appropriate cytology and/or culture samples should be retrieved.
Use each step and continue to the next step if necessary.
CHAPIER 13 Simple Diagnosis and Treatment of Pruritic Otitis 271
Step 1: Ear Cleaning
Clean the ear thoroughly using a non-ototoxic ear cleaner in the hospital so that a
thorough otic examination can be performed, including assessment of the tympanic
membrane. The author prefers an acetic acid/boric acid ear cleaner (MalAcetic Otic).
Problems may arise when detergents and alcohols are used as ear cleaners in situa-
tions where the eardrum may be ruptured. Use anesthesia when appropriate.
Acetic acid and boric acid in combination has been shown to be an effective
combination in vivo to treat Malassezia otitis. In many cases, continued daily ear
cleansing by the owner at home for 1 week is all that is needed to treat the ear.
Maintenance cleaning twice weekly may prevent recurrence of Malassezia.
Cleaning the ear is important for removal of surface debris from the affected ear
canal epithelium. Apply medications, if needed, after cleaning.
How to Clean an Ear
1. Apply approximately 5 ml (1 teaspoon) of the ear cleaner into the ear canal and
massage thoroughly. A cotton ball may be inserted into the canal to protect
against drenching should the pet shake its head.
2. For maximum benefit, allow the ear cleaner to remain in the ear canal for at least
5 minutes before attempting to clean manually.
  o  a   o an      g  a  
and dislodged debris. As days of treatment go by, less debris will be removed.
 4. Stop daily cleaning when the cotton ball remains free of debris after cleaning.
In dry and/or irritated ears with little debris and/or wax, the cotton ball may be
irritating. In these cases, a tiny bulb syringe or Water Pik can be helpful. Warmed
solutions seem to soften waxy debris. In problem ears, the frequency of cleaning
may need to be increased to one to three times daily.
It is important to remember that infected ears are very acidic, which inactivates
A n p  sn s  an u psn n s a
ear cleaners are also acidic. In those cases, waiting 4 hours after cleaning to apply
these antibiotics may be warranted.
Cleaning with Tris-EDTA. One non-ototoxic alkalinizing agent that the litera-
ture reports to have primary antimicrobial properties is tris-ethylenediamine-
tetraacetic (tris-EDTA [TrizEDTA, DermaPet]). To use tris-EDTA, one should
follow the previous instructions on how to clean an ear, substituting the alkalinizing
tris-EDTA for the acidic ear cleaner MalAcetic Otic. It appears that tris-EDTA
pretreatment allows increased antimicrobial activity for many antibiotics used to
treat ear disease. It is especially useful in stubborm Pseudomonas otitis cases.
Step 2: Topical Therapy
Logical otic therapy is based on the results of otic examination and cytology.
In bacterial infections, use antibiotics. In yeast infection, use an anti-yeast therapy.
272
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
TOPICAL EAR FORMULA (GEMISH)
MALASSEZIA GEMISH
12 ml acetic acid/boric acid ear cleaner
6 mg dexamethasone sodium phosphate (for increased solubility)
Also add as appropriate:
0.5 to 1 ml medical-grade dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
0.5 ml ivermectin
BACTERIAL GEMISH
12 ml tris-EDTA
60 mg Baytril injectable
6 mg dexamethasone sodium phosphate (for increased solubility)
Also add as appropriate:
0.5 to 1 ml medical-grade DMSO
TRIS-EDTA GEMISH
Add 600 mg Baytril LA to a 4-ounce bottle of tris-EDTA. This creates a 5%
Baytril/tris-EDTA solution. The increased emphasis on topical therapy versus systemic
therapy has led to the popularization of this formula. This better affords the recom-
mended usage of 0.5 to 2 ml per ear twice daily, allowing sufficient volume for effective
topical therapy. If sufficient volume is not used, the infected surface area cannot be
thoroughly reached.
In inflammation (neutrophils on the cytology) or erythema, use topical cortico-
steroids. If ear mites are present, use a topical insecticide or topical ivermectin. After
the ear has been cleaned, apply the topical formula.
The use of these gemishes has many advantages over all current commercial
products. The application of oils tends to have adverse consequences, including not
reaching the affected sites, not covering the surface area, and ototoxicity. The fact that
these products often only come in 7.5- to 15-ml packaging should not be overlooked.
Step 3: Systemic Therapy
Continue Steps 1 and 2 and, if there is inflammation or purulent material present, use
a systemic antibiotic and/or a short-acting systemic corticosteroid.
Step 4: Further Complications
When Steps 1 through 3 do not cause remission of signs after 2 weeks, reexamine the
ears. If there is stenosis and strangulation of the canal, using a 1.5-inch 20-gauge needle,
inject approximately 0.5 ml of methylprednisolone acetate (Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia-
Upjohn) between the epithelium and cartilage as distal in the canal as possible
If the eardrum is bulging, a myringotomy may be done to relieve the pressure and
pain, and a culture of the middle ear can be obtained. If the eardrum is ruptured,
infuse a combination of 0.5 ml of dexamethasone sodium phosphate and 0.5 cc of
enrofloxacin directly into the tympanic bulla.
CHAPIER 13 Simple Diagnosis and Treatment of Pruritic Otitis 273
Myringotomy may reveal pathology in the middle ear that, once removed and
treated, will reduce cervical, head, or neck pain. An example is primary secretory
otitis media (PSOM) of Cavalier King Charles Spaniels.
The use of corticosteroids is multifunctional. Although we are most familiar with
their antiinflammatory properties, in cases of otitis media the reduction of viscosity
of the secretions and exudate are also noteworthy goals. The tympanic bulla is
covered with pseudostratified squamous epithelial cells with mucus-secreting goblet
cells that need to be toned down by 2 mg/kg daily of prednisone for as long as
2weeks.
Step 5: Step 4 and Culture and Sensitivity
Many dermatologists recommend a culture from each ear in difficult cases to assess
the bacterial microflora. It is possible to have different bacteria in each ear, and it is
also possible to have bacteria complicating otitis media that are not normally found
in the extermal ear. Topical treatment (see tris-EDTA gemish) with antibiotics
achieves much higher topical levels than the mean inhibitory concentration (MIC)
reported by the laboratory, so bacteria resistant on the culture results may be suscep-
tible to the higher topical doses.
Step 6: Tris-EDTA
In stubbom bacterial otitis exterma or media, use tris-EDTA (TrizEDTA, DermaPet)
before instilling the antimicrobial. Clean the ear thoroughly for 7 to 21 days. Tris-
EDTA is an alkaline solution with a pH of 8.0. There are reports in the literature of
the primary microbiocidal properties of tris-EDTA, particularly to Pseudomonas.
Those reports also indicate the evidence for potentiation with antibiotics that other-
wise are inactivated by other acidifiying ear cleansers. If Pseudomonas is suspected
from cytology or cultured, use the appropriate systemic and topical antibiotics after
a 15-minute pretreatment with tris-EDTA. Others recommend using the tris-EDTA
gemish, allowing both cleansing, pretreatment, and treatment simultaneously.
The mechanism of action of tris-EDTA is discussed elsewhere in this book.
Step 7: Surgery
If corticosteroid injection into the ear canal epithelium fails to open up an inflamed,
swollen, occluded ear canal (Step 4), if permanent pathologic changes are evident,
or if there is severe calcification of the ear canal, surgery of the ear canal is indicated
for relief of pain and to allow for drainage.
Reference
1. Gotthelf L, Young S: A new treatment for canine otitis externa, Vet Forum 14(8):46-53, 1997.
14
Diagnosis and
Treatment of
Otitis Media
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
276
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
titis media is a common disease process that often goes unrecognized in most
veterinary practices. The fact that otitis media is present in more than half of all
canine patients with chronic otitis exterma should stimulate a refonmulation of the
diagnostic process when faced with these cases. Just the common history that the
patient has been treated repeatedly for ear infections should alert the veterinarian to
think about otitis media as a possibility.
The diagnosis of otitis media in dogs can be quite difficult to make, owing to the
long, bent, funnel-shaped conformation of the dog's ear canal, which makes visualiz-
ing the tympanic membrane (T'M) difficult. In addition, many patients with otitis media
have an intact TM, giving the clinician the impression that there is nothing wrong in
the middle ear. Most canine patients with otitis media also have a chronic otitis exterma
with pathologic changes to the ear canal that cause stenosis, making visual examina
tion of the TM impossible. It is often theorized that otitis media is an extension of otitis
exterma that was either not treated, improperly treated, or resistant to treatment.
The result is significant damage, resulting in porosity to the eardrum over time.
Otitis media in cats most often results as a sequela to respiratory disease, so
a history of sneezing, ocular discharge, and/or nasal discharge may provide a clue.
Some cats with otitis media also have a visible polyp in the ear canal after the ear is
cleaned of the dried exudates and mucus. Many feline otitis media cases have a dark,
dried, crumbly exudate in the ear canal that mimics an ear mite infestation. The diag-
nosis of otitis media in cats may be easier to determine with the otoscope because of
their relatively short ear canals
Otitis media should be considered when the clinician is presented with a patient
showing any neurologic disease affecting the head, including vestibular disease,
Homer's syndrome, or facial nerve damage.
By definition, otitis media refers to the extension of an inflammatory disease into
the middle ear cavity. This may or may not be infectious. The inflammatory reaction
of the mucous membrane lining the tympanic bulla is different than the reaction of
the skin of the extermal ear, so the symptomatology and treatment of otitis media are
different from those for otitis exterma. The mucous membrane lining the tympanic
bulla reacts to foreign substances, including infectious organisms, hair, cells, ceru
men from the extermal ear canal, chemicals, and pharnmaceuticals used in the extermal
ear canal. It produces a purulent exudate and increases its secretion of protective
mucus from activated goblet cells
If the eardrum has a hole in it during active otitis media, copious mucoid exudate is
often seen along the floor of the horizontal canal. Although this material is usually in
liquid form, the mucus and pus may be inspissated and dry. Mucus is not produced
anywhere along the extermal ear, but oozes from the tympanic bulla into the horizontal
canal through any rent in the TM. The presence of mucus indicates a hole in the eardrum;
precautions should be taken not to introduce ototoxic substances into the ear canal.
Otitis media in dogs is much more prevalent than previously thought. In dogs,
secondary otitis media occurs in approx imately 16% of acute otitis exterma cases and
as many as 50% to 80% of chronic otitis exterma cases.'2 Many cases of otitis media
are well hidden from visual detection by the significant exudates present in the ear
canal and the severe pathologic changes that have occurred in the ear canal as a result
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media
Fgure14-1
Stenotic ear: Extensive fibrosis in the horizontal ear canal prevents visual examination of the TM.
of chronic otitis exterma. These changes include stenosis, fibrosis, tumors, polyps,
epithelial hyperplasia, and glandular hyperplasia (Figure 14-1). Chronic changes in
the extemal ear canal prevent adequate visualization beyond these blockages, so
determining the integrity of the eardrum is not always possible.
Some dogs with otitis media have intact eardrums but also have significant bacte-
rial and yeast populations that can be isolated from the middle ear.? These dogs may
have had a ruptured eardrum that healed, trapping bacteria and yeast in the tympanic
bulla. Therefore the presence of an eardrum does not rule out otitis media. Healed
eardrums trap infectious organisms in the middle ear, and suppurative otitis media
results (Figure 14-2). Secretions and exudates are trapped behind the healed
eardrum, causing it to bulge outward under pressure, which in tum causes severe
pain. Myringotomy may be necessary to investigate the contents of the bulla in
suspected cases of otitis media where the eardrum is intact.
Signalment and History
It is uncommon for a patient to present to the veterinarian with a history of acute
otitis media. However, iatrogenic rupture of the eardrum during ear cleaning can lead
to an inflammatory acute otitis media. A foreign body that has become lodged in the
ear canal can cause acute otitis media. Often plant awns and foxtails work their way
through the eardrum and cause a considerable bacterial infection and inflammatory
reaction in the ear canal.
278
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure14-2
The TM is opaque and cystic. Serous fluid behind the eardrum causes increased pressure on
the eardruml.
More commonly, a dog with otitis media will have a history of recurrent or
chronic bacterial extermal ear infections. Perhaps the pet owner will present all
the extermal ear medications already tried on the pet; that is a signal for the veterinarian
to look deeper in the ear canal for middle ear disease. Chronic otitis media is
almost always suppurative, with large amounts of fluid draining into the ear canal.
The presence of liquid in the ear canal may signal otitis media (Figure 14-3).
In dogs and cats with otitis media where the eardrum is open, a copious, malodor-
Ous liquid discharge is often present when the ear canal is examined with the otoscope.
Some patients produce so much exudate that it overflows onto the periaural region of
the face; in a floppy-ear dog, there will be dried exudate on the ear flap adjacent to the
extermal opening of the auditory canal. Head shaking to relieve the pain and tickle asso-
ciated with liquid exudate is very common in otitis media. It may be wise to check for
otitis media in cases of aural hematoma. Pain on palpation of the base of the ear canal
Or pain on manipulation of the pinna should also alert the clinician to otitis media.
Some patients with otitis media are reluctant to have their mouth opened and may
have histories of reluctance to chew hard food. This is due to inflammation, swelling.
and pain within the bulla, which is located adjacent to the temporomandibular joint.
When otitis media affects the nerves that course around the base of the ear or
through the tympanic bulla, the patient may show signs as subtle as keratoconjunc-
tivitis sicca on the ipsilateral side. This results from damage to the palpebral branch of
the facial nerve. When otitis media affects the sympathetic nerves from the facial and
trigeminal nerves coursing through the middle ear, the patient may show mild signs of
Hormer's syndrome (enophthalmos, ptosis, and miosis) (Figure 14-4). Some patients
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media
279
Fgure14-3
Otitis media in a cat. Liquid discharge filling the horizontal canal. Flecks of thick, inspissated
mucus can be visualized floating in the fluid.
Fgure 14-4
Horner's syndrome in a cat with cerumen gland adenocarcinoma extending into the tympanic
bulla. The eyelid opening is small, the pupil is pinpoint, and the eyeball rolls inward (not
pictured).
280SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
may show pain, head tilt, or, with facial nerve palsy, a drooped lip, drooped ear, or
loss of the ability to close the eyelid, leading to exposure keratitis.? Since the facial
nerve courses in and around the ear canal, it is easily affected by swelling, inflam-
mation, and trauma from the dog scratching at the base of the ear. Facial neuropathy
should be suspected if there is drooping of the facial muscles and skin or drooling of
saliva because the lips and facial muscles cannot create an oral seal. Peripheral
vestibular disease with nystagmus and circling may be evident if the infection and
inflammation have affected the inner ear.
An owner may present a patient for a hearing deficit. These cases should be eval-
uated for otitis media. Fluid in the middle ear dampens hearing. If this fluid is the
result of previous flushing, it is usually absorbed within 7 to 10 days, and the patient
regains the hearing. When the eardrum is ruptured or when the ossicles of the middle
cannot be effectively transmitted from the ear canal to the cochlea. If a tumor or a
polyp has filled the middle ear, air-conduction hearing is eliminated. Bone-conduction
hearing is usually still present in these patients, but the pet can only hear the lower
range of tones. (Bone-conduction hearing can be demonstrated by placing your
fingers in your ears and listening to the sounds around you.) If there is hearing loss
detected, this is usually as a result of bilateral ear disease. Unilateral hearing loss is
difficult to assess in animals
If there is pharyngeal drainage of mucus and exudates resulting from otitis media.
the patient may be presented for inspiratory stridor. In these cases, a pharyngeal
examination may reveal a nasopharyngeal polyp interfering with breathing or thick
mucus draining from the auditory osteum in the nasopharynx, covering the caudal
pharynx, and occluding the airway (Figure 14-5).
Otitis media with an intact, bulging eardrum may be very painful for the patient.
Simply manipulating the pinna can lead to behavioral changes consistent with pain.
Many dogs with otitis media cry out when the base of the skull is palpated at the
junction of the ear cartilage and the skull. Some dogs even bite their owners while
they are trying to administer medication because of the intense pain. Strong pain
relievers are indicated in these patients. After the eardrum ruptures or is intention-
diminishes.
Evaluation of the Patient
Careful examination of the TM in the dog or cat with otitis media requires general
anesthesia. It is recommended that the patient have an endotracheal tube placed
in case there is a ruptured eardrum. Manipulation or flushing can cause material
to drain through the eustachian tube into the nasopharynx, resulting in aspiration
If there is significant stenosis of the extermal ear canal, either from inflammation
or from penmanent pathologic changes to the ear canal, the eardrum may not be
adequately visualized. Patient preparation using potent topical and/or systemic corti-
costeroids (prednisone, 1 mg/lb daily for 10 to 14 days, then taper or dexamethasone
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media
281
Fgure 14-5
Pharyngeal drainage of mucus from a 12-year-old cat with mucoid otitis media. The mucus
drainage is coming from under the soft palate. No organisms were cultured from this cat's
middle ear, but both bullae were sclerotic.
2 mg/ml at a dose of 0.1 mg/lb intramuscularly [IM] once) may be needed to reduce
Otic inflammation and allow examination of the TM on a subsequent visit. If perma-
eardrum, other techniques are used to identify disease proximal to the stenosis.
Recently, with the introduction of video otoscopes, it is possible to get a very
detailed, magnified examination of the ear canal and eardrum. The video otoscope
provides excellent lighting at the tip of the tapered probe by transmitting light
through the probe by a fiberoptic cable attached to a high-output light source.
After the veterinarian is comfortable looking at normal eardrums—the location,
color, clarity, and the normal tension on itusing the TM to diagnose otitis media
becomes much easier. If the eardrum remains translucent, the middle ear can be
transilluminated with the bright light from the video otoscope and the contents of the
middle ear can be visualized (Figure 14-6).
In obvious cases of canine otitis media, there is no eardrum present. The ear canal
is filled with a liquid secretion, often with flecks of material mixed with it. A mucus-
filled ear canal may alert the clinician to otitis media. Most patients with chronic
otitis exterma that has been present for 45 to 60 days will have a coexisting otitis
media. In otitis exterma, purulent exudates and proteolytic enzymes elaborated by
inflammatory cells have a caustic effect on the thin epithelium of the eardrum, caus-
ing it to become necrotic, weaken, and eventually rupture. When this happens, hairs.
282
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 14-6
Transillumination of the TM with high-intensity light allows examination of the middle ear.
Air fills the normal middle ear, and a bony prominence called the promontory (behind which is
the cochlea) can be seen on the medial wall of the bulla.
ceruminous secretions, exudates, and infectious bacteria or yeast organisms in the
 extermal ear move into the middle ear. In these patients it is difficult to visualize any
 part of the eardrum, since it may not be present at all. Sometimes only a small ring
of granulation tissue may be seen at the annulus fibrosus, where the eardrum attaches
to the ear canal. With the otoscope, an otitis media case without suppuration looks
like a deep, dark hole. The mucosa becomes dark as it becomes hyperemic, and
brownish ceruminous exudates fill the bulla
There is a condition described in dogs called a "false middle ear:" Obstructions
along the horizontal ear canal from hypertrophic or cystic glands, neoplasia, inflam-
 mation, or ceruminous plugs increase pressure on the TM, causing it to stretch and
bulge into the middle ear cavity. Coupled with poor air movement through the
eustachian tube, negative pressure inside the bulla pulls the eardrum even farther into
the middle ear cavity. A false middle ear may develop as a result of the distended
membrane ballooning into the bulla. Examination of this ear also reveals the absence
of an eardrum at the end of the horizontal canal. Computed tomography (CT) scans
 of these ears reveal a "finger"’ lesion protruding into the bulla. The invaginating
eardrum may collect large amounts of debris from the extemal canal such as keratin,
wax, and desquamated epithelial cells. The invaginated eardrum forms a cavity that
needs to be flushed out thoroughly. Often misdiagnosed as having otitis media, these
patients can be retrospectively diagnosed when on 2-week recheck the previously
unseen eardrum is back in the normal location.
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media  283
Fgure 14-7
The middle ear of this cat contains a fleshy mass that can be seen by transillumination.
In some cases of otitis media the eardrum is intact, but it may look abnonmal.
It may change color in response to inflammation on the medial side, becoming
opaque and gray in color rather than pearly and translucent. Sometimes there is fluid
behind the eardrum, and examination of the intact TM may indicate that it is bulging
into the extermal ear. Purulent material in the middle ear may be seen as yellow fluid
 behind the eardrum. Early polyps and tumors in the middle ear may be seen as fleshy
masses through the eardrum (Figure 14-7).
Imaging of the Tympanic Bulla
Radiographic assessment of the bullae can be very helpful in determining the extent
of bony involvement and the presence of increased tissue or fluid filling the bullae
(see Chapter 2). However, the absence of radiographic changes in the bullae does not
rule out otitis media, especially the more acute cases.
 The first radiograph is taken using an open-mouth, rostrocaudal view with the
x-ray beam directed through the pharynx. The tongue should be pulled rostrally
to remove soft tissue that overlies the bullae. If an endotracheal tube is in place,
it should be temporarily removed for this view. The procedure requires angling the
mandible and maxilla to an angle of 10 to 15 degrees away from perpendicular while
maintaining symmetry of the skull.
 In a dog with minimal bony changes, the bullae appear as normal, eggshell-thin
circular structures medial to the mandibular rami on the rostrocaudal view. The cortical
284SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
outline is thin and the middle of the bullae radiolucent because the bullae are filled
with air. The cat has an air-filled, two-chambered tympanic bulla separated by a bony
septum.
When the bulla is chronically affected, either the intraluminal or extraluminal bone
shows new bone production or remodeling. Bone lysis may be evident. The cartilage
of the extermal canal may also be calcified and easily visible on a radiograph.
Dystrophic mineralization of soft tissue surrounding the ear canal may be present.
or tissue growths (neoplasm, polyp, or choleasteatoma) filling the air space. If lytic
lesions are present, there may be radiolucent areas or the bone constituting the bulla
recent ventral bulla osteotomy may be identified by the absence of a segment of bone;
however, bone may regrow after bulla osteotomy. One or both bullae may be affected.
If unilateral disease is present, a comparison between the normal and abnormal bulla
makes radiographic assessment of middle ear disease easier.
If large volumes of flushing solution are infused into the ear canal of a dog with
a ruptured eardrum before radiographic assessment, a misreading of the radiograph
can occur because the bullae become filled with the flushing fluid and appear
radiopaque on the radiograph. One limitation of radiographic evaluation is that old
sclerotic lesions in the bulla of aged animals cannot be differentiated from a more
current proliferative otitis media lesion
Computed axial tomography (CAT scan) of the tympanic bullae, where available,
may aid in differentiating bony lesions in the bulla from soft tissue reactions. Many
universities and teaching hospitals have access to CAT scanners. In the United
States, specialty referral centers are acquiring older CAT scanners from human
hospitals and may be able to provide this type of radiographic examination.
 These radiographs provide views in the horizontal, vertical, and sagittal planes.
CAT scans provide a number of views in these planes taken at various distance inter-
vals, each successive view slightly farther from the previous. Each successive view
may be considered as one slice of bread removed from an entire loaf, with each slice
being derived from a different part of the whole.
Even when the ear canal is stenotic and otoscopic examination is impossible,
CAT scans are able to give clear impressions of the status of the ear canal distal
to the stenosis as well as clues to the pathology in the middle ear. Bony lesions of
the bulla can be differentiated from soft tissue lesions using CAT scans. Three-
distance between successive views in different planes.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the ear is also being done to visualize
the middle and inner ears. MRI can use such fluids as the endolymph within the
cochlea and semicircular canals to provide contrast to the examination. Patients with
neurologic signs relating to middle- or inner-ear disease can be seen. Extension of
infection into the cerebrospinal fluid space and meninges can be detected by MRI.
The computer-generated images can be viewed in three planes, as with the CAT
scan. At the present time, this technology is available to veterinary medicine on a
very limited basis.
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media
285
Is the Eardrum Ruptured?
Several techniques have been described to determine the integrity of the TM when it
cannot be visualized in an ear with a stenotic extermal ear canal.4 A small-diameter
(3 to 5 Fr) catheter can be inserted into the ear canal until it stops. It is then
feel, the eardrum is intact. If there is a definite hard feel to the "stop,"’ the eardrum is
ruptured and the catheter is hitting the medial wall of the tympanic bulla. This tech
nique should be practiced on cadaver specimens to acquire the necessary sensitivity.
Tympanometry uses a sensor that measures the compliance of the eardrum in
response to sound waves. It is not practical to perform this test in the veterinary
clinic, however, because it is still a research tool in animals.
An easy, indirect method for determining the integrity of the eardrum is to infuse
warmed, very dilute povidone-iodine solution (or dilute fluorescein solution) into
the ear canal with the anesthetized dog or cat in lateral recumbency. If the orange or
yellow-green flushing fluid comes out of the nose or if the patient snorts out this
solution through the oropharynx when pressure is applied by the flushing fluid, the
eardrum is ruptured (Figure 14-8). The fluid has flowed from the extermal ear canal
through the ruptured eardrum, into the tympanic bulla, and through the auditory tube
imtothenasopharynx.
Another technique used by some is to fill the ear canal of a patient in lateral
recumbency with the suspected ruptured eardrum up with wanmed saline and to
insert the tip of the video otscope into the ear canal. By looking through the clear
Fgure 14-8
Nasal drainage of dilute povidone iodine flushed from the middle ear during ear cleaning.
286SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
fluid, if air bubbles rise from the ear canal while the animal breathes, the eardrum is
ruptured. Air from the nasopharynx rises through the auditory tube into the tympanic
bulla to escape from the middle ear through a ruptured eardrum.
Positive contrast canalography has been described as a method for detecting a
ruptured TM in dogs with otitis media. Two to 5 ml of dilute iodinated contrast
agent is instilled into the ear canals of these anesthetized patients while in lateral
recumbency with the affected ear up. The author uses 0.3 ml of Hypaque 50% or
similar contrast agent in 2.7 ml of saline. In a stenotic ear canal, a 3/z- or 5-Fr
catheter is threaded into the stenosis if possible. Contrast agent is then infused
beyond the stenosis. An open-mouth view of the bullae is then taken, using a
horizontal x-ray beam. If the eardrum is intact, there will be a distinct contrast/air
interface at the eardrum. If the eardrum is not intact, the contrast material will enter
the bulla, and a continuous column of contrast will extend into the bulla.
In a study of this technique, eardrums of cadaver dogs with normal ear canals and
intact eardrums were intentionally ruptured and contrast material was introduced
into the extermal ear canal. In every case, contrast media entered the tympanic bulla
and was detected by a radiograph. In clinical otitis media cases, positive-contrast
canalography was positive in most of the cases where the eardrum was determined
to be ruptured otoscopically, and it was positive for other cases in which the eardrum
appeared to be intact otoscopically. In normal ears, canalography was more accurate
for detecting iatrogenic TM perforation than otoscopy.
Primary Otitis Media in Cats
In the cat, primary otitis media occurs as a result of infection ascending through the
eustachian tube to the middle ear. The cat can also have a secondary otitis media as
a result of eardrum damage from ear mites or extension of a polyp through the TM.
An exact mechanism for the development of otitis media in the cat has not been
reported, although the bacterial isolates from the bullae of cats with middle ear
disease are consistent with respiratory pathogens. It has been hypothesized that
otitis media in cats because these infections and polyps occur in younger cats.
However, this has not been documented with virus isolation studies. The presence of
these viruses, however, may affect the ability of the auditory tube to protect the bulla
from infection with other agents.
In many species, including humans, rats, pigs, and cattle, Mycoplasma has been
reported as an inducing agent in middle ear disease. In addition to the more
cases, organisms much more difficult to culture and identify, such as Mycoplasma
and Bordetella, have also been cultured from the middle ear of cats with otitis
media.7.12 It is unclear what role these upper respiratory bacteria may play in the
pathogenesis of feline otitis media. It is also unclear whether anaerobic organisms
may be involved when the eardrum is intact and the auditory tube swells, thus seal-
ing these bacteria within the bulla. In the author's experience, treatment of cats with
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media  287
otitis media using azithromycin (Zithromax Oral Suspension, Pfizer), which has
excellent activity against both Mycoplasma and Bordetella, at a dose of 5 mg/lb every
48 hours for two or three treatments, hastens recovery from otitis media. Often,
culture and/or cytology do not reveal an infectious organism. This raises the ques-
tion of whether allergy, viruses, and/or fungi have a role in middle ear disease in
dogs and cats.
Secondary Otitis Media in Dogs
Exudates and infectious organisms draining into the middle ear from the extermal ear
canal through an eroded or ruptured eardrum get trapped in the ventral portion of the
bulla. (Samples for cytology or culture should be taken from the ventral bulla before
flushing and suctioning.) After the medications, chemicals in ear flushing products,
and/or debris contained within the extermal ear canal enter the middle ear through an
eroded eardrum, tissue reaction of the respiratory epithelial lining of the middle ear
begins." This is called secondary otitis media.
Pathogenesis of Secondary Otitis Media
Due to the L-shaped configuration of the canine extermal ear canal, proteolytic
enzymes within exudates produced as the result of otitis exterma accumulate against
the thinnest portion of the eardrum. The resulting inflammation and enzymatic
destruction lead to necrosis of the epithelium and supporting collagen, which results 
in thinning of the tympanic membrane, causing it to weaken.
Ulceration along the ear canal can extend to the eardrum (Figure 14-9). The ulcer-
ated tissue leaks serum, which can cause maceration and excoriation of the epithe-
lium. The reaction is similar to a "hot spot’ on the skin of the trunk of the dog.
Liberation of bacterial proteases, collagenases, elastases, and lysozymes from
phagocytic cells and epidermal maceration resulting from the excessive amount of
either erosion or rupture of the eardrum.
Many cases of acute otitis media can be prevented. Special care in cleaning and
attention to fluid pressure, especially with the use of bulb syringes used to flush the
extermal ear canal, can prevent the high pressure from causing an iatrogenic rupture.
Removal of exudates by careful flushing and suctioning of the ear canal eliminates
the source of destructive enzymes acting on the eardrum. Specific therapy for infec-
tious organisms based on cytology or culture results can shorten the course of the
bacterial or fungal disease. Treatment of underlying skin disease such as atopy, food
allergy, and hypothyroidism may remove or improve primary causes of otitis
exterma. Proper client education concerming the chronic nature of ear diseases
increases compliance in allowing frequent rechecks to follow the progress of treat-
ment. Recheck visits allow the veterinarian to examine the eardrum and to make
288
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure14-9
Otitis media with no eardrum present in an ulcerated ear canal. Pseudomonas was cultured
from both the external ear canal and from the bulla. A slight ring of tissue (annulus fibrosus) can
be seen where the eardrum was attached to the ear canal.
Whether primary or secondary, the resulting inflammation causes the lining
epithelium, called the mucoperiosteum, in the bulla to change from cuboidal to
pseudostratified columnar ciliated, leading to an increase in the number of secretory
cells and glands, further adding to the quantity of exudate. Chronic inflammation
leads to mucosal ulceration and breakdown of the epithelial lining.
 The lamina propria thickens in response to inflammation, and as vascularity
increases, edema and granulation tissue fonm. As otitis media becomes more
chronic, the lamina propria changes to dense connective tissue, and bone spicules
may develop within it.
The cycle of inflammation, ulceration, infection, and granulation tissue formation
may continue, destroying the surrounding bone. For example, septic arthritis of the
ossicles may cause pain and decreased hearing owing to the fusion of these joints.
The normal air conduction of sound waves is prevented, and the patient may suffer
decreased ability to detect high-pitched sounds. With time, the ossicles are dissolved
from osteomyelitis, and irreversible hearing deficit occurs.
The exudates and secretions thus formed in the bulla escape into the extermal ear
through the ruptured eardrum and contribute to the exudate already present in the
extermal ear canal. This large amount of liquid fills the ear canal and overflows onto
the pinna when the patient shakes its head. If a polyp or tumor is blocking the
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media
289
outflow of secretions and exudates from the middle ear, significant quantities of
inspissated material can be present when the obstruction is removed
The fluid pressure gradient created by suppurative otitis media and increased
mucus secretion prevents the eardrum from completely sealing. As the fluid pressure
increases within the bulla, it pushes against a healing eardrum with a very thin,
tenuous covering. The pressure allows fluid to escape through the path of least resis-
tance, and a small hole remains in the TM. As long as there is a hole in the eardrum,
this condition remains in a state of flux—that is, fluid can enter or leave the bulla,
carrying infectious materials and exudates in both directions.
When the amount of middle ear secretion and exudate is decreased, when the
infection is controlled by therapy, and when the fluid pressure is decreased, the
eardrum can heal and otitis media resolves. Sometimes, however, the eardrum seals
but the infection is not completely resolved. If the trapped organisms lead to a retum
of inflammation and secretion, the eardrum can once again bulge and/or rupture.
Patients with otitis media may have had histories of repeated episodes because of
this altemating rupture of the TM and subsequent healing. A report by Cole et al
demonstrated that 70% of eardrums in documented cases of canine otitis media were
imtact.2
Microbiology of Otitis Media
The most common microbes recovered from chronic otitis media in the dog include
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus intermedius.9,13 In one study, one or
the other of these two bacteria was isolated in over 70% of the cases.' Other isolates
include streptococci, Proteus, Klebsiella, E. coli, and some anaerobes.
When microbiologic samples from the middle ear were compared with the same
bacterial isolates found in the horizontal canal, the antibiotic sensitivity of organisms
isolated from the horizontal ear canal was different from the antibiotic sensitivity of
organisms from the middle ear. This occurred in almost 80% of these cases.? This
supports the notion that different strains of the same bacteria may be better suited to
survive on different tissue types.
Bacterial sensitivity reports are based on the amount of antibiotic in serum
required to kill the organism. So an antibiotic reported capable of treating an extermal
or middle ear infection may be useless if the antibiotic cannot get to the bacteria. Due
to the poor blood supply in the extermal ear canal and middle ear, there is limited
diffusion of antibiotic from the serum into the lumen of the ear canal or tympanic
bulla. In some inflammatory conditions, blood supply increases and may slightly
increase antibiotic levels. For example, enrofloxacin (Baytril, Bayer) has been
shown to produce poor skin levels in the normal skin. When tissue levels were meas-
ured in inflamed skin, the tissue level doubled. However, even with the doubling
effect, the levels were much lower than the MIC for many resistant bacteria.
It is not uncommon for a number of different isolates of the same bacteria to be
found in a microbiologic sample from the middle ear. This further confounds interpre-
tation of culture and sensitivity results. The laboratory may report that the organism
290SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
was Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Was the antibiotic sensitivity patterm representative
of all the different strains in the sample or from only one isolate? If the report
indicated that the bacteria were sensitive to an antibiotic, would there be other strains
in the same sample that were resistant?
In ear disease, laboratory assessment based on culture and sensitivity does not
usually correlate to clinical response. Antibiotic resistance mechanisms differ markedly.
so even though the organism may be reported as resistant to an antibiotic, alterations in
the use of the antibiotic may render it sensitive. In dogs that have been repeatedly treated
for chronic otitis exterma with a variety of topical antibiotics or suboptimal doses of
systemic antibiotics, the bacteria adapt readily and become resistant to further antibiotic
therapy.
Three mechanisms of antibiotic resistance are recognized. The first relates to the
organisms producing substances that inactivate or modify the antibiotic. The second
relates to the ability of the bacterium to provide a membrane barrier to antibiotic
diffusion. Often resistant bacteria have undergone mutation and a gene expression of
"efflux pumps" functions to extrude absorbed antibiotic actively from the bacteria
through the cell membrane. The third mechanism of resistance involves the bacteria
altering the sites at which antibiotics bind to them, rendering the antibiotic incapable
of acting on the bacteria.8 The challenge to the veterinarian treating dogs with
resistant extermal and middle ear infections is to provide different therapeutic options
to outwit the bacteria.
Examples of the first mechanism of resistance include penicillinase-producing
bacteria and β-lactamase enzyme-producing bacteria. These enzymes either bind to
penicillins or cleave the penicillins and prevent them from interfering with bacterial
wall synthesis. Semisynthetic penicillins such as methicillin fool the penicillinase
enzyme by having a modified ring structure. Strategies for treating β-lactamase enzyme
producers include formulating the antibiotic with compounds that inactivate the
enzyme such as clavulanic acid. Both amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (Clavamox, Pfizer)
and ticarcillin-clavulanic acid (Timentin, Smith Kline, Beecham) are used in dogs
When there is an efflux pump mechanism involved in bacterial resistance,
increasing the extracellular concentration of the drug to overwhelm the pumps
increases the intracellular concentration of the drug. In the middle ear, this can be
achieved by using topically infused antibiotics with 100 to 1000 times the concen-
trations in the tympanic bulla compared with their parenteral administration. Much
current research is underway to identify substances that act as efflux pump inhibitors
that can inactivate the pumps and allow antibiotics to concentrate in the bacteria.
Increased antibiotic concentrations can also be achieved in the middle ear by using
certain antibiotics that concentrate in inflammatory cells. However, there is a limit
to the concentrations of these drugs that can be achieved in tissue, ranging from 5 to
15 times serum levels.
By chelating metal ions (magnesium, calcium [Ca+], and zinc) from the gram-
negative bacterial cell membrane, tris-EDTA (TrizEDTA, DermaPet, Inc.) makes
the bacterial cell membrane more porous so concentrated antibiotic solutions can
diffuse more easily into the bacteria.' Tris-EDTA may indirectly interfere with
the efflux pump mechanism by chelating the Ca+ jons required for the active
CHAPIER 14Diagnosis andTreatment of Otitis Media2
291
pump mechanism. Future drug formulations may contain a mixture of an antibiotic
and an efflux pump inhibitor.
When the bacteria become resistant by preventing the antibiotic from binding to
it, another antibiotic with a different mechanism of action is required. For example,
certain bacteria can add a methyl group to their ribosomal ribonucleic acid (RNA),
inhibiting the binding of macrolide drugs such as erythromycin and lincomycin to
the 50S ribosome, so they become resistant to these drugs. Cross-resistance among
the lincosamides and the macrolides is common because all of these drugs bind to
the same site. Changing to an antibiotic that does not bind to the ribosome may be
a more effective choice for therapy than using another macrolide.
In cats with otitis media and polyps, the most common bacterial organism
isolated was Staphylococcus intermedius. Other bacteria have been isolated from cat
middle ears, including Pseudomonas, Bordetella, Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, and
Mycoplasma.'l Fortunately, bacterial resistance problems are not usually a feature of
feline otitis media.
n  n  n n  d s s
systemic antibiotics alone are often used to achieve levels within the bulla. If a
bacterium is reported as sensitive to an antibiotic, and that antibiotic can get to the
site of infection, systemic therapy may help. Unlike treating otitis exterma, where
topical antibiotics can achieve many times the blood MIC, systemic antibacterial
therapy for otitis media relies on lower levels of antibiotics arriving in the middle ear
hematogenously or through inflammatory cells.
     a     
Suppurative otitis media with purulent exudation provides the pathway for increas-
ing the amount of antibiotic within the bulla. Azithromycin (Zithromax, Pfizer) also
 sn o  a sn    u 
concentrate in respiratory tissues at many times the level in serum. Due to its intra-
cellular accumulation, azithromycin has a long half-life of 48 hours in cats and
are commonly isolated from the middle ear (staphylococci, Mycoplasma, and
   s       
pseudomonal otitis media. Development of resistance to clindamycin is common, so
its use should be limited to the first occurrence. Certain oral fluoroquinolones such
as enrofloxacin and marbofloxacin are effective for treating some Pseudomonas
infections in the middle ear, but even at maximal oral doses the levels within the
bulla may not be high enough for resistant Pseudomonas.
Topical antibiotic treatment of otitis media has gained recent favor in veterinary
medicine. The use of topical antibiotics is based on the high levels of antibiotic that
can be placed into the bulla, coupled with the poor drainage of the tympanic bulla.
Aqueous solutions of non-ototoxic antibiotics can be placed directly onto the infected
mucoperiosteum. Infused antibiotics can remain in contact with the inflamed, granu-
lating middle ear mucosa much longer because the fluid filling the bulla cannot
readily escape. Antibiotics for infusion should have a spectrum of activity against
292SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
gram-negative organisms, which include Pseudomonas, and gram-positive organisms,
whichincludeStaphylococcus
The dilemma facing the clinician treating otitis media is that systemic drug levels
may not reach a sufficient MIC in the bulla and topical treatment requires frequent
applications. Using maximal doses of oral antibiotics along with weekly bulla infu-
sions of a fresh supply of antibiotic increases therapeutic successes.
Many infections are polymicrobial, including mixed infections of bacteria and
be reported if only bacterial culture was submitted to the laboratory. Cytology may
not reveal bacteria because they are often protected from the cytology stains by
mucus. Many cytology-negative specimens have been reported as culture positive.
Malassezia yeasts found in the middle ear may cause disease, but their presence
there is the result of cellular and ceruminous debris falling into the middle ear
through a perforation or rupture. This condition responds to systemic antifungal
therapy.
Myringotomy
To diagnose and treat patients with otitis media, it is sometimes necessary to perfonm
-is  p ao  aoe p rds o e n   n
tivity testing on the material trapped behind the eardrum. If there is fluid pressure
pushing on the eardrum or negative pressure retracting it, perforation of the eardrum
using a controlled myringotomy incision immediately relieves the intense pain asso-
ciated with these pressure changes.
To perform a myringotomy, the patient is anesthetized and the extermal ear canal
is thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant such as dilute povidone iodine. The ear canal
is then dried using suction. A sterile, rigid polypropylene catheter is cut to a 60-degree
a os uo aaa [ds   'sod ds n aod o ang ns e rm a
used to puncture the eardrum. The tip of the cut catheter is advanced under good visu
alization, and the pars tensa is punctured at either the 5 or 7 o'clock position in order
manubrium of the malleus (Figure 14-10)
Altematively, a small Buck curette (2 mm) can be used to make a hole in the
eardrum. This instrument makes a larger hole in the eardrum and is more difficult to
a large hole in the eardrum to allow middle ear exudates to drain into the horizontal
canal and to prevent pressure gradients from recurring. Larger instruments should
not be used for myringotomy because they cause tearing of the eardrum.
Many veterinary practices are using CO, lasers to make the myringotomy incision.
A 0.8 mm x 180 mm rigid tip or a long, flexible Teflon tip can be inserted through
the working channel of the video otoscope and can be advanced to the eardrum.
Applying a pulsed, low wattage (3 or 4 watts) laser impulse melts the eardrum. The
advantage of laser myringotomy is that the tip does not have to touch the eardrum,
so there is less chance of contamination of the bulla with extermal ear canal material.
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media
A
C
Fgure 14-10
B, Surgical landmarks are identified. Blood vessels identify the pars flaccida and the hooked
membrane is at a 45-degree angle to the horizontal canal. D, Advancing the catheter and
pushing it through the eardrum creates a “smiler" type of incision.
In addition, the hole made by the laser is circular and takes longer to heal, which is
sometimes beneficial in providing drainage (Figure 14-11).
Fluid under pressure may freely flow into the horizontal canal as the perforation
begins, and it should be suctioned to ensure that the myringotomy incision is large
enough to accommodate a 3/- or 5-Fr catheter. In the case of suppurative otitis
media, myringotomy serves to decrease the fluid pressure behind the eardrum. The
fluid escapes into the extermal ear canal and may continue to drain for several days,
so during therapy the ear canals need to be flushed to remove this debris. The
catheter is advanced through the incised TM and directed ventrally into the bulla;
gentle suction is then used to retrieve any material within the bulla. If a spinal needle
was used, the stylet is withdrawn before suctioning. If the bulla is dry, 1 or 2 cc of
nonmal saline can be infused into the bulla and then immediately retrieved. This
material is submitted for cytology, bacterial culture, and antibiotic sensitivity.
Certain antibiotics or corticosteroids can be infused directly into the tympanic
bulla through the myringotomy incision, providing high topical levels within the
tympanic bulla.
294
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 14-11
Laser myringotomy creates a more circular hole because the eardrum is vaporized. Laser
myringotomy heals slower than catheter myingotomy, which may be an advantage for
repeated treatments.
Treatment of Otitis Media
Planning treatment of otitis media requires a stepwise protocol for maximal effect.
An organized approach allows the clinician to formulate treatment or change exist-
ing treatment based on observations. The steps outlined below provide a framework
for treating otitis media.
1. Access middle ear—myringotomy
2. Bacterial culture or cytology (not always helpful)
3. Flush bulla—suction until clean
4. Infuse topical medication into the bulla
5. Reduce inflammation with corticosteroids
6. Systemic antimicrobials
7. Recheck weekly—re-treat two or three times
8.Surgery
Sample Collection
Accessing the middle ear by myringotomy has been previously discussed. In order
to get a culture or cytology sample from the bulla in an ear without an eardrum,
a sheathed catheter is used. A sterile 3/2-Fr polypropylene urinary catheter is
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media
295
Fgure14-12
A 5-Fr polypropylene urinary catheter with the closed end cut off acts as a shroud for a 312-Fr
earcanal.
threaded into a 5-Fr polypropylene urinary catheter (Figure 14-12). With the closed
irrigating ends removed, the 5-Fr catheter is first threaded through the extermal ear
canal until it reaches the bulla. This acts as a shroud to prevent contamination of the
sample with debris from the extermal ear canal. It should be inserted into the bulla
along the floor of the horizontal canal and directed ventrally into the bulla. After this
catheter is placed, the 3'2-Fr catheter is threaded into the 5-Fr catheter and extended
beyond the cut end. The sample is aspirated with a syringe or suction apparatus using
the flanged end of the 3/z-Fr catheter. If no liquid is in the bulla, 1 cc of sterile saline
can be infused and suctioned back. Any fluid or mucus that enters the lumen of the
3l-Fr catheter is submitted to the laboratory for cytology and culture and sensitivity.
If a myringotomy incision is made with a sharp-pointed 5-Fr catheter, as the inci-
sion is made the catheter is extended into the bulla and the contents aspirated.
The lumen contents are submitted to the laboratory. If a laser myringotomy was
made, a sterile catheter is inserted through the hole and a sample is taken
Aushing and Suctioning the Bulla
Probably the most important technique for treating otitis media is flushing the bulla.
middle ear during otitis media, so this exudate and secretory material must be removed.
In the bulla, many destructive enzymes that are trapped in the mucoid secretions
mucus with the water in flushing solutions makes it less dense and easier to suction
Using fluid under pressure to irrigate the bulla loosens mucus from the tissue.
This material does not stick to the mucous membrane as cerumen sticks to the
epithelium in the extermal ear canal.
296 SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
The fluid the author uses for flushing the bulla is warmed, very dilute povidone-
iodine solution in warm tap water. If there is an identifiable bacterial infection,
wanmed tris-EDTA is also infused into the bulla. Acidic solutions should be avoided
in the middle ear to prevent pain and irritation. Using a device that delivers the fluid
umder high pressure allows the mucus and pus to flush out of the bulla either into
the extermal ear canal, where it can be suctioned out, or through the auditory tube into
the throat. The MedRx Earigator (MedRx, Inc., Seminole, Florida) makes flushing
and suctioning the tympanic bulla a simple, efficient procedure. A 5-Fr or smaller
polypropylene catheter connected to the irrigation/suction unit is placed into the 2-mm
working channel built into the Video Vetscope. The entire cleaning process is observed
on the video monitor. The veterinarian positions the Video Vetscope in the proper loca-
tion in the horizontal canal, and the assistant manipulates the catheter under direction
from the veterinarian. The catheter is advanced along the floor of the horizontal canal
and is directed ventrally into the bulla (Figure 14-13). A less rigid red rubber feeding
tube can be used for flushing, but it may collapse when used for suctioning.
Use of a flush/suction instrument allows small pieces of wax, mucus, pus, blood
clots, and other material in the bulla to be removed quite easily without the need for
an assistant to manipulate a suction syringe. Repeated infusion-suction cycles are
done to ensure that the bulla is as clean as possible. Without this equipment, catheter
placement and evaluation of the efficiency of cleaning are hard to determine, but that
should not deter the attempt to flush the bulla.
Fgure 14-13
A catheter attached to a flush/suction device is used to clean and dry the tympanic bulla before
infusing medication into the bulla.
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media  297
A recent retrospective analysis from a major university looking at the effect of
flushing the bulla on the outcome of otitis media showed that high-pressure bulla
flushing resulted in an 82% resolution of otitis media.
Topical Ototoxicity
When the eardrum is perforated or totally absent, topical medications and the chemi-
cals used in ear cleaners can gain access to the inner ear via the round and oval
windows, resulting in neurologic ototoxicity. The ingredients of an ear cleaner should
be carefully considered before use. Many manufacturers of otic products are now
putting warmings on the labels of these products stating that their use should be avoided
if the eardrum is not intact. In addition to topical ototoxicity, many pharmacologic
agents are ototoxic when administered parenterally.
The aminoglycosides, polymyxins, detergents, and most alcohols routinely used
in the treatment of the extermal ear canal are known to be toxic to the nervous struc-
tures of the inner ear.'3 Potentially ototoxic antimicrobial pharmaceuticals are present
in most topical formulations for treatment of otitis exterma. Many ear-cleaning solu-
tions contain a mixture of ototoxic substances that may gain access to the inner ear,
resulting in alterations of vestibular and cochlear function. Of these compounds,
chlorhexidine is probably the most toxic, especially in cats. Severe, prolonged
vestibular signs canbe caused by chlorhexidine,and its use in ears is strongly
discouraged.
cause ototoxicity versus the therapeutic benefit must be considered when using these
formulations to treat otitis media. For example, the aminoglycoside tobramycin has
shown to be an effective antibiotic for many multidrug resistant Pseudomonas organ-
isms. Although it is an aminoglycoside with potential ototoxic side effects, it is often
infused into the bulla to treat the bacterial infection because of its efficacy.
In acute otitis media, the thin, permeable membranes of the round and oval
windows provide easy access into the inner ear for many compounds. Access of
ototoxins to the inner ear structures may be enhanced by inflammatory damage to
the round window. Enzymes contained in otic exudates can cause maceration of the
epithelium covering the round window, increasing its permeability. It is also possible
for the round window to become hyperplastic and thickened after longstanding otitis
media, providing a barrier to prevent these ototoxins from reaching the inner ear.
Because the round and oval windows cannot be visually examined, it is difficult to
know whether the membrane is thinned or thickened. By using non-ototoxic prod-
ucts, this issue can be made less important. If there is thick mucus within the bulla,
it may act as a barrier covering the round window, effectively shielding the toxic
material from contact.
Ototoxicity results from damage to the hair cells either in the cochlea and/or in
the vestibular apparatus. This results in hearing deficits, vestibular disease, or both.
Overt deafness or severe clinical vestibular disease (nystagmus, head tilt, and
circling) may be obvious. However, subtle changes in either hearing or balance may
298SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
not be detected by the owner or the veterinarian. Many common topical antibiotics
can cause ototoxicity. Gentamycin, for example, concentrates in the hair cells of the
organ of Corti in the cochlea when administered parenterally. However, it may also
cause vestibular signs when administered topically in the middle ear. The cell perme.
ability is altered so the hair cells swell and become deformed. They are rendered
rigid and are unable to respond to movements of the endolymph within the semicir-
cular canals. Ataxia, head tilt, and circling can result. A similar situation occurs in
cells are damaged and cannot respond to vibrations, leading to hearing loss.
Safe Drugs for the Tympanic Bulla
There is a very short list of products that can be infused into the tympanic bulla with-
selecting a product for use in the bulla, the ingredients contained in the preparation
should be evaluated to determine the ototoxic potential.
For antibiotics, the fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin, enroflox acin, and ofloxacin),
aqueous penicillin G, some semisynthetic penicillins (carbenicillin and ticarcillin),
and some cephalosporins (ceftazidime and cefmenoxime) are safe to use in middle
ear disease.14
The antifungals clotrimazole, miconazole, nystatin, and tolnaftate can be safely
infused.
The aqueous forms of the antinflammatories dexamethasone and fluocinolone
are safe in the middle ear.
Most ceruminolytics cannot be used in the bulla. The exception is Squalene
(Cerumene, Evsco), which has been shown to be safe. Tris-EDTA as a flushing agent
is safe.
Bulla Infusion and Topical Therapy
Removal of the mucus and pus within the tympanic bulla during the treatment of
otitis media allows topical medications to penetrate in and around the thickened,
folded mucoperiosteum. The use of aqueous formulations of non-ototoxic topical
antibiotics, steroids, or antifungals placed on the mucoperiosteum hastens recovery
from otitis media. Topical levels of these drugs may be many times the level that can
be achieved using parenteral therapy, even when there is severe hyperemia of the
mucoperiosteum. Antibiotic concentrations are high in inflamed tissues because
the increased blood flow allows increased serum levels of antibiotic to perfuse the
inflamed tissue. But even these levels may not achieve the MIC necessary to kill
the bacterial target.
Infusing drugs into the bulla is an effective method of providing long-acting high-
When the bulla is filled with antibiotic,the fluid cannot escape easily.Because of the
small diameter of the swollen auditory tube and its location high on the medial wall
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media299
of the bulla, drainage from the auditory tube is unlikely. Depending on the amount
of eardrum present, fluid has to traverse a jut in the petrous temporal bone, which
forms the floor of the horizontal ear canal and extends into the bulla. Fluid escape
from the bulla is difficult and requires severe changes in head position to allow
drainage through the eardrum. If a myringotomy incision was made, it would be
difficult for fluid to escape the middle ear because of the surface tension across the
incision. There may be a small movement of the infused antibiotic solution into the
extermal ear canal, which actually may be beneficial, but the majority of the topical
antibiotic solution can remain within the bulla for several days after infusion.
The antibiotic, antifungal, or corticosteroid solution is infused into the bulla through
a small catheter placed into the bulla until the fluid overflows into the extermal ear
canal. During the first bulla infusion, less than 1 cc of solution can be infused into the
imflamed bulla. The entire procedure of flushing, suctioning, and bulla infusion should
be repeated weekly during therapy. With each successive treatment, the mucoperios-
teum should retract slightly, increasing the volume of fluid the bulla can accommodate.
With successive recheck visits, the eardrum and the horizontal canal should be
examined for fluid, mucus, and pus. If there is fluid within the bulla, it should be
flushed out and the bulla suctioned to prepare it for reinfusion. When the weekly
examination reveals a dry canal and little liquid within the bulla, the inflammation
and infection within the bulla has subsided (Figure 14-14).
At this point, bulla infusion treatments can be discontinued. Subsequent 2-week
rechecks should reveal a healing eardrum.
Fgure 14-14
When otitis media resolves, the mucoperiosteum stops mucus and pus production and the ear
canal isdryonsubsequent examinations.
300SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Topical therapy of otitis media in the author's practice is 75% successful. A small
number of chronic otitis media cases require total ear canal ablation and bulla
  n      s    si 
topical levels that can be achieved in the middle ear. For example, oral enrofloxacin
at high levels (20 mg/lb daily) may achieve no more than 4 to 6 μg/ml in the
bulla, but infusing 1 ml of injectable enrofloxacin provides 22,700 μg/ml. Even
recommended off-label dilutions of injectable enrofloxacin of 1:1, 1:2, and 1:4
provide extremely high concentrations within the bulla. The limitation of topical
           
maintain peak antibiotic levels. Daily infusion would be ideal,' but weekly treatment
seems adequate.
Much has been made of the use of the inhibitory quotient (IQ) for determining the
efficacy of parenteral antibiotic therapy. The IQ is determined by dividing the tissue
level of the antibiotic (Cmax) by the MIC of the bacteria.'6 The tissue level is deter-
mined by the drug insert supplied with the antibiotic. The MIC is provided by
the laboratory. High IQ values have been associated with a lower development of
resistant bacteria. By definition, if the IQ is greater than 8 to 10, the antibiotic dose
is optimal. For ciprofloxacin and marbofloxacin, resistant Pseudomonas organisms
have an MIC greater than 2 μg/ml, so to achieve the proper IQ, a middle-ear tissue
level of 16 μg/ml is necessary. For enrofloxacin, the laboratories usually consider
sn a om  g e os s, l t  
 It is doubtful whether oral doses of these medications can achieve these levels in the
middle ear. Sensitive bacteria with low MICs may be adequately treated with
systemic drugs that can reach the bulla.
If there is a resistant infection, the veterinarian should try to determine whether
oral therapy alone is appropriate. For example, in a resistant Pseudomonas middle
ear infection, if the MIC of the bacteria is reported as 3 μg/ml (resistant) for
enrofloxacin and the tissue level within the bulla using very-high-dose oral
enrofloxacin (20 mg/kg once daily) is 6 μg/ml, the IQ is only 2. This indicates
highest recommended dose. Resistant organisms result from suboptimal antibiotic
doses.
The Use of Corticosteroids in Otitis Media
When the character of the middle ear secretions is mucoid and cultures do not
reveal a bacterial infection, aqueous topical corticosteroids such as dexamethasone
sodium phosphate (DMSO, 4 mg/ml) or a DMSO/fluocinolone combination
(Synotic, Ft. Dodge) may be infused through a catheter placed in the cleaned and
dried bulla. These potent topical antiinflammatories are not ototoxic. Other potent
injectable topical corticosteroids are formulated with such ototoxins as benzyl
the bulla.
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media :
301
Corticosteroids slow the intense inflammation and exudation found in middle ear
disease. As described earlier, the mucoperiosteum undergoes severe pathologic
changes in response to inflammation. Corticosteroids can reverse some of the exten-
sive granulation that forms in the bulla, enhancing the ability of topically applied
antibiotics to penetrate into the infected tissue. The tympanic cavity is crowded out
by this hyperemia and proliferating granulation tissue, so the amount of free space
within the bulla decreases. Reducing the inflammation helps this lining membrane
retract back toward the bone, increasing the volume within the bulla. When the
eardrum heals, this space should refill with air.
Corticosteroids reduce the amount of mucus produced in the bulla and decrease
the viscosity of the secretions from the inflamed mucous membrane in the bulla.
Changing the character of the mucus aids in its removal. Thickened, tenacious,
inspissated material is more difficult to remove than thin mucus. Corticosteroids
may also reduce the swelling in the auditory tube, increasing lumen diameter, which
has the beneficial effect of offering limited drainage of mucus into the nasopharynx.
If there is bacterial or fungal disease and the space in the bulla is needed for
antibiotic or antifungal topical therapy, decreasing doses of systemic corticosteroids
may be used for a few weeks during the recovery phase of otitis media. The high
initial doses of corticosteroid required mirror the doses used for such other diseases
as inflammatory bowel disease. Patients should be screened for diabetes, Cushing's
disease, demodicosis, and potential pregnancy before using high doses of cortico-
steroids. Prednisone or prednisolone at 1 to 2 mg/lb daily for 2 weeks then decreas-
ing to 2 mg/lb every other day provides high enough levels to decrease inflammation
within the bulla. Owners of these animals need to be warmed that there will be side
effects of prednisone at such a high dose. Many owners discontinue the medication
when the side effects occur. The author prefers to use a 0.1 mg/lb intravenous dose
of dexamethasone (2 mg/ml) at the time of treatment and then repeat this injection
weekly at the recheck appointment if there is significant exudate that needs to be
suctioned from the bulla. (The presence of exudate indicates continuing inflamma-
tion in the membrane.) This prevents the owners from having the choice to stop the
medication. Dexamethasone has a higher degree of antinflammatory activity than
prednisone and has no mineralocorticoid activity, which minimizes the undesirable
side effects (polyuria/polydypsia) seen with prednisone. Dexamethasone, however.
depresses the pituitary-adrenal axis.
Because many dogs with otitis media also have concurrent otitis exterma,
systemic corticosteroids aid in reducing the swelling and pain from otitis exterma. In
addition, they reduce the signs associated with atopic disease, which is a primary
cause of otitis exterma in the dog.
Systemic Antimicrobials
Systemic antibiotic therapy is appropriate when topical therapy is impossible, such
fails, it is usually the result of inability of the antibiotic to get to the bacteria.17 There
may be sequestration of bacteria within folds or pockets of granulation tissue, which
302SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
therefore remain unexposed to the topical antibiotic. In infections where the bacteria
are sensitive, even the lower concentrations of systemic antibiotics may be sufficient
to treat the infection.
Oral fluoroquinolones often are sufficient for non-pseudomonal gram-negative
middle ear infections.16 Because fluoroquinolone efficacy is based on a peak blood
level, what level can be achieved and for what period should be determined. This is
a dose-dependent antibiotic. Other antibiotics are time dependent. Their levels need
to be constant to treat a bacterial infection, so the dose and the interval of dosing are
tant infections, it often requires the use of intravenous drugs. Ticarcillin-clavulanic
acid (Timentin, Smith Kline, Beecham) has been reported as effective in treating
multidrug resistant Pseudomonas otitis media in dogs when used as an intravenous
injection of 15 to 25 mg/kg given three times daily.18 In human medicine, intra-
venous ceftazidime has been used successfully for resistant Pseudomonas infections
of the middle ear.
Summary
cats with upper respiratory disease and polyps. Diagnosis of otitis media requires
attention to history and clinical signs, but it also requires other methods of deter-
mining disease within the bulla. If the integrity of the eardrum cannot be determined,
assume that there is middle ear disease and proceed accordingly. It is prudent to take
necessary precautions to avoid the use of potentially ototoxic ear cleaners or topical
medications in suspected otitis media cases. Therapeutic success is possible using
systemic and topical treatment within the cleaned bulla. Referral to a dermatology
specialist or a radiologist for CT scan may be indicated in some refractory cases.
Surgical intervention may be required to cure these difficult cases.
References
1. Little CJL, Lane JG, Pearson GR: Inflammatory middle ear disease of the dog: the pathology of otitis
media, Vet Rec 128:293-296, 1991.
pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis media, JAVMA 212(4):
534-548, 1998.
3. Kem TJ, Erb HN: Facial neuropathy in dogs and cats: 95 cases (1975-1985), JAVMA 191(12):1604.
1609, 1987.
4. Litle CJL, Lane JG: An evaluation of tympanometry, otoscopy and palpation for assessment of the
canine tympanic membrane, Vet Rec 124:5-8, 1989.
5. Tower ND, Gregory SP, Renfrew H, et al: Evaluation of the canine tympanic membrane by positive
contrast ear canalography, Vet Rec 142(4):78-81, 1998.
6. Walz PH, Mullaney TP, Redner JA, et al: Otitis media in pre-weaned Holstein dairy calves in
Michigan due to Mycoplasma bovis, J Vet Diagn Invest 93):250-254, 1997
CHAPIER 14 Diagnosis and Treatment of Otitis Media
303
JAVMA 202(1): 123-128, 1993.
8.Gotthelf LN: Otitis media. In Gotthelf LN,ed: Smatt animat ear diseases: an ittustrated guide,
Philadelphia, 2000, Saunders.
9. Jordan DG: Azithromycin, Comp Cont Ed Vet Pract Vet 21(3):242, 2001.
10.MedScape Today: Antibiotic resistance varies with undertying biotogic mechanism, www.medscape.
com/viewarticle/4 17558_3.
11. Foster AP, DeBoer DJ: The role of Pseudomonas in canine ear disease, Comp Cont Ed 20(8):909-918,
1998.
cats, JAAHA 26(S):496-499, 1990.
13. Colombini S, Merchant SR, Hosgood G: Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptible patterns from
dogs with otitis media, Vet Dermatot 11:235-239, 2000.
14. Martin Barrasa JL, Lupiola JL, Gomez P, et al: Antibacterial susceptibility patterns of Pseudomonas
strains insolated from chronic canine otitis externa, J Vet Med B Infect Dis Vet Pubtic Heath
47(3): 191-196, 2000.
15. Mansfield PD, Miller SC: Ototoxicity of topical preparations. In Gotthelf LN, ed: Smatt animat ear
diseases:an ittustrated guide,Philadelphia,2000,Saunders.
Rhinot Laryngot 107(10, Pt 1):865-871, 1998.
17. Ihrke PJ, Paqpich MG, DeManuelle TC: The use of fluoroquinolones in veterinary dermatology,
Vet Dermatot 10:193-204, 1999.
18.Parry D, et al: Middte ear chronic suppurative otitis, medical treatment, http:hwwwe-medicine.com/
ent/topic2 14.htm, April 18, 2002.
Suggested Readings
147:684-687, 2000.
Dunn Cl, Barradell LB: Azithromycin. A review of its pharmacological properties and use as 3 day
therapy in respiratory tract infections, Drugs 51(3):483-505, 1996.
Nuttall Tl: Use of ticarcillin in the management of canine otitis externa complicated by Pseudomonas
αeruginosa,J Sm Anim Pract 39(4):165-168,1998
Schachern PA, et al: The permeability of the round window membrane during otitis media,
Arch Otolaryngot Head Neck Surg 113(6):625-629, 1987.
Stanley Bl: Management of nasopharyngeat potyps in cats, Walham Feline Medicine Symposium,
North American Veterinary Conference, January 14, 1998.
histopathological study, Acta Ototaryngot 97(5-6):580-592, 1984.
Van Heerbeek N, et al: Effect of exogenous surfactant on ventilatory and clearance function of the rat's
eustachian tube, Otot Neurotot 24(1):6-10, 2003.
for feline calici virus and feline herpes virus—1 in 28 cases, J Fetine Med Surg 4(4):95-199, 2002.
15
Healing of the
Ruptured
Eardrum
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
306
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
 eterinarians are often faced with the problem of ruptured eardrums. It is diffi-
cult to assess the eardrum in a small animal because most otoscopes do not
provide good lighting or adequate magnification. Many cases of otitis exterma result
in an ear canal that is inflamed, stenotic, and full of exudates that impede the visual
determination of the integrity of the eardrum (Figure 15-1).
Causes of Rupture
Tympanic membrane perforation occurs in dogs and cats for a variety of reasons,
the most common being chronic otitis exterma. Otitis media results from the destruc-
tive effects of proteolytic enzymes on the thin epithelial layers of the membrane.
These enzymes are released from bacteria, inflammatory cell degradation, and ulcer-
ations along the ear canal produced as a result of otitis exterma; the enzymes then
gain access to the sensitive respiratory lining of the tympanic bulla through the
perforation.
Traumatic perforations of the tympanic membrane also occur as the result of
either excessive fluid pressure achieved during flushing of the ear canal or traumatic
Fgure 15-1
The eardrum of a 10-year-old German Shepherd is ruptured. Copious mucoid debris filled the
drained from the dog's nose and throat during the flushing process, confirming that the
eardrum was ruptured and the eustachian tube was open.
CHAPIER 15 Healing of the Ruptured Eardrum
307
Fgure 15-2
Traumatic myringotomy created by using a coton-tipped applicator that was pushed too far
 into the horizontal canal.
use of instruments during cleaning of the ear canal (Figure 15-2). Myringotomy,
a traumatic perforation of the eardrum, may be iatrogenic or may be intentionally
induced in therapy for otitis media.
Cats with respiratory disease may rupture their eardrums through sneezing.
Increased air pressure builds within the eustachian tube during the violent act
of sneezing, and that air pressure is transmitted through the eustachian tube to
the middle ear cavity. When the pressure in the tympanic bulla exceeds 300 mm Hg.
the eardrum ruptures (Figures 15-3 and 15-4).
Rarely, ascending respiratory infections in dogs and cats resulting in suppurative
otitis media may cause fluid pressure buildup inside the tympanic bulla. Without an
exit point for the fluid, the increasing pressure within the tympanic cavity weakens
the tympanic membrane, resulting in perforation. Children often suffer from this
painful condition and require insertion of ventilation tubes in the eardrum to equalize
the pressures between the tympanic bulla and the ear canal. In dogs and cats,
myringotomy is indicated to relieve the pressure.
Nasopharyngeal polyps found in dogs and cats either grow along the eustachian
tube toward the oropharynx or enlarge into the tympanic bulla. A large polyp within
the tympanic bulla pushes against the eardrum, creating pressure necrosis, and its
continued growth results in the ultimate destruction of the tympanic membrane
(Figure 15-5).
308
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure15-3
The patient, a young kitten with upper respiratory disease, was presented with the complaint
of sneezing and blood in the ear.Close examination of the eardrumrevealed an acute perfora-
tion caused by increased air pressure in the bulla created by sneezing.
Fgure 15-4
Another example of an eardrum with a small peripheral perforation caused by sneezing.
The eardrum in this patient is thickened, perhaps as a result of herpesvirus infection.
CHAPIER 15Healing of the Ruptured Eardrum
309
Fgure 15-5
Left, Normal eardrum and tympanic bulla in a cat. Right, A polyp mass growing within the bulla
pushing against the eardrum.
Healing Process
Unless the structures associated with the eardrum are completely destroyed, the
eardrum attempts to heal. The mechanism for healing of a ruptured eardrum requires
the presence of an adequate blood supply and a viable germinal epithelium.
Regrowth of the eardrum depends on these vital structures, so the ability of the
eardrum to heal is determined by the extent of the damage to them.
 As discussed elsewhere, the germinal epithelium for the epidermal layer of the
tympanic membrane is located in the area of the manubrium of the malleus and
grows radially toward the annulus of the tympanic membrane from that location.
Vascular supply to the germinal epithelium is derived from the blood vessels branch-
ing from the pars flaccida along the "vascular strip." If the malleus is preserved
and the vascular strip is not compromised, the process of healing can continue
(Figure 15-6).
The mechanism of healing in experimentally induced acute perforations of the
eardrum has been studied in the dog. Tympanic membranes were perforated using
a technique of subtotal myringectomy or by electrocautery. In these experiments the
attachment of the malleus to the tympanic membrane and vascular strip were
preserved. Tympanic membrane healing was observed in all dogs otoscopically. The
time required for complete regeneration of the ruptured eardrum ranged from 3 weeks
to 4 months.
Cytologic studies of the way the tympanic membrane heals reveal that around the
perforation border, keratinocytes on the extermal surface of the eardrum begin
to proliferate. At the same time, fibrous connective tissue cells from the middle layer
proliferate. The inner mucosal epithelial layer differentiates into ciliated and secretory
cells only at the perforation border and cooperates with the proliferated
310
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 15-6
 Prominent blood vessels demonstrated along the pars flaccida. This is the major blood supply
to the eardrum.
keratinocytes to close the perforation. The superficial epithelial layers of the
eardrum appear to be effective at rapidly moving toward the tympanic membrane
perforation to form a temporary patch, but it is the slower-moving basal epithelial
cells that are involved in permanent closure of the perforation (Figure 15-7).
The intensity of this process may be directly proportional to the oxygenation
provided to the cells by the intact vasculature. Vascular compromise or ischemia may
impede tympanic membrane healing. Experimentally, in rats, aeration of the
ruptured eardrum with increased oxygen concentrations resulted in acceleration of
the healing process. This finding may have clinical implications in a patient in which
the ear canal is stenotic and the eardrum is ruptured. Decreased ventilation of the ear
canal may slow the healing rate
The effects of naturally occurring otitis exterma or otitis media on the tympanic
membrane are different from those of experimentally produced perforations of
healing ability of the tympanic membrane. Inflammation, excessive fibrosis,
tympanosclerosis, and hyperkeratosis are frequently found in and around the
eardrum. Keratinized epithelial proliferation at the edge of the perforation
often grows inward and localizes on the medial side of the tympanic membrane.
A thick keratin layer protrudes into the middle ear at the periphery of a permanent
perforation.
CHAPIER 15 Healing of the Ruptured Eardrum
311
B
Fgure 15-7
A, Chronic otitis media and ruptured eardrum in a 12-year-old Sheltie that was present for at
least 6 months before treatment. B, Four months after treatment for the otitis media, the
eardrum has healed.
312
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Otitis Media Prevents Healing
Otitis media is a highly secretory condition. Copious mucus results from the
increased number and activity of goblet cells lining the tympanic bulla. Purulent
exudates result from inflammation within the middle ear. The fluid may be thin and
serous or thick and mucopurulent. The accumulation of mucus and pus creates a high
fluid pressure between the middle ear cavity and the horizontal canal of the extemal
ear canal. When the eustachian tube is inflamed or the exudate is very viscous, the
fluid escapes from the middle ear cavity along the path of least resistance, which
is through any perforation in the eardrum, and moves into the extermal ear canal.
For healing of the tympanic membrane to progress, the mucus and pus must be
removed from the bulla and ear canal (Figure 15-8).
Effective treatment for otitis media diminishes production of mucopurulent
fluid. Until the amount of fluid produced by the mucoperiosteum decreases,
any attempt at eardrum healing is negated by the constant flow of fluid through
the perforation. In addition, treatment for otitis exterma reduces the quantity of
exudates in the horizontal canal and alters the chemical composition of the exudates
that move distally along the ear canal toward the eardrum. By properly treating the
ear canal, the quantity of proteolytic enzymes decreases. The enzymes are not avail-
able to destroy the new epithelium that is attempting to heal the eardrum.
Depending on the severity of the otitis exterma or otitis media, lysis of the malleus
bone may be evident, and the germinal centers overlying this important structure
destroyed. Extensive fibrosis may be present in the pars flaccida and around the
annulus of the eardrum, occluding the vascular supply to the eardrum and leading to
ischemia (Figure 15-9). In either case, the essential components for eardrum healing
are removed and a chronic perforation remains.
Even if the otitis media is successfully treated and resolved, the eardrum may not
heal completely closed. Often, a ring of hyperkeratotic epidermis surrounds the hole
in the tympanic membrane; this condition represents a permanent perforation.
Sometimes the eardrum will grow back only partially (Figure 15-10), and the middle
ear is primed for inflammation. Any substance in the extermal ear canal, such as flush
solution, exudates, loose hairs, epithelial cells, cerumen, or ototoxic otic drugs, can
enter the middle ear and initiate an inflammatory response. Bacteria and yeasts gain
ad ad e m   ad p a ai an o sa
of the tympanic membrane should not swim or get water in their ears. Veterinarians
and groomers should be aware of this condition to ensure that no ototoxic ear cleaner
or ototoxic topical medication enters the ears; otherwise, frequent flare-ups of otitis
media result.
Chronic, persistent perforations of the tympanic membrane are common in dogs.
In people with permanent holes in the tympanic membrane, the standard treatment is
area of intense research is to identify substances that may be applied topically
to the perforation to institute closure.
CHAPIER 15 Healing of the Ruptured Eardrum
313
B
Fgure 15-8
 A, Severe mucopurulent discharge from the ear of an 8-year-old Shih-Tzu. The cytology revealed
rods and neutrophils, and culture revealed Pseudomonas. The eardrum was not visible.
B, After 6 months of treatrment consisting of systemic and topical enrofloxacin, periodic middle
ear flushes, tris-EDTA flushes by the owner at home, and topical and systemic corticosteroids,
the eardrum healed.
314
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 15-9
Chronic otitis media with extensive granulation tissue and fibrosis in the area of the pars
media, which requires total ear canal ablation and bulla osteotomy.
Fgure15-10
Chronic unstable otitis media. The eardrum has healed as much as it can. The middle ear
mucosa will result in otitis media.
CHAPIER 15 Healing of the Ruptured Eardrum
315
Suggested Readings
Boedts D: Tympanic membrane perforations, Acta Otorhinotaryngot Betg 49: 149-158, 1995.
Caye-Tomasen P: Changes in goblet cell density in rat middle ear mucosa in acute otititis media, Am J
Otot 16:75-82, 1995.
Laryngoscope 106:280-285, 1996.
Gotthelf LN: Secondary otitis media: an often overlooked condition, Canine Pract 20: 14-20, 1995
Koba R: Epidermal migration and healing of the tympanic membrane: an irmmunohistochemical study
of cell proliferation using brormodeoxyuridine labeling, Ann Otot Rhinot Laryngot 104:2 18-225,
1995.
Little CJL, Lane JG, Pearson GR: Inflamimatory middle ear disease of the dog: the pathology of otitis
media, Vet Rec 128:293-296, 199 1.
membranes: experimental study, Ann Otot Rhinot Laryngot 104:625-631, 1995
Somers TH: Histology of the perforated tympanic membrane and its muco-epithelial junction, Clin
Ototaryngot 22:162-166, 1997,
Steiss JE, Boosinger TR, Wright JC, et al: Healing of experimentally perforated tympanic membranes
demonstrated by electrodiagnostic testing and histopathology, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:307-3 10,
1992.
Truy E: Chronic tympanic membrane perforation: an animal model, Am J Otot 16:222-225, 1995.
16
Inflammatory
Polyps
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
318
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Feline Polyps
The feline inflammatory polyp may be the most common non-neoplastic growth
found in the ear canal. It is unclear whether polyps are truly congenital in origin or
whether they are acquired as a result of otitis media secondary to upper respiratory
infection. They are often found in young mature cats with an average age of 1.5 years,
although they have been reported in cats of all ages. There seems to be no breed or
sex predilection. There seems to be no relationship to feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) status
Signalment and History
Nasopharyngeal or inflammatory polyps originate from the eustachian tube or from
the middle ear mucosa. Most of these polyps have their origin in the middle ear;
however, when they originate in the eustachian tube, growth is usually directed
toward the throat. Nasopharyngeal polyps can be found exiting the eustachian tube
on the lateral wall of the oropharynx, beneath the soft palate. Retraction of the soft
palate with a spay hook reveals their presence. The cat with an oropharyngeal loca-
tion of its polyp shows respiratory symptoms such as stertorous respiration, voice
changes, wheezing, dyspnea, and dysphagia.'
The predominant clinical signs in a cat with an inflammatory polyp of the ear
canal are discharge from the ear canal and head shaking and/or head tilt. Polyps are
rarely bilateral. Nystagmus and vestibular disease may be present in severe cases of
aural polyps, because pressure on the round and oval windows from the enlarging
mass increases pressure in the endolymph within the semicircular canals.
cats with an aural polyp are presented to the veterinarian with a waxy accumulation
deep in the ear canal (Figure 16-1). This may look similar to a ceruminolith or wax
plug. The polyp mass cannot be visualized because it is under the wax.
Some cats have dried, crusty material in the ear, similar to the discharge seen in
Otodectes infections. The middle ear mucosa is a respiratory epithelium capable of
producing copious amounts of mucus when it is inflamed. The mucus and pus that
leak from the bulla into the extermal ear canal can dry out and become flaky, giving
the impression that the cat has ear mites. More commonly, cats with polyps have a
copious mucopurulent discharge in the affected ear due to liquid exudates filling the
ear canal (Figure 16-2).
After cleaning the cat's ear, otoscopic examination reveals a pink to red, fleshy,
mobile mass deep in the ear canal (Figures 16-3 and 16-4). When the mass is visible
in the extermal ear canal, it has already protruded through the eardrum, having ruptured
it as the polyp grew outward from the tympanic bulla. When this happens, a secon-
dary otitis media can develop as bacteria gain access to the middle ear mucosa.
 Manipulating the polyp mass often causes the release of material from the
bulla into the extermal ear canal because the polyp acts as a seal for these middle
CHAPTER 16Inflammatory Polyps
319
Fgure16-1
Cat with a waxy accumulation in the ear canal. This mass was located deep in the horizontal
portion of the cat's ear canal. The cat was presented for a head tilt and ataxia.
Fgure 16-2
revealed (see Figure 16-4).
320
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure16-3
Nasopharyngeal polyp occluding the ear canal of a cat. The waxy accumulation in Figure 16-1
was removed to reveal this red, fleshy mass in the cat's ear canal.
Fgure 16-4
After the mucus and pus were removed from the ear canal from the cat in Figure 16-2, this fleshy
mass was evident and could be pushed back into the middle ear No eardrum is present in cats
with polyps.
CHAPTER 16Inflammatory Polyps
321
ear exudates. Polyps can become quite large and may reach the diameter of the ear
Microbiology
 Many kittens and grown cats have unrecognized middle ear disease often as a sequela
to upper respiratory disease. Otitis media is a consistent feature when nasopharyn-
geal polyps are found in the ear canal. Many bacterial pathogens have been cultured
from the middle ear after bulla osteotomy including Pasteurella, streptococci,
staphylococci, and occasionally Bacteroides and Pseudomonas. Some bacteria
isolated from the middle ear in cats with polyps originate from the upper respiratory
mucosa, and some pathogens originate from the extermal ear canal epithelium.
Routine aerobic cultures for respiratory pathogens rarely include Mycoplasma,
Bordetella, or Chlamydia, which may be involved in respiratory disease and middle
ear disease of cats.? It was once thought that viruses played a role in development of
polyps. In one study, tissues from inflammatory polyps were assayed for feline
calicivirus and feline herpesvirus-1 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Failure to
detect either of these viruses suggests that the persistence of these viruses is not
associated with the development of inflammatory polyps. In another study, polyps
were induced in rats by placing type 3 pneumococci into one middle ear cavity of
each rat. In 44% of the rats a polyp developed in the experimentally infected ear.
None of the rats developed a polyp in the untreated ear.
The sequestered inflammation and infection lead to changes in the middle ear
mucosa. It is theorized that the chronic irritation of the middle ear mucosa leads to
the formation of polyps. Initially there is a rupture in the respiratory epithelium lining
the tympanic bulla or the eustachian tube, followed by intraluminal protrusion of the
lamina propria through the epithelial defect. Then the respiratory epithelium covers
this protrusion. As the epithelium covering the polyp becomes damaged by infection
or by the physical trauma of its own movement against the surrounding tissue, this
process repeats a number of times, resulting in significant production of fibrous stroma
and enlargement of the mass. Often the mass becomes lobulated (Figure 16-5).
Grossly, a nasopharyngeal polyp is pedunculated, having a narrow stalk at
its origin and becoming a large fleshy mass as it grows. Histologically, a polyp is a
hyperplastic inflammatory proliferation of the middle ear mucosa. A polyp is composed
of well-vascularized fibrous tissue stroma covered with a respiratory epithelium,
which is often ulcerated. The stroma is edematous, and the submucosa contains a
mixed population of acute and chronic inflammatory cells, including neutrophils,
macrophages, and plasma cells. Variable amounts of lymphocytes may also be present.
It is difficult to determine the exact point of origin of a polyp histologically because
the respiratory epithelium of the mucous membrane in the tympanic cavity, auditory
tube, and nasopharynx is continuous.
Depending on their growth pattem, polyps can grow through the auditory tube
toward the nasopharnx or they may grow through the tympanic membrane. When
found in the extemal ear canal, the enlarging polyp mass has grown through the
322
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Figure 16-5
Multilobulated polyp in a cat. This type of polyp is usualy more vascular than solitary-lobed polyps.
tympanic membrane, creating a permanent opening from the extermal ear canal to the
middle ear. The middle ears of these cats have copious mucus and pus.
Treatment
Surgical Treatment
The most effective method for treating nasopharyngeal polyps is surgical because
there is less chance of recurrence of the polyp. However, surgical treatment is asso-
ciated with a high risk of postoperative complications. Veterinary surgeons recom-
mend ventral bulla osteotomy to remove the origin of the polyp as well as to culture
the inflamed mucosa and institute proper antibiotic therapy.3> The cat has a double-
chambered tympanic bulla. Exploration of the caudomedial portion, which is easily
accessed through ventral bulla osteotomy, is relatively straightforward. However,
exploration of the anterolateral portion requires breeching the septum that separates
these two compartments. The sympathetic nerve fibers along the wall of the septum
can be traumatized during this surgery. The interruption of these nerves results in
Hormer's syndrome, a common postoperative sequela to ventral bulla osteotomy in the
cat. After ventral bulla osteotomy, most cases of Hormer's syndrome resolve sponta-
neously. In addition, a branch of the facial nerve courses through the middle ear, and
reversible facial neuropathy can occur as a result of trauma to this nerve. Vestibular
signs such as head tilt, nystagmus, and ataxia can be associated with ventral bulla
osteotomy; these signs may be irreversible.
CHAPIER 16 Inflammatory Polyps
323
Traction/Avulsion of Polyps
a s g ad as m [ a s   p aq  sds
through the otoscope cone. Special endoscopic tools or long alligator forceps can be
used. The objective is to grasp the polyp mass and, using force, tear the attachment
of the polyp away from the underlying mucosa. This is often accomplished by rotat-
ing the grasped mass 90 degrees and then applying traction. In this manner the entire
polyp mass can often be removed from the mucosa lining the bulla. Increased expo-
sure can be achieved by performing a lateral ear canal wall resection (Figure 16-6).6
Traction works best in small, non-lobulated polyps. When removing some polyps
using traction, only small pieces of the polyp can be removed. Visualization is diffi-
cult, and blood often oozes from the cut surface of the polyp mass. Repeated grasps
and pulls are required to debulk the mass. This still leaves the polyp stalk in the
middle ear, which may lead to regrowth of the polyp.
Endoscopic Removal of Polyps
Altermative methods for dealing with nasopharyngeal polyps in the ear canals of
affected cats and kittens look promising. Removal of a polyp by traction may be
easier when this procedure can be viewed endoscopically using the video otoscope and
endoscopic instruments. A procedure called perendoscopic trans-tympanic excision
Fgure 16-6
Lateral bulla osteotomy. when the polyp is inaccessible from the ear canal, an open procedure
is required to excise the mass. In this cat, the polyp was not visible through the otoscope due
ablation.
324
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 16-7
Removal of a polyp using perendoscopic trans-tympanic excision (PTTE). Top left, There is
liquid in the ear canal of this cat. Top right, After cleaning, the fleshy polyp was revealed. Under
direct video visualization, the polyp mass is grabbed with an endoscopic grasping forceps
 o      s         o
removed intact (bottom right).
(PTTE) has been described that uses a pinching technique with endoscopic forceps
(Figure 16-7).7 The major part of the polyp can be easily removed in this manner,
and the lateral portion of the bulla can be explored to remove the remnants of
the peduncle. In a study of PTTE, 10 cats with polyps were treated in this manner.
With follow-up endoscopic evaluations from 3 to 24 months, eight of the cats had a
complete remission; only two of the cats required a second PTTE. Two cats exhib-
ited mild Homer's syndrome, which was temporary.
In another study of 22 cats with inflammatory polyps that were treated by traction
alone, nine (41%) had recurrence. Because 59% of cats treated by traction alone had
a successful outcome, these authors suggest that traction alone is a reasonable first
per day for 2 weeks, followed by half the initial dose for 1 week, and then every
other day for an additional 7 to 10 days) after traction removal of the polyp. None of
the cats that received prednisolone had recurrence, whereas nine of 14 cats that did
not receive prednisolone had recurrences. Because it is suspected that inflammation
promotes the growth of polyps, it is reasonable to assume that controlling the mucosal
inflammation after removal of the polyp would retard further growth. The author
routinely treats cats that have had polyps removed by traction with a combination of
CHAPIER 16  Inflammatory Polyps 325
DMSO and a very potent corticosteroid, fluocinolone (Synotic, Fort Dodge), initially
with bulla infusion through a 3i2- or 5-Fr catheter placed into the bulla and then
with eardrops administered by the owners twice daily for a minimum of 3 weeks.
Recurrence of the polyp is rare in these cases. In addition, azithromycin (5 mg/lb
orally every other day for two or three treatments) is prescribed to treat bacterial
otitis media. Cats with only nasopharyngeal polyps were nearly four times more
likely to be cured by traction alone than were cats with aural polyps.
Laser Ablation of Polyps
Another promising method for aural polyp removal is laser ablation under visuali-
zation with the video otoscope. The carbon dioxide laser has been used by the author
tip, 120 mm long, that can be placed through the 2-mm working channel of one
video otoscope (MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida), so that precise laser ablation can be
 performed while the entire procedure is viewed on a video monitor. Two techniques
can be used in this manner.
For small polyps, the laser energy is applied to the polyp mass to vaporize cells
and debulk the mass. The charred tissue is removed, and the ear is flushed. This
procedure is repeated for several cycles to shrink the mass and seal off the blood
vessels within the polyp. The laser procedure is continued until the stalk of the polyp
can no longer be visualized.
If the polyp mass is large, the 120- x 0.8-mm tip can be extended through the
1.8-mm working channel of the endoscope into the tympanic bulla along the floor of
the horizontal ear canal under the polyp mass. Laser energy is applied to vaporize
portions of the polyp stalk, making traction removal easier. After the bulk of the polyp
is removed from the bulla, the laser is placed into the bulla, and laser energy seals
off the polyp stalk as previously described. Postoperative treatment includes the use
of oral azithromycin for two or three treatments and fluocinolone/DMSO bulla infu-
sion, followed by at-home ear drops for a minimum of 3 weeks.
Cats that have had their polyps removed rarely regrow their eardrums. Frequent
reassessment of these cats is important to prevent secondary otitis media
CaninePolyps
The dog only rarely develops a nasopharyngeal polyp originating from the mucosa
of the tympanic bulla or from the eustac hian tube. There have been reports of polyps
In one report, a canine nasopharyngeal polyp was so large that an incision into the
soft palate was required to access it at the extermal opening of the auditory tube in
order to grasp and remove it.? Other reports demonstrate that there are nasopharyn-
geal polyps that protrude through the eardrum into the ear canal in the same manner
as the feline inflammatory polyp. Canine inflammatory polyps have been reported to
occur bilaterally on occasion. One report indicated polyps only in older male dogs.
326
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Figure 16-8
Canine inflammatory polyp. This Labrador Retriever was presented with both pinnae extend-
ing laterally from his head. Inflammatory polyps were present in both ears. The white polyp
              s
middle ear. The polyps were easily removed by excision, and the stalks were removed using
traction.
The significance of this is unclear.10 The author has seen several canine aural polyps
that grow very large, and they grow to the outside of the ear canal, often molding to
the epithelial folds at the tragus (Figure 16-8).
Traction removal has been successful in canine polyps seen by the author, perhaps
 isa si aq   sa s m s n  n as
feline polyps (Figures 16-9 and 16-10). Surgical treatment of canine polyps requires
total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy (TECA-LBO) rather than ventral
bulla osteotomy, as in cats, because of the chronic nature of the extermal ear canal
'siod Aioueu ym shop ysou u punoy s! neu Aonoyd
 Most dog polyps are not true polyps but huge ceruminous gland adenomas. This
type of tumor often has a broad base originating from the epithelial surface of the
extermal ear canal. The eardrum is usually intact in these cases. The rapid growth and
the position of this tumor mass in the ear canal make the diagnosis confusing. Pinch
biopsies of these masses are sometimes reported as polyps, because there is an inflam-
matory stroma with inflammatory cells covered by epithelium. When the entire mass
is submitted for histopathology, the dilated ceruminous glands become apparent.
This type of otic mass cannot be removed using traction because of its broad
attachment. Lateral ear canal resection with excision from the ear canal at the base
of the tumor is the preferred method of removing large ceruminous gland adenomas
(Figure 16-11).
CHAPTER 16InflammatoryPolyps
327
Figure 16-9
Unless this vascular supply is removed at the time of surgery, the polyp is likely to grow back.
Fgure 16-10
328
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 16-11
Cerumen gland adenoma in the vertical canal of a dog. This type of tumor is often confused
with a true nasopharyngeal polyp. The difference is that these tumors are attached by a broad
otitis media.
References
1. Allen HS, Broussard J, Noone K: Nasopharyngeal diseases in cats: a retrospective study of 53 cases
(199 1-1998), J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35(6):457-461, 1999.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26(5):496-499, 1990.
3. Trevor PB, Martin RA: Tympanic bulla osteotomy for the treatment of middle ear disease in cats:
19 cases (1984-199 1), J Am Vet Med Assoc 202(1): 123-128, 1993.
4. Veir JK, Lappin MR, Foley JE, et al: Feline inflammatory polyps: historical, clinical, and PCR find-
ings for feline calicivirus and feline herpesvirus-1 in 28 cases, J Fetine Med Surg 4(4): 195-199, 2002.
5. Boothe HW: Surgery of the tympanic bulla (otitis media and nasopharyngeal polyps), Prob Vet Med
3(2):254-269, 1991,
6. Stanley Bl: Management of nasopharyngeat potyps in cats, Proceedings Waltham Feline Medicine
Symposium, 1998.
7. Mortellaro CM, Alfieri C, DeFrancesco l, et al: Perendoscopic trans-tympanic excision (PTTE) of ear
canat potyps in cats: I0 case reports, World Small Animal Veterinary Association Proceedings, 2001.
8. Anderson DM, White RAS, Robinson RK: Management of inflammatory polyps in 37 cats, Vet Rec
147(24):684-687, 2000.
9. Fingland RB, Gratzek A, Vorhies MW, et al: Nasopharyngeal polyp in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
29:311-314, 1993.
10. Pratschke KM: 1Inflammatory polyps of the middle ear in 5 dogs, Vet Surg 32(3):292-296, 2003.
17
Ototoxicity
Louis N. Gotthelf, DVM
3308
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
 n human medicine, certain systemic drugs used to treat diseases can have profound
I negative effects on hearing and balance. Injectable antibiotics, mainly the amino
glycosides, and the cancer drug cisplatin seem to cause deafness in many children
and adults. Some topical medications placed into the ear canals of children have caused
hearing deficits and vestibular disease. In many of these cases there was eardrum
damage, allowing these agents access to the nervous structures of the inner ear.
In human medicine, the symptoms of being dizzy or losing hearing can be detected
very early in the course of treatment with ototoxic medications, so if an ototoxic
be easily detected, and ototoxicity is often only suspected when there is major neuro-
logic damage to either the cochlea, manifesting in deafness, or the semicircular canals,
resulting in vestibular signs.
The primary method of treatment of ear disease in dogs and cats is with topical
products. It is well documented that more than 50% of dogs with chronic ear disease
have absent or perforated eardrums, so an understanding of the potential for many of
 these drugs and/or chemicals to cause neurologic problems is necessary.12
Experimental Studies
Many reports have identified ototoxic substances in animals, including dogs and
cats. Some of the ingredients found in topical preparations that are safely used on the
skin in the extermal ear canal can cause damage to the respiratory tissues that line the
middle ear cavity and to the nervous structures in the inner ear. Some drugs are
ototoxic when used systemically but do not seem to have the same ototoxic poten-
tial when used topically. One ex ample of this phenomenon is tobramycin. Numerous
reports of ototoxicity have been published in regard to the injectable form; however,
there are no published reports of ototoxicity from topical otic use of tobramycin.?
Many experimental trials demonstrating ototoxic potential are done in normal
laboratory animals. They involve placing medication or ear cleaners directly into one
of the tympanic bullae for several days. Usually saline is infused into the opposite
bulla as a negative control. But for a positive contol, gentamicin infusion into the
tympanic cavity of laboratory animals may be substituted. In ototoxicity studies, brain-
auditory-evoked-response (BAER) testing is done to determine hearing loss prior to
euthanizing the experimental animals. Cochlear damage occurs initially in the cells
detecting high-frequency sounds, so these animals first lose the ability to detect high-
pitched sounds. Neurologic examinations are used to assess the function of the
vestibular system. Screening for ototoxicy using the BAER test during safety tests
of any otic drug or chemical should be done before its release for use in animals.
Histopathologic analyses of the tympanic bulla and the immer ear from these
experimental animals are used to verify evidence of damage to the epithelium of the
bulla or to the neurologic structures in the inner ear.
Care is prudent in interpreting the studies done in laboratory animals and extrap-
olating the results to dogs and cats with diseased middle ears. Studies from normal
experimental animals provide clues for potential ototoxicity concems in dogs and
CHAPIER 17Ototoxicity 331
cats; the results bear further investigation. For example, there have been many reported
cases of acute deafness in dogs associated with the use of otic products containing
gentamicin. One product containing gentamicin, clotrimazole, and betamethasone
even wams on the drug label that the product "has been associated with deafness or
partial hearing loss in a small number of sensitive dogs." However in a controlled
experiment in 10 normal dogs, when low-dose aqueous gentamicin solution (3 mg/ml)
was placed directly into one tympanic bulla twice daily for 21 days, neither cochlear
nor vestibular function was affected.4
In another study that used juvenile guinea pigs to compare the ototoxicity of
polymyxin and gentamicin directly instilled into the bullae, it was determined that
the polymyxin group showed a 66% loss of cochlear hair cells compared with a 6.5%
loss with gentamicin. In human medicine, most people with gentamicin ototoxicity
have vestibulotoxicity rather than deafness. It has been estimated that up to 1% of
Ticarcillin (Ticar, SmithKline, Beecham) and ticarcillin with clavulanate potassium
(Timentin, SmithKline, Beecham) have been successfully used topically and parenter-
ally for the treatment of refractory Pseudomonas otitis exterma and media.' However,
chinchilla studies using these compounds have demonstrated significant pathologic
effects when they were injected as single applications into normal middle ears.8
Can a medication toxic to one species of animal also be ototoxic to another? Can
a substance toxic to the cochlea in one species show toxicity to the vestibular appa-
ratus in another species? It is possible that there are genetic differences among
animals that confer susceptibility to certain drugs and chemicals, but most of these
are undocumented.
Vehicles
Some of the studies done im animalsreveal that other factorsbesides the active ingre-
dient of the drug itself cause neurologic damage. For example, the alcohol bases of
disinfectants, not the disinfectant itself, may cause the damage. Aqueous povidone
iodine seems to be safe in the middle ear, but tincture of iodine contains alcohol, so
it is not safe to use. Alcohol-containing products should be avoided if the status of
the eardrum cannot be determined. Could it be that some of the carrier vehicles in
ointment bases cause increased contact of the antibiotic with these sensitive epithe-
lial and nervous tissues? Many topical otic products contain propylene glycol, which
may cause some inflammation in the extemal ear canal. However, in the middle ear,
it causes increased inflammation of the mucoperiosteum, leading to excessive gran-
ulation tissue and bony changes within the bulla.
Dilutional Factors
Some topical products that are ototoxic if used as supplied may not be ototoxic at
lower concentrations. Acetic acid at 5% seems to cause more problems than acetic
s        ds m   i
332SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
In a series of studies done in cats, chlorhexidine gluconate was shown to cause
degeneration of the hair cells in the labyrinthine vestibule of the vestibular apparatus.
At a 2% concentration, chlorhexidine caused profound degeneration of these cells,
but at a concentration of 0.05% there was less degeneration of these cells.10
However, even in the dilute chlorhexidine group there were still clinical vestibular
signs. Subsequent studies in cats showed loss of hair cells in the organ of Corti over
a very wide range at both concentrations. This indicates a cause for hearing loss after
the use of chlorhexidine gluconate.!l Chlorhexidine gluconate also caused the loss
of the mucociliary clearance function in the mucosa of the tympanic bulla as it
produced subsequent cell destruction.12
The use of systemic drugs such as salicylates and furosemide causes increased
concentrations of gentamicin in the endolymph in the cochlea within the imner ear,
resulting in clinical ototoxicity.'3 Salicylates may actually increase the membrane
conductance of the outer cochlear hair cells, increasing the amplification of sound.
In human medicine, this results in tinnitus, a high-pitched ringing in the ears.!4 Other
 o    ss  s  s 
ototoxins.
Mixing Drugs
Some nonototoxic medications can safely mix with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to
enhance penetration of the drug into tissues. Enrofloxacin injectable (Baytril, Bayer)
is frequently mixed with DMSO/fluocinolone (Synotic, Ft. Dodge) to treat otitis
exterma or media in the dog. However, mixing a known ototoxin with the non-
ototoxic DMSO may potentiate the ototoxicity. Mixing the aminoglycoside drugs
with DMSO may enhance their absorption into the inner ear and may increase the
toxicity of the medication.15
Duration of Therapy
The duration of therapy with ototoxic medications can influence the amount of nerv-
ous tissue damage. Reversibility of clinical signs often depends on the duration of
the treatment. In the case of neomycin applied to the middle ears of guinea pigs, the
degree of cochlear damage and hearing loss worsens as the duration of its use
increases.'6 Young animals seem to have a greater sensitivity to ototopical antibi-
otics. Neomycin, an aminoglycoside antibiotic, is contained in many commonly
prescribed combination veterinary otic preparations. It is especially ototoxic in the
ears of 2- or 3-week-old kittens.17
Delayed Ototoxicity
 Delayed ototoxicity from topical gentamicin has been documented. It may persist
within the inner ear of animals for more than 6 months. So gentamicin ototoxicity
CHAPIER 17 Ototoxicity 333
Neomycin, streptomycin, and kanamycin are also known to be eliminated from the
inner ear slowly.18
The duration of middle ear disease can affect the absorption of materials into the
inner ear. The permeability of the round and oval windows increases early in the
course of otitis media, allowing increased amounts of ototoxins to pass easily into
the inner ear. With chronicity, granulation tissue and mucus accumulation within the
middle ear may prevent the diffusion of the same medication into the inner ear. In a
chinchilla study, when experimentally induced otitis media resolved there was less
susceptibility to ototicity by polymyxin.19 Some ototoxic medications and chemicals
are also pro-inflammatory, causing thickening of the mucosa and the membranes of
the round and oval windows, which limits absorption of these compounds into the
imner ear.
With so many otic products available to veterinarians, it is prudent to look at the
ingredients of an ear cleaner to see whether it may have ototoxicity potential. Many
manufacturers are aware of the potential ototoxicity of the ingredients in their prod-
ucts and so they have been placing warmings on their labels stating "Caution: Do not
use if the eardrum is ruptured.
Ear Cleaners
One study looked at four commonly used ear cleaners to determine what ototoxic
effects could be determined. The ingredients tested included squalene, dioctyl
sodium succinate, carbamide peroxide, and triethanolamine. These ear cleaners
[   s   so        am
BAER. Each product was instilled into one bulla of each test animal, only one time.
through a myringotomy incision. Neurologic function and BAER were assessed
every week for 28 days. Then the animals were sacrificed, and the inner ears were
examined histopathologically. The untreated ear (normal control) of the same
no morphologic or neurologic changes.? Another study comparing the vestibular
and cochlear effects of the common topical antiseptics chlorhexidine, alcohol,
amd povidone iodine in sand rats showed that chlorhexidine and alcohol had a
profound effect on both the vestibular and cochlear functions but that povidone
jodine did not.21
Tables 17-1 through 17-3 list drugs that have known ototoxic potential as well as
those agents generally recognized as safe. These lists should be used as guidelines
based on sound scientific studies for making therapeutic decisions. Until we have
answers to the questions regarding which compounds are known to cause ototoxicty
in dogs and cats, we should attempt to preempt ototoxicity while treating otitis. We
should base the use of these topical otic products on current evidence, including
laboratory studies in animals other than dogs and cats. By learming which medica-
 s    a  ro d n  sa a p s
is ruptured, and avoiding their use, we will "do no harm.
334
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
TABLE 17-1 Potentially Ototoxic Systemic Agents
Aminoglycoside antibiotics
Amikacin
Dactinomycin
Dibekacin
Dihydros treptomycin
Framycetin
Gentamicin
Kanamycin
Netilmicin
Ribostamycin
Sisomicin
Streptomycin
Tobramycin
Nonaminoglycoside antibiotics
Erythromycin
Ristocetin
Diuretics
Acetazolamide
Bumetanide
Ethacrynic acid
Furosemide
Mannitol
Antineoplastic agents
Actinomycin C and D
Bleomycin
Carboplatin
Cisplatin
Mechlorethamine
Vinblastine
Vincristine
Miscellaneous agents
 Arsenic compounds
Chloroquine
Danazol
Gold salts
Pentobarbital
Potassium bromide
Quinidine
Quinine
Salicylates
CHAPTER17 Ototoxicity
335
TABLE 17-2 Potentially Ototoxic Topical Agents
Aminoglycoside antibiotics
A11
Nonaminoglycoside antibiotics
Bacitracin*
Chloramphenicol*
Chlortetracycline*
Colistin*
Erythromycin
Gramicidin*
Hygromycin B
Iodochlorhy droxyquinolone
Minocycline
Oxytetracycline*
Pharmacetin
 Polymyxin B
Tetracycline*
Ticarcillin*
Vancomycin
Viomycin
Antiseptics
Acetic acid
Benzalkonium chloride*
Benzethonium chloride
Cetrimide
Chlorhexidine*
m-Cresyl acetate
Ethanol
Iodine and iodophors
Merthiolate
Antifungal agents
Amphotericin B*
Griseofulvin*
Ceruminolytic agents and solvents
Carbamide peroxide*
 Dimethyl formamide
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate*
Ethanol
Propylene glycol*
 Polyethylene glycol 400
Triethanolamine
Toluene
Miscellaneous agents
Cyclophosphamide
Dapsone
Detergents
Dimethyl sulfoxide
Diphenylhydrazine
Mercury
Potassium bromide
Triethy1 tin bromide
Trimethyl tin chloride
*Has an inflammatory effect on the middle ear.
336
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
TABLE 17-3 Safe Ototopical Agents*
Antibiotics
Carbenicillin
Ceftazidime
Cefmenoxime
Ciprofloxacin
Enrofloxacin
Fosfomycin
Oflox acin
Penicillin G
Antinflammatory agents
Dexamethasone
Triamcinolone
Fluocinolone
Antifungal agents
Clotrimazole
Nystatin
Tolnaftate
Ceruminolytic agents and solvents
 Isopropyl myristate
Squalene
*Generally regarded as safe on the basis of published reports.
References
1. Little CLJ, Lane JG, Pearson GR: Inflarmmatory middle ear disease of the dog: the pathology of otitis
media, Vet Rec 128:293-296, 1991,
 2. Cole LK: Microbial flora and antimicrobial sensitivity patterns of the horizontal canal and middle ear
in dogs with otitis media, JAVMA 212:1549-1553, 1997.
3. deHoog M, van Zanten GA,Hoeve LJ, et al: A pilot case control followup study on hearing in
children treated with tobramycin in the newborn period, Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngotogy 65:
225-232,2002.
preparation in dogs, Am J Vet Res 56(4):532-538, 1995.
5. Barlow DW, Duckert LG, Kreig CS, et al: Ototoxicity of topical otomicrobial agents, Acta
Ototaryngot 115(2):231-235, 1995.
6. Hain TC: Ototoxic medications, Otoneurology Education Index: www.tchain/otoneurology/disor-
ders/bilat/ototoxins.html.
7. Nuttall TJ: Use of ticarcillin in the managerment of canine otitis externa complicated by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, J Sm Anim Pract 39:1165-1168,1998
8. Jakob T, Wright CG, Robinson K,et al: Ototoxicity of topical ticarcillin and clavulanic acid in the
chinchilla, Arch Ototaryngot Head Neck Surg 121(1):39-43, 1995.
9. Mansfield PD: Ototoxicity in dogs and cats, Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet 12(3):331-334, 336-337, 1990.
10. Igarashi Y, Suzuki, J: Cochlear ototoxicity of chlorhexidine gluconate in cats, Arch Otorhinotaryngot
242(2):167-176, 1985.
11. lgarashi Y, Oka Y: Vestibular ototoxicity following intratympanic applications of chlorhexidine
gluconate in the cat, Arch Otorhinotaryngot 245(4):210-217, 1988.
in cats, Arch Otorhinotaryngot 245(5):273-278, 1988.
13. Pickerell JA, Oheme FW, Cash WC: Ototoxicity in dogs and cats, Semin Vet Med Surg (Sm Anim)
8(1):42-49, 1993.
CHAPIER 17Ototoxicity
337
14. Stypulkowski PH: Mechanisms of salicylate ototoxicity, Hear Res 46(1-2): 113-145, 1990.
15. Brown RD, Daigneault EA: Pharmacotogy of hearing, New York, 198 1, John Wiley and Sons.
middle ear space, Laryngoscope 86(8): 1177-1187, 1976.
17. Leake PA, Hradek GT: Cochlear pathology of long term neomycin induced deafness in cats, Hear
Res 33(1): 1 1-33, 1988.
19. Ikeda K, Morizono T: Round window membrane permeability during experimental purulent otitis
media: altered Cortisporin ototoxicity, Ann Otot Rhinot Laryngol suppl 148:46-48, 1990.
20. Mansfield PD, Steiss JE, Boosinger TR, et al: The effect of four commercial ceruminolytic agents on
the middle ear, J Am Anim Hosp Assn 33:479-486, 1997.
21. Perez R,Freeman S, Sohmer H, et al: Vestibular and cochlear ototoxicity of topical antiseptics
assessed evoked potentials, Laryngoscope 110(9): 1522-1527, 2000.
18
Otitis Interna
and Vestibular
Disease
Todd W. Axlund, DVM, Dipl ACVIM
340SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
dog. It is usually a result of extension of middle ear infection (see Chapter 14)
and results in a characteristic set of clinical signs. These signs reflect the dysfunc.
tion of the inner ear organs—namely, the cochlea and vestibular apparatus. Cochlear
dysfunction manifests as decreased hearing acuity. This may be difficult to detect in
the dog without electrodiagnostic testing, especially if it is unilateral. However, often
the astute animal caregiver is able to detect the subtle signs of hearing loss in the
animal's natural environment. This information can be elucidated by careful ques-
tioning of the caregiver. The vestibular system is responsible for the detection of
acceleration and orientation in respect to the earth's gravitational field, and it is
absolutely essential for an animal to be able to maintain normal balance and posture
It comprises components located in the bony labyrinth of the inner ear and nuclei
located in the medulla oblongata.
Vestibular dysfunction results in a variety of readily visible clinical signs, includ-
ing head tilt, small-radius circling, nystagmus, and strabismus. The primary concerm
of the examining veterinarian when presented with an animal with vestibular disease
is to detenmine whether the problem lies within the bony labyrinth (peripheral vestibu-
lar disease [PVD]) or in the brainstem vestibular system (central vestibular disease
[CVD]). This determination helps when forming a diagnostic differential list and
also allows for some sense of prognostication. For the most part, CVD carries a grim
prognosis, whereas PVD is often treatable and carries a much better prognosis.
Components of the Vestibulocochlear System
temporal bone. Important structures of the labyrinth include the utriculus and sacu-
lus of the maculae, the semicircular canals, and the cochlea. The maculae detect the
pull of gravity and linear acceleration, whereas the semicircular canals detect angu-
lar and rotational acceleration. The cochlea houses the cochlear membrane, which
is the receptor organ for the sense of audition. Information from the vestibular and
cochlear systems leaves the peripheral apparatus in the vestibulocochlear nerve
(cranial nerve Vllf), which terminates in the brainstem. Neurons emanating from the
cochlear apparatus course into nuclei within the brainstem and eventually project to
the cerebral cortex, where the auditory information is processed, resulting in the
sense of audition. The majority of the neurons from the peripheral vestibular system
synapse in one of the four divisions of the vestibular nuclei that are located on both
sides of the medulla oblongata, adjacent to the fourth ventricle. The vestibular nerve
also projects directly to the cerebellum, which in turm sends projections back to the
vestibular nuclei. Numerous projections from the vestibular nuclei are sent to different
areas within the central nervous system.
Projections from the vestibular nuclei to the motor nuclei of the oculomotor
(CN III), trochlear (CN IV), and abducent (CN VI) nerves control reflex eye move-
ment (Figure 18-1).
CHAPIER 18 Otitis Interma and Vestibular Disease
341
OR
Eyesrotated
in opposite
direction at
same speed
Semicircular canals
 detect speed and 
V
direction of rotation
Vestibular nuclei
integrate input from
semicircular canals
Figure 18-1
Vestibular control of eye movements. When the head rotates, the semicircular canals detect the
direction and speed of the rotation. The vestibular nuclei integrate the information and direct
the oculomotor (lll), trochlear (Iiv), and abducens (Vl) nuclei to move the eye in the opposite
direction at the same speed. This maintains a fixed image on the retina even as the head moves.
(From O'Brien DP: Comparative neurology Columbia, MO, 2003, University of Missouri.)
Rotation of the head in one direction results inmamment of the yes in the oppo-
site direction at the same speedThis refl& maintains aiked image on the retina as
the head moes. If the head is still mong when the ges reach the furthest possible
excursion in the opposite direction, the area of the pons that controls quyek e
movements flicks the ges quickly in the direction of the head wemment, and the
drift in the opposite direction gies again. Disease of theestibular system creates
the false perception of rotation, which produces a spontaneous drifting ofybe it
one direction with a quick reset in the opposite direction (spontanegstagmus).
Projections to a separate area of the brainstem (the emetic center) are responsible for
the nausea that may accompay estibular disease.
Projections from theestibular nuclei to the spinal cord maintain balance and
support against graity They fcilitate the ipsilateral lge extensor muscle groups
in all four limbs and the muscles of the neck that support the head (Figure 18-2).
Unilateral loss of thiscfilitation with estibular disease produces the clinical
signs of head tilt, leaning, and rollingvtod the side of the lesionThe estibular
nuclei also send projections to the cerebral cortewhich mediates the conscious
perception of mement and graity
342
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Vestibulospinal
tract
To neck
muscles
Inhibits
extensors
Excites extensors
Inhibitsflexors
Figure 18-2
Vestibular control of posture. The vestibular nuclei give rise to the ipsilateral vestibulospinal
tract. The medial vestibulospinal tract projects to the neck muscles supporting the head against
gravity. The lateral vestibulospinal tract facilitates the extensor muscles of the ipsilateral limb.
It also inhibits the ipsilateral flexor muscles and the contralateral extensor muscles. (From
O'Brien DP: Comparative neurology, Columbia, MO, 2003, University of Missouri.)
Diagnosis: Otitis Interna (Otitis Media/lnterna)
Otitis intema is a common cause of vestibular disease in dogs. It is almost always
a result of infection of the middle ear (otitis media), but it must be noted that otitis
media, in and of itself, does not cause vestibular disease. It is the extension of the
infection into the petrosal bone, which houses the vestibular organs, that causes the
signs associated with vestibular disease. Therefore, animals with signs consistent
with PVD need to be thoroughly examined for evidence of middle ear disease. If
present, it can usually be assumed that an otitis media/interma is causing the clinical
signs, and treatment can begin.
Neurologic Examination
The first step in diagnosing animals with vestibular disease is the neurologic examina-
tion. Although patients with vestibular disease are often difficult to examine because
of the severe clinical signs, the veterinarian can often get vital clues as to the loca-
tion of the animal's problem by concentrating on certain aspects of the neurologic
examination. Remember, the ultimate goal is to decide whether the animal is suffering
from PVD or CVD. Animals with CVD have, by definition, brainstem dysfunction.
Therefore, treating these animals for a presumptive diagnosis of otitis media/interma
is ultimately unrewarding.
CHAPIER 18 Otitis Interna and Vestibular Disease
343
All animals with vestibular disease, regardless of whether they have PVD or CVD,
have certain common clinical signs. They typically have a nystagmus, a strabismus
that is more apparent when the animal is placed in dorsal recumbency (positional
strabismus); a head tilt; a tendency to circle in one direction; and a generalized ataxia.
Nystagmus, by convention, is named according to the direction of the fast phase of
the ocular movement. For example, an animal with a nystagmus characterized by
horizontal movement of the pupil with the fast phase to the right has a "right hori-
zontal nystagmus." It is important to note that the fast phase is typically away from
the side of the lesion; therefore the animal in the example above is likely to have a
left-sided vestibular lesion. The head tilt, again by convention, is named according
to the side of the head that is lower. In most cases the head tilt is directed toward the
side of the lesion. The head tilt is often accompanied by a tendency to lean toward
the side of the lesion. In severe cases the dog may roll toward the lesion. Circling, if
present, should be described according to the direction of the circle (e.g., left circling)
and by the radius of the circle (tight versus broad). Animals with vestibular dysfunc-
tion typically present with tight circles and circle toward the side of the lesion.
Peripheral Vestibular Disease
Animals with PVD may have either a horizontal or rotary nystagmus that does not
change with the animal's head position. The nystagmus may not be constant, espe-
cially in more longstanding disease. In those cases, sudden head movements (e.g..
quickly extending the head toward the ceiling) or rolling the animal onto its back
may precipitate the nystagmus, but the direction of the nystagmus is constant. The
head tilt is always directed toward the side of the lesion, whereas the fast phase of
the nystagmus is away from the lesion. With severe, acute disease, the animal may not
be able to stand, but if proprioception could be evaluated, it would be normal.
Animals with PVD as a result of otitis media or interma, in addition to the signs
of vestibular dysfunction, may also have ipsilateral facial nerve paresis and Homer's
syndrome. This is because the sympathetic fibers to the eye course through the middle
ear, and the facial nerve (VTl) courses through the petrosal bone in close proximity
to the VIlI nerve (Figure 18-3). Therefore an infection of the middle or inner ear often
affects these two nerves as well as the vestibular system. Other cranial nerves should
not be affected.
Central Vestibular Disease
Animals with CVD may have any type of nystagmus (horizontal, rotary, or vertical).
However, if the animal has a vertical nystagmus, it must have CVD. Additionally,
     s  ss n a   m s
a change in head position. Dysfunction of cranial nerves other than VII and VIlI is
suggestive of CVD, as is the presence of proprioceptive deficits. This is because any
problem occurring in the brainstem that results in vestibular dysfunction may be
large enough to affect the surrounding structures. These structures include the various
nuclei of neighboring cranial nerves, the upper motor neuron fibers that course from
344
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Cerebellum
Peduncle
4thventricle
Vest.Vll!
Semicircular
VI
canals
CE
UMN
Petrosal
VII
UMN
bone
Facial
nerve
Sympathetic
Bulla
nerve toeye
Figure 18-3
(CT) scan of the area. The facial nerve and sympathetic nerve to the eye run through the middle
ear, where they can be damaged by otitis media. Structures in the brain that can be affected
 by CVD include the cerebellum, upper motor neuron (UMN) and conscious proprioception (CP)
tracts, and other cranial nerves, including the facial (Vi), abducens (V), and trigeminal (V) nerves.
(From O'Brien DP: Comparative neurology Columbia, MO, 2003, University of Missouri.)
their origin in the cerebrum and brainstem to the spinal cord, and sensory fibers that
carry proprioceptive information from the limbs to the cerebrum.
Lastly, animals with lesions affecting the cerebellar cortex, nuclei, or peduncles
may show CVD. Such lesions may produce a paradoxical vestibular disease, in that
the head tilt, ataxia, and strabismus are on the side opposite that of the lesion. In this 
instance the lesion can be localized by observing the side of the animal that shows
proprioceptive deficits. For example, an animal with paradoxical vestibular disease
may have a right head tilt and a left horizontal nystagmus, with prominent proprio-
ceptive deficits on the left. The lesion would thus be localized to the left side of the
brainstem. Other signs of cerebellar disease, such as dysmetria and intention tremors,
would also be expected.
Diagnostic Tests
Animals with PVD should be thoroughly examined for evidence of otitis media or
interma. Diagnostic procedures for this condition are discussed in depth elsewhere;
CHAPIER 18 Otitis Interna and Vestibular Disease
345
major points, however, are reviewed in this chapter. It is important to note that any
animal with PVD should have a differential diagnosis list that includes otitis media
and interma, inflammatory polyps (especially in cats), neoplasia, trauma (fracture of
the petrosal bone), ototoxicity (drugs), congenital disease (rare), generalized polyneu
ropathy, hypothyroidism, and idiopathic disease. Diagnostic procedures, other than a
thorough otic examination, may include advanced imaging procedures with computed
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), bulla radiographs, the
Schirmer tear test (STT), and/or myringotomy.
Radiographs of the tympanic bulla (middle ear) may be used as a general screen-
ing test for middle ear disease. The presence of radiographically normal tympanic
bulla, however, does not rule out the possibility of a middle ear infection because
plain radiography is insensitive for detecting subtle soft tissue and bony abnormalities
Radiographs are most useful if oblique lateral, open-mouth, and ventrodorsal views
are used and each side is examined for symmetry. Calcification of the extermal ear
within the bulla (such as exudates, granulation tissue, or neoplasia) is usually very
difficult to visualize. However, in chronic cases of otitis media and interma, a thicken-
ing of the bulla or osteomyelitis of the petrous temporal bone or temporomandibular
joint may be noted.
Advanced imaging should be performed in cases where otitis media or interma
CVD is suspected. Either CT or MRI can be used. An animal with exudate in the
middle ear will have a soft-tissue opacity easily visualized using CT (Figure 18-4).
Fgure 18-4
CT image of a dog with bilateral middle ear effusion (arows). (From O'Brien DP: Comparative
neurology, Columbia, MO, 2003, University of Missouri.)
346
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 18-5
Serial CT images in a cat showing lysis of the right tympanic bulla and a large soft tissue mass
associated with the right external ear canal (arrows). (From O'Brien DP: Comparative neurology.
Columbia, MO, 2003, University of Missouri.)
Erosive bone disease, such as in an animal with a bony neoplasia of the middle
ear, appears as a mixed lytic and proliferative lesion (Figure 18-5).
CT is generally considered to be superior in the imaging of bone and MRI better
at imaging soft tissue. This is even more marked when trying to image parts of the
brain because a beam-hardening artifact (due to the thick and dense petrous temporal
bone) prevents adequate visualization of the brainstem using CT. Therefore, when
 imaging the brainstem is important, as in cases of suspected CVD, an MRI would
prove superior (Figure 18-6).
Fgure18-6
MRl of a dog with a tumor of the brainstem causing CVD (arrow).
CHAPIER 18 Otitis Interma and Vestibular Disease
347
tool. This test is usually performed when the tympanic membrane is intact, but there
 is direct visual or imaging evidence of fluid accumulation. This procedure is performed
on a heavily sedated or anesthetized animal. In short, the technique involves visual.
a blunt probe caudal to the malleus, insertion of a 20-gauge spinal needle through
the hole, and aspiration and culture/cytology of the middle ear contents, followed by
gentle flushing of the tympanic bulla with warm sterile saline. Care is needed in this
procedure to avoid damaging the auditory ossicles or nerves. This is best done by
directing the flush caudally and ventrally.
A Schirmer tear test (STT) should also be performed in all animals with otitis
media or interma. The major petrosal nerve, a branch of the facial nerve (VTI), runs
through the middle ear and often is damaged by the inflammatory process. The
lacrimal gland is innervated by the major petrosal nerve, and denervation results in
decreased secretion and the potential development of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
(KCS). Also, certain antibiotics used to treat otitis interma and media can result in
decreased tear production. Therefore, a baseline STT identifies dogs that may
develop KCS; it can be used as a benchmark to determine whether the antibiotic is
causing decreased tear production.
Evoked-response audiometry can yield valuable information in animals with
suspected hearing loss. Brain-auditory-evoked-response (BAER) is a test that
records the electrical activity of the auditory nerve and brainstem time-locked with
an auditory stimulus that is delivered to the ear. In general, hearing loss can be attrib-
uted to either a conductive or sensorineural problem. Conductive hearing loss is
dysfunction in the peripheral hearing mechanism as a result of extermal and/or middle
ear disease. Exudate or waxy buildup in the extemal ear canal or middle ear, a ruptured
tympanum, or auditory ossicle damage results in decreased transmission of airbome
sound waves to the cochlear apparatus. This is reflected on the BAER by increased
sound intensity.
Sensorineural hearing loss is caused by dysfunction of the cochlear apparatus,
cochlear nerve, or portions of the auditory pathway in the central nervous system.
BAER findings are variable, ranging from a complete absence of all waveforms (such
as in the case of congenital deafness in white-coated breeds of dogs) to changes in
amplitude and latency. It is important to note that the BAER tests auditory pathways,
not the sense of audition. It is possible for an animal to have a normal BAER and
be deaf.
Treatment
 s   sn  i  n o g n
minority of cases also requires surgical drainage of the exudate in the middle ear.
The choice of antibiotic is important because the clinician needs to consider both the
organism causing the infection and the location of the infection. The organism can
348 SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
usually be identified by culturing the contents of the middle ear. The most common
isolates include Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., and Pseudomonas spp. It
is important to choose an antibiotic that has good penetration into areas with poor
circulation because otitis interma involves infection of both soft tissue structures and
bone. The drug of choice depends on the susceptibility pattem of the organism. If
this is not available, a broad-spectrum antibiotic with good penetrability, such as a
cephalosporin, chloramphenicol, or potentiated sulfonamide, should be used. Ototoxic
drugs such as the aminoglycosides should be avoided. If trimethoprim/sulfa is used,
monitoring of tear production is essential. Long-term antibiotic therapy of from 3 to
6 weeks is usually necessary to eradicate the infection. The animal should be exam-
ined periodically during the treatment period to evaluate recovery and monitor for
the side effects of long-tenm antibiotic treatment
mine meclizine. This drug helps to alleviate some of the signs of vestibular disease
but does not affect the underlying pathology of the disease.
Prognosis
The prognosis for otitis media or interma is good if the disease is identified early and
head tilt, and hearing loss—may improve in time. However, it is not unusual for the
animal to have permanent mild deficits
Suggested Readings
deLahunta A: Veterinary neuroanatomy and ctinicat neurotogy, Philadelphia, 1983, Saunders.
O'Brien DP: Circling. In August JR, ed: Consultations in fetine internal medicine, Fhiladelphia, 1994,
Saunders.
O'Brien DP: Comparative neurology, Columbia, MO, 2003, University of Missouri,
www.cvm.missouri.edu/ac ademic/neurology/VM604/.
Oliver JE, Lorenz MD, Kornegay JN: Handbook of veterinary neurotogy, Philadelphia, 1997, Saunders.
19
Laser Ear Surgery
Jeffrey R. Moll, DVM
Peter H. Eeg, B.Sc, DVM
Noel Berger, DVM, MS
350
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
 ommon ear ailments of dogs and cats can be seen in up to 50% of patients in
 areas of humid climates during some or all of the patient's life. Dogs have a
moderately higher incidence of ear disease than cats.
Treatment of the variety of inflammatory, infectious, neoplastic, and chronic
connective tissue changes that can be observed in small animal patients is often very
difficult, unrewarding, and frustrating. This is due to the restricted size of the extermal
auditory meatus and tympanic bulla. The small size of these areas is often further
restricted in the presence of disease due to excessive inflammation of the dermis and
underlying tissues. Recurrences are common. This may be due to a failure to resolve
the underlying pathology or incomplete treatment (resection) of the problem. Repeated
treatments, assessments, and an extended duration of therapy are not uncommon. This
often causes increased client concem and dissatisfaction
Implementation of laser energy for the effective treatment of a variety of condi-
tions can simplify both the therapeutic protocol and the recovery of the patient. Video
Otoscopy offers the opportunity to enhance the diagnostic ability of the veterinarian.
Because tissues are visualized on a video monitor under magnification, the condition
of the ear can be more accurately assessed. In combination with a surgical laser, many
diseases of the ear canal and bulla can be treated in an aggressive, yet minimally
invasive manner. The advent of advanced otoscopic equipment coupled with CO2
and/or diode-wavelength laser energy can significantly improve the final therapeutic
outcome for many diseases of the ear. This method of therapy can lead to shorter
recovery times with less discomfort for the pet.
Video otoscopic equipment has greatly enhanced the veterinarian's ability to eval-
uate and treat diseases of the ear canal and middle ear (bulla). A variety of systems
are available. These systems can be broadly categorized as diagnostic or therapeutic
systems. The major difference is the presence of an operating channel in the ther-
apeutic systems. For the purposes of this discussion, only therapeutic systems are
considered.
Therapeutic endoscopic telescopes are usually either the 0 degree (directly forward)
or 30 degree (oblique view). Video otoscopes are 0 degree. They are usually larger
(around 4.75 mm [because of the presence of an operating channel]), have a larger
field of view, and are more durable and less costly than other rigid endoscopes. The
single working channel of the video otoscope allows access for suction, biopsy, irri-
gation, and laser devices. The 2-mm channel accepts instrumentation up to 5 Fr, or
about 1.8 mm. The biopsy channel can provide for simultaneous irrigation, suction,
and treatment with the use of a two- or three-port connector, as shown in Figure 19-1.
A 2.7- x 180-mm, 0-degree, or 30-degree rigid endoscopic telescope with a 14-Fr
operating sheath can also be used in these procedures. The smaller overall diameter,
longer length, and separate irrigation and operating channels make this endoscope
an excellent choice for interventional otoscopy (Figure 19-2). The 30-degree endo-
scope is particularly useful in laser surgery and treating lesions of the middle ear.
The 30-degree offset allows for visualization of the laser delivery system or surgical
instrumentation as it exits the operating channel (Figure 19-3). This allows for more
precise aligmment of the instrument and decreases the possibility of iatrogenic damage.
CHAPTER 19Laser Ear Surgery
351
ThreeWay
Adapter
Video Otoscope
Figure 19-1
Videootoscopeand three-way adapter.
Because of the higher cost and increased fragility of this equipment, it should not be
used in conscious patients.
Lasers can both extend and enhance the therapeutic options for the treatment of
aural disease. Two types of lasers are useful in the treatment of auricular pathology.
They are the CO2 laser (10,600-nm wavelength) and the diode laser (either 810- 0r
980-nm wavelength). It is beyond the scope of this chapter to discuss fully the physics
involved with each of these wavelengths. The practitioner is strongly encouraged to
Fgure 19-2
Aeuns esel pue uoeiun uoons ot paedad aossoue pie 
352
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 19-3
Treatment end of 30-degree rigid endoscope.
using this technology. By combining lasers and video otoscopy, a wider range of
problems can be corrected in a minimally invasive fashion. This often leads to a
better outcome. Lasers can prove extremely useful in the following:
·Aural hematoma repair
· Removal of masses in the aural canal
· Controlling hemorrhage during video otoscopy
· Ear canal resection and ablation
· Removal of masses in and around the pinna
· Treatment of chronic otitis
· Myringotomies
· Cosmetic and therapeutic otoplasty (ear trims, correction of abnormal ear
carriage, and treatment of neoplasia)
In general lasers can be used in three different modalities:
1. Coagulation. In this mode lasers are used to provide hemostasis. This is accom-
plished by providing laser energy at a lower power, usually with a longer exposure
time. By using the laser in this manner, tissue contraction rather than vaporization
is achieved. When the collagen in the end of a bleeding vessel is contracted,
hemostasis is achieved.
 2. Incision. By providing relatively high wattage with a small focal point, high power
densities are achieved. This results in incision of the target tissue. This is partic-
ularly useful in situations where a mass is pedunculated and the base of the mass
can be visualized. Depending on the power density, more or less hemostasis can
be attained.
 3. Ablation. Laser energy can also be applied to the surface of structures within the
duced, and the surface of the targeted structure is vaporized. Through continuous
appropriate application of energy, tumors can be removed from all parts of the
aural canal and the middle ear.
CHAPIER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
353
A Comparison of cO, and Diode Laser Energy
CO laser energy is primarily absorbed by water and must therefore be used in a rela-
tively dry ear. When CO laser energy interacts with tissue, the intracellular water is
rapidly heated to boiling, and the cell ruptures. When this vaporization occurs, a smoke
plume is generated that must be removed by an appropriate evacuation system.
The CO2 laser energy is usually delivered through a semiflexible hollow tube
(Figure 19-4) that guides the energy to the target through the operating channel of
the endoscope. COz laser energy is most useful in the ablation (vaporization) of
abnonmal tissue. It can also be effectively used to provide hemostasis. In cases where
the base of the auricular mass is visible, the laser can be used in an incisional mode
to remove these structures more quickly.
The limitations of COz laser energy are primarily related to the wavelength itself.
Because it is absorbed by water, it cannot be used in an ear that has been flooded
with fluid (saline) to increase visualization.
Diode laser energy is absorbed by hemoglobin, ox yhemoglobin, and melanin. This
selective absorption may aid in treatment if the abnormal area is more pigmented than
the surrounding tissue. Lesions can be treated in a contact or noncontact mode. The
noncontact mode is usually used only on pigmented lesions on the pinna. The noncon-
tact mode has not been proven to be useful in a fluid environment. Diode laser energy
is delivered by a shielded flexible quartz fiber (Figure 19-5). This system allows for
the precise delivery of laser energy in a fluid environment in a contact mode. The
fiber delivery system of the diode laser may become extremely hot when energized
for a prolonged period. This depends on the fiber size, the energy setting (wattage),
and the vascularity of the tissue (thermal diffusion). If the fiber becomes overheated,
peripheral thermal damage results. It is vital to keep the fiber cool. This can be
accomplished by limiting the exposure time (pulse duration) and by cooling the fiber
with an irrigant such as saline. The ability to operate immersed in fluid makes the
diode laser extremely useful in otoendoscopy. Continual irrigation during the proce-
dure increases visualization and decreases unintentional iatrogenic damage. Irrigation
also removes debris and helps control any heat from the laser or the endoscope.
Fgure 19-4
CO, delivery systems.
354
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Figure 19-5
600-Micron diode laser fiber.
Specific Laser Therapy Goals
A treatment plan for the individual patient is based on the anatomic location and
the suspected underlying etiology. These variables influence both the type and deliv-
ery method for the laser energy. In some cases multiple problems are present. These
may require multiple wavelengths or delivery systems, which should be available in
advance to facilitate the procedure.
COz and diode laser energy allow for a more targeted removal or alteration of
tissue. The ear canal is a confined space to work in and around, and the pinna has
limited additional dermis with which to work. A laser can simplify a number of
procedures, improve near-term recovery, and provide for more normal anatomy and
retum to function. This can be accomplished by incorporating laser-directed ablation
(vaporization), incision, or excision of tissues. As discussed earlier, disease compo-
nents in the ear that are predisposing to or perpetuating the disease can then be more
efficiently removed with cleaning, medication, and evacuation.
The first step in the use of laser energy is to determine the way the energy is to be
applied to the target tissue. Typically on the pinna, standard laser techniques can be
used to accomplish the desired goals. Here the CO2 laser is clearly superior because
of its reduced peripheral thenmal tissue interaction and noncontact application.
Surgery of the pinna can be provided by laser energy, similar to techniques for other
CHAPTER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
355
areas of the dermis. In the extermal ear canal the video otoscopic or fiberoptic tele.
scope can be used to facilitate visualization and direction of the laser energy. This is
usually accomplished by extending the direction of the laser energy through special
tips that fit into and through working channels in the otoscopic equipment. Diode
laser fibers are usually between 400 and 1000 microns and easily fit most working
channels. This allows the clinician to visualize the area and provide treatment within
the confined space of the extermal ear canal.
Treatment of Aural Hematomas
Aural hematomas occur when a vessel within the pinna ruptures and blood accumu-
lates under the skin. Aural hematomas occur on the inner (concave) surface of the
pinna and can occur in both dogs and cats (Figure 19-6). Because the skin is so
firmly attached to the auricular cartilage on the concave surface, the hematoma actu-
ally develops subparachondrally or intrachondrally, not subcutaneously.' Most aural
hematomas are lined by cartilage; this suggests that damage to this cartilage may
play a role in their occurrence.2 The etiology of this condition is unknown. It may
result from self-trauma or head shaking (secondary to otitis exterma or media or to
Aural
hemator
Fgure 19-6
Canine aural hematoma.
356
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
extermal parasites), trauma, increased vascular fragility, hemorrhagic diathesis, or some
form of immune-mediated disease. Any underlying pathology should be addressed
as part of the therapy. It may be wise to delay treatment in thrombocytopenic patients
until any platelet abnormality has been corrected.
A variety of treatment methods have been published to repair aural hematomas.
These treatments require various degrees of aftercare and some failures do occur.
The CO, laser is extremely useful in the treatment of this condition. It reduces post-
operative discomfort and the amount of aftercare required.
After the induction of anesthesia or heavy sedation, the affected ear is fully
evaluated. Any evidence of otitis exterma or media should be addressed at this time.
If there has been a history of chronic otitis, ear swabs for cytology and culture and
sensitivity should be obtained and a complete video otoscopic ear examination
performed in both ears. Ear disease in one ear may result in an aural hematoma in
the other ear from the constant head shaking. After the evaluation has been completed.
 the inner pinna of the affected ear is clipped and prepared for aseptic surgery. The
patient is positioned in lateral recumbency with the affected side up.
Three or more round, partial-thickness circular skin incisions of approximately
0.3 to 0.7 centimeters are made in a triangular patterm (Figure 19-7). The size of the
opening depends on the size of the patient. After this patterm has been made, one of
the proximal incisions is continued to full thickness to penetrate the hematoma. At
this time the fluid within the hematoma is removed. This fluid is usually hemor-
rhagic to serohemorrhagic, depending on the length of time the hematoma has been
present. After the fluid has been removed, the remaining incisions are continued to
full thickness. At this time any fibrin clots should be removed from the subcutaneous
Fgure 19-7
Ear pinna after creation of laser drain perforations.
CHAPTER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
357
space. It may be useful to lavage the space gently with normal saline or lactated
Ringer's solution.
The skin is then sutured with stented 0 Prolene or nylon (3-0 Prolene for feline
patients) to the underlying cartilage in a simple interrupted patterm. Only the inner
pinna and the cartilage are sutured (Figure 19-8). The sutures should not penetrate
the outer (dorsal) skin surface of the pinna. A taper needle is less likely to cause
inadvertent bleeding and is preferred. The long axis of the individual sutures should
be parallel to the long axis of the ear. This helps to preserve the normal blood supply
to the pinna and avoid the three major branches of the auricular artery. After comple-
tion of the procedure, 0.006 mg/kg of buprenorphine (Buprenex) is given intra-
venously. Usually no additional pain control medication is required. An Elizabethan
collar is placed to prevent self-trauma. Bandaging of the ear is not necessary or
recommended. An altermative procedure that does not involve sutures has been
published and may also be effective.4
Aftercare is performed at home by the client. This consists of twice-daily hot
compresses applied to the ear for 5 to 10 minutes each. Any scab that forms should
be removed, and the drain holes should be kept open for as long as possible. Any
reaccumulation of fluid should be gently expressed during the process of compress-
ing. Follow-up visits should be encouraged on a weekly basis. The drain holes
Fgure 19-8
 Postoperative appearance of the ear.
358
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
usually will close by the second postoperative week. Sutures should be left in place
for approximately 7 days after they have closed. Any otitis that is discovered during
the course of treatment must be fully and aggressively treated. It is recommended
that the otitis be completely resolved for at least 5 days before suture removal.
This procedure is relatively easy to perform, has a low recurrence rate and a low
degree of morbidity and mortality, and achieves excellent cosmetic results. Most
patients have no noticeable deformity from the procedure and have excellent post-
operative comfort.
Neoplasia of the Pinna
tumors include papilloma, fibropapilloma, mast cell tumor, cutaneous hemangioma,
cutaneous hemangiosarcoma, melanoma, histiocytoma, fibrosarcoma, apocrine
side of the pinna. Growths that occur on the outer (convex) surface of the ear are
more likely to be centrally located and rarely penetrate the underlying cartilage.
Excision of these masses is readily accomplished due to the loose attachment of the
skin to the underlying cartilage. When removing these masses, it is important to
identify the three main branches of the auricular artery (Figure 19-9). The CO, laser
is useful in these cases. In cases where the mass is a small papilloma, the laser may
be used to ablate the mass (Figure 19-10). In all other cases the laser should be used
to excise the mass completely. The skin should be closed with 3-0 to 5-0 mono-
filament nonabsorbable suture. Even in cases that require removal of auricular carti-
lage, only the skin should be sutured. Deficits that cannot be closed without causing
deformity to the ear should be allowed to heal by secondary intention or repaired by
the use of a pedicle flap.* The excised tissue should undergo histopathologic evalu-
ation. Malignant or incompletely excised neoplasia requires additional treatment, up
to and including amputation of the pinna. Use of the COz laser in these cases
increases hemostasis and postoperative patient comfort, thus helping to prevent
surgical complications
Sharp excision with the CO, laser should be performed with a focal size of 0.4 mm
or smaller and usually 7 to 9 watts of continuous-wave power. The power density
should be great enough to incise the skin cleanly while controlling hemorrhage and
causing minimal carbonization. Superpulse delivery of energy is ideal for excision
but may have a decreased hemostatic effect. Any small bleeding vessels can usually
be controlled by decreasing the power density. This may be accomplished by defo-
cusing the laser or diminishing the power output. The hemostatic effect is usually
better in a continuous-wave modality without superpulse.
Ablation of papillomas with the CO, laser may be accomplished with a larger
      i      
tively, a sufficient power density must be applied. In most cases a power setting of
8 to 15 watts is appropriate. If an insufficient power density is used, peripheral thermal
damage may occur. Multiple passes are usually required to ablate the abnormal tissue.
Lat. auricular.
Rostral auricular
Intermed.auricular
Masseteric
Parotid
Trans. facial
Med. auricular.
Lat. dorsal palpebral
Deep auricular
 Lat. ventral palpebral
Occipital br.
Malar
Superficial
Superiorlabial
Angularis oris
temporal'
Maxillary
Caud. auricular
Sternocleido-
mastoid br.
Stylomastoid
Occipital
Ascending
pharyngeal
Int. carotid ~
Ext. carotid
Rostral mental
Cran.thyroid
Middle mental
Facial
Inferiorlabial
Com.carotid
Caudal mental
Digastricus m., cut
Thyroid gland 
Sublingual
Styloglossis m.
Sternothyroid m.
Hyoglossus m.
Facial
Sternohyoideus m.
Lingual
Cranial laryngeal
Thyrohyoideus m.
Fgure 19-9
The vasculature of the canine ear. (From Evans: Miler's Anatomy of the dog, ed 3, Philadelphia,
1993, Saunders.)
Fgure 19-10
Mass on the pinna (feline)
360
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 19-11
CO, treatment of a mass on the pinna (feline).
It is important to remove any carbonized tissue (char) that occurs between passes.
Failure to remove char results in thermal injury to the surrounding tissue. If hemor-
rhage occurs during the ablation process, it can usually be controlled by decreasing
the power density delivered to the tissue. This may be accomplished by decreasing
the power setting (wattage) or defocusing the laser beam.
The diode laser may also be used. Diode laser energy is absorbed by hemoglobin,
oxyhemoglobin, and melanin. This selective absorption results in excellent hemo-
stasis and may help in the selective treatment of only the abnonmal tissue. When the
diode laser is used in an incisional mode, the tip of the fiber should be carbonized.
Incision with the diode laser occurs through a thermal effect on the tissue. The
carbonization of the tip ensures efficient thermal transfer. Caution must be used
to prevent peripheral (unintended) thermal damage. The fiber delivery system of
the diode laser becomes extremely hot when energized for a prolonged period. This
depends on the fiber size, the energy setting (wattage), and the vascularity of the
target tissue (thermal diffusion). If the fiber becomes overheated, peripheral thermal
damage will result. It is vital to keep the fiber cool. This can be accomplished by limit-
ing the exposure time (pulse duration) and by cooling the fiber with sterile saline.
Pigmented lesions may be treated in a noncontact mode. Ablation of masses in this
manner may be extremely effective because of the selective absorption of diode laser
energy. It is imperative to rule out malignancy before treatment. Malignant masses
should be treated by complete excision with an appropriate surgical margin. Peripheral
thermal damage is still a concerm in the noncontact mode, and cooling of the fiber is
still important. Because the fiber is not in contact with the tissue, there is no thermal
CHAPTER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
361
diffusion of the heat that is generated. If the fiber is not properly cooled, it will
rapidly become white hot. This may damage tissue as well as the plastic sheath that
surrounds the fiber.
Ceruminous Gland Hyperplasia
The lining of the extermal ear canal is stratified squamous epithelium with sebaceous
and apocrine glands and hair follicles.'0 The apocrine glands in this area are also
referred to as ceruminous glands. Springer Spaniels, Cocker Spaniels, and black
 Labrador Retrievers have an increased proportion of these ceruminous glands.11 This
may explain the higher incidence of otitis exterma in these breeds. Patients with
chronic otitis extema develop hyperplasia of the ceruminous and sebaceous glands
(Figure 19-12).'2 Hyperplasia leads to decreased diameter of the ear canal as glan-
dular tissue increases, and it also results in increased ceruminous secretions within
the ear canal. Cocker Spaniels appear to develop primarily ceruminous gland hyper-
plasia with less fibrosis than other breeds.13 In another study the quantity of seba-
ceous glands was found to be similar in dogs with and without otitis exterma. In this
study dogs with otitis exterma were found to have a higher population of ceruminous
glands.14 It is important to remember that chronic otitis exterma is usually not a primary
disease. It is usually caused by some underlying allergy or unresolved chronic infec
tion. As part of the therapy, it is important to address any underlying problem. Failure
to resolve or at least control the underlying problem results in temporary palliation
of the problem at best.
Hyperplastic
Ceruminous
Glands
Fgure 19-12
Hyperplasia of the ceruminous glands.
362
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Before initiating treatment of the affected ear, swabs for cytology and bacterial
culture should be obtained from just in front of the tympanic membrane (if present)
or the middle ear if there is an obvious rupture of the membrane. Appropriate
medications can then be prescribed and adjusted based on these results.
After the culture and cytology specimens have been obtained, the ear is thoroughly
cleaned with a ceruminolytic agent and lavaged with copious amounts of saline. This
should be done under direct visualization through the video otoscope. A complete
evaluation of the ear canal may then be performed. Any hyperplastic areas within
the ear canal should be easily visualized. Biopsies of the abnormal tissue should be
taken for histopathology. The results of the histopathology may help to identify the
underlying disease process. Hemostasis after the biopsy can be accomplished with
the CO, or diode laser. The diode laser may be more clinically useful in this situa-
tion because it can be used in a fluid environment (Figure 19-13). A 600-micron fiber
is used to deliver the diode laser energy. A setting of 3 to 4 watts in continuous wave
mode usually rapidly accomplishes hemostasis.
The CO, laser may also provide hemostasis to the biopsy sites. The CO, laser's
energy should be directed to the target site under direct visualization. This allows for
accurate hemostasis and treatment with little iatrogenic damage to surrounding
tissue. This is accomplished through a flexible, hollow waveguide. The CO, laser's
energy must be directly applied to the hemorrhaging area. This means that adequate
suction must be applied to the area for the laser energy to have the desired hemostatic
effect. If sufficient suction cannot be obtained, the blood itself will be vaporized,
Fgure 19-13
Diode laser coagulation.
CHAPTER 19Laser Ear Surgery
363
eral thermal damage. COz laser hemostasis can usually be obtained with a power
setting of 2 to 4 watts with a 0.8-mm focal size in a continuous-wave mode.
After hemostasis has been achieved, removal of the abnormal tissue can be accom-
plished; lasers are useful in this procedure. The laser is used to ablate the abnormal
tissue. Removal of this tissue helps to increase the diameter of the ear canal and
decrease the amount of secretions within the ear. Diode laser energy may be used for
this procedure. The size of the fiber depends on the size of the operating channel in
the video otoscope or therapeutic telescope or the size of the targeted area. Generally,
fibers of 600 to 1000 microns are used. Because the laser is being used in a contact
mode, the energy is precisely directed into the target tissue. Another advantage of the
diode laser is its ability to operate in an aqueous environment. Continuous irrigation
of the ear canal improves visualization by removing any blood or debris from the
surgical field. It also diminishes or eliminates peripheral thermal damage. Power
settings vary depending on the size of the fiber used and the size of the target. It is
important to provide sufficient power to ablate the target tissue without causing
peripheral damage. Diode laser energy penetrates more deeply than CO laser energy.
and care must be taken to avoid damaging the deeper structures. In general, a
600-micron fiber requires 6 to 12 watts of power to obtain the desired effect. A
1000-micron fiber requires 10 to 20 watts for a similar effect. The energy is delivered
in continuous wave, and exposure times should generally be less than 3 seconds. The
irrigant solution should not reach the boiling point. Bubbles will begin to form
around the fiber if the solution is overheated. Prolonged exposure times increase the
risk of peripheral thermal damage by overcoming the cooling effect of the irrigant
and the thermal relax ation time of the tissue.
CO laser energy can also be directed at the abnormal tissue as described previ-
ously (Figure 19-14). This energy vaporizes the abnormal tissue. CO2 lasers cannot
currently be used immersed in a fluid environment. Evacuation of the smoke (plume)
produced during vaporization is vital. This allows for better visualization of the target
tissue and is an important factor in the safety of operatory personnel. During the
course of therapy a layer of char may form on the targeted tissue. It is essential to
stop and remove this substance. If the carbonized layer is not removed, it absorbs the
CO2 laser energy and results in inadvertent peripheral thermal damage. The amount
power density is used. A spot size of 0.8 mm with 8 to 14 watts of power in continuous-
wave mode usually results in adequate vaporization with good hemostasis.
After the abnormal tissue has been removed, the ear canal should be lavaged with
copious amounts of irrigant and any carbonized tissue gently removed. The ear is
gently dried with suction and an appropriate topical antimicrobial with steroid instilled.
 It is important to evaluate fully the tympanic membrane because some medications
may be ototoxic if the tympanic membrane is not intact. A myringotomy should be
considered in cases of chronic otitis exterma (see the section on Myringotomy later
in this chapter). The short-term use of parenteral steroids may be indicated in some
cases. Postoperatively most patients receive 0.006 mg/kg of buprenorphine (Buprenex)
intravenously during the recovery period. Additional pain medication is usually
364
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Figure 19-14
CO, ablation of hyperplastic ceruminous glands.
not required. Most patients seem markedly more comfortable postoperatively and
are usually less resistant to the continued treatment of their ears.
Laser ablation often greatly improves the clinical outcome for cases of chronic
otitis with ceruminous gland hyperplasia. Removal of the hyperplastic tissue increases
the diameter of the ear canal, decreases the amount of discharge, helps remove some
of the bacteria, and allows the owner to clean and maintain the ears more thoroughly.
Postoperatively, most patients are very comfortable and readily allow the owner to
treat the ears. Weekly follow-up visits that include otoscopic evaluation and ear swabs
for cytology are imperative. Treatment should continue until the ears look normal
and for 1 week after a negative swab is obtained. After healing, the ablated glandular
areas are replaced with fibrous tissue covered by epithelium.
It is extremely important to use antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity in
cases of bacterial infection. Many of these cases are a result of multidrug-resistant
bacteria. Oral antibiotic or antifungal agents may be useful in the management of these
cases. In addition, any underlying food allergy, inhaled allergy, contact dermatitis, or 
endocrinopathy should be properly evaluated and addressed.
Laser Polypectomy (Aural Tumor Removal)
Tumors can occur within the ear canals and middle ears of both dogs and cats.
are usually less malignant than those that occur in cats.15 Malignant tumors should
CHAPIER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
365
be treated by total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy. Both favorable and
unfavorable long-term results from surgery alone have been reported.16 The most
common tumor found in the extermal ear canal of both dogs and cats arises from the
ceruminous gland. Ceruminous gland adenomas are more common than ceruminous
adenocarcinomas in the dog. In cats the tumors are more likely to be adenocarcino-
mas.17 These masses can be an underlying cause or a result of chronic otitis.
 In feline patients, inflammatory polyps can arise from the epithelium of the
tympanic cavity or the eustachian tube.18 Feline polyps can grow distally into the ear
canal (Figure 19-15) or proximally into the retropharynx. It is therefore extremely
important to evaluate the middle ear in cases of feline retropharyngeal polyps. Failure
to remove this tissue from the middle ear may result in recurrence. Canine polyps
can occur any where in the ear canal (Figure 19-16). These are usually cerumen gland
adenomas and may occlude the entire ear canal. They may also grow into the middle
ear. True retropharyngeal polyps in dogs are rare.
 Before the advent of video otoscopy, complete excision of polyps within the ear
canal often required a lateral ear canal resection to obtain the necessary access to the
mass. This procedure, followed by laser excision of the mass(es) within the auditory
canal, may still be necessary. The video otoscope allows improved identification
and evaluation of these masses. Once identified and evaluated, they can usually be
successfully removed by traction and/or laser vaporization.
Lasers offer significant improvements in the treatment of these lesions. The treat-
ment of benign polyps in the ear canal is best accomplished as a two-step procedure.
It is in the patient's best interest that the clinician obtain a biopsy and a definitive
diagnosis before attempting to ablate any mass. As previously stated, malignancies
Polyp
Fgure 19-15
Feline polyp arising from the middle ear.
366
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Figure 19-16
Caninepolyp.
are best treated by resection of the entire ear canal. In addition, antibiotics can be
started based on culture and sensitivity before mass removal.
In the first step cultures and biopsy specimens can be obtained through the
operating channel of the video otoscope. Hemostasis is achieved with the COz or
diode laser, as explained in the previous section.
After the masses are identified, both CO2 and diode lasers can ablate these masses
 jo la n u oans aq  ra as ia n a a um
polyps. Diode lasers do not create carbonized tissue, and they operate in a fluid envi-
ronment. This allows increased visualization of the target tissues and precise appli-
cation of laser energy. In addition, simultaneous lavage prevents hemorrhage or plume
from interfering with visualization. In most cases, any source of hemorrhage can be
readily identified, and the diode laser can provide hemostasis.
When the diode laser is used, irrigation with saline is provided continuously.
Irrigation is vital to visualization and essential to the prevention of peripheral thermal
damage. Normal saline (0.9%) is currently the solution of choice. Depending on the
size of the patient and the size of the mass, a 600- or 1000-micron fiber is used. The
fiber is introduced into the center of the mass, and energy is provided until a majority
of the abnormal-seeming tissue has a blanc hed appearance. This devitalized tissue is
larger masses.
In some cases the tumor may be large enough to fill the entire auricular canal.
It is possible to remove these masses with a laser and a video otoscope. To expedite
the removal it may be useful to debulk the mass with a larger-diameter biopsy
forceps placed alongside the endoscope. These forceps can then be positioned under
direct visualization. Blakesley or Takahashi nasal forceps are well suited for this
CHAPTER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
367
Fgure 19-17
Nasal biopsy forceps.
procedure (Figure 19-17). In this manner, large masses can be rapidly reduced.
Biopsy forceps of 3.5 to 5.0 Fr can also be introduced through the operating channel
to debulk these masses (Figure 19-18). With this method, moderate hemorrhage is
encountered. It is essential to provide adequate irrigation to allow visualization;
irrigation is provided through the biopsy channel of the video otoscope. After debulk-
ing, hemostasis and removal of the remaining abnormal tissue is performed with the
diode laser, as described previously. Rapid debulking can also be accomplished with
an arthroscopic shaver. A hooded debrider blade provides rapid debulking while
protecting the normal auricular canal. This system offers improved visualization
because suction is provided by the shaver. Because irrigation is provided via the
video otoscope, simultaneous irrigation and suction can occur.
Fgure 19-18
Debulking of a polyp with biopsy forceps.
368
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
By prepositioning the diode fiber in the operating channel of the video otoscope,
 s s n     an  si
techniques can help to markedly reduce the surgical time required to remove larger
masses. By using the laser to provide hemostasis and remove the final layer of abnor-
mal tissue, the advantages of laser surgery can be preserved. Patients treated in this
manner have minimal postoperative discomfort, edema, or hemorrhage. Power settings
for the diode laser depend on the size of the fiber, the size of the mass, and whether
ablation or hemostasis is desired. In general, a 600-micron fiber requires 6 to 12 watts
of power for ablation (Figure 19-19) and 2 to 4 watts for hemostasis. A 1000-micron
ously stated, the energy is delivered in a continuous wave, and exposure times should
be limited to prevent the irrigant solution from reaching the boiling point. Bubbles
will begin to form around the fiber if the solution is overheated. Overheating the irri-
gant increases the risk of peripheral thermal damage. Peripheral thermal damage
markedly increases the patient's postoperative discomfort.
COz lasers can also be used to remove large masses (Figure 19-20). In this proce-
dure the mass is ablated in layers (Figure 19-21). Relatively high power is applied in
a continuous-wave manner. Char must be removed between layers. Failure to remove
this char will result in peripheral thermal damage. In some cases it may be possible
to reduce the size of the mass by debulking. The hemorrhage that results from
debulking can be difficult to control. In order to provide hemostasis, the CO, laser's
energy usually must contact the end of the bleeding vessel. Due to the confined area
of the auricular canal, blood can often fill the area, making it difficult to visualize
the source of the hemorrhage. T'his limitation can sometimes be overcome by the use
of a suction trap in the smoke evacuation line. The suction trap allows the smoke
evacuator to function as a suction unit. The smoke evacuator should be directly
connected to the otoendoscope; this may require a T or Y adapter so that both the
laser and the suction unit can be active at the same time. In most CO, laser units, a
Fgure 19-19
Treatment of a polyp with a diode laser.
CHAPIER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
369
Fgure 19-20
CO laser ablation of a large mass.
column of air is produced and exits the laser aperture. This air is designed to keep
the aperture free of debris, but it may also help in visualizing the source of the
hemorrhage. In some cases the amount of hemorrhage is great enough to prevent
laser coagulation. In these cases, hemostasis must be achieved in another manner
before the procedure is continued; direct pressure or electrocautery is usually effec
tive. Electrocautery should be used with caution. It may cause peripheral damage
 and can greatly reduce the potential benefits of laser surgery.
Fgure 19-21
Middle ear after laser mass removal.
370
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Myringotomy
In cases of otitis media or chronic otitis, the middle ear should be fully evaluated.
 Otitis media is an important perpetuating cause of recurrent otitis exterma.19 The
evaluation should include radiography of the bulla, which may be accomplished with
conventional radiology or with intraoral dental films. Intraoral films seem to provide
better visualization. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography
(CT) may also be useful in the evaluation of the middle ear.20.21 In the future, ultra-
 sound evaluation of the tympanic bulla may prove useful in the detection of fluid.22
After these imaging studies have been performed, the ear should be fully evalu-
ated with the video otoscope. In order to evaluate the middle ear, a myringotomy
must be performed. Both the diode laser and the CO, laser can be used for this proce-
dure (Figure 19-22). The goal is to provide sufficient laser energy to ablate the tympanic
membrane without damaging the underlying structures. This can be accomplished
with the CO, laser by using a series of single pulses through a waveguide placed in
the operating channel of the video otoscope aimed at the periphery of the pars tensa
of the eardrum. The beam diameter of these guides usually ranges from 0.4 to 1.0 mm.
In general a diameter of more than 0.5 mm and a power setting of 3 to 6 watts should
be used. The higher power is usually necessary in cases with chronic disease. The
diode laser is very useful in this procedure. A 600- to 1000-micron fiber is intro-
duced into the video otoscope, and a myringotomy is performed in the contact mode.
A setting of 4 to 7 watts is appropriate. This is performed while irrigating with ster-
ile saline solution. This keeps the fiber cool, and peripheral damage is not an issue.
In addition, any hemorrhage that occurs can be rapidly identified and controlled with
Tympanic
Membrane
Fgure 19-22
Diode laser myringotomy
CHAPIER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
371
Figure 19-23
 Normal middle ear after myringotomy.
this laser. Irrigation markedly increases visualization and allows for the removal of
any matter within the bulla.
After the myringotomy has been performed, the middle ear should be carefully
evaluated for any masses (Figure 19-23). These masses should be biopsied and then
can be ablated with CO, or diode laser energy as described previously in this chapter.
Lateral Ear Canal Resection and Ear Canal Ablation
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to describe lateral ear canal resection and ear
canal ablation fully; the reader is referred to a general surgery text. Lateral ear canal
resection is indicated in cases where the management of chronic otitis extema has
failed or the size and number of the masses within the auricular canal prevent their
adequate removal with laser-assisted video otoscopy. In some cases it may be more
time effective to perform a lateral ear canal resection and then use the laser to
remove the masses under direct visualization.
Complete ear canal ablation and bulla osteotomy are indicated in cases where
a malignant tumor has been diagnosed within the ear canal or tympanic cavity. It
may also be performed as a salvage procedure in cases of refractory otitis exterma
(Figure 19-24).
The incisions and dissection required for these procedures are greatly enhanced
by the use of the CO, laser. The hemostasis that can be achieved greatly increases
the surgeon's visualization of vital structures, which in tum minimizes iatrogenic
complications (Figure 19-25). In cases of chronic otitis exterma, the ear canal is
372
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Fgure 19-24
Preoperative total ear canal resection and bulla osteotomy.
Ear
canal
Fgure 19-25
Intraoperative ear canal ablation.
CHAPIER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
373
Figure 19-26
 Postoperative total ear canal resection and bulla osteotomy.
markedly thickened and can be calcified and surrounded by a significant amount of
fibrous tissue. The facial nerve can become entrapped in this tissue. Meticulous
dissection is required to preserve this structure and its function. Facial nerve paraly-
sis results if this nerve is damaged or severed. The use of the COz laser for this
 procedure markedly increases postoperative comfort and seems to lead to a more
rapid recovery (Figure 19-26).23
Cosmetic and Therapeutic Otoplasty
The dermis and auricular cartilage that make up the functional anatomic structure of
the pinna are very responsive to COz laser application. The great advantage of CO2
Amputation of a specific area of the pinna using COz laser energy can also be
effectively accomplished. This technique should be used only when the mass or area
of abnormal tissue cannot be effectively ablated. A tip of 0.4-mm spot size at a power
setting of 10 watts efficiently incises both the dermis and the auricular cartilage. The
tissue edges can then be sutured similarly to what occurs during ear-cropping tech-
niques or by application of surgical-grade cyanoacrylic tissue adhesive.
Ear-cropping procedures have also been enhanced by the use of COz laser energy.
The pinna can be sculpted freehand or with a surgical guide. In either case the use
of CO, laser energy significantly reduces the pain, swelling, and bleeding typically
associated with standard scalpel technique. A spot diameter of 0.4 mm at a power
setting of 10 to 15 watts produces excellent results. Small-diameter 3-0 or 4-0 nonab-
sorbable sutures on a small-cutting-edge needle are used to appose skin edges without
374
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
involving the cut surface of the cartilage in the closure. Tissue adhesive cyano
acrylics also provide excellent closure and reduced maintenance.
Treatment of a pinna that does not stand correctly or that, due to technique, has
an exaggerated curve after ear cropping is in some cases possible using CO, laser
energy. The objective of this corrective surgery is to contract the overlying denmis so
that the pinna either stands up more correctly or curves less severely. To accomplish
this procedure, the hair should be shaved away completely over the area to be
treated. A spot size of 0.8 mm or larger or a scanning attachment should be used to
direct the laser energy. The power setting should be only high enough to produce
collagen contraction of the dermis. Full-thickness incisions should be avoided. This
technique may also require rigid taping of the pinna after the therapy to ensure that
the underlying auricular cartilage learns the new position.
complete amputation of the pinna can be accomplished more effectively using CO2
laser energy. In this area, laser energy allows for more efficient removal of the pinna
with less bleeding and postoperative discomfort to the patient. It is recommended
that after the pinna has been removed, the auricular cartilage edge be resected about
5 mm from the edge to allow for more complete cosmetic suturing of the incision.
Conclusion
The addition of laser energy for the treatment of abnormalities of the canine and
feline ear can help to facilitate more rapid recovery, more effective subsequent treat-
ment applications, and more cosmetically pleasing results for the patient and client.
As with any use of laser energy, it is incumbent on the clinician to understand the
laser tissue interaction and how it affects the outcome of cases related to the ear and
ear canal.
References
1.Macy DW: Textbook of veterinary internat medicine, ed 3,1989.
2. Henderson RA, Horne R: Textbook of smatt animat surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, WB Saunders.
3. Macy DW: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 3, 1989, p 251.
4. Teresa LD, Teague HD, Ostwald DA, Jr, et al: Evaluation of a technique using the carbon dioxide
laser for the treatrment of aural hematomas, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38(4):385-390, 2002.
5. Miller MA, Ramos JA, Kreeger JM: Cutaneous vascular neoplasia in 15 cats: clinical, morphologic,
and immunohistochemical studies, Vet Pathot 29(4):329-336, 1992.
6. Roth L: Rhabdomyoma of the ear pinna in four cats, J Comp Pathot 103(2):237-240, 1990.
7.Bensignor E: A practical guide to fetine dermatotogy 1999, pp 22-24.
8.Henderson RA, Horne R: Textbook of smatl animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, WB Saunders,
p 1742.
9.ColeLK: Chronic otitis and otitis media,Western Veterinary Conference 2002,Columbus,OH, 2002
Ohio StateUniversity, College of Veterinary Medicine.
10. Muller GH, Kirk RW, Scott DW: Smatt animat dermatotogy ed 4, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders,
p 807.
CHAPIER 19 Laser Ear Surgery
375
11. Rosychuk RAW, Luttgen P: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 4, 1995, p 538.
12. McKeever Pl, Globus H: Kirk's Current veterinary therapy Xll small animat practice, Philadelphia, 1995,
WB Saunders, pp 647-655.
chronic severe otitis externa in dogs: 80 cases (1995-2001), J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(7): 1000-1006,
2002.
14. Stout-Graham M,Kainer RA,Whalen LR, et al: Morphologic measurements of the external
horizontal ear canal of dogs, Am J Vet Res 51(7):990-994, 1990.
15.McKeever Pl, Globus H: In Kirk's Current veterinary therapy Xll smalt animat practice,
Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders, pp 647-655.
16. Henderson RA, Horne R: Textbook of smalt animat surgery ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, WB Saunders,
p.1755.
17. Rosychuk RAW, Luttgen P: Textbook of veterinary internat medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1995,
WB Saunders, p. 542.
18. White RAS: Textbook of smalt animat surgery ed 3, p. 1760.
19. Cole LK: Chronic otitis and otitis media, Western Veterinary Conference 2002, Columbus, OH, 2002,
Ohio State University, College of Veterinary Medicine.
20. Allgoewer l, Lucas S, Schmitz SA: Magnetic resonance imaging of the normal and diseased feline
middle ear, Vet Radiot Uttrasound 41(5):413-418, 2000
    o           
Vet Radiot Uttrasound 41(1):46-49, 2000.
22. Griffiths LG, Sullivan M, O'Neill T, et al: Ultrasonography versus radiography for detection of fluid
in the canine tympanic bulla, Vet Radiot Uttrasound 44(2):210-213, 2003.
23. Bartels KE: Lasers in medicine and surgery, Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 584-585, 2002.
20
Marketing Ear
Service
Ronald E. Whitford, DVM
378
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
 he veterinary profession is undergoing major changes in the demographics of
delivery of some services and products. Today's pet owner is more educated and
standards of "best value." Over the past several years, due to the introduction of new
heartworm preventives and flea control products, many practices have seen the service/
product mix of total revenues swing much more toward product sales as a major source
of gross revenue. Recently I have evaluated practices with as much as 40% of total
gross income coming from the sale of products. This in itself is not bad for as long
as it lasts, but it does greatly increase the vulnerability of these practices to decreased
income if and when these particular products become easily accessed over the counter
(OTC). It is very disturbing to see that the vast majority of practices are showing
more gross profit income coming from the sales of these products than true bottom-
line profit in the practice, as defined by taking the true net income reported and
deducting a fair investment returm for land, building, and equipment, as well as 25%
 d uns e a s m s so q d n s o
another veterinarian for performing services for the practice. After these statistics are
reviewed, sadly, many practice owners would be better off working as associates in
another practice, eliminating the risk they are taking for the very poor returms they
currently receive.
It is crucial for long-term survival that practices immediately change to a major
emphasis on providing professional services rather than merely being vendors selling
every day. The problem in most practices today that minimizes the detection and
 treatment of pathology is complacency—-being satisfied with less than maximizing
the potential of every patient seen.
From a profit perspective, it is better to select potential profit center services that
offer minimal competition from sources other than licensed veterinarians. Placing
major emphasis on marketing services rather than products greatly reduces our risk
of competition, limiting it to veterinarians committed to at least the same level of
quality veterinary medicine as ourselves.
Marketing of professional services also has definite financial bearings as well.
Typically products are priced simply by doubling the cost to determine retail price.
Therefore approximately 50% of the selling price is "hard costs." That 50% is all that
is left to help pay the daily clinic overhead. However, when professional services are
charged, the percentage of gross margin profits over "hard costs" of materials needed
to provide those services is much greater, typically being at least 80% of the fee
charged. A rule of thumb in pricing professional services is that the fee should be at
least five times the costs of materials needed. The result of this strategy is that 80%
of the fee charged now becomes available to help pay daily clinic overhead, as well
as leave some bottom-line profit as well.
More Bad News
Latest surveys show that pet populations have stabilized. Fewer people are adopting
pets. A primary reason for this is thought to be the "inconvenience" associated with
CHAPITER 20  Marlzeting Ear Service  379
taking care of pets with today's hectic lifestyles. Due to the fact that the number of
veterinarians continues to increase as a result of new graduates entering practice
and current practitioners choosing to remain in the profession longer, one can
assume that the number of pets available to be seen by a veterinarian is decreasing.
It also is a known statistic that many pet owners are choosing not to replace
deceased pets. All these factors underscore the importance of retaining as many
clients as possible in the practice as well as maximizing the number of services
provided for each pet presented. It is estimated that the typical practice in a rela-
tively stable community with minimal transient populations loses 30% of its clients
annually through normal attrition—owners moving, pets dying, etc. Survival of this
profession depends on finding as many problems as possible and making appropri-
ate recommendations for pets to live the longest quality life possible for every pet
presented to the practice.
There Is Some Good News
Pets are predisposed to many conditions because of specific breed predilection or
environmental conditions. This is especially true for ear conditions and disease.
Fortunately, there is more pathology out there than would be needed to keep every
veterinarian busy 24 hours per day, 52 weeks per year. The biggest problem, however,
 in capitalizing on this fact is complacency—-many veterinarians seem to be disen-
chanted with the current financial situation and feel hopeless about reversing current
trends.
The human-pet bond continues to grow tighter and stronger. Many pets are no
longer considered "disposable." Pet owners who value their pets as four-legged family
members want the same high quality of veterinary care as they expect for their own
human health care. There are now more than 6,000,000 dogs and 6,000,000 cats in
the United States older than 6 years. As pets age, in most cases they become even
 more cemented in the human family. Fortunately, as these pets grow into the “senior
years,”’ the aging process initiates many medical conditions, including ear problems
Therefore ear care programs can be developed to help catch problems earlier, allowing
the practitioner to either prevent, minimize, or slow the progression of the particular
problem.
Even though the United States economy has been weakened over the past few
years, pet owners who consider their pets to be true "family members" have proven
with their pocketbooks that they still expect and are willing to pay for quality pet
health care.
Of all the marketing strategies and options currently open to the practitioner today.
none is more professional, more restricted to services provided only by licensed
veterinarians, or has more potential to grow both gross and net income than the profes-
sional marketing of services related to ear care. These services are not easily duplicated
prescribe the appropriate treatment to resolve abnormal conditions. Clients often
relate ear infections to the very painful conditions seen in human ear problems.
A veterinarian's best clients—those who want and can afford high-quality pet health
380SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
care—readily accept ear care services. Pet owners in need of these services cannot
readily price-shop for comparison, leading to the potential for higher gross margin
profits, resulting in higher bottom-line nets. Unfortunately, a survey of practitioners
today would show that only a very small percentage of practices are currently placing
a significant emphasis on ear care as a major profit center.
Other reasons the practitioner should seriously consider placing more emphasis
 On ear hygiene, diagnostics, and treatment include the following:
· Pets have two ears, thereby doubling the potential for problems over singular intermal
organs.
· The ear canals of dogs and cats are anatomically formed in such a way as to
increase the potential for medical problems.
· People do not put a price on pain control. Ear infections are perceived to, and often
do, hurt—and the pain is perceived by the owner who observes a bad odor coming
from the ears as well as the pet scratching, shaking its head, or whining when the
ears are touched.
· Ear infections are often lifelong problems. Unfortunately, however, a major reason
for chronic otitis is a failure to treat long enough as well as to determine the under-
lying problem creating the environment conducive to otitis (e.g., allergies). It is
not all the fault of the practitioner; many owners fail to returm on time for rechecks
or to treat according to the recommended treatment schedule or for sufficient
periods of time to gain total resolution. It is human nature (coupled with today's
busy lifestyles) to avoid placing ear treatment at a high-enough priority to effect a
long-tenm cure.
· People often feel guilty when their pet has a recurrence after they understand that
it has occurred because of a failure to continue treatment long enough. The feeling
of guilt may make the client more willing to seek more extensive treatment at a
later time.
· Clients often leave one veterinary practice for another because the first veterinarian
failed to diagnose, explain, or treat the pet's ear disease adequately. A failure to do
the job correctly the first time often causes a practitioner to lose all other potential
services for the duration of the pet's life. Therefore there is a bright future for prac.
tices willing to give ear care the respect it is due and to work diligently to resolve
problems and help pets lead healthier, longer lives.
What Is Marketing, Anyway?
Marketing is nothing more than communication. It is simply providing facts
amd benefits about the services recommended so clients can make educated deci-
sions. Therefore marketing, as strictly defined, is not enough. We must market
assertively. This means being the "pet's spokesperson/advocate." We wish only for
the pet to have the opportunity to receive the best that veterinary medicine has to
recommendations but doing it in such a way that the client wants to accept those
recommendations.
CHAPIER 20 Marlketing Ear Service
381
We must first know what pets need and what we can provide. We must then
consistently find the problems with thorough medical history-taking and compre.
hensive physical"nose-to-tail"examinations.We must take time to develop trusting
that are truly in the pet's best interest. We must also take the time to understand our
clients and what is most important to them, learming how to stimulate each individual
client to the positive response we desire. The marketing strategy of the 1990s was to
listen to the client and then give them what they wanted. However, it has changed
today to "listen to the client and then lead them to what the pet needs:" This is
accomplished by learming the "hot buttons" for each individual client. Each client is
 an individual with unique perspectives and desires.
Some marketing fundamentals to remember:
services and products you recommend.
· Avoid creating the impression of high-pressure selling. Clients love to buy but hate
to "be sold:" Few people buy from pushy sales personnel, at least not more than once.
· Marketing is not manipulative or unethical; it is simply providing facts and benefits
so the consumer makes an educated buying decision.
· Clients must first trust us and have confidence in us as medical professionals rather
s, sas sopaa Aara u
· We must discover the needs of each client in order to make the appropriate recom-
mendations in the form of solutions. The key is assisting the client in finding the
right solution for the specific problem.
· Clients must believe we care. We must develop friendships before clients will trust
us and allow us to gain client compliance with our recommendations. People don't
care how much we know until they know how much we care. We show we care by
being sincerely interested, listening, asking good questions, and knowing what
to recommend by correctly interpreting what the client wants along with what the
pet needs.
Much research has been conducted on the "buying process." People buy to feel
better or to solve a problem. We want solutions that lead to "peace of mind." Owners
request veterinary services to make the pet feel better, which in tum makes them feel
better, or to solve a problem with the pet, which again makes them feel better. Eighty
percent of all purchases are based on emotional issues rather than logic. Therefore it
is important to first determine the emotional needs of the client. Emotional buying
requires emotional selling. Marketing is nothing more than a battle of perceptions.
We must position ourselves as caring, concermed pet health care professionals inter-
ested in providing the best that veterinary medicine has to offer.
Clients must first trust us before they will accept our recommendations. Some
principals to understand include the following:
· People are interested in themselves and want to be noticed
· People crave to feel important and be appreciated.
· People tend to judge other people and organizations on the basis of first
impressions.
3828
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
We must never forget that every time clients have any interaction with the clinic,
they are reassessing the perceptions they have of the value received. The sum total
  g ss  ,  g si a s ss s g
Perception is reality. For clients to accept our recommendations readily, they must
believe we are professionally competent. Because almost no clients are capable of
judging true competence, this perception is grounded in areas in which they can
make comparisons. Such things as friendliness, cleanliness, professionalism, state-
of-the-art equipment, and time efficiency are common factors that enter into the final
overall impression perceived by the client of the veterinary practice.
We therefore gain clients' trust by making them feel important and confident they
have made the right decisions for their pets. Treating the client as an individual.
giving frequent compliments, respecting the client's opinion, using the client's name
and pet's name often, being a good listener, respecting the client's time, and expressing
appreciation are all ways to make the client feel important.
Successful marketing depends on communicating with the client. Communication
is incomplete without comprehension. We must talk in language that the client
understands. One of the biggest obstacles we must overcome is thinking the client
understands what we are talking about. Most clients will never tell a veterinarian
a client knows what services the pet needs or what we can provide.
Children are great teachers of successful marketing tactics. All we really need to
know about marketing successfully can be learmed by watching toddlers who want
something:
· They are persistent. They know it takes six to eight interactions just to get some-
 One to think about something. They know it may take 16 to 18 interactions to get
to the "yes."
· "No"' always means "'maybe."’ "No"' means they did not provide enough facts and
benefits about what they want for daddy to give it to them!
· They are never embarrassed to ask over and over again. They know the average sale
in America only occurs after the consumer has said "no'" four times. They know that
.sa, au o ja o ,sou, noy au yanou ssisiad suosiadsaes inoj u auo Auo
· They know that most sales are based on emotions rather than logic—and that
emotional selling requires emotional buying. Crying works!
Clients have three types of needs that the veterinarian must solve to gain compliance.
These needs include the following:
· Professional needs: Making the pet well or keeping it well.
· Emotional needs: Making the client feel good about owning a pet, seeking veteri-
nary attention, and choosing a particular clinic to provide those services. Meeting
these emotional needs is the number-one reason that clients retum to the clinic
· Consumer needs: These needs are most often the reason a client visits for the
first time. They include convenience, costs, and so on
Successful marketing is an accumulation of many different strategies. First and
foremost is the creation of a perceived high medical competence. Trust results when
the client believes the veterinarian and staff really know what they are talking about
and are committed to high-quality care. After this barrier has been broken, our
marketing efforts become much easier and must be directed toward "emotional"' selling.
CHAPIER 20 Marlzeting Ear Service
383
Our success depends on using the following basic strategies to persuade clients of
their need for the services we are recommending:
· Show how the pet benefits.
·Show how the client benefits.
· Detail the consequences of failing to accept the recommendation now.
· Communicate the consequences of failing to accept the recommendation at all.
      (d  s) o u  .
recommendation.
Enthusiasm is crucial for marketing professional services successfully.
Enthusiasm can be generated only when there is a genuine belief in the value of the
recommended services. The last four letters in the word enthusiasm can be defined
as standing for "I Am Sold Myself!" The best salesman is the one sold on the prod-
uct. This creates a more enthusiastic selling approach. One should remember that the
only thing more contagious than enthusiasm is apathy.
 An enthusiastic response to your recommendations by the client comes from
involvement. We must do everything possible to involve the client in making the
diagnosis as well as instituting treatment. Some ways to involve the client include
the following:
· Show the problem on the pet.
· Explain the importance of preventing and treating potential problems.
· Show the client how to administer medications properly.
· Observe and praise the client's efforts to use the medications.
perceive the progress being made.
Smiling is one of the best ways to show enthusiasm. Smiling breaks down barriers,
drops defenses, increases credibility, shows we care, and defuses anger. The most
important thing we can wear is a smile. We cannot afford to "have a bad day." Clients
don't really care what kind of day we are having—only how we affect their day!
Rejection is a normal part of successful marketing. The Coca-Cola Company sold
only 400 bottles the first year. Marketing research has determined that (as mentioned
previously) it takes six to eight interactions just to enter the subconscious mind of a
consumer. Additionally, it may take 16 to 18 interactions to get them to agree to the
recommendation. The average consumer says "no" four times before finally agree-
ing. Sadly, as we've noted, only one in four salespersons is persistent enough to
drop the subject to avoid confrontation. However, a mission statement of being the
pet's advocate does not allow us simply to forget about offering what the pet really
needs for the best life possible
Specific Strategies for Successfully Marketing Preventive and
Therapeutic Ear Care
Believe In Its Importance. Understand that preventing and resolving ear prob-
lems is very important to the pain-free life of the pet.
384
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Educate Yourself. As in all other facets of our veterinary education, we must first
understand both normal and abnormal conditions, including disease processes of
the ear. The veterinarian must become proficient with physical examination tech-
niques and appropriate laboratory evaluation of ear specimen cytology and cultures.
Surprisingly, the investment of a very small amount of additional study time can
greatly enhance one's professional abilities in the diagnostics and therapeutics of ear
care. Many professional reference textbooks and jourmals now include in-depth infor-
mation on ear care. This book, for example, can greatly enhance our visual perception
of abnormalities that occur within the ear. Almost all regional and national continuing
education programs now have full-day programs devoted to ear pathology.
It is also important for the veterinarian to keep abreast of the numerous products
now available for both preventive care and therapeutics for the ear. The formulary
contained in the appendix of this book lists many drugs, along with specific ingre-
dients. The chapter on ototoxicity has a helpful guide to ingredients contained in
products that may potentially cause additional problems if used in pets compromised
with a ruptured tympanum. It is crucial to understand not only what products are
available but also their uses and contraindications. Many of today's pet owners are
better educated than ever before—and sadly, with the help of the Intermet, may be
better versed in particular products than the veterinarian who has not taken the time
to study each product introduced to this profession.
Educate the Staff. Clients relate better and therefore talk more openly with your
staff members than to the veterinarians in the practice. Therefore the veterinary staff
 be brought to the attention of the veterinarian during the examination. Since this is
the case, it is crucial that all staff members be educated in the importance of ear care
the consequences of failing to catch ear disease early and of being persistent to
resolve ear problems before treatment is discontinued completely.
Staff must understand the importance of not making a telephone diagnosis or
examination table-side diagnosis until appropriate confirmation diagnostics are
performed, so that all recommendations are made based on confinmed and docu-
mented diagnoses. It is very difficult for any veterinarian or other staff member to
overcome wrong information that has been provided by an uneducated staff member
without destroying some credibility of the practice as a whole. Every staff member
must fully appreciate the power of each interaction with the client and the potential
consequences of giving out wrong information. Every staff member interaction with
the client has a positive or negative effect on every client decision.
Seeing is believing and one of the best staff education tools. Teaching staff
members what a normal horizontal and vertical canal looks like allows them to know
what is abnonmal. The use of videoscopes such as the MedRX Video Vetscope
(MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida) allows the veterinarian to teach many staff members
at the same time, by generating a visual image on a video monitor that all can watch.
The educated staff is far more capable of selling clients on the need for thorough ear
examinations when clients call with questions about a problem, as well as when
medical history indicates the possibility of aural pathology.
CHAPIER 20  Marlzeting Ear Service 
385
It is impossible for anyone to market successfully anything he or she does not
understand. All educational tools available should be used to teach both staff and
clients about ear care. This might include wall pictures and charts (excellent ones are
available from several suppliers of ear products, as well as MedRx, Inc.), pamphlets,
handouts, and ear models. Most people learm much more easily and retain more
information when visual aids are used.
Equip Yourself. Much of the instrumentation needed for ear disease diagnostics
and therapeutics is already present in the typical veterinary clinic. Client perception
of overall medical competence is influenced by the equipment seen and used in the
examination room. Otoscopes must be in every examination room, ready for use, if
ear, each and every time. Battery-operated otoscopes provide portability but also are
prone to become inoperable due to low battery charge. Wall-mounted transformers
(Welch-Allyn) eliminate the embarrassment of dead batteries—and the resulting
perception of incompetence. These units typically also have a much brighter light,
allowing better visualization.
Particular attention should be paid to sanitation and cleanliness of the otoscope
specula so they are always ready for use when a new patient enters the room. A new,
innovative specula-cleaning device is available, consisting of a brush within a stain-
less cylinder, which can be filled with disinfectant. Having the cleaner instrument on
clean. A cheap altermative would be to place a small bristle brush used for cleaning
test tubes in each examination room—or having two sets of specula in each room so
the soiled one can be removed from the room during the cleaning process before the
next client is called in. Staff should also be educated on the possibility of spreading
infectious organisms from one pet to another when using an uncleaned specula, even
though it may not appear dirty.
The expense of new equipment is relatively unimportant relative to the immedi-
ate cash flow that can be generated from the use of such medical instrumentation.
Gross revenue enhancement is much more effective in increasing profits than trying
to minimize expenses by purchasing only minimal equipment—and the best way to
the potential that exists in every ear canal you have the opportunity to examine
thoroughly. Most practices quickly find that after new equipment is purchased, the
caseload of use for that equipment increases substantially, if only for the reason that
now it is there, it needs to be paid for! The end results are better client service, more
pets with otitis treated earlier, and the satisfaction that comes from providing quality
medicine.
New video otoscopes now available not only allow the practitioner to do a better
job with diagnostics but also educate the client at the same time and treat more thor-
oughly and effectively. Adequate visualization, a clear view of the inner lining of
canine and feline ear canals and tympani, can be very difficult owing to the limits of
standard diagnostic otoscopy instruments. Showing clients, staff, students, and other
practitioners ear canal abnormalities through a standard otoscope can be awkward,
386
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
The video otoscope employs new technology to expose the hidden world of ear
pathology. Because the instrument is attached to a miniature video camera and video
display, otic examinations can be visualized in real time on a video monitor. A color
video printer allows "before and after” pictures of ear canal conditions that can be
shown to the client later. The photographs generated can provide pathologic infor-
mation in a way that is perceived much more seriously by the client; the client is
more willing to request needed procedures because it has now become a much more
informed (educated) decision.
Failure to look is much more often the problem in clinic income than is a lack of
knowledge. It should become standard protocol that every ear of every anesthesized
pet in the clinic for any procedure, related to ear disease or not, be examined using
the videoscope; doing so often results in the discovery of many additional medical
problems in the ear that would otherwise go unnoticed until they became much more
"proof’ of the problem, which often must be discussed with the client on the phone
after discovery when the client is not present to witness it. This photograph then
becomes factual evidence and documentation of the findings; they can even be
converted into digital images in the pet's medical record. If the client refuses the
initial treatment recommendation when communicated via the phone call, these
pictures increase the chance that the client will allow later treatment after the pet is
"Before and after"’ pictures can also be kept on file to use in educating other
clients about ear disease and the reason for appropriate preventive ear hygiene.
These pictures can also be added to the reminders sent out to the client for various
procedure updates.
Adapters allow other hospital instruments to generate video images for both
the practitioner and client. Such instruments as microscopes, rigid endoscopes, and
flexible endoscopes can be enhanced via the videoscope.
them. Why? They are not convenient to use. For that reason, I have installed a new
videoscope system called Vet Dock (MedRx, Inc., Largo, Florida) that is economi-
cal enough to be placed in all examination rooms. T'his has allowed videoscope visu-
alization of all ears during every examination to become habitual. The client is able
to visualize the ear examination at the same time as the veterinarian does. Involvement
 breeds interest, and interest generates additional requests for appropriate services.
Look for Problems. The foundation of a successful wellness program includes
both a thorough medical history and comprehensive physical examination of the
patient, with the goal of catching signs of potential disease before it becomes clini-
cally evident. Time is required for thoroughness. Staff delegation is an important tool
in optimizing the time available for the veterinarian to concentrate and perform these
nose-to-tail examinations. A thorough medical history form can be used to ensure
that nothing is overlooked when obtaining the medical history. Many times the client
does not know the subtle signs of pain. Asking the right questions can provide insight
into observations by the client assumed to be "normal." A pet examination report
card noting both the normal and abnormal findings becomes tangible proof to the
CHAPIER 20  Marlzeting Ear Service
387
client of the thoroughness of the examination. Abnormalities noted on the report
card may serve as a reminder to the client later at home of the problems discovered
and recommendations refused. Most clients do not like to make hasty decisions and
may request appropriate services after they have had time to think about it. Standardized
protocols for handling ear diagnostics are very useful in maintaining consistency.
Standardization of procedures allows the staff to have all needed supplies ready
when the pet is presented for a specific problem. Standard protocol for all examina-
tions should include evaluation of the eardrum and middle ear.
Educate the Client. People do not buy what they do not understand. A lack of
client education reduces the choices by the client to a matter of price. Because a
large amount of ear disease lies deep in the ear, the pet owner may not even perceive
a problem. The old adage "show and tell to sell' is still true. As mentioned, every
client is a unique individual having different "hot buttons" and different desires. The
particular "hot button'" (stimulus triggering the client to take action) may be visual,
auditory, tactile, or olfactory. Clients learm in different ways. It is crucial that the
practitioner take the time not only to be thorough in the examination but also to
discover the"hotbutton"of each client to determine what is the most important to
them. Clients want to know: What is wrong? Can we solve it? Will it hurt? How long
will it take? How much will it cost?
Never assume the client is aware of all the services/products the pet needs or
you can provide! Increasing the client's perception of all abnormalities may be
accomplished by the following:
· Show the problem to the client via the standard otoscope, teaching otoscope, or
video otoscope. Reddened, inflamed ears are quite easy to understand when they
are observed.
· Have the client smell the odor.
·Have the client feel the swollen or bony ear canals.
· Explain to the client that the resistance by the pet to having the ears examined
or whining during manipulation or insertion of the otoscope specula indicates
that the ear is painful. Use the analogy of how painful human ear infections
may be.
Othervisual aids that areavailable and shouldbe used include thefollowing:
· Diagrams of the ear's anatomy. These should be framed to enhance the profes-
sional image and placed on the wall of each examination room close to the exam-
ination table so they can be referred to when discussing ear disease.
· Wall posters of photographs of dog and cat ear disease conditions
· Loose-leaf notebooks in each examination room showing pictures of ear disease
and therapeutic/surgical procedures
· Brochures from product suppliers
· Ear models
· Personalized handouts on clinic letterhead, including a diagram of the ear, so that
the area of the problem can be identified. It should be standard policy that no client
ever leaves the examination room without a handout detailing the specific condi-
tions diagnosed. Handouts become miniature billboards marketing both the prac-
tice as a whole and the specific problem being explained.
388SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Visual aids are good, but the most important educational tool is staff and veteri-
narian interaction with the client! Staff training in ear disease conditions, therapy.
and prevention is essential. After appropriate staff members are properly trained,
much of the client education time can be delegated to them. Everyone must under-
stand the "hows" and "whys"of ear disease. Staff must comprehend that the number-
one reason for chronic otitis is lack of client compliance, which is most commonly
a result of a lack of perceived importance to the long-term quality of life of the pet.
To market ear recommendations most effectively, relate otitis to the following:
· Otitis hurts! It can be very painful, as is often evident from the swelling and
redness. Many pets with painful ear infections may show behavioral changes such
as aggression from the pain. Compare it with human ear infections.
· Otitis stinks! A stinky pet may well not remain inside the house for long. Pets
relegated to the backyard most often no longer get the best care.
·Oitis includes infection! Any infection can be a "seed" for infection elsewhere in
sau a  u a u p a a ad to un q a
system. The inner ear is a direct route to the brain!
·Otitis can cause loss of hearing!
Successful client education requires an environment conducive to learming. Client
        o   n   o  s 
to the veterinary hospital? Do we make it easy for them to do business with us?
Think of all the barriers we throw up to the client, making it inconvenient for them.
Waiting time is the number-one de-marketing problem in almost all practices. Today's
client does not have time to wait. Today, instant service takes too long! When we feel
hassled, we are not in the best state for listening attentively. Minimizing client anxi-
ety allows the client to concentrate more on what you are saying and showing. Such
things as striving to see appointments on time and minimizing confusion in the
reception area can improve client relations. Offering to assist the client with the pet
 both on arrival and when paying says a lot about the value the practice places on its
clientele.
Methods for entertaining children, such as a TV showing pet movies and quiet
toys, can be quite useful in distracting them so they do not distract the parents.
a snp u g st ad a  uad e u  ose u ix
examination or treatment. The best way to show you care is to be gentle. Sedatives
are greatly underused in veterinary medicine and result in poor examinations and
missed diagnoses. Any resistance to a thorough examination should result in sedation
ofthepet.
Clients must also be educated about the many products available that have the
potential for enhancing the ear's resistance to infection. These products should be
evaluated by the veterinarian, who should make appropriate recommendations to the
client, including the facts and benefits of the particular product. Recommendations
should be provided in the form of "the pet needs" rather than merely "I recom
mend—."
Most treatment failures are a result of poor client compliance with prescribed
home-care therapy. Successful outcomes require that the client understand both the
importance of following the treatment protocol and how to do it. Written home-care
CHAPIER 20 Marlketing Ear Service
389
instructions should always be provided after discussion in the examination room.
Using treatment regimens that clients can actually do and that fit their lifestyles are
the cormerstones of successful treatment. Proper administration should always be
demonstrated and then observed as the client attempts to mimic your demonstration.
       s      
talize the pet or have it brought to the clinic daily for treatment. Remember that you
will be judged by your results. If the problem does not resolve, even though it may
be due to the client's lack of appropriate treatment, you will be blamed. That's not
fair—but that is reality! After a few days of appropriate treatment, ideally, the pet
will feel more comfortable and the pain reduced so the owner can take over treat-
ment. It is crucial that the practitioner understand the importance of resolving the
pain as quickly as possible so the pet will accept treatment readily. Everyone should
praise the client's efforts. Everyone loves compliments and being made to feel
important. Compliance with home-care recommendations should always be assessed
during telephone progress checks.
Make Your Services Convenient! Convenience rules the world today. The astute
practitioner offers such services as pet drop-off and late pickup. Treatment proce-
dures such as topical medication application should be initiated during the initial
visit to better ensure client compliance. All needed services should be scheduled for
a time most convenient for the clientwhich in most cases is the initial time of pre.
sentation for the problem or routine examination. The veterinary practice demonstrates
respect for the client's time when appointments are behind schedule by offering an
opportunity to leave the pet at the clinic for a few hours while complete diagnostic
evaluation and therapeutic procedures are perfonmed. The client will appreciate the
explanation that it would be more convenient for them to have all work performed
now that the pet is already there. Staff should be trained to schedule a specific
dismissal appointment time to minimize client waiting, frustration, and anxiety.
Price for Your Market! There are two types of fools: those who charge too much
and those who do not charge enough! Fee schedules vary tremendously due to
practice philosophy, locale, and financial status of the typical client in the practice.
Different clinics attract different types of clients. The key to success is being sure
that the level of service exceeds the fees charged.
Pricing is no longer based on what it costs to provide a service but rather what
the client perceives the service is worth. My rule of thumb is that the fee for any
service should be a minimum of five times the hard costs of materials. In other
words, drugs and materials needed to provide the service should be no more than
20%ofthetotalfee.
The major cause of relapsing otitis is failure to recheck and treat long enough. A
line item on a client's bill entitled "otitis recheck package" may be established to
include the medical progress examination, sedation, ear swab and staining, and
flushing. This is preferable to listing all services at a standard fee and then provid-
ing a discount. Discounting merely hints to the client that the veterinary practice's
services are overpriced. Bundling these services into one line-item fee enables the
total fee than if the fees are individually itemized and are perceived as too much by
390
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
the client. It is always better to adjust fees to an acceptable level and still provide
"best care" whenever possible. When procedures start to be deleted because of clien
resistance to the total fee, quality medicine begins to suffer quickly. This group of
bundled services may then be lumped into one total fee and the package given a
separate treatment computer number. The total fee is the same as it would have been
with some discount given at the bottom of the invoice, but this strategy avoids the
flavor of being merely another retail outlet. It is important to look at long-term prac-
tice revenues rather than short-term gratification. The key is to keep pets healthy and
coming back for years to come
The fee charged for individual components of ear problems must be based on
client perception of the importance and difficulty of each service. Some of the line
items include examination, cytology, cultures, cleaning, flushing, biopsy, sedation,
corticosteroid injections, antibiotic injections, and medications dispensed, including
pain management. T'he practice manager must look at the total as well as the indi-
vidual line-item fees and make a determination as to what is acceptable to the client
to maintain a high level of compliance with recommendations.
Fees must always be related to value. Clients should always leave with tangible
evidence of the intangible services provided. Examples would be client handouts,
pet examination report cards, pictures of the individual pet's problem, and brochures.
If clients are to return, they must perceive the services as worth the fees charged.
Unfortunately, clients constantly reevaluate everything they encounter while visiting
the clinic, and the sum total of these evaluations determines the overall practice's
image of competence and compassion—and it continues to improve or decline on
every new encounter.
Remind Clients! Clients hate making hasty decisions. Spending money causes the
same stages as the death of a family member: anger, denial, grief, acceptance. Even a
pet's chronic renal failure may be an acute diagnosis to the client—-which requires time
for mental adjustment. Some tips for better compliance include the following:
· Go slowly. Give the client time to weigh the potential disadvantages of not
accepting the recommendations.
· Give the client a reason to act promptly, such as better chance of complete
resolution.
· Show the client how the pet will benefit, such as pain resolution.
·Show the client how he or she will personally benefit (healthier pet, lower
future costs).
· Detail the consequences of noncompliance with the recommendations.
Today's client has an absolute right to be demanding. It is important that all staff
members understand that every client must always be given the opportunity to provide
the best care available for their beloved family member. Sometimes financial constraints
do not allow all pets to receive this highest level of care. We must, however, always
be thankful that every client and pet encounter gives us an opportunity to recom-
mend the best course of treatment. Clients unable to accept this "best care" level
should not be made to feel bad but rather given options for treatment. In my own
practice, the first option is to finance the difference in "best care"’ and "OK" care. If
the client can pay at least a significant portion of the total fee, it may be wise to
CHAPIER 20 Marlketing Ear Service
391
consider financial arrangements. Financing will always be more profitable than
discounting. The sad fact is that we all discount every day by not charging what our
human-care counterparts do for anything we do! Veterinarians should make medical
decisions, not financial decisions. Clients do not pay us to be financial counselors.
Whenever we do not offer the best, we are prejudging the value of the particular pet
to the client—and we do not have the right to do that.
past otitis problems that can be targeted for marketing efforts. Even offering compli-
mentary rechecks of this client base can result in significant findings of additional
pathology, allowing the recommendation of additional services and products. The
real key is simply finding a way to get these pets presented for examination—which
is then followed by thorough medical history-taking and comprehensive physical
examinations, with the goal being to discover every potential medical problem with
every pet every time it is presented. After the problems are found, a commitment
to assertive marketing is essential to help pets live the longest, highest-quality life
possible.
Follow Up! It is surprising how many veterinarians are willing to allow a client
 u Aian uan anq a pu ss a uo a jo ss s puads m
client's impression of the response to treatment. A phone call to the client to check on
the pet's progress in 24 to 48 hours impresses the client by reflecting a caring attitude
and stressing the importance the doctor places on complete resolution of the problem
Clients respond better when they are treated nicely from the start and are made to
feel that they are an important part of their pet's future well-being. Scheduling and
charging for follow-up examinations and diagnostic testing greatly enhance the
client bonding rate to the practice, build client trust, and ensure administration of
appropriate therapy. Staff should always schedule the recheck appointment and ensure
that needed reminders are entered into the computer before the client leaves the clinic.
The veterinarian should also consider sending reminder notes to clients for proce-
dures recommended that were not accepted at the time of the initial diagnosis and
recommendation. Patients with severe wax accumulation in the ear canals should
receive a reminder for rechecking and ear flushing at an appropriate interval. All pets
receiving Iong-term medications should receive periodic rechecks
Become Creative! The practice wishing to improve or grow the practice should
consider the following strategies:
· Plan a staff meeting to discuss ear care and ask staff for ways to improve
compliance.
  d     e a   e
· Position the clinic as an ear care clinic.
 r  oq r a iso a  sss  e
about ear care.
· Develop relationships with local groomers and other pet care professionals to
increase the number of referrals for ear disease.
Why is client compliance with ear care recommendations so low?
· They do not perceive the significance of catching problems early and treating them
to get complete resolution.
392SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
· They do not realize that the normal ear anatomy predisposes pets to extermal ear
disease.
· Clients often do not recognize the early, subtle signs of pain from ear disease.
· Clients have financial issues. Sufficient money is most likely not the problem but
rather the client's priorities in spending discretionary funds. Your goal is to raise
that priority through client education.
· Fear of anesthesia. Clients do not understand the advances in anesthesia safety of
the past few years. Everyone must be careful not to create unnecessary anxiety by
Overemphasizing the “risks" of anesthesia required for appropriate treatment.
Clients must definitely be informed of the inherent risks of all anesthetic events
and appropriate consent documentation completed, but they should also perceive
that the risk of anesthesia is much less than the damage an untreated ear infection
can cause. Consider using the term sedation rather than anesthesia, when deep
surgical planes of anesthesia are not needed. Emphasize all the precautions, such
as vital-sign monitoring, that are performed to make the procedure as safe as
humanly possible.
· Owner forgetfulness of the recommendation. It pays to develop a system of consis-
tent reminders for needed procedures.
Marketing ear care is one of the most professional services a veterinary practice
can offer. Clients perceive the veterinarian as the pet health care professional. We
must not disappoint them. More ear disease is missed because we don't look than
because we don't know. We must look for it consistently and thoroughly in every pet
presented for examination. Current estimates are that 15% to 20% of all canine
patients and 4% to 6% of all feline patients presented have some type of ear abnor-
mality. A little quick arithmetic reveals that the income potential for marketing ear
care is not insignificant:
Typical client base: 2500 canine patients + 1000 feline patients = 3500 patients
10% to 20% of canine patients with ear disease = 250 to 500 patients
4% to 6% of feline patients with ear disease = 40 to 60 patients
Total possible patients = 290 to 560
Minimum services needed and suggested fees to perform thorough ear
examinations:
Office visit and physical examination
$35
Ear swab and cytologic evaluation
$22
Sedation and reversal
$35
Ear flushing and suction
$28
Total
$120
NoTE: The potential income from examination and minimal treatment only
is $37,700 (290 patients) to $72,800 (560 patients).
Add fees for any other treatments, drugs, additional testing, surgical
procedures, follow-up visits, and so on, and the income stream continues to
increase substantially
CHAPIER 20 Marlketing Ear Service 393
There is probably sufficient ear pathology in our current patient base to keep a
veterinarian busy full time. The real question is whether practitioners are willing to
dedicate themselves to examinations thorough enough to find all the problems pres-
ent and then have the time needed to educate the client so that every recommendation
is borme out by an educated decision by the client. Assertive marketing is nothing
more than providing all the facts and benefits of the recommendations in such a way
that the clients desire to accept those recommendations. Assertive marketing requires
 persistence, consistency, passion, and credibility. Veterinarians who maintain the 
 trust of their clients see a high level of compliance in the acceptance of recommen-
dations. That is all there is to successfully marketing high-quality ear care in the
veterinary practice.
It is the veterinarian's professional, ethical, and moral duty to recommend every
thing the pet needs. Never assume that the client is aware of all the services the pet
needs or you can provide. Good medicine is great business!
Appendix
Ear Product
Formulary
Appendix Ear Product Forrmulary
395
Ihis formulary is presented as a guide to products available for treating ear
 disease. The products listed are for topical use in the ear canal unless indicated
otherwise. Many topical formulations are compounded mixtures containing ingredi-
 ents that may be potentially ototoxic when there is no eardrum. Consult the manu-
facturer for the recommendation for use when the eardrum is perforated.
The organization of the formulary is by function or mode of action. Ingredients
are categorized as antinflammatory, antibacterial, antifungal, miticidal, ear cleaners,
and drying agents. Some formulations have more than one function and may be
listed again in the appropriate sections. Under each category, the generic ingredient,
the trade name, and the manufacturers are listed. The proprietary names and active
ingredients of products are listed after the ingredients.
Active Ingredients of Ear Products, Listed by Function
POTENTANTIINFLAMMATORY AGENTS
Betamethasone 0.1%
Genta-Otic
Vetus
Gentaved Otic
Vedco
Gentocin Otic
Schering-Plough
Otomax
Schering-Plough
Tri-Otic
Med-Pharmex
Betamethasone 0.64 mg
Lotrisone
Schering-Plough
Dexamethasone 0.1%
Decadron Phosphate
Merck
Tobradex
Alcon
Tresaderm
Merial
Fluocinolone 0.01%
Synotic Otic
Ft. Dodge
MODERATE ANTIINFLAMMATORY AGENTS
Isoflupredone acetate 0.1%
Neo-Predef
Upjohn and Pharmacia
Tritop
Upjohn and Pharmacia
Triamcinoloneacetonide0.1%
Animax
Pharmaderm
Coly-Mycin S Otic
Parke-Davis
Cortisporin Otic
Glaxo Wellcome
Derma 4 Ointment
Pfizer
Dermalone
Vedco
Derma-Vet
Med-Pharmex
Forte Topical
Upjohn and Pharmacia
Neo-Predef
Upjohn and Pharmacia
Panolog
Solvay
MILD ANTIINFLAMMATORY AGENTS
Hydrocortisone acetate0.2%
Forte Topical
Upjohn and Pharmacia
Hydrocortisone 1%
Bur-O-Cort
Q.A. Labs
Burotic HC
 Allerderm
Cipro HC Otic
 Bayer Pharmaceutical
Clear X Ear
DVM
Drying Solution
396
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Active Ingredients of Ear Products, Listed by Function-cont'd
Coly-Mycin S Otic
Parke-Davis
CORT/ASTRIN
Vedco
Cortisporin Otic
Glaxo Wellcome
Epiotic HC
 Allerderm
VoSol HC Otic
Wallace
Prednisolone 0.17%
Chlora-Otic
Vetus
Liquichlor
Evsco
ANTIBACTERLALS
Acetic acid-boric acid
DermaPet Ear/Skin
DermaPet, Inc.
Cleanser
Chloramphenicol
Chlora-Otic
Vetus
Chloromycetin Otic
Parke-Davis
Liquichlor
Evsco
Ciprofloxacin
Cipro HC Otic
 Bayer Pharmaceuticals
Colistin
Coly-Mycin S Otic
Parke-Davis
Enrofloxacin
Baytril Injection
Bayer Pharmaceuticals
(Mix 2 ml in 13 ml of artificial tears or saline)
Gentamicin
Genta-Otic
Vetus
Gentaved Otic
Vedco
Gentocin Otic
Schering-Plough
Otomax
Schering-Plough
 Topagen Ointment
Schering-Plough
Tri-Otic
Med-Pharmex
Neomycin
Animax
 Pharmaderm
Coly-Mycin S Otic
Parke-Davis
Cortisporin Otic
Glaxo Wellcome
Derma 4 Ointment
Pfizer
Dermalone
Vedco
Derma-Vet
Med-Pharmex
Forte Topical
Upjohn and
Pharmacia
Neo-Predef
Upjohn and 
Pharmacia
Panolog
Solvay
Quadritop
Vetus
 Tres aderm
Merial
Tritop
 Upjohn and Pharmacia
Oflaxacin
Floxin Otic
Daiichi
Polymyxin B sulfate
Cortisporin
Glaxo Wellcome
 Forte Topical
 Upjohn and Pharmacia
Silversulfadiazine0.1%
Silvadene Creme
Marion
(Mix 1.5 ml of cream in 13.5 ml of distilled water)
Ticarcillin
Ticar 1 g vial
SmithKline Beecham
AppendixEar Product Formulary
397
Active Ingredients of Ear Products, Listed by Function-cont'd
(Mix with 2 ml of sterile water. Add 0.5 ml of this solution to 15 ml of artificial tears or
saline. Keep refrigerated. Use as ear drops for l week, then discard remaining solution.)
Freeze the remainder in 0.5-ml increments for future use; good for 90 days frozen.
Tobramycin
Tobradex Ophthalmic
Alcon
Tris-EDTA
TrizEDTA
DermaPet, Inc.
T8 Solution Ear Rinse
DVM
ANTIFUNGALS
Acetic acid-boric acid
DermaPet Ear/Skin
DermaPet, Inc.
Cleanser
Clotrimazole 1%
Lotrimin AF
Schering-Plough
Lortisone
Schering-Plough
Otomax
Schering-Plough
Tri-Otic
Med-Pharmex
Miconazole1%
Conofite
Mallinckrodt
Micazole
Vetus
Miconosol
Med-Pharmex
Nystatin 100,000 U/ml
Animax
Pharmaderm
Derma-4
Pfizer
Dermalone
Vedco
Derma-Vet
Med-Pharmex
Panolog
Solvay
Quadritop
Vetus
Zinc undecylenate
Fungi-dry-ear
Q.A. Labs
MITICIDALS
Fipronil
Frontline Top Spot
Merial
Ivermectin 1% injectable
Ivomec 1%
Merial
(0.1 ml/10 1b subcutaneously every 2 weeks for three injections)
Pyrethrins
Aurimite
Schering-Plough
Cerumite
Evsco
Eradimite
Solvay
Mita-Clear
Pfizer
Nolvamite with
Ft. Dodge
Nolvasan
Oticare-M Ear Mite
ARC
Treatment
Otomite Plus
Allerderm
Rotenone 0.12%
Mitaplex-R
Tomlyn
Rotenone 0.12% and
Ear Mite Lotion
DurVet
cube resins 0.16%
Ear Miticide
Vedco
 Ear Miticide
Phoenix
Thiabendazole
Tresaderm
Merial
868
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Ear Products Listed by Trade Names
Animax Ointment (Pharmaderm)
Active ingredients: Nystatin, neomycin sulfate, thiostrepton, and triamcinolone
acetonide in a nonirritating polyethylene and mineral oil base.
Aurimite (Schering-Plough)
Active ingredients: Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate 1.952%, benz0caine 1.952%,
technical piperonyl butoxide 0.49%, pyrethrins 0.04%. Inert ingredients
95.566%.
Baytril Injection Solution (Bayer)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter of injection solution contains enrofloxacin
 22.7 mg, n-butyl alcohol 30 mg, potassium hydroxide for pH adjustment, and water
for injection, q.s. (quantum sufficiat).
Bur-0-Cort 2:1 (Q. A. Labs)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains Burow's solution (astringent) 20 mg.
hydrocortisone (antiinflammatory, antipruritic) 10 mg.
Burotic HC (Q. A. Labs)
Active ingredients: Hydrocortisone 1%. Other ingredients: Propylene glycol, water,
Burow's solution, acetic acid, benzalkonium chloride.
CERUMITE (EVSCO)
Active ingredients: Squalane (hexamethyltetracosane) 25.00%, pyrethrins 0.05%,
technical piperonyl butoxide 0.50%. Inert ingredients 74.45%.
Chlora-Otic
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains chloramphenicol 4.2 mg, prednisolone
1.7 mg, tetracaine 4.2 mg, squalane 0.21 ml.
Chloromycetin Otic
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains 5 mg (0.5%) chloramphenicol in propy
lene glycol.
Appendix  Ear Product Formulary
399
Cipro HC Otic (Bayer)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains ciprofloxacin HCl (equivalent to 2 mg
ciprofloxacin), 10 mg hydrocortisone, and 9 mg benzyl alcohol as a preservative.
Clear X Ear Drying Solution (DVM)
Active ingredients: Acetic acid 2.5%, colloidal sulfur 2%, hydrocortisone 1%.
Coly-Mycin S Otic
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains colistin base activity 3 mg (as the sulfate),
neomycin base activity 3.3 mg (as the sulfate), hydrocortisone acetate 10 mg (1%),
thonzonium bromide 0.5 mg (0.5%), with polysorbate 80, acetic acid, sodium
acetate buffered at a pH of 5.
Conofite Lotion (Mallinckrodt)
Active ingredients: 1.15% miconazole nitrate (equivalent to 1% miconazole base by
weight), polyethylene glycol 400, and ethyl alcohol 55%.
CORT-ASTRIN Solution (Vedco)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains Burow's solution 20 mg, hydrocortisone
10 mg in a water-miscible propylene glycol base.
Cortisporin Otic Solution
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains polymyxin B sulfate 10,000 units,
neomycin sulfate 3.5 mg neomycin base, and hydrocortisone 10 mg (0.1%). The
vehicle contains potassium metabisulfate 0.1% and the inactive ingredients cupric
sulfate, glycerin, hydrochloric acid, propylene glycol, and water for injection.
Decadron Phosphate 0.1% (Merck)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains 1 mg dexamethasone phosphate. Inactive
ingredients: Creatinine, sodium citrate, sodium borate, polysorbate 80, disodium
edentate, hydrochloric acid to adjust pH, and water for injection.
Derma 4 0intment (Pfizer)
Composition: Each milliliter contains 100,000 umits of nystatin, neomycin sulfate
triamcinolone acetonide. Inert ingredients: Plastibase* 50-weight, 20%; mineral oil
USP, 80%.
*Plastibase tradermark of E.R. Squibb & Sons, Princeton, N.J.
400
SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Dermalone Ointment (Vedco)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains nystatin 100,000 units, neomycin sulfate
(equivalent to neomycin base) 2.5 mg. thiostrepton 2500 units, triamcinolone
acetonide 1 .0 mg, polyethylene and mineral oil gel base.
Derma-Vet Ointment
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains nystatin 100,000 units, neomycin sulfate
(equivalent to neomycin base) 2.5 mg, thiostrepton 2500 units, triamcinolone
acetonide 1.0 mg.
Epi-Otic HC (Virbac)
Active ingredients: Hydrocortisone 1%, lactic acid, and PCMX in a surface-acting
vehicle.
Ear Mite Lotion (Durvet)
Active ingredients: Rotenone 0.12%, cube resins 0.16%. Inert ingredients
99.72%.
Ear Miticide (Vedco)
Active ingredients: Rotenone 0.12%, cube resins 0.16%. Inert ingredients 99.72%.
Ear Miticide (Phoenix)
Active ingredients: Rotenone 0.12%, cube resins 0.16%. Inert ingredients 99.72%.
Eradimite (Solvay)
 Active ingredients: Pyrethrins 0.15%, piperonyl butoxide technical 1.50%. Inert
 ingredients 98.35%.
Floxin Otic (Daiichi)
Active ingredients: 0.3% (3 mg/ml) ofloxacin with benzalkonium chloride 0.0025%,
sodium chloride 0.9%, and water for injection. Hydrochloric acid and sodium
hydroxide are added to adjust the pH to 6.5.
Frontline Top Spot (Merial)
Active ingredients: Fipronil: 5-amino-1-(2,6-dichloro-4-[trifluoromethyl]phenyl)-
4-([1<R,S]-[trifluoromethy]sulfinyl)-1-H-pyrazole-3-carbonitrle 9.7%. Inert ingre-
dients 90.3%.
Appendix  Ear Product Formulary
401
Fungi-Dry-Ear (Q. A. Labs)
Active ingredients: Isopropyl alcohol, deionized water, silicon dioxide, zinc unde-
cylenate (undecylenic acid), methyl salicylate, PEG 75 lanolin oil, sucrose octyl
acetate, polysorbate 60, propylene glycol, acetic acid, FD & C blue #1.
Genta-Otic Solution (Vetus)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains gentamicin sulfate equivalent to 3 mg
 gentamicin base, betamethasone valerate equivalent to 1 mg betamethasone, 1 .0 mg
hydroxyethylcellulose, 2.5 mg glacial acetic acid, 200 mg purified water, 19%
ethanol, 9.4 mg benzyl alcohol as preservative, 300 mg glycerine and propylene
glycol q.s.
Gentaved Otic Solution (Vedco)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains gentamicin sulfate equivalent to 3 mg
gentamicin base, betamethasone valerate equivalent to 1 mg betamethasone, 1 .0 mg
hydroxyethylcellulose, 2.5 mg glacial acetic acid, 200 mg purified water, 19%
ethanol, 9.4 mg benzyl alcohol as preservative, 300 mg glycerine and propylene
glycol q.s.
Gentocin Otic Solution (Schering-Plough)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains gentamicin sulfate equivalent to 3 mg
gentamicin base, betamethasone valerate equivalent to 1 mg betamethasone, 1.0 mg
hydroxyethylcellulose, 2.5 mg glacial acetic acid, 200 mg purified water, 19% ethanol,
9.4 mg benzyl alcohol as preservative, 300 mg glycerine and propylene glycol q.s.
vomec 1% Injection for Cattle and Swine (Merck)
Active ingredients: 1% ivermectin, 40% glycerol formal, and propylene glycol, q.s.
at 100%.
Liquichlor (Evsco)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains chloramphenicol 4.2 mg, prednisolone
1.7 mg, tetracaine 4.2 mg, squalane 0.21 ml.
Lotrisone (Schering-Plough)
Active ingredients: Each gram contains 10.0 mg clotrimazole, 0.64 mg betametha
sone diproprionate (equivalent to 0.5 mg betamethasone) in a hydrophilic emollient
cream consisting of purified water, mineral oil, white petrolatum, cetostearyl, alcohol,
cetareth-30, propylene glycol, sodium phosphate, monobasic, and phosphoric acid.
402SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Micazole Lotion 1% (Vetus)
Active ingredients: 1.15% miconazole nitrate (equivalent to 1% miconazole base by
weight), polyethylene glycol 400, and ethyl alcohol 55%.
Miconosol Lotion 1%
Active ingredients: 1.15% miconazole nitrate (equivalent to 1% miconazole base by
weight), polyethylene glycol 400, and ethyl alcohol 55%.
Mita-Clear
Active ingredients: Pyrethrin 0.15%, piperonyl butoxide technical 1.50%, N-octyl
bicycloheptene dicarbox imide 0.50%, di-n-propyl isocinchomeronate 1.00%. Inert
ingredients 96.85%.
Neo-Predef (Upjohn and Pharmacia)
Active ingredients: Each gram contains isoflupredone acetate 1 mg (0.1%),
neomycin sulphate 5 mg (0.5%) (equivalent to 3.5 mg neomycin), anhydrous lano-
lin, white petrolatum, mineral oil. Chlorobutanol (chloral derivative) 0.65% added as
a preservative.
Nolvamite (Ft. Dodge)
Active ingredients: Pyrethrin 0.10%, piperonyl butoxide technical 1.05%. Inert
ingredients 99.85%. Contains Nolvasan as a preservative.
Oticare-M Ear Mite Treatment (ARC)
Active ingredients: Pyrethrin 0.15%, piperonyl butoxide technical 1.50%. Inert
ingredients 98.35%.
Otomax (Schering-Plough)
Active ingredients: Each gram contains gentamicin sulfate veterinary equivalent to
 3 mg gentamicin base; betamethasone valerate USP equivalent to 1 mg betametha-
sone; and 10 mg clotrimazole USP in a mineral oil-based system containing a
plasticized hydrocarbon gel.
Otomite Plus (Virbac)
Active ingredients: Pyrethrin 0.15%, piperonyl butoxide technical 1.50%, N-octyl
bicycloheptene dicarboximide 0.5%, di-n-propyl isocinchomeronate 1.0%. Inert
imgredients 96.85%.
Appendix  Ear Product Formulary  403
Panalog Ointment (Solvay)
Active ingredients: Nystatin, neomycin sulfate, thiostrepton, and triamcinolone
acetonide in a nonirritating protective vehicle, Plastibase (plasticized hydrocarbon
gel), a polyethylene and mineral oil gel base.
Quadritop Ointment (Vetus)
alent to neomycin base 2.5 mg), thiostrepton 2500 units, triamcinolone acetonide
1.0 mg.
Silvadene Creme 1%
Active ingredients: Each gram contains 10 mg micronized silver sulfadiazine. The
cream vehicle consists of white petrolatum, stearyl alcohol, isopropyl myristate,
sorbitan monooleate, polyoxyl 40 stearate, propylene glycol, and water.
Synotic Otic Solution (Ft. Dodge)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains 0.01% fluocinolone acetonide (6a, 9a-
difluoro-11b, 16a, 17, 21-tetrahydroxypregna-1, 4-diene-3, 20-dione, cyclic 16, 17-
acetal with acetone) and 60% dimethyl sulfoxide in propylene glycol and citric acid.
(Smithkline Beecham)
Active ingredients: Ticarcillin is a semisynthetic injectable penicillin derivative
supplied as a white to pale yellow powder for reconstitution.
Tobradex Suspension (Alcon)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains tobramycin 0.3% (3 mg) and dexa
methasone 0.1% (1 mg). Preservative: Benzalkonium chloride 0.0l%. Inactive
ingredients: Tyloxapol, edentate disodium, sodium chloride, hydroxyethyl cellulose,
sodium sulfate, sulfuric acid and/or sodium hydroxide (to adjust pH), and purified
water.
Topagen Ointment (Schering-Plough)
Active ingredients: Each gram contains gentamicin sulfate veterinary equivalent to
3 mg gentamicin base, betamethasone valerate equivalent to 1 mg betamethasone,
   ad go s   r e u h ss p
Benzyl alcohol is the preservative.
404 SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Tresaderm (Merial)
Active ingredients: Each milliliter contains thiabendazole 40 mg, dexamethasone
1 mg, neomycin (from neomycin sulfate) 3.2 mg. Inactive ingredients: Glycerin
propylene glycol, purified water, hypophosphorous acid, calcium hypophosphite,
about 8.5% ethyl alcohol, and about 0.5% benzyl alcohol.
Tri-Otic
Active ingredients: Each gram of gentamicin-betamethasone-clotrimazole ointment
contains gentamicin sulfate USP equivalent to 3 mg gentamicin base, betamethasone
valerate USP equivalent to 1 mg betamethasone, 10 mg clotrimazole USP in a
mineral oil-based system containing a plasticized hydrocarbon gel.
Tritop (Upjohn and Pharmacia)
Active ingredients: Each gram contains the potent antinflammatory agent isoflupre-
done acetate 1 mg (0.1%), the antibiotic neomycin sulfate 5 mg (0.5%) (equivalent to
3.5 mg neomycin), and the topical anesthetic tetracaine hydrochloride 5 mg (0.5%).
VoSol HC Otic
Active ingredients: Solution of acetic acid 2% in a propylene glycol vehicle containing
propylene glycol acetate (3%) and hydrocortisone (1%).
Ear Cleaners, Listed by Trade Name
Ace-Otic (Vetus)
Active ingredients: Acetic acid 2.0%, lactic acid 2.7%, salicylic acid 0.1%. In a
pH-buffered at 2.3 surface-active vehicle containing docusate sodium (DSS) and
propylene glycol.
Adams Pan-Otic (Pfizer)
Active ingredients: Purified water USP, isopropyl alcohol, aloe vera, diazolidinyl
urea, methylparaben, propylparaben, dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, octoxynol,
sodium lauryl sulfate, parachlorometaxylenol, propylene glycol USP, fragrance,
tetrasodium EDTA, FD&C blue #1.
Aloacetic Ear Rinse (DvM)
Ingredients: Water, acetic acid, nonoxynol-12, fragrance, methylparaben, DMDM
hydantoin, aloe vera gel, FD&C yellow #5, FD&C blue #1.
Burotic (Allerderm)
jum chloride.
Appendix Ear Product Formulary
405
Cerulytic (Allerderm)
Active ingredients: Benzyl alcohol and butylated hydroxytoluene in a propylene
glycoldicaprylate base with fragrance.
Cerumene (Evsco)
Active ingredients: Cerumene (squalane) 25% in an isopropyl myristate liquid
petrolatum base.
Clear X Ear Cleansing Solution (DVM)
Active ingredients: Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate 6.5%, urea peroxide 6%.
Corium 20 (VRx)
Active ingredients: Purified water USP, SDA-40B 23%, glycerol tri-esterified with
fatty acids, glycerine USP, fragrance, and B.H.A.
Corium TX (VRx)
Active ingredients: Pramoxine HCI (1%). Also contains purified water USP, SDA-40B
23%, glycerol tri-esterified with fatty acids, glycerine USP, Tween 80, fragrance, B.H.A.
DermaPet Ear/Skin Cleanser (DermaPet, Inc.)
Active ingredients: A multicleanse, acetic and boric acid solution with surfactants.
EarMed Cleansing Solution & Wash (Davis)
Active ingredients: 50A 40B alcohol, propylene glycol, cocamidopropyl phos-
phatidyl and PE dimonium chloride.
EarOxide Ear Cleaner (Tomlyn)
Epiotic Ear Cleanser (Allerderm)
Ingredients: Lactic acid and salicylic acid are present in encapsulated (spherulites)
and free forms. Chitosanide is present in encapsulated form. PCMX propylene
glycol and sodium docusate are present in free form. Also contains water, fragrance,
and FD&C blue #1.
Fresh-Ear (Q.A. Labs)
Active ingredients: Deionized water, isopropyl alcohol, propylene glycol, glycerine,
fragrance, salicylic acid, PEG 75 lanolin oil, lidocaine hydrochloride, boric acid,
acetic acid, FD&C blue #1.
406SMALL ANIMAL EAR DISEASES
Gent-L-Clens (Shering)
Active ingredients: Lactic acid and salicylic acid in a propylene glycol surface-
acting vehicle preserved with PCMX.
Nolvasan Otic (Ft. Dodge)
Active ingredients: Special solvent and surfactant.
Oticalm Cleansing Solution (DVM)
Active ingredients: Benzoic acid, malic acid, salicylic acid, and oil of eucalyptus in
a soothing solubilizing vehicle.
Otic Clear (Butler)
Active ingredients: Deionized water, isopropyl alcohol, propylene glycol, glycerine,
fragrance, salicylic acid, PEG 75 lanolin oil, lidocaine hydrochloride, boric acid,
acetic acid, FD&C blue #1.
Oticlean A Ear Cleaning Solution (ARC)
Active ingredients: 35% isopropyl alcohol, boric acid, salicylic acid, fragrance, PEG 75,
lanolin oil, acetic acid, propylene glycol, glycerine, and FD&C blue #1.
Oticlens (Pfizer)
Active ingredients: A clear, colorless liquid with an approximate pH of 2.3 prepared
from the following active ingredients: propylene glycol, malic acid, benzoic acid,
and salicylic acid.
Otipan Cleansing Solution (Harlmen)
Active ingredients: Propylene glycol, hydroxypropyl cellulose, octoxynol, and a
phosphate buffer system (phosphoric acid and potassium hydroxide). The pH is
adjusted to 2.5 or less.
Otisol (wysong)
Active ingredients: Copper chelate of chlorophyll,essential oils of eucalyptus, pepper-
mint, cajeput, juniper, wintergreen, clove, jojoba oil, aloe vera extract, benzocaine.
carbolic acid, and natural oleoresins, menthol in a coconut soap, sodium metasili-
cate, isopropanol base. Stabilized with rosemary extract and vitamin E.
Appendix Ear Product Formulary
407
Otisol 0 (Wysong)
Active ingredients: Copper chelate of chlorophyll, jojoba oil, aloe vera, armica, and essen-
tial oils of eucalyptus, peppermint, cajeput, juniper, wintergreen, clove, and menthol in
of vitamin E, botanical oleoresins, ascorbate oxidase, and glutathione peroxidase).
Otocetic Solution (Vedco)
Active ingredients: 2% acetic acid with surfactants.
T8 Solution Ear Rinse (DvM)
Ingredients: Purified water, USP, benzyl alcohol, nonox ynol-12, PPG-12/PEG-50,
 lanolin, tromethamine base, tromethamine HCl, and tetrasodium edetate.
TrizEDTA Aqueous Flush or Crystals (DermaPet)
Ingredients: Each 4-ounce bottle contains 112 ml distilled water, 533 mg
tromethamine (tris) USP, 141 mg edetate disodium dihydrate (EDTA) USP, buffered
to pH 8 with tromethamine HCl.
Wax-0-Sol (Life Science)
Active ingredients: 25% hexamethyltetracosane in mineral oil.
Zymox (Pet King Brands)
Ingredients: Lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, lactoferrin, hydrocortisone 1 %.
Ear-Drying Products
CLEARX Ear Drying Solution (DVM)
Active ingredients: Acetic acid 2.5%, colloidal sulfur 2%, hydrocortisone 1%.
Oticare B Drying Creme (ARC)
Active ingredients: 70% isopropyl alcohol, silicon dioxide, salicylic acid, boric acid,
acetic acid, propylene glycol, FD&C blue #1.
*xapu
3-Fr catheter, 285
Air-conduction hearing, elimination, 280
shroud, 295f
Airedales, hairy external ear canals, 5
5-Fr catheter, 285, 295
Air-filled bulla, fluid-filled bulla (contrast), 68f
5-Fr polypropylene catheter, usage.ee Myringotomy
Alaskarn Malarmutes
 5-Fr poly propylene urinary catheter
hypothyroidisrm predilection, 207
 3 %-Fr polypropylene urinary catheter, threading,
Syndrorme I, 257
294-295
zinc-responsive dermatosis, 211
usage, 295f
Alcohol-containing products, 331
Allergen-specific IgE, 212
A
Allergen-specific IgG, 212, 213
Abducens nerve, 344f
Allergic dermatitis, 2i2-214. See aiso Flea allergy
Abducens muclei, irmpact. See Eye rmoverments 
derrmatitis
Abducent rerves, 340
Allergic inhalarnt dermatitis (Atopy), 212-213
Ablation. See Ear canal; Intraoperative ear canal ablation;
clinical signs, 212
Total ear canal ablation; Tympanic mermbrane 
diagrosis/treatment, 212-213
rmodality. See Lasers
etiology/pathogenesis, 212
process, 360
All-vegetable hypoallergenic diet, 268
Abrorrmal CT findings, 93-99
Aloacetic Ear Rinse (DVM), 404
Abrormal cytology, 52-59
Alopecia. See Periodic alopecias; Siarmese cat; 
Abnormal radiographicfindings,86-91
Symrmetrical pinnal alopecia; Yorkshire Terriers
Abrormal tissue, biopsies, 362
areas. See Logs
Acantholytic cells, 38
areata, 260
Acaricidal drugs, toxicity, 24
cause, 245
Acaricidal spray, usage, 24-242
evolution, 260
Acarids, protection, 240
rmanifestation, 208
Accessory rerve (XI), I4f
reduction, 207
Ace-otic (Vetus), 405
visibility, 242
Acetate tape, usage, 242
Alveolar nerve. See Inferior alveolar nerve
Acetic acid sharmpoo, 270
Armerican Cocker Spaniel
Acetic acid-boric acid solution, cleansing effect, 183
cerurmen gland adenocarcinomas, 148f
Acid rmucopolysaccharides, 62
ear canal
Acidic solutions, avoidance, 296
opening, 148f
Acid-type ear cleaners, pain, 159f
turmors, prevalence, 72
Acquired folding. See Pinna; Siarmese cat
idiopathic prirmary seborrhea, 206
Acrylic head rack, 84f
inflarm matory stirmuli, physiologic responses, 69
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone
inherited disorders, 205
Actinic dermatitis, 243
Staphylococcus intermedius, infection, 148f
Actinic keratosis. See Ear
stenotic calcified ear canal, radiograph, 147f
Actinic reactions, 249
turmors, laser ablation, 148f 
Actinomryces, 44
Armerican Staffordshire Terriers, solar dermatitis, 249
Active cellsuppression, 30
Arminoglycoside antibiotics, 333t, 334t. See also
Actively replicating organisms (unipolar budding),
Nonarminoglycoside antibiotics
presence. See Malassezia pachydermatis
Aminoglycoside tobramycin, 297
Acute inflarn matory stirmulus, 64
Arminoglycosides, 297
Acute suppurative otitis media, 34
avoidance, 348
Adarms Par-Otic (Pfizer), 404
Armitraz
Adenocarcinoma, 70-71, 217
toxicity, 241
Adhesion molecules, 128
usage, 240
Adjunctive therapy, 175
Armoxicillin-clavulanic acid, 290
Adnexa, 358
Armpulla, 13f
Adnexal glands, types, 61 -62
Armpullary nerve, 2of. See also Lateral armpullary
Adnexal structures, 144
 nerve; Posterior arm pullarry nerve
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stirmulation test,
Anaphylaxis, 129, 13 1
209, 252
Anemia, symptoms, 251
 Advanced leishrmaniasis. See Gerrman Shepherd
Angioederma, 131, 132
Adverse drug reaction. See Cutaneous adverse drug
Anirmax Ointrment (Pharmaderm), 398
reaction
Arular cartilage, 2, 7
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)
illustration, 2f, 5f, 6f, 10f
background, 126
 proxirmal end, diarmeter, 91
sigralrment/history. See Cutareous AFR
Annular ligarment, proxirmal/distal borders, 9 If
Aedes spp., 243
Annulus (dorsal portion), pars flaccida (presence), 36f
Afghan hounds, hypothyroidism predilection, 207
Anmulus fibrocartilaginous, 9
AFR. See Adverse Food Reactions
Annulus fibrosis, 288f
Age, clinical feature/history, 254
Anoploura, 242
Aging process, 379
Aritibiotic resistance mechanisms, 290
*Page numbers followed by / indicate figures; , tables; b, boxes.
408
Index
409
Antibiotics, 335t. See also Aminoglycoside antibiotics;
Aural herm atorma—cont'd
Nonarminoglycoside antibiotics
operation, 163f
therapy, 178
repair, 352
treatrmenit, 164
treatrment, 355-358
Antifungal agents, 334t, 335t
Aural pathology, possibility, 384
Antifungal therapy, 178
Aural turmor rermoval. See Laser polypectormy
Antifungals, usage, 18, 298
Auricle, apex (concave surface). See Male Dobermarn 
Antigen-presenting cell, 1 30
Pinscher cross
Antihelix, 2f, 4f
Auricular cartilage, 2, 2f, 10f
Antinflarmmatory agents, 335t
Auricular hematomas, formation, 215
Antinflarmmatory therapy, 55, 59
Auricular vessels, tubus auris (relationship), 5f
Antirmicrobials. See Systermic antirmicrobials
Auriculopalpebral nerve, 9f 
therapy, 42
Auriculotermporal nerve, 14f
Antineoplastic agents,333t
Aurirmite (Schering-Plough), 399
Antiseborrheic treatrments. See Pruritus
Aurizon, usage, 182
Antiseptics, 334t
Autoirmmune diseases, 123
Antitragohelicine incisure, 2f
Avermectins, usage, 24 1
Antitragus
Azathioprin, 257
lateral process, 2f
Azithrormycin, 29 1
rmedial process, 2f, 4f
Anti-yeast treatment, 164
B
Apex, 2f, 4f
Baeillus, presence, 191
crusts/scales. See Fermale Malinois Shepherd
Bacillus spp.,192
Apocrine cyst
Bacteria, 54-56, 155. See also Grarm-negative bacteria;
debris, accurmulation, 156f
Grarm-positive bacteria
decormpression, laser usage, 156f
amount, 42
irmpact. See Vertical ear canal
growth, 143, 175
location, 154 
murmber/morphology, 190 
Apocrine glands
population, significance (determination), 194
cross-section. See Modified apocrine gland
secondary growth, 205f
cyst, 358
sensitivity, 1 77
drying, lipid secretion, 152f
Bacterial cell mermbrare, porosity (increase), 290
genetic predisposition. See Persian cat
Bacterial folliculitis, 256
Apocrine lipid secretion (clurmps), accurmulation, 151f
Bacterial germish, 272
Apocrine secretions, bacterial degradation, l67-168
Bacterial hypersensitivity, 270
Apocrine tubular glands, 154
Bacterial infections, 55, 161, 262
 Aqueous gentarmycin solution, placerment.
Bacterial otitis, 48, 258
See Tympanic bulla
cytology. See Severe bacterial otitis
Aqueous medications, impact, 1 22f
Bacterial overgrowth, 55
Aqueous penicillin G, 298
meutrophils, response, 57
Arachidonic acid concentration, decrease, 207
Bacterial proteases, liberation, 287
Arachnoid, 13f
Bacterial pyoderma, 132
Armpit pruritus, 212
Bacteroides, 29l, 321
Arthropod bites, 248
BAER. See Brain-auditory-evoked-resporse
Arthroscopic shaver, usage, 367
Basal cell apoptosis, 249
Arthus (Type IIl) reaction, I 14
Basal cell carcinormas, 217
Arthus-like irm rmediate hypersensitivity, I 15
Basal cell turmor, 59
Ascending respiratory infections, 307
Basal epithelial cells, involvement, 310
Ataxia, 322. See aiso Cats
Basal keratinocytes, 222
Atopic dermatitis, 112-1 14, 243-244
Basilar mermbrare, 20f
indication, 174f
Basset Hounds
Atopica, 114
ear-margin seborrhea, 252
Atopy, 132, 266. See aisc Allergic inhalant dermatitis
inherited disorders, 206
incidence. See Cocker Spaniels
Bathing procedure. See Pruritus
pathogenesis, theories, 212
Baytril injection solution, 398
treatment, 39
Beagle
Auditory canal, vertical/horizontal parts, 6f
bullae, transverse view, 96f
Auditory meats, occlusion, 206
chronic otitis externa, 96f
Auditory ossicles, 16
ear caral
structure, visualization, 93
facial wound, 157f
Auditory tube, 6f, 13f, 35
red rubber catheter, usage, 157f
drainage, 299
ear-margin seborrhea, 252
osteurm, 15
facial wound, iodin ated contrast rmediurm
wall, I4f
(infusion), 157f
Aural canal, masses (rermoval), 352
rmiddle ear, otoscopic exarmination, 96f
Aural hermatorma, 236-238. See αiso Canine aural
right external acoustic canal, diarmeter (increase), 96f
hermatorma; Golden Retriever
tail folds, absence, 142
cartilage lining, 355
traurmatic facial wound, 157f
fibrosis, interaction, 237
Bearm hardening, 93, 98f
history, 239f
artifact, 10lf, 346. See also Caudal fossa lesion
410
xapul
Before/after pictures, 386
Bulla (bullae)cont'd
Benign rmelanorma, 170
fluid, presence, 105f
Benign turmors, 186
flushing/suctioning, 295-297
Beta-lactarmase en zyrme-producing bacteria, 290
infusion, 298-300
Betarmethasone, usage, 18l, 330
treatment,299
Bichon Frise
level. See Dogs
trarsverse CT irmage, I0lf
 inner pinnae, erytherma/lichenification, 245f
lumen, opacity, 165f
Bilateral bullae thickening, 90f
rmedial wall, 282f
Bilateral ceruminoliths, identification.
rmedication, infusion, 296f
See Mixed-breed dog
Osteotormy, 3 14f, 372f, 373f. See aise Lateral bulla
Bilateral hyperintense volurme. See Tympanic bulla
osteotorny
Bilateral middle ear effusion, CT irmage. See Dogs
pathological changes, 37
Bilateral otitis, diagnosis. See Spayed fermale cat
polyp rmass, growth,309f
Bilateral symrmetrical hypotrichosis, 260 
Psewdomonas culture, 288
Biopsy
radiographs, 345
channel. See Video otoscope
series, 78
forceps. See Nasal biopsy forceps
structure. See Osseous tympanic bulla
usage, 366. See also Polyps
Tl -weighted sagittal irmage. See Spayed fermale cat
rnecessity, 206
term poral bones (petrosal portion), syrm rnetry
sarmples, 257
(comparison), 82
specimen, histopathologic analysis, 170f
thickening. See Bilateral bullae thickening
Biphasic Type I hypersensitivity reaction, 129
topical therapy. See Tympanic bulla
Blind-ended tube, usage, 60
 trarisverse view. See Beagle
Blood cormponents, release, 159
ventral displacerment. See Right bulla
Blood srmears, evaluatiorn. See Peripheral blood srmears 
walls
Blood vessel
caudal aspect, bilateral thickening, 88f
dermonstration/identification. See Pars flaccida
curvilinear signal void, 104f
forarmen, 2f
inner surface, enhancerment (rim), I04f
Bloodborne pathogens, hem atogenous spread, 195 
Bulldog
Blunt force injury, 158
chronic bilateral otitis, 87f
B-lyrmphocytes, 1 24 
external acoustic canals, exuberant bilateral
Borie
dystrophic calcification, 87f
forrmation. See Ear canal
solar dermatitis. See White Bulldogs
lining, thickening/irregularity, 68f
VD radiograph, 87f
rmargins, 79
Buprenorphine, 357
spicules, 200
Bur-O-Cort 2:I (Q.A. Labs), 398
window,usage,96f
Burotic (Allerderm), 405 
Bone tissue window, 95f
Burotic HC (Q.A. Labs), 399
Bone-conduction hearing, 280
Bony spiral larmina, 21
C
Bordetella, 286-287, 291
C branch, 3f
Boric acid, 183
Calcification, visibility, 68
shampoo, 270
Calciurm ions, chelation, 290-291
Boston Terriers, pattern baldness, 259
Calvariurm, caudal third, 8 1
Boxers,hypothyroidism predilection, 207
Canalogram, DV radiograph. See Mixed-breed hound dog
Brain-auditory-evoked-response (BAER),330,347
Carnalography. See Positive contrast carnalography
assessmert, 333
Candida aibicans, 54, 192
Brainstem turmor, MRI. See Dogs
prevalence, 180
Breakpoints, usage. See Mean-count breakpoints 
Canine aural hermatorma, 355f
Breed, clinical feature/history, 254
Canine ear, vasculature, 359f
Bristly hairs, inclusion. See Wax balls
Canine eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis, 243
Broad-based cerumen gland adenoma, 167f
Canine inflarmrmatory polyp, 326f
Broad-based cerurmen gland turmors, edema/tissue
Carine rasopharyngeal polyp, 325
rmaceration (confusion), 165f
Canine polyps, 325-328, 366f
Bruising, manifestation, 208
Carbencillin, 298
Buccal nerve, 14f
Carbirmazole, treatrment, 246
Buck curette, usage, 292
Carbon dioxide (CO)
Buck ear curette threaded retrograde. See Video Vetscope
ablation. See Hyperplastic cerurminous glands; Mass
Bull Terriers
delivery systerms, 353f
 pattern baldress. See Staffordshire Bull Terriers
energy, diode laser energy (comparison), 353-355
solar derrmatitis, 249
lasers, 351
zinc-responsive derrmatosis, 21 1
energy, 350, 363
Bulla (bullae), 344f. See aiso Tyrmpanic bulla
usage, 292, 370, 373
abserice. See Left septurm bullae 
treatrment. See Pinna
access, 39f
Carbonized tissue, creation, 366
air replacement, isotense fluid (irmpact), 104d
Carcinogenesis, increase, 168
anatormy/rermoval. See Left tympanic bulla 
Carcinormas, 1 70
contrast. See Air-filled bulla
Carotid artery. See External carotid artery
CT irmage. See Castrated rmale cat
carotid canal, accormrmodation. See Internal carotid
division, septurm bulla, 94f
artery
Index
411
Carotid canal, 14, 14f, 95f
Cats—cont'd
accorm modation. See Internal carotid artery;
severe ear mite infestation, 225f
Postganglionic sympathetic nerves; Ventral
unilateral nasopharyngeal polyp, 165f
petrosal verous sinus
unilateral persistent drainage. See Spayed fermale cat
Carotid plexus, 14
VD radiograph, 89f
Cartilage, 6lf
vitarmin A, rmetabolic conversion inability, 2 10
boundary, 6 If
wax plug rermoval, 23 If
fibrosis/calcification. See External ear canal
Cats (ears)
Cartilages. See Right external ear
ear mites, impact, 160f
Castrated rmale cat
excoriatiorn. See Male dormestic short-hair cat
bullae (level), CT image, 98f
Otodectes rmite infestation, otoscopic view, I 15f
rmandible (rostral third), fibrosarcorma diagnosis, 98f
wax/debris, accurmulation, 160f
ctitis, diagnosis, 98f
Caudal auricular nerve, 9f 
CAT. See Cormputed axial tomography
Caudal forarmen lacerurm, [4
Catheter
Caudal fossa
advance. See Video Vetscope
aggressive process, 100f
visualization, 34f
lesions, 107f
attachrment. See Tympanic bulla
bearm-hardening artifact, 100f
rmyringotomy, healing rate, 294f
Caudal inferior auricular nerve, 9f
positioning,39f
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, PSOM, 273
srmiler incision, 293f
Cavernous venous sinus, caudal continuation, Iof, 14
trurmpet valve connection, 33f
CBC. See Cormplete blood count
usage. See Corticosteroids; Myringotormy
Cefrmenoxime, 298
Cats
Ceftazidirne, 298
ataxia,319f
Cell surface receptors, 128
bullae (level)
Cell-mediated irmrmunity, 128
CT irmage, 98f. See also Castrated male cat
Cell-poor interface dermatitis, 249 
post-contrast transverse CT irmage, 94f
Cell-to-cell binding/interaction, 128 
cerurminous cysts. See Persian cat
Cell-to-matrix binding/interaction, 128
cerurminous gland carcinorma, 89f
Cellular defense systerm, 195
CT irmage, 97f
Central vestibular disease (CVD), 340, 342-344.
dermatophytosis, Microsporwrr canis (irn pact), 255f
See aiso Otitis interna
dirminished hearing, 228f
irmpact, 344f
ear canal
Cephalexin,usage,269
asopharyngeal polyp, occlusion, 320f
Cephalexin-induced permphigus foliaceus lesions, 247
wax, accumulation,319f
Cephalosporins, 298, 348
wax ball rermoval, 229f-230f
Cerebellar surface, 19
eardrurm
Cerebellurn, 344f
examination,231f
Cerebral surface, 19
granulomatous exudate, 38f
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 13f
fighting, history, 238
hyperintensity,102f
fleas, impact, 120f
perilymph, cormparison, 15
head
Cerulytic (Allerderm), 405
positioning. See U-shaped head holder
Cerurmen. See Dry cerurmen; Wet cerurmen
tilt,228f,319f
coating. See Epithelium
high-dry field, 54
composition, changes, 64
internal ear, schermatic view, 16f
contact. See External acoustic canals
middle ear, schermatic view, 16f
excess production, 143, 151-156
rmucoid otitis media, 28 If
exudates, presence, 97f
rmucus, pharyngeal drainage, 28 If
lipid
multiobulated polyp, 322f
corm position, alterations, 183
neck excoriation. See Male dormestic short-hair cat
content,189
normal eardrum, 28f
predominance, 49
opern-mouth rostrooccipital radiograph, 165f
plugs. See Miniature Schnauzer
otitis rmedia, 88f, 97f, 165f, 279f
presence, 36f, 95f, 190
PF, presence, 256f
types, 152
pinna
Cerurmen gland turmors. See Labrador Retriever
concave surface, erosive/crusted lesions, 256f
adenormas. See Ulcerated cerurmen gland adenormas
pinna, fibrosis/folding, 239f
confusion. See Broad-based cerurmen glarnd
polypoid rmass, diagnosis, 98f
tumors
polyps, eardrurm (absence), 320f
function ality, 162f
positive Wood's larmp ex armination, 255f
Cerurmen glands
prirmary otitis media, 286-287
aderocarcinorma. See Tyrm panic bulla
right external ear canal, large soft tissue mass
aderorma, 217, 218f. See aiso Broad-based cerurmen1
(serial CT irmages), 346f
gland adenoma; Dogs; Ear canal; Protruding
right pinna, concave surface, 237f
cerurmen gland adenoma; Solitary cerurmen 
right tympanic bulla, lysis (serial CT irmages), 346f
gland adenoma
rostral 30-degree ventral-caudodorsal
dilation/inflarnrmation, 21 8f
 open-mouth oblique radiograph, 85f
hyperplasia, 178f, 218f
rostroventral-caudodorsal closed-rmouth oblique
rmultiple openings. See Ear canal
radiograph, 88f
Cerurmene (Evsco), 405
412
apul
Cerurmirnoliths, 226-228
Chlora-Otic,398
grasping, endoscopic forceps (usage), 232f
Chlorhexidine, 331, 333
hardened concretion type, removal, 230 
Chlorhexidine gluconate, 331
identification. See Mixed-breed dog
Chlorormycetin Otic, 398
rmatrix
Chonchal cartilage, 6f 
eardrum, involvement, 232f
Chondroitin sulfate, 129
hairs, inclusion. See Poodle
Chondrosarcormas, 217 
presence. See German Shepherd
Chorda tyrmpani, 13f, 14f, 17, 18f
rermoval, 228-233
Chow Chow, hypothyroid disposition, 124, 207
Ceruminolytic, usage, 2f
Chronic bilateral ear infections. See Doberman Pinscher
Cerurminolytic agents, 153, 334t, 336t
Chronic bilateral otitis. See Bulldog
Cerurminolytic flushes, usage, 155
Chronic conective tissue changes,reatment,0
Cerurminolytic solvents, 335t, 336t
Chronic inflarmmation, 168
Ceruminolytics, 1 17
Chronic inflamrmatory changes, 97f
Ceruminous adenccarcinomas, 145
Chronic inflarmrm atory diseases, 64
Cerurminous cysts. See Persiar cat
Chronic inflarmrmatory otitis, 64-70. See aiso Cocker
Cerurminous exudates
Spaniels
accumulation. See Ear
Chronic otitis, 154
Demedex, presence, 177
Chronic otitis externa. See Beagle
Otdetes, presence, 177
characterization, 178f
Cerurminous glands, 7, 151, 204, 361
irmpact. See Fibrosis; Granulation tissue
adenocarcinormas, 1 70. See aiso American Cocker
Chronic otitis media. See Sheltie
Sparniel
extensive grarulation tissue, 3 14f
adenorma, 59
fibrosis, 314f
carbon dioxide ablation. See Hyperplastic
suppurativity, 278
cerurminous glands 
Chronic purulent otitis, 161
carcinorma. See Cats
Chronic unstable otitis media, 3 14f
cystic dilation, 216
Chronicity,212
dilation, 69f, 149
Chymases, 129
hyperplasia, 215-217, 361-364. See aiso Severe
Cipro HC Otic (Bayer), 398
cerurminous gland hyperplasia
Ciprofloxacin, 298
early stage, 151f
Citrabacter spp.,200
illustration, 69f, 36 1f
Clavulanate potassiurn, 331
irmpact. See Cocker Spaniels
Clawbed, PF irmpact, 256
illustration, 60f, 67f
Clearsers, usage. See Prurits
inflarmrm ation, 66f, 69f
Clear X Ear Drying Solution (DVM), 399, 405
rmetabolisrm, increase, 205f
Client
reoplasia, 87
benefits,383
secretion, 117
bills, 389
tissue
care, 381
close-up, photormicrograph, 63f
education, 387-389
response. See Cocker Spaniels
fees, 390
Cerurmirnious glandular hyperplasia, 65
follow-up, 391
Cerurminous neoplasms, histopathologic
interaction, 382
differentiation, 1 70
reeds, types, 382
Ceruminous otitis, 207
rejection,383
cause, 215
rerminders, 390-391
clinical signs, 206
trust, 381, 382
diagnosis, 206
waiting tirme, problerm, 388-389
environrmental/conformational causes, 219
Clindamycin,29
etiology, 204-205
Clastridium spp., 200
externa, 30f
Clotrirmazole, usage, 182, 330
resolution, 208
Coagulase-positive staphylococci, 194
treatrment, 206-207
Coagulation modality. See Lasers 
Cerurmite (Evsco), 398
Coagulopathies, 248
Cervical branch, 9f
Cobblestone adenomas. See Ear canal
Cervicoauricularis superficialis rmuscle, 3f
Cocci, presence, 176
Cervicoscutularis rmuscle, 3f
Coccoid bacteria, cluster. See Paired coccoid bacteria
Cheilitis, 243
Cochlea, 21, 95f. See also Initernal ear
Chermical ear cleaning, 179
abnormalities, 21
Chermotactic factor, 183
darmage, 330
Cheyletiella eggs, 242
hyperintense signal, 102f
Chiggers (Trormbicula), I 19, 241
sculpted medial view, 18f
Chihuahua
spiral ganglion, 20f
pattern baldness, 259
structure, visualization, 93
transverse CT irmage, 99f
Cochlear apparats, airbore sound waves
transverse TI -weighted spin-echo irmage.
(transrmission decrease), 347
 See Spayed fermale Chihuahua
Cochlear aqueduct, 13f
Chinese Crested dog, pinna (convex surface), 236
Cochlear auditory, 13f
Chloralrm phenicol, 348 
Cochlear nerve, 18f
Chlorarm bucil, 257
Cochlear prormontory, 12, 12f 
Index
413
Cochlear window, 12f-14f, 13
Corncretion, formation, 122f
margin, 18f
Concurrent leukocytes, 54
Cocker Spaniels
Concurrent otitis rmedia, suspicion, 57
atopy, incidence, 68-69
Conditioners, usage. See Pruritus
ceruminous gland response, 65
Condyles, zygormatic portion. See Mandible
cerurminous glands, 361
Congenital alopecia,259
tissue response, 69f
Conjunctivitis, 212
chronic inflarnrmation, histopathologic changes, 72
Conofite Lotion (Mallinckrodt), 399
chronic inflarmrm atory otitis, 68-70
Conscious proprioception (CP) tract, 344f
cormpound hair follicles, presence, 64
Cornitact derm atitis, 244 -246
ear canal opening, glabrous area, 236
Contagion, clinical feature/history, 254
ear mites, incidence, 68-69
Continuous-wave modality, 358
ear-margin seborrhea, 252
Contra lateral bulla, homogeneous fluid (presence), 107f
fibrosis, response. See Non-Cocker Spaniels
Contralateral extensor muscles (inhibition), lateral
food allergy, incidence, 68-69
vestibulospinal tract (irmpact), 342f
glandular tissue, increase, 142
Contrast agent, infusion, 286
horizontal canal, turmor mass (protrusion), 169f
Contrast enhancerment, 97f
hypothyroid disposition, 124
Contrast rmaterial
hypothyroidism predilection, 207
injection. See Labrador-Golden Retriever
middle ear, plant awns (retrieval), 121f
intravenous injection, 96
reoplasia, 72
Conventional radiography, 78-90
csseous metaplasia, CT scan, 68f
Corium 20 (VRx), 406
otitis externa, 30f
Corium TX (VRx), 406
predisposition, 153
Corynebacterium spp, 192
otitis rmedia, 12If
Corpus adiposum auriculae, 7
plant awns, retrieval, 121f
Cort-Astrin Solution (Vedco), 399
prirmary cerurminous gland hyperplasia, 361
Corticosteroids
single-hair follicular unit, close-up, 70f
infusion, catheter (usage), 150f
stenotic calcified ear canal, radiograph.
usage, 266. See aiso Otitis externa; Otitis rmedia;
Pruritus
See Armerican Cocker Spaniel
stenotic ear canal, 301
Cortisone-responsive hypersensitivity, 270
synthetic retinoid, usage, 207
Cortisporin Otic Solution, 399
vertical ear canal
Corynebacterium, 44, 200
ablation, 169f
Cosmetic ear trirmrming, decline, 142
stenosis, cerurminous gland hyperplasia
Cosrmetic otoplasty, 373-374
(impact), 147f
laser, assistance, 352
Coffee grounds exudate, I14
Cotton-tipped applicators (Q-tips)
Coiled gland, cross-section, 63f
irmpact. See Ear; Eardrum; Traurma
Cold agglutinin-related pinnal vasculitis, lesions.
insertion, 43
See Male Doberman Pinscher cross
 rmineral oil saturation, I 16
Cold weather, acclirmatization, 250
mopping motion, 112
tip sizes, 159
Coliforms, 44
Collagen
usage, 158, 176. See aiso Horizontal canal; Traurmatic
application, 238
rmyringotomy
Cotton-tipped swab
tissue, presence, 71f
Collagenases,liberation, 287
insertion, 37, 43
Collagenolysis, 249
usage,30
CP: See Conscious proprioception
Collies, ivermectin (nonusage), 269
Cranial cervical ganglion, 14f
Color dilution alopecia, 259
Cranial nerves, 344f
Coly-Mycin S Otic, 400
Cran iormandibular osteopathy, 78, 86. See aiso Scottish
Cormedone form ation, manifestation, 208
Terrier
Cormrmensal organisms, 177
CT assessrment, 96
Cormplete blood count (CBC), 209
Crusted lesions. See Cats
Compost areas, enclosures, 242
Crusts, 133
Cormputed axial tormography (CAT) scan, 284
presence. See Male Doberman Pinscher cross
Cormputed tormography (CT), 92-99, 345, 370
reduction, 207
assessrment. See Craniormandibular osteopathy;
Crusty/scaly derrmatoses, 253-258
rasopharyngeal polyps; Neoplasia; Otitis
Cryofibrinogenemia, 251-252
dorsal plane reconstruction, I07f. See aiso Dogs
Cryoglobulinermia, 25 1-252
findings. See Abnormal CT findings; Norrmal CT
Cryptococcus, 192
findings
CSF. See Cerebrospinal fluid
irmage. See Cats: Term pororm andibular junction; 
CT. See Computed tormography
Dogs; Transverse CT irmage
Culex spp., 243
scar, 28 2
Cupula, 18f
superimposition. See Inner ear; Middle ear
Curettes, usage, l60, 167. See also Buck curette
technique, 92-93
Cushing's disease, 123
usage, 78
Cutaneous adverse drug reaction, 246-247
Concave pinna
Cutareous adverse food reaction, 132
derrmatoses, 258-259
diagrosis, 134
hyperplastic epithelium, 145f
differential diagnosis, 133
lesions, 258
double-blinded study, 135
414
xapul
Cutaneous AFR, signalrmernt/history, 131 - 132
Derma-Vet Ointrment, 400
Cutaneous faci muscle, 6f
Dermis, 6lf
Cutaneous hermangiorma, 358
ceruminous glands, position, 62
Cutaneous hermangiosarcoma, 358
follicular units, sparsity, 71f
Cutareous rmarginal pouch, 4f
Desquamated glandular epithelial cells, disintegration,
Cutting-edge needle, 373
151
CVD. See Central vestibular disease
Desquarmation products, accurmulation, 228
Cyclic alopecia, 259
Detergents
Cystic apocrine glands, genetic predisposition.
irritation,179
See Persiari cat
usage, 297
Cystic ceruminous glands, 154
Dexarmethasore
Cystic structures. See Ear canal; Pinna
depression effect, 301
Cytokines, 129
suppression tests, 209
release, I29
usage, 181, 182
Cytologic evaluation, 26 1
Diethyl ether, irritation, 245
Cytologic findings docurmentation, rmedical record
Diff-Quik stain (Baxter Scientific Products), 37, 44
insert, 48f
Digastricus rmuscle, 6f
Cytologic smears, 228
Dilute fluorescein solution, 285
Cytologic specimen, staining technique. See Ear
Dilute povidone-iodine solution
Cytological evaluation, 37-39. See aiso Otitis externa
infusion, 285
Cytology, 42-48. See also Abnormal cytology; Normal
cytology
rasal drainage, 285f
usage, 31, 35, 179, 292. See also Ear canal
culture, cormparison. See Otitis externa
Dirmethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 182, 324
technique, 42-48
Cytoseal60 (Richard Allen Scientific), 37
usage, 332
Dioctyl sodiurm sulfosuccinate (DSS), 179
Cytotox ic drugs, 206-207
Diode fiber, prepositioning, 368
D
Diode laser, 351
coagulation, 362f
Dachshunds
ear-rmargin seborrhea, 252
energy, 360, 363
cormparison. See Carbon dioxide
hypothyroidisrm predilection, 207
fiber (600 micron), 354f
iniherited disorders, 206
 pattern baldress, 259
myringotomy, 370f
Dalrmatians, solar dermatitis, 249
usage, 360, 370. See aiso Polyps
 Diode-wavelength laser energy, 350
Dalton, armount, 131
Darmaged tissue, surgical excision, 250
Discoid lupus erythermatosus, 256
Debulking, biopsy forceps (usage). See Polyps
Disease conditions, wall posters, 387
Decadron Phosphate 0. 1 % (Merck), 399
Distal ganglion (IX), 14f
Delayed ototoxicity, 332
Diuretics, 335t
Dermatological conditions, 123
DMSO. See Dirmethyl sulfoxide
Dermodectic mange, I19
Doberman Pirnscher
Demodex, presence. See Cerurminous exudates
 chronic bilateral ear infections, 86f
Demodex canis, 216
ear-margin seborrhea, 252
Demodex cati, I19, 216
elevated estradiolermia, 26 If
Demodex follicwlorum, I 19
hypothyroidism predilection, 207
presence. See Mineral oil
otitis, 142
Demodex identification, 48
pinnal alopecia, 261f
Demedex mites, 216
Syndrorne II, 21 1
topical treatment, 119
testicular tumor, 26 If
Demodex spp., 58
VD radiograph, 86f
Demodicosis, 256
zinc-responsive derrmatosis, 211 
DepoMedrol (Pfizer), I 14, 272
Docurmentation capability, 33
Derrma 4 Ointrment (Pfizer), 399
Dogs
Derrmal changes, 249
 bilateral middle ear effusion, CT irmage, 345f
Derrmal curette (6 mrm), placerment. See Turmor rmass
brainsterm turmor, MRI, 346f
Dermal ederma, 64
CT dorsal plane reconstruction, l0lf
Dermalone Ointment ( Vedco), 400
ear canal, aratomy, 26f
DermaPet Ear/Skin Cleariser (DermaPet, Inc.), 267,
ear srmear
268, 270, 405
Malassezia, rmodified Wright-Giermsa stain, 194f
Dermatitis. See Allergic derrmatitis; Allergic inhalant
Otodectes cynotis, gravid fermale, 190d
derrm atitis; Atopic dermatitis; Contact
Psewdomonas, gram stain, 193f
derm atitis; Flea allergy dermatitis; Insects
staphylococci, modified Wright-Giemsa stain, 193f
Dermatophytes,transmission,254
end-stage otitis externa, 67f
Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma, 254
external ear muscles, 3f
Dermatophytosis, 253-256
fleas, irmpact, 120f 
clinical features/history, compatibility, 254
generic food dermatosis, 258f
Microsporum canis, irmpact. See Cats
head (transverse section), tyrmpanic bulla level, I0f
treatrment,255-256
high-dry field, 54
Derrmatosis/derrmatoses. See Crusty/scaly derrmatoses;
hyposensitization, 1 76f
Ear; Parasitic dermatosis; Pruritic dermatoses;
left ear canal, atopic dermatitis, 176f
Vitarmin A-responsive dermatosis;
left external ear, ar atorm ical features, 4f
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
normal bulla
Index
415
Dogs—cont'd
Ear—cont'd
normal bulla—cont'd
Proteus spp., 204
TI-weighted transverse irmage, 102f
dds sououopnasd
T2-weighted trarsverse irmage, 102
scratching, impact, 132. See aise Hypotrichosis
normal ear canal, 25f
service, rmarketing, 378
normal left eardrurm, 28f 
skin diseases, impact, 39, 175f
pinnae/face, alopecia/hy perkeratosis/
solar dermatitis (sunburn), 249-250
hyperpigmentation,258f
trauma, 156-161
right ear canal, atopic derrmatitis, 176f
treatrment station, 36f
rostral 30-degree ventral-caudodorsal
ulceration. See Poodle
open-mouth oblique radiograph, 85f
unilateral persistent drainage. See Spayed fermale cat
secondary otitis rmedia, 176f, 287
wax, 7
transverse FLAIR irmage, I06f
Ear canal. See Horizontal ear canal; Normal ear;
tyrmpanic mermbrane anatomy, 1If
Stenotic ear canals; Vertical ear canal
vertical canal, cerurmen gland adenorma, 328f
ablation, 87f, 371 -373. See also Intraoperative ear
vertical ear canal, cross-section, 67f
canal ablation; Total ear canal ablation
wax ball extraction, Video Vetscope working channel
performing, failure, 106f
en s sou)
anatormy. See Dogs
Dorsal buccal nerve, 9f 
assessment, 30-31
Dorsal scala vestibuli, 21
bone form ation, 67f
Dorsolateral compartrment, separation, 85f
calcification, 273
Dorsoventral (DV) axis, orientation, 27f
Lorsoventral (DV) projections. See Radiography
cerurmen glands
aderormas, 217f
Dorsoventral (DV) radiograph. See Middle ear;
rmultiple openings, 204f
Mixed-breed hound dog
changes, 180
Dorsoventral (DV) view, 78
cleaning, 307
contrast. See Ventrodorsal view
cobblestone adenomas, 166f
taking, 90
cobblestone appearance, 65
Dried medication, irmpact, 122f
color changes, 30
Drug reaction. See Cutaneous adverse drug reactior
contrast rmaterial, accumulation, 157f
Dry cerumen, 152f
Dry wax, accurmulation. See Ear canal
cystic structures, 155f
diarmeter, reduction, 361
Drying agents, usage, 122
DSS. See Dioctyl sodiurm sulfosuccinate
dry wax, accurmulation, 143f
dryness, exarmination, 299f
Dura mater, 13f
eardrurm, attachment,88f
DV. See Dorsoventral
DVM Exclude, 135
epithelial cells,migration,225f
epitheliurm,156,227f
Dyskeratosis, 72
Dystrophic alopecia, 259
tumors, attachment, 328f
Dystrophic mineralizatior, scattered foci, 96f
exarmiration, 24, 27f, 179-180
exudates, 30
E
crust formation, I 15f
Ear
facial opening, 143f
actinic keratosis, 249-250
fibrosis, 146f
anatormy, slices (requirerment), 93f
flushing, 31, 178-179
blood, presence. See Kitten
dilute povidone-iodine solution, usage, 225f
blood supply, increase, 205f
foreign bodies, 30
care, marketing, 392
hair
cerurminous exudates, accurmulation, 225f
excess, 30
cropping techniques, 373
interference, 5
cytologic specirmen, staining technique, 45f
presence, 150-151
discharge, 132
histopathologic section, 146f
disease, treatment (decision-making process), 37
histopathology, 2 18f
drooping, 17
horizontal part, central axis, I0f
epithelial surface (denuding), cotton-tipped
hyperplastic epithelium, 146f 
applicator (irmpact), 159f
inflarmrmation, reduction, 150f
excoriation. See Male dormestic short-hair cat
irrigation, 363
flushing, 246
irritation, 8
products, 287
large soft tissue mass (serial CT irmages). See Cats
iatrogenic perforation. See Poodle
lining
infections, Tris-EDTA ear solution (usage).
irritation, 226
See Grarm-negative ear infections
skin cells, migration, 143
Malassezia pachydermatis, 204
liquid, presence, 324f
rmargin, dermatoses, 247253
lurmen, visibility, 60f, 61f
rmites, 114-118
malignarit reoplasms, 168
debris, rermoval, 225f
rmicroclirmate, 195
infestation, 176. See aiso Cats
mucoid debris, 306f
MRI, 284
neoplasia, 70-72, 161-171
odor, 1 32
occlusion, 34
ossicles, 15
otitis media. See Ulcerated ear canal
synovial joint formation, 1 3f
Otobius tick, presence, I 19f 
Otodectes rmites, infestation (otoscopic view). See Cats
parasites, 30
416
xapul
Ear canal—cont'd
Eardrum—contd
proliferative changes, 30
bulge, 34, 272. See aiso Gerrman Shepherd; Golden
protruding cerurmen gland adenoma, 166f
Retriever puppy
radiograph. See Armerican Cocker Spaniel
conicretion. See Poodle
resection. See Lateral ear canal resection;
darmage, 178
Postoperative total ear canal resection;
epithelial migration, dermonstration, 223f-224f
Preoperative total ear carnal resection 
exarmination, 23lf. See aiso Cats
laser, assistance, 352
granulormatous exudate. See Cats
rougherned surface, 205f
healing, 311f, 313f, 314f
routine cleaning, 163
India ink, rmoverment, 223f-224f
scraping, 158-159
induced acute peforations,healing mechanism,09
solitary cerumen gland adenoma, 166f
involverment. See Cerurminoliths
stenosis, 34. See aiso Pugs; Shar-Peis
pathological changes, 37
structure, 6f, 7-9
perforation, 35
surgery, surgical trauma, 158
peripheral perforation, 308f
surgical opening, 205
popping, cotton-tipped applicator (irm pact), 1 60f
swelling, 144f
pressure, increase, 278f
ticks, presence, 118f
serous fluid, presence, 278f
tissue, white blood cells (presence), 67f
shape/color change, 38f
traurma, 143
soft wax ball, attachment, 226f
turmors, 30, 217-219
thickening, 308f
tympanic rmermbrane, 9-11
vaporization, laser myringotomy (usage), 294f
ulcerations, 30
vertical ear canal, cerurmen plug (extension).
vertical part, 10f
See Miniature Schnauzer
viewing, 32f
Eardrurm rupture, 232. See aise German Shepherd;
wax accurmulation. See Cats
Mixed terrier; Sheltie
excess, 30
analysis, 285-286
wax ball rermoval. See Cats
causes, 306-309
wax plug (eardrurm level). See German Shepherd
healing
working channel, usage, 35f
interruption, otitis media (impact), 312-314
Ear cleaners. See Ototoxicity
process, 309-311
overtreatrment, 149
Ear-drying products, 407
Early sarcoptic mange,249
pain. See Acid-type ear cleaners
trade narme, 404-406
Ear-rmargin seborrhea, 252. See aiso Basset Hounds;
Ear cleaning,271.ee alsChemical ear cleaning
Beagle; Cocker Spaniels; Dachshunds;
Mechanical ear cleaning; Middle ear
Doberrman Pinscher; Springer Spaniels
EarMed Cleansing Solution & Wash (Davis), 405
process, explanation, 271
Tris-EDTA ear solution, usage, 271
EarOxide Ear Cleaner (Tormlyn), 405
Ear Mite Lotion (Durvet), 400
Ectasia, 66f
Ectoparasites, removal. See Pruritus
Ear rmites. See Cats
Ectopic hairs, 122-123
recurrence, 228f
Ear Miticide ( Vedco), 400
Eczerma, 131
Ederma, 42. See aiso Derrmal ederma
Ear pinna
confusion. See Broad-based cerurmen gland turmors
concurrent greasiness, 210
laser drain perforations, creation, 356f
progression, 68
reduction, 149
postoperative appeararce, 357f
Edermatous ear canal. See Gerrman Shepherd
Ear products, 385
active ingredients, 395-397
EicosaDerrm, 269
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 268-269
forrmulary, 396
Ektascan M filrm (Kodak), 78
trade rarmes, 398-404
Elastases, liberation, 287
Ear srmear
Elastic cartilages, 2
Malassezia, rmodified Wright-Giermsa stain. See Dogs
Electrocautery, 369
Otodectes cynotis, gravid fermale. See Dogs
Elevated estradiolermia. See Loberrman Pinscher
Psewdomonas, grarm stain. See Dogs
Elirmination diet trial, 137
staphylococci, rmodified Wright-Giermsa stain.
ELISA. See Enzyrme-linked irmrmunosorbent assay
See Dogs
End-differentiated epithelial cells, basket-weave 
Ear therapy, 270-273
appearance, 60f
cormplications, 272-273
Endocrine derrmatosis, 207-209
culture/sensitivity, 273
Endocrine disease, 260
steps, 271-273
Endocrine disorders, 123
surgery, 273
Endocrinologic skin conditions, 154
systermic therapy, 272
Endocrinopathy, 259, 261
topical therapy, 271-272
Endolymph, 15, 21
Tris-EDTA ear solution, usage, 273
Endolymphatic duct, 13f
Eardrurm. See Dos
Endoparasites, rermoval. See Pruritus 
absence, 36f. See also Cats
Endoscope. See Rigid endoscope
acute perforation. See Kittern
Endoscopic biopsy tool ( l.8 rmm), placerment.
annulus, 26f
See Video Vetscope
assessrment, 34-39
 Endoscopic forceps. See Grasping-type endoscopic
attachrment. See Ear canal
forceps
blood supply, 29f
usage. See Cerurminoliths
Index
417
Endoscopic grasping forceps, usage. See Logs; Polyps
Epitympanic recess, I0f, 13f, 95f
End-stage inflarmrmatory otitis externa, 68
location, I3
End-stage otitis externa. See Dogs
widening, 98f
changes, 66
Equilibriurn dialysis (fT4), 124
histopathologic changes, 69
Equiprment, usage, 385-386
English Bulldog
Eradirmite (Solvay), 400
hypothyroidisrm predilection, 207
Erosions, i33,258
tail fold pyoderma, 142
visibility, 242
English Springer Spaniels
Erosive bone disease, 346
lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatosis,206
Erosive lesions. See Cats
English Springer Spaniels, inherited disorders, 205
Erytherma, 258. See aise Bichon Frise; Golden Retriever
Enhanced rmeninges, 94f
rmultiforme, 123
Enophthalrmos, 17
visibility, 242
Enroflox acin (Baytril Otic), 182, 269, 289, 298.
Erythematous dermatitis, 254
See aiso Oral enroflox acin
Escherichia coli, 19l, 192, 200
injection, 300
Essential oils, irritation, 245
topical otic solution, 182
Estradiolermia. See Doberrman Pinscher
Enterobacter spp.,200
Estrogen-responsive derm atoses, 209
Enterococc5,44
Ethylenediarmine tetraacetic acid-tris (Tris-EDTA)
Environrmental allergen-induced atopic dermatitis, 1 32
Aqueous Flush or Crystals (DermaPet), 407
Enzyme-linked irmrmurosorbent assay (ELISA), 213
ear solution, usage. See Ear; Grarm-negative ear
Eosinophil, presernce. See Paired coccoid bacteria
infections
Eosinophilic chermotactic factor, 129
flushes. See Shih-Tzu
Eosinophilic furunculosis, 243
germish, 272
Eosinophilic granulormas, 133
microbiocidal properties, 273
cormplex lesions, 212
usage, 184
Eosinophilic plaques, 133
Etretirate, usage, 207
Eosinophilic vasculitis, 132-133
Eustachiarn tube. See German Shepherd
EPA. See Eicosapentaenoic acid
material, draining, 280
Epiderrmal barrier function, alteration, 64
obstruction, 195
Epidermal collarettes, 256
Eutrombicwla alfreddugesi, 58, 241
Epidermal dysplasia, 206
Excess stain, rermoval, 47f
Epidermal hyperplasia, 68, 205, 210
Excoriation, cause, 245
Epidermal proliferation, alteration, 207
Exocytosis, 56
Epidermis, desquarmation process, 188
Exotoxins,production55
Epinephrine, application, 238
Exposure keratitis, 280
Epiotic Ear Cleanser (Allerderm), 405
Externsive fibrosis. See Horizontal ear canal
Epi-otic HC (Virbac), 400
Extersor muscles, lateral vestibulospinal tract
Epithelial cells
irnpact. See Contralateral extensor muscles
basket-weave appeararce. See End-differentiated
support. See Ipsilateral lirmb
epithelial cells
External acoustic canals
disintegratior. See Desquarmated glandul ar epithelial
cerurmen, contact, 94f
cells
exuberant bilateral dystrophic calcification.
migration, 60-6l. See also Ear canal
See Bulldog
presence, 34. See also Keratinized epithelial cells
horizontal portion, cerurmen (presence), 95f 
surface, dehydration, 183
rarrowness, 86f
Epithelial folds
obliteration, soft tissue opacity, 89f
polyps, rmolding. See Labrador Retriever
External acoustic meatus, 12f, 13f 
presence, 146f
body orbit, 7
Epithelial hyperplasia, 277
dorsal location. See Left external acoustic meatus
Epithelial layer, 60f
dorsal position. See Tynpanic bulla
thickening, 66f
dorsal wall, 14f
Epithelial lining, ulceration, 55-56
gas-filled stucture,79
Epithelial migration, 143, 222-223
level, hormogeneous space, 98f
dermonstration. See Ear canal
presence, 80f
failure, 153, 222-226
skin, IIf
impact,225f
visualization, 85f
loss, 42
External auditory canal (dermis), inflamrmatory
origination, 63
cell infiltration, 179
prevention, 226-227
External canal, normal histoar atomy, 60-63
process, rate, 232
External carotid artery, 7
Epithelial parakeratosis, 215
External ear
Epithelial proliferation, 178f
blood supply, 7-8
Epithelial surface (denuding), cotton-tipped applicator
leaf-shaped pirna, 3
(irnpact). See Ear
nerves, 8-9
Epithelial turmor, 59
otoscopic exarmination, 88f
Epithelium. See Ear canal; Respiratory epithelium
sensory branches, supply, 9f
appearance. See Horizontal ear canal
strcture, 2-7
blood vessel supply, 28f
External ear canal, 327f
cerurmen coating, 24
calcification, 345
pathologic changes, 178f
cartilage, fibrosis/calcification, 133
Rhipicephalus tick, attachrment, 1 I1 8f
contarmination, 295f
418
Index
External ear canal—cont'd
Fermale Malinois Shepherd
histopathology, 204
apex, crusts/scales, 247f
microbiology, 189-194
vasculitis, 247f
microclirmate, 188-189
Ferrormagnetic foreign rmaterial, impact, I01-103
neoplasia, 58-59
Fibroblasts, 10
otitis externa, nonpresence
Fibrocartilaginous ring, 9
microbial flora, surmmary, 196t-197t
connection, 63
otitis externa, presence
Fibropapilloma, 356
microbial flora, surmmary, 1 98t-1 99t 
Fibropruritic nodules, 214 
pH, 189
Fibrosarcormas, 59, 217, 358. See aiso Middle ear
Psewdomonas culture, 288f
diagnosis. See Castrated rmale cat
structure, 188
Fibrosis, 68, 178f. See aiso Ear canal
visualization, 83f
chronic otitis externa, irmpact, 148f
Extermal ear rmuscles. See Dogs
excess, 310
External epiderrmal layer, 10
irmpact. See Inflarmrmation; Tissue rmass increase
External parasites, 356
interaction. See Aural hermatorma
Exuberant bilateral dystrophic calcification. See Bulldog
Fibrous connective tissue, contracture, 156
Exudates
Fibrous tissue
drainage, 39f
inflarmmation, absence, 71f
presenice, 301
response pattern, example, 71f
sermiquantitative cytologic evaluation, 191
Fight wourds, 248, 249
Eye moverments
Fine-needle aspirate, usage, 58
abducens muclei, impact, 341f
Finger lesion, 282
oculomotor nuclei, irmpact, 34 1f
Fipronil (Frontline TopSpot, Merial), I 15, I 18.
trochlear nuclei, irmpact, 34 If
See alse Topical fipronil
Eye rmoverments, vestibular control, 341f
usage, 240
Eyeball
FTV. See Feline im munodeficiency virus
irward roll, 279f
FLAIR. See Fluid-attenuation inversion recovery
recession, 17
 FLASH. See Fluid-attenuation spoiled gradient echo
Eyelid opening, size, 279f
Flat turmors, appearance, 163
Flea allergy derrmatitis, 132, 214, 242
F
diagnosis/treatrment, 214
Fabricius, 129
Flea cormbing, 214
Face rubbing, 212
Flea dirt, 214
Facial canal, 12f
Flea-control measures, I14 
Facial muscles, rmotor branches, 5f
Fleas
Facial nerve, 8
control. See Pruritus
brarches, 5f, 17
irmpact. See Cats; Dogs; Pruritic ears
darn age, 276
Floxin Otic (Daichi), 400
illustration, 6f, 18f, 20f, 344f
Fluid pressure gradient, 289
location, 13f
Fluid-attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR)
path, 5f, 343
irmage, I03. See also Dogs; Labrador Retriever
sensory branches, schermatic drawing, 9f
protocols, 103
vagal nerve, cormrmur ication, 8
sequences, 105
1‘I
Fluid-attenuation spoiled gradient echo (FLASH)
Facial pruritus, 247
irmage, 103
False middle ear, 29, 282
protocols, 103
False-positive reactions, level, 213
sequences, 105
Falx cerebri, 94f
transverse irmage. See Spayed fermale cat
Farmilial cutareous vasculopathy. See Gerrman Shepherd
Fluid-filled bulla, contrast. See Air-filled bulla
Fatty acid
Fluocinolone (Synotic), usage, 18l, 182, 192, 324
deficiency, 209-210
Fluocinolone/DMSO bulla infusion, 325
substrates, rermoval, 183
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics, 175
supplermentation. See Pruritus
Fluoroquinolones, 298
Fatty acid-deficient diet, 210 
Flush solution, 34f
FDA. See U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Flushing, independent function, 3f
Fecal flotation specirmens, 48
Flush/suction device, usage. See Tympanic bulla
Feet, PF irmpact, 256
Foarn wedge, usage, 79f
Felicola subrostrata, 242
Focal-to-truncal alopecia, 212
Feline calicivirus, 321
Follicles
Feline herpesvirus-1, 321
cross-section, 60f
Feline irn rmunodeficiency virus (FTV) status, 318
presence, photormicrograph. See Srmall hair follicles
Feline inflarm matory polyp, 325
Follicular casts, 252
Feline leukermia virus (FeLV) status, 318
Follicular dysplasia, 259
Feline polyps, 318. See aiso Middle ear
Follicular keratinocytes, 249
 Feline retropharyngeal polyps, 365
Follicular keratosis, 252
FeLV. See Feline leukermia virus
Follicular units, sparsity. See Dermis
Fermale atopic Labrador
Folliculitis, 253
inner pinnae, intense pruritus, 244f
Fomites, 254
otitis externa, 244f
Food allergy, I14, 244. See aiso Bichon Frise
secondary Malassezia dermatitis, 244f
determination, guidelines, 1 38b
Index
419
Food allergy—cont'd
Gerrman Shepherd—cont'd
open eustachian tube, 306f
diagnosis, 133-137
otitis rmedia, 38f
physical findings, 132-133
presence, 233f
signalrment/history, 13 1- 132
painful ear, exarmination, 233f
treatment, 39,137
pinnae, involverment, 254f
Food elirmination diet. See Pruritus 
Germarn Short-Haired Pointers, Syndrorme II, 211
Food hypersensitivity, 212-214, 244, 266
Germinal epithelium, 309
clinical signs, 213
GI. See Gastrointestinal
diagrosis/treatment, 213-2 14
Gland ratios, variation, 62
Food intolerarce, 244
Glandular hyperplasia, 42, 68, 179, 277
Food-allergic dogs, 268
Glandular secretions, usage, 205f
Foot licking/chewing, 212
Glass slides
Footpads
rinsing, 47f
hyperkeratosis, 211
usage, 45f
hyperkeratotic plaques, 258
Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX), 14f, 18
PF irmpact, 256
Goblet cells, I5. See also Mucus-secreting goblet
Forarmen. See Blood vessel; Oval forarmen
cells
Forarmen lacerurm, 12f, 14f
Golden Retriever. See Labrador-Golden Retriever
Forarmina, symrmetry. See Oval forarmina
erythema,257f
Foreign bodies, 262. See aiso Ear canal
head shaking, cure, 163f
removal, 35f
hypothyroid disposition, 124
Foreign material, 12l-122
inrer pirnae, pustules (presence), 257f
Free fatty acids, inflarmmation triggers, 155
PF, presence, 257f
Free thyroxine (T4), I24
recurrent aural hermatormas, 163f
Fresh-Ear (Q.A. Labs), 405
Golden Retriever puppy
Frontalis rmuscle, 3f
eardrurm bulge, 38f
Frontline Top Spot (Merial), 400
purulent exudate, 38f
Frostbite, 248, 250-251
Grarri-negative bacteria, 44, 18 1
Fungal infection, 262
involverment, 192
Fungi-Dry-Ear (Q.A. Labs), 401
resistance, 182
Furosemide,332
Grarm-negative ear infections, Tris-EDTA ear solution
Furunculosis, 253
(usage), 183b
Fusobacteriwum, 29 1
Grarri-negative organisrm, 292
Gra-positive bacteria,44
D
Grarri-positive organisrm, 192, 292
Garmrma linolenic concentration, decrease, 207
Grarn’s stain, 190
Garmrma-arminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, I 17
Granular pigment, 67f
Gas-filled lurmern, 79
Granulation tissue
Gastrointestinal (GI) diseases, 210
chronic otitis externa, irmpact, 148f
Gastrointestinal (GI) signs, rarity, 213
formation, cycle, 288
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 54, 1 30
obstruction, 143
Germish, 272. See also Bacterial germish; Malassezia:
Granulocytes, migration, 223
Tris-EDTA
Granulorm atous reactions, 254
Ceneric food dermatosis. See Dogs
Grasping forceps, threading. See Video
Cenesis. See Pruritus
Vetscope
Gentamycin
Grasping-type endoscopic forceps, 122
concentrations, increase, 332
Great Danes
delayed ototoxicity. See Topical gentanycin
hypothyroidism predilection, 207
irmpact, 298, 330
Syndrorme II, 21 1
ototoxicity, 331
zinc-responsive dermatosis, 21 1
Genta-Otic Solution (Vetus), 402
Gross examination. See Otitis externa
Gentaved Otic Solution ( Vedco), 402
Gross revenue enhancerment, 385 
Gent-L-Clens (Schering), 407
Growth horrmone supplementation, 260
Gentocin Otic Solution (Schering-Plough), 402
Gustatory fibers, 17
Gerrman Shepherd
advanced leishmaniasis, 254f
H
ceruminolith, presence, 227f
Hair-follicle cycle, disorders, 259
ear canal, wax plug (eardrurn level), 233f
Hairs. See Dogs
eardrurm
clipping, 240
bulge, 38f
coat, observation, 242
rupture, 306f
follicles, 7,60, 151, 211
edermatous ear canal, 306f
rminiaturization, 6 1
farmilial cutareous vasculopathy, 248, 249
follicular unit, 60f
generali zed/severe scaling, 254f
growth, slowness/failure, 208
hypothyroid disposition, 124
inclusiorn. See Poodle; Wax balls
hypothyroidism, 259f
interference. See Ear canal
inherited disorders, 206
irritatior, 26f
inner pinna, Malassezia dermatitis, 259f
plucking, 150-151
mucus/pus, preserce, 233f
shaft, visibility, 60f
nose/throat, flushing proces, 306f
Hard costs, 378
420
xapul
Head
Hurmars, irmrmurnopathogenesis, 128-131
pruritus, 212
Hurmectarnits, 267
rotation, 34If
Humoral irmmunity, 124 
shaking, 132, 215, 353
Hyaline degeneration, 249
support, 342f
Hydrocortisone (1%), usage, 181
tilt, 215, 343. See aiso Cats
Hydrolyzed casein/liver, 135
trarsverse section, 10f
Hydrolyzed soy, 135
violent shaking, 8
Hydrophobic lipid material, 155
Hearing deficit, 280
Hyoglossus muscle, 6f
results, 297
Hyperadrenocorticisrm, 208-209
Heat fixation, benefit, 190 
diagnosis/treatrment, 209
Helicene rmargins, 8
Hyperandrogenism, 209
Helicotrerma, 1 3f, 21
Hyperermic rmucosa. See Middle ear
Helix. See Antihelix
Hypergranulosis, 210
caudal border, 4f, 237f
Hyperintense signal. See Cochlea; Intralabyrinthine
distal crus, 2f
fluid; Sermicircular canals
lateral border, 2f, 4f
Hyperkeratosis, 145
lateral crus, 2f, 4f
areas. See Logs
rmedial border, 2f, 4f
Hyperkeratotic diseases, 64
medial crus, 2f, 4f 
Hyperpigmentation, 132
rostral border, 4f, 237f
areas. See Dogs
spirne, 2f, 4f
presence. See Male Doberman Pinscher cross
Hermagglutination, syrmptoms, 251
Hyperplasia, 145. See aiso Cerurmen glands; 
Hermangiosarcorma, 170
Cerurminous glands; Glandular hyperplasia;
Hermorrhage
Sebaceous hyperplasia
coritrol,352
Hyperplastic cerurminous glands, carbon dioxide 
presence. See Spayed female Chihuahua
ablation, 364f
source, visualization, 368
Hyperplastic changes,258
Hermorrhagic bullae, 247
Hyperplastic epitheliurm. See Concave pinna;
Hermostasis, 362, 367
 Ear canal; Shetland Sheepdog
achievement, 369, 371
Hyperplastic lesions, 167
wattage, rating, 370
Hyperplastic superficial perivascular derrm atitis, 21 I
Herpesvirus infection, 308f
Hypoallergenic diet, 1 34, 270. See also
Heterodoxus spiniger, 242
 All-vegetable hypoallergenic diet 
Heterogeneous enhancerment (rmass), effacerment.
Hypodense rmass
 See Left tyrmpanic bulla
extension. See Right hermirmandible
High-dry field. See Cats; Dogs
lateral/rostral position. See Right bulla
 organisms, mean number, 53f
Hypoglossal canal, 12f
usage, 53
Hypoglossal nerve (XII), [14f
High-fat rmeal, 211
Hyposensitization. See Dogs 
High-oil irmrmersion lens ( I00x objective), usage, 50f
Hypothyroidisrm, 64, 123-125, 207-208. See αlso
High -output light source, fiberoptic cable (attachment),
Gerrman Shepherd
281
clinical signs, 207
High-pitched sourd waves, transrmission, 280
diagnosis/treatrment, 208
High-pitched sounds, detectior ability, 288
etiology, 207
Hill's Preseription DietZ/D Low Allergen, 135
treatrment,39
Hill's Prescription Diet Z/D UItra Allergen Free, 135
Hypotrichosis, ear scratching (irnpact), 239f
Histarmine, 129
Histiocytoma, 59, 358
1
Histoanatomy. See Normal histoanatormny
Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism, 18 1
Histopathologic evaluation. See Turmor rmass
Iatrogenic myringotormy, prevention, 34f
Histopathology, 59
Iatrogenic perforation. See Poodle
Holocrine glands, 151
Idiopathic prirmary seborrhea. See Armerican Cocker
Hore-prepared dit, 13435
Spaniel
Horme-prepared elirmination diet, 1 36b
Idiopathic seborrhea, 123, 267. See aiso Prirmary
Hooded debrider blade, usage, 367
idiopathic seborrhea
Horizontal canal
IgA. See Irmmunoglobulin A
bony portion, periosteum, 149
IgE. See Trmrmunoglobulin E
catheter, direction, 293f
IgM. See Irmmunoglobulin M
cotton-tipped applicator, usage, 307f
Irmmune cormplex, 128
fluid flow, 293
deposition, 129
liquid discharge, accurmulation, 279f
Irmmunoglobulin A (IgA)
turmor rmass, protrusion. See Cocker Spaniels
binding, 130
Horizontal ear canal, 149
production, 131
epithelium, appearance, 227f
Irmmunoglobulin E (IgE). See Allerger-specific IgE
extensive fibrosis, 277f
IgE-mediated food allergy, 132
ventral floor, wax accurmulation, 27f
rmolecules, cross-link, 129
ventral portion, yellow wax, 28f
 Immunoglobulin G (IgG). See Allergen-specific IgG
Horner's syndrome, 17, 276, 279f
Irmrmunoglobulin M (IgM), involverment, 129
cases, resolution, 322
Irmrmunoglobulins, 128 
Hot buttors, 385
Irmrmunopathogenesis. See Hurmarns
Index
421
Irmmunosuppressive drugs, 257
Irtradermal testing, 134
In vitro allergy testing, 266, 270
Intralabyrinthine fluid
Incision rmodality. See Lasers
detail, t05f
Incus, 13f, 14f, i5
hyperintense signal, 102f
vestibular window, medial position, 95f
T2-weighted spin echo irmages, 105
India ink, moverment. See Ear canal
Iritraoperative ear canal ablation, 372f
Indolent ulcers, 133
Intravenous ticarcillin, reactions, 182
Irdoor allergens, 113
Iodinated contrast rmaterial, intravenous injection, 92
Infection, cycle, 288
Iodinated contrast rmediurm, infusion. See Beagle 
Inferior alveolar rnerve, 14f
Iodine organification, defects, 207
Inflammation
Iohexol, usage, 90
cycle, 288
Ionizing radiation, usage, 99
fibrosis, impact, 144f
Ipsilateral flexor muscles (inhibition), lateral
Inflarmmatory alopecia, 259. See glso
vestibulospinal tract (irmpact), 342f
Noninflarmrmatory alopecia
Ipsilateral large extensor rmuscle groups, facilitation, 341
Inflarnrmatory bowel disease, 301
Ipsilateral lirmb, extensor muscles (lateral
Inflarmmatory cells, 38
vestibulospinal tract support), 342f
degradation, 306
Ipsilateral vestibulospinal tract, vestibular nuclei
Irnflarn matory exudates, presence, 97f
(irmpact), 342f
Inflarn rmatory polyps. See Canine inflarn rmatory polyp;
IQ. See Inhibitory quotient
Labrador Retriever
Irish Setters, inherited disorders, 206
clinical signs, 318
 Ischermia. See Local ischemia 
signalent/history,318-32
 Isotense fluid, impact. See Bulla
Inguinal area, PF irmpact, 256
Isotense tissue, irmpact. See Right bulla
Inguinal pruritus, 212
Italian Greyhounds, pattern baldness, 260 
Inheritarce, autosormal recessive mode, 249
Itracornazole, 269
Inhibitory quotient (IQ), 300
Ivermectin, 115
Injectable ivermectin, 175 
nonusage. See Collies
Injection sites
usage, 216, 241. See aise Topical ivermectin
lesions, 247
Ivormec I% Injection for Cattle and Swine (Merck),
vasculitis, vaccines (impact), 248
10^L11
Irner ear, 19-21
relationship. See Subarachnoid space
schermatic drawing, 20f
 Jugular forarmen, 14f 
structure
CT scan, superirmposition, 342f
Juvenile cellulitis, 123
visualization, 93
K
Inner mucous layer, 10
Inner pinnae
KCS, 278, 345. See Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
erytherma/lichenification. See Bichon Frise
Keratin, 36f
Maiassezia dermatitis. See German Shepherd
presence, 34
pruritus. See Fermale atopic Labrador
Keratirnaceous debris, presence, 190
 pustules, presence. See Golden Retriever
Keratinization, disorders, 205-209, 267, 270
Insects
Keratinized epithelial cells, presence ( 100x objective),
bite dermatitis, 242-243
5lf
bites, 249
Keratinized epithelial proliferation, 310
irnpact, 119-120
Keratinocyte
Irspissated material, 301
differentiation, 60
Inspissated mucus, presence, 279f
proliferation/differentiation, 210
Instrurmerntation, irmpact. See Traurma
surface, 49
Integrins, 128
Kerion, 254
Irterleukins, 152
Kitter
Internal acoustic meatus, 18f, 19 
ear, blood (presence), 308f
Internal carotid artery, carotid canal
ear canal
(accorm modation), 1 0f
flushing, 319f
Internal carotid nerves, 14f
liquid rmucus, accurmulation, 319f
Irterral ear
pus, accurmulation, 319f
cochlea, 20f
eardrum, acute perforation, 308f
csseous labyrinth, accomrmodation, 10f
polyp, presence, 319f
schermatic view. See Cats
sneezing, 308f
sermicircular canals, 20f
upper respiratory disease, 308f
structures, schermatic drawing, 13f
Klebsiella spp., 192, 200
Interparietoscutularis rmuscle, 3f
Irnterscutularis muscle, 3f
L
Irnterstitial cell turmor, 209
Labrador Retriever
Intertragic incisure, 2f, 4f
cerumern gland tumors, 164f
Intervening fibrous tissue, layers, 10
ceruminous glands, 361
Interventional otoscopy, 348
glandular tissue, increase, 142
Irntestinal barrier function, irmmaturity, 13 1
inflarmrmatory polyps, 326f
Intestinal irmrmune systerm, irmrmaturity, 13 1
otitis exteareisositn,53
Irntracrarial structures, full visualization 
pinna (tragus), epithelial folds (polyp molding), 326f
(interference), I0 If
pinnae, extension, 326f
422
Index
Labrador Retriever—cont'd
Leukocytes, 56-57. See aise Concurrent leukocytes
Syndrome II, 211
abserce, 191
vertical ear canal, turmors, 164f
mum ber/ty pes, 190 
Labrador-Golden Retriever
presence, 52
bulla level, TI-weighed dorsal irmage, 107f
Lichenification, 133, 258. See aiso Bichon Frise
contrast material, injection, 107f
Lichenoid-psoriasiform derrmatosis. See English
high cellular content fluid, 1 08f
 Springer Spaniels
otitis media, irmpact, 108f
Ligament, support, 13f
transverse FLAIR irmage, I08f
Limbus. See Tympanic rmermbrane
transverse T2-weighted irmage, 108
Lirme sulfur
Lactobac illus spp., 200
effectiverness, 241
Larmina propria, thickening, 288
rirses, 240
Larminar flow. See Water
Lingual nerve, I4f
Larex fine screens (Kodak), 78
Linognathus setosus, 242
Laser myringotomy
Linoleic acid, 210
healing rate, 294f
Lipids
usage. See Eardrurm
secretion. See Apocrine glands
Laser polypectomy (aural turmor rermoval), 364-369
synthesis/mobiliation/degradation,207
Lasers
Lipofuscin, 67f
ablation, 364. See aiso Armerican Cocker Spaniel;
inclusion. See Macrophages
Nasopharyngeal polyps
Lipofuscin-laden microphages, photomicrograph, 67f
rmodality, 352
Liposarcorma, description, 169f
coagulation modality, 352
Liquichlor (Evsco), 401
drain perforations, creation. See Ear pinna 
Local ischermia, 238
ear surgery, 350-352
Long-term steroid treatment, 252
energy, usage, 354-355
Long-term systermic antibiotic therapy, 55
incision modality, 352
Lotrisone (Schering-Plough), 402
rmass rermoval. See Middle ear
Louse infestations, 242
modalities, 352
Low cellular fluid, 102f
therapy goals, 354-355
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL), increase.
usage. See Apocrine cyst
See Serurm LDL
Late-phase reactions, 128
Lurmer. See Gas-filled lurmern
Lateral 20-degree ventral-laterodorsal oblique
closure,144f
direction, 81
diarmeter
 Lateral arm pullary rnerve, 20f
decrease, 145, 175
Lateral bulla osteotormy (LBO), 323f, 326, 363
increase, 149, 301
obliteration, 97f
Lateral ear canal resection, 326, 371-373. See aiso
Nondiseased ear
opacity. See Bulla
Lateral incisure, 2f
walls, thickening, 97f
Lateral interior auricular nerve, 9f
Lyrmphatics, 60
Lyrm phocytes, differentiation, 128
Lateral recurmbency, 8 1
Lateral ventricles, portions, 94f
Lymphocytic thyroiditis, 123, 207
Lymphoid nodules,68
Lateral vestibulospinal tract
irni pact. See Contralateral extensor muscles;
Lymphoma, 59
Lysis. See Termporal bones
Ipsilateral flexor rmuscles
serial CT irmages. See Cats
support. See Ipsilateral lirmb
LBO. See Lateral bulla osteotomy
Lysozymes, 152
Leather ears, 260
liberation, 287
secretion, 195
Left 20-degree ventral-right dorsal oblique radiograph.
See Middle ear
M
Left 20-degree venitral-right dorsal oblique view,
M.persicolor, 254
78, 81f
 Macrophages. See Lipofuscin-laden rmicrophages
Left bulla
lipofuscin, inclusion, 65
enlargement, space-occupying mass (irmpact), 100f
rmediator release, 237
rmedial wall, permeative lysis, I00f 
rmigration, 223
outline, 82f
Magnetic resonance irmaging (MRI), 99-108, 345, 370.
ventral wall, thickening, I 0Of 
Left ear carial, atopic derrmatitis. See Dogs
See aiso Dogs
abnormal findings, 103-108
Left eardrurm. See Dogs
irmages, improverment, 101f
Left external acoustic canal, fluid (presence), 104f
norrmal findings, 103
Left external acoustic meatus, dorsal location, 82f
Left external ear, anatormical features. See Dogs
technique, 103
usage, 78
Left horizontal nystagrmus, 344 
Major histocompatibility cormplex (MHC), 129
Left septurm bullae, absence, 98f
MHC I molecule, 130
Left term poral bone, petrosal portions (thickening), 98f
MHC II molecule, 130
Left tympan ic bulla
 Major petrosal nerve, 14f 
heterogeneous enhancerment (rmass), effacerment, I07f
MalAcetic Conditioner, 267, 268
internal anatormy, ventral view, 12f
MalAcetic Otic, 271
ventral wall, removal, 12f
Malassezia, 177
Leishrmaniasis, 256, 262. See aiso German Shepherd
abserce, 48
Lesion treatrment, contact/rnoncontact mode, 353
colonization. See Tyrmpanic cavity
Index
423
Malassezia—cont'd
Mass—contd
derrmatitis, 132. See aiso Fermale atopic Labrador;
extension. See Right hemirmandible
Gerrman Shepherd; Miniature Poodle;
growth.See Bulla
Yorkshire Terrier
irmpact. See Left bulla
germish,272
increase, fibrosis (irmpact). See Tissue mass increase
indication, 42
infiltratiorn. See Tyrmpanic bulla
infection, 184, 206, 211
lateral position. See Right bulla
isolation, 180
protrusion. See Cocker Spaniels
rmetabolisrm/reproduction, 183
rermoval. See Middle ear
rmodified Wright-Gierma stain. See Dogs
serial CT irmages. See Cats
organisrs, 123
visibility, transillumination (usage). See Middle ear
otitis externa. See Yorkshire Terriers
Masseteric nerve, 14f
yeasts, growth, 228
Mast cells
Malassezia canis, 191
degranulation, 129
fuorescing, 255
turmors, 217, 358
Malassezia equi, 52
Mattress sutures, usage, 238
Malassezia furfur, 52-53
Maxillary bones, 79f
Malassezia globosa, 52, 53
Mean inhibitory concentration (MIC), 273, 289-292
Malassezia obtuse (obrusa), 52, 53
achieverment, 298
Malassezia pachydermatis, 52, 204
Mean-count breakpoints, usage, 55
actively replicating organisrms (unipolar budding),
 Mechanical ear cleaning, 179 
presence, 51f
 Medial vestibulospinal tract, projection. See Neck 
ronbudding yeast, presence, 5 If
Medical competence, client perception, 385
 paired coccoid bacteria, presence, 51f
Medical record insert. See Cytologic findings
Malassezia restricta, 52
docurmentation
Malassezia sloofiae, 52
Medical-grade adhesive tape, usage, 84f
Malassezia species, differentiation (reasons), 53
Medioventral corm partrment, walls, 85f
Malassezia sppo, 52-54
MedRx Earigator (MedRx), 33f
Malassezia sympodialis, 52, 53, 192
usage, 296
Male Doberrman Pinscher cross
Melanin granules, recognition, 49
auricle apex, concave surface
Melanoderma, 260. See aiso Yorkshire Terriers
crusts, presence, 251f
Melanorma, 358
hyperpigmentation, presence, 251f
Meninges. See Enhanced rmeninges
 bleeding episodes, 251f
 Mesencephalic aqueduct, distention, 106f
cold agglutinin-related pinnal vasculitis, lesions, 251f
Metal ions, chelation, 290
crusted purched-out lesions, presence, 25 1f
Metaplasia. See Osseous rmetaplasia
Male dormestic short-hair cat, ear/neck excoriation, 246f
Methylpredrisolone acetate, I 14
Malignant melarorma, 1 70 
Methylprednisone acetate, 272
Maligrarnt reoplasrms. See Ear canal
MHC. See Major histocormpatibility complex
Malignant turmors, 186, 364
MIC. See Mean inhibitory concentration; Minirmurm
Malleolus, [4f
inhibitory concentration
Malleolus, vestibular window (medial position), 95f
Micazole Lotion 1 % (Vetus), 40 1
Malleus, 13f, 15
Miconazole Lotion 1%, 401
blood vessel identification, 293f
Microbial flora (surmrmary). See External ear canal
footplate, 28f
Microbiology, relationship. See Nasopharyngeal
marubriurm, Ilf, 18f, 292. See aiso Mixed terrier
polyps
visibility, 39f
Microclirmate aids, normalization, 188
Mallaphaga, 242
Micrococcus spp.,192
Mandible, condyles (zygomatic portion), 94f
 Microorganism overgrowth, 64
Mandibular body, visible cortex (thickening), 90f 
Microsporum canis
Mandibular branch. See Vagus
irnpact. See Cats
Mardibular fossa, 1 2f
invasion, 253
Mandibular gland, 6f
Middle ear, 12-19. See aiso False rmiddle ear
Mardibular rarmi, 283
access, 294
Mandibular salivary glands, 17
cavity, IGf, 13f
Mange. See Notoedric mange; Sarcoptic mange
division, 16-17
Marubrium. See Malleus
rerves, relation, 14f
distal end, 9-10
squarmous epithelium, rmigration, 222
Marbofloxacin, usage, 182, 291
details, 95f
Margin, dermatoses. See Ear
disease, duration, 332
Marginal pouch, 3. See aiso Cutaneous rmarginal pouch
DV radiograph, 83f
Market prices, 389-390
ear cleaning, 285f
Marketing. See Preventive ear care; Therapeutic ear care
effusion, CT irmage. See Dogs
communication, 380-383
ex armination, 282f
creativity, 391-393
feline polyp, 365f
Mass. See Turmor mass
fibrosarcoma, 1 70f
carbon dioxide
fleshy mass (visibility), transillurmination (usage), 283f
ablation, 369f
flushes. See Shih-Tzu
treatrment. See Pinna
hyperermic mucosa, 314f
diagnosis. See Cats
infections, 345. See aiso Non-pseudormonal
effacement. See Left tyrmpanic bulla
 grarm-negative middle ear infections 
424
Inde
Middle ear—cont'd
Moisturizers, usage. See Pruritus
laser mass rermoval, 369f
Monocytes, rmigration, 223
lateral radiograph, 80f. See also Scottish Terrier
Mosquitoes, 243
lateral view, patient positioning, 79f
MRI. See Magnetic resonance irmaging
left 20-degree ventral-right dorsal oblique
Mucociliary systerm, 195
radiograph, 82f
Mucoid debris. See Ear canal
microbiology, 200
Mucoid otitis rmedia. See Cats
rmucosa, 318, 327f
Mucoperiosteum, 288
rerves, 17-19
contact, 295
oblique view, patient positioning, 8lf
irmpact. See Mucus; Pus
otoliths, 87
inflarm mation, 33 1
otoscopic exarmination, 88f. See aiso Beagle
Mucopurulent discharge. See Shih-Tzu
plant awns, retrieval. See Cocker Spaniels
Mucopurulent fluid, production (decrease), 312
Pseudomonas, presence, 181
Mucosa. See Middle ear
radiographic assessrment, 284
 irritation, foreign substance (impact), 3 14f
sarnpling, 295f
Mucus
schermatic view. See Cats
absence, 314f
sculpted medial view. See Right rmiddle ear
armount, 121, 301
secretiorn, decrease, 289
pharyngeal drainage. See Cats
structure
presernce, 276. See aiso Inspissated mucus
CT scan, superirmposition, 342f
production (cessation),rmucoperiosteurm (irmpact), 299f
schermatic drawing, 13f
rermoval, 320f
visualization, 93
Mucus-secreting goblet cells, 273
tissue level, 300
Multilobulated polyp. See Cats
VD radiograph, 83f
Muscle tensor tyrmpani, 14f
VD view, patient positioning, 83f
Middle interior auricular nerve, 9f
Musculotubal canal, 12f
Mycoplasma, 286-287, 291
Milbermycin oxirme solution (Milbermite, Novartis), 11 8
Mylohyoid nerve, [14f
usage, 216
Mylohyoideus muscle, 6f
Miliary dermatitis, 133, 212, 213
Myringotormy, 272, 292-294, 370-371. See also
Mineral oil
Diode laser; Normal middle ear
benefits, I17
5-Fr polypropylene catheter(usage), scalpel blade
Demodex follicwlorwm, presence, 120f
saturation. See Cotton-tipped applicators
(usage),293f
Mineralocorticoid activity, 30 1
consideration, 363
Miniature Poodle
creatiorn, cotton-tipped applicator (usage).
Malassezia dermatitis, 174f
See Traumatic myringotomy
otitis externa, 174f
illustration, 293f
periodic alopecia, 260
incision,293
salivary staining, 174f
inclusion, 345
Miniature Schnauzer
laser, assistance, 352
eardrum/vertical ear canal, cerurmen plug
necessity, 277
extension, 154f
performing, 5-Fr polypropylene catheter (usage), 39f
otitis, 142
 prevention. See Iatrogenic myringotomy
Minirmurm inhibitory concentration (MIC), 177
usage, 170f
Minor petrosal nerve, 14f
N
Mita-Clear, 402
Mites
Nasal biopsy forceps, 367f
debris, rermoval. See Cats
Nasal drainage. See Dilute povidne-iodine solution
identification, 216
Nasal plarurm
infestation. See Cats
hyperkeratotic plaques, 258
presence, 39
PF irmpact, 256
Mixed terrier
Nasal septum, 79f
car accident, 158f
Nasopharyngeal polyps, 78, 307. See also Cats
ear, blood, 158f
CT assessrment, 96
eardrum, rupture, 158f
diagnosis, 88f
malleus, manubrium, 257f
endoscopic removal, 323-325
Mixed-breed dog
formation, 117
bilateral cerurminoliths, identification, 232f
identification, 217
dirminished hearing, 232f
laser ablation, 325
Mixed-breed hound dog, canalograrm
microbiology, relationship, 321-322
(DV radiograph), 91f
occlusion. See Cats
 Modified apocrine glands, 62, 144
signalrment/history, 318-321
cross-sectiorn, 60f
surgical treatrment, 322
 Modified apocrine tubular sweat glands, 7
traction/avulsion, 323f
Modified Wright-Giemsa stain, 1 90. See aiso Dogs
treatrment, 322-325
Modified Wright's blood stain, 177
turmors, confusion, 328f
Modified Wright's stain (Diff-Quik)
Neck
recorm rmendation/design, 44
excoriation. See Male dormestic short-hair cat
usage, 46f
rmuscles, rmedial vestibulospinal tract 
Modiolus, I 8f
(projection), 342f
larmira, 18f
pruritus, 212
Index
425
Necrosis
 Nystagmus. See Left horizontal nystagrmus; Right
creation. See Pressure necrosis
horizontal nystagrmus; Spontaneous nystagmus
occurrerce, 248
presence, 318, 322
Necrotic pinnal lesions, 247
Neomycin
0
involvement, 245
Occipital area, subcutaneous region, 1 57f
usage, 149
Occipital bone (caudal aspect), lysis, 89f
Neoplasia. See Cocker Spaniels; Ear canal; External
Occipital condyle, 12f
ear canal; Pinna
Occipitalis rmuscle, 3f
CT assessment, 96
Occlusion. See Cats; Ear canal; Vertical ear canal
irmpact, 207
Oculormotor nerves, 340
indication, 38
Oculomotor ruclei, irn pact. See Eye rmoverments
treatment,358
Ofloxacin, 298
Neoplastic cells, presence, 190
Oils, usage. See Pruritus
Neoplastic conditions, simulation, 205
Ointrment rmedications, application, 1 80
Neoplastic lesions, 167
Ointrment-based rmedication, 44
Neo-Predef (Upjohn-Pharm acia), 401
Old English sheepdogs, hairy external ear canals, 5
Neotrombicula autumnalis, 58, 241
Oleosa, 267
Nerves. See Middle ear
Ormega-3 fatty acid, 210
Neutrophilic chermotactic factor, 1 29
Ormega-6 fatty acid, 210
Neutrophils
Onychomadesis, 247
rumber, 66
Onychomalacia, 257
presernce, 55, 66f. See aiso Paired coccoid
Open-ended tormcat catheter, acdvance. See Video Vetscope
bacteria; Polymorphonuclear neutrophils; 
Open-mouth projection, value, 85f
Shih-Tzu
Operi-rmouth rostrocaudal view, 283
response. See Bacterial overgrowth
Open-mouth rostro-occipital radiograph, 163.
Newfoundlands, hypothyroidisrm predilection, 207
See aiso Cats
Nits, visibility, 242
Opportunistic pathogens, 52
Noca rdia spp., 44
Oral cyclosporine-A-rmodified capsules, usage, 1 13-1 14
Nodules, 261-262
Oral enroflox acin, 300
Nolvarmite (Ft. Dodge), 403
Oral prednisolone, application, 241
Nolvasan Otic (Ft. Dodge), 407
Organisrm nurmbers (cytological identification),
Nonarminoglycoside antibiotics, 333t, 334t
recomrmended breakpoints, 53t 
Nonbudding yeast, presence. See Malassezia
Organochlorates, toxicity, 241
pachydermatis
Orgarophosphates, toxicity, 241
Non-Cocker Spaniels, fibrosis (response), 65
Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, 210
 Nondiseased ear, lateral ear canal resection, 142
Osseous aratormy, 19
Osseous auditory tube, 14f
Nonepithelial turmor, 59 
 Non-irnrmurne-rmediated rmechanisrms, 244
Osseous bony cochlea, 1 2-13
Osseous external acoustic meatus, I0f
Noninflarmrmatory alopecia, 259
facial nerve, proxirmity, 8
 Noninflamrmatory prirmary alopecia, 26 1
Osseous labyrinth, 19
 Nonionic iodine-based contrast material, usage, 90 
Nonototoxic alkalinizing agent, 271
accormrmodation. See Internal ear
Osseous metaplasia, 66, 67f, 68
Nonototoxic antibiotics, aqueous solutions, 291
Nonototoxic ear cleaner, 271
CT scan. See Cocker Spaniels
Osseous septurn, 85f
Nonototoxic topical antibiotics, 298
Osseous spiral larmina, 18f, 21
 Non-pseudormonal gram -negative middle ear
Osseous tympanic bulla, structure, 12-14
infections, 302
Ossicles. See Ear
Nonseasonal pruritus, 132
Osteotomy. See Bulla; Lateral bulla osteotomy
Normal bulla
OTC. See Over the counter
 TI-weighted transverse image. See Dogs
T2-weighted transverse irmage. See Dogs
Otic Clear (Butler), 405
Otic exudates
Normal CT findings, 92-93
cytologic ex armination, 161
Normal cytology, 49-52
rmineral-oil swab, Otodectes mites (presence), 1 l6f
Normal ear, 24-29
Otic fungal organism, 180
canal, 24-27. See aiso Dogs
Otic ganglion, 14f, 19
tymipanic membrane, 27-29
Otic rmedications, efficacy, 178
Norrmal eardrurm, 309f. See aise Cats
Otic pain, 132
rice paper appearance, 27
Otic preparations, 181
 Norrmal histoanatormy, 60-64. See aiso External canal;
Otic pruritus, 207
Tympanic mermbrane
Oticalrm Cleansing Solution (DVM), 406
Normal left eardrurm. See Dogs
Oticare-M Ear Mite Treatrment (ARC), 402
Normal middle ear, post-myringotomy, 371f
Oticlean A Ear Cleaning Solution (ARC), 406
Norrmal radiographic findings, 78, 90-91
Oticlens (Pfizer), 406
Normal vertical ear canal, photormicrograph, 60f
Otipan Cleansing Solution (Harlrmen), 407
Notoedres cati, 58, 215-216
Otisol O (Wysong), 407
Notcedric rmange, 24l, 249
Otisol ( Wysong), 406
Novartis, I 14
Otitis
Nuclear arypia, 72
CT assessrmerit, 96
Nutritional deficiency, 209-212
noninfectious causes, 38
Nylon suture, usage, 357
recormrmendations, 388 
426
xapul
Otitis externa, 188-195. See aiso Cocker Spaniels;
Otoscopic tube
Fermale atopic Labrador; Miniature Poodle
rirn, IIf
cause, 174f
usage, Ilf 
cormplications, 180
Otoscopy. See Interventional otoscopy
cytologic evaluation, 176-178
usage, 31-34
evaluation, cytology/culture comparison, 56t
Ototopical agents, safe usage, 336
factors, 142-144
Ototopical antibiotics, sensitivity (increase), 332
perpetuation, 174-176, 180-181
Ototoxic antibiotics, 176
follow-up, 1 84-185
Ototoxic otic drugs, 312
gross evidence, 191
Ototoxic substances, rermoval, 232
gross exarmination, 164-171
Ototoxic systermic agents. See Potentially ototoxic
microscopic evidence, 191 
systermic agents
overtreatrment, 184
Ototoxic topical medication, 312
pathophysiology, 195
Ototoxicity, 330. See also Delayed ototox icity; Topical
preserce, 188
ototox icity
prirmary/predisposing causes, 194
dilutional factors, 33 1-332
recurrence, 137
drugs, rmixing, 332
symptomatology, 161-164
ear cleaners, 333, 335
treatrment, corticosteroids (usage), 18 1-184
ex perirmental studies, 330
Otitis interna, 340
therapy, duration, 332
central vestibular disease, 343-344
vehicles, 331
diagnosis, 342-347
Outer hair cells, 20f
diagrostic tests, 344-347
Oval fenestrated endoscopic grasping forceps, 
neurologic ex armination, 342-343
threading. See Video Vetscope
peripheral vestibular disease, 343
Oval forarmen, 12f
presurmptive diagnosis, 342
Oval forarmina, syrmrmetry, 94f 
prognosis, 348
Over the counter (OTC) products, 378
treatrent, 347-348
Overgrowth, 55. See aiso Bacterial overgrowth
Otitis media, 195-200. See aiso Acute suppurative
Oxygen concentrations, increase, 310
otitis rmedia; Cats; Chronic unstable otitis
rmedia; Dogs; German Shepherd; Prirmary
A
secretory otitis rmedia; Ulcerated ear canal
Paired coccoid bacteria
abserce, 328f
cluster, 50f
active/non active cases, 87
eosinophil, presence (400x objective), 50f
appearance, 36f
neutrophils, presence (400x objective), 50f
corticosteroids, usage, 300-301
presence. See Malassezia pachrydermatis
diagnosis, 276-277, 342-347
Palpebral rerve, 9f
findings, 87
Parialog Ointrment (Solvay), 403
history, 277-280
irmpact. See Labrador-Golden Retriever
323-324
microbiology, 289-292
Papillorma, 358
patient evaluation, 280-283
Papular dermatitis, 254
presurm ptive diagnosis, 342
Papules, visibility, 242
resolving, 299f
Para-aural space, palpation, 68
sarmple collection, 294-295
Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, 210
signalment, 277-280
Parasites, 57-58, 216. See aiso Ear canal; External
Suspicion. See Concurrent otitis media
parasites
treatmenit, 276-277, 294
presence, 190
Otobius megninii, 216
Parasitic dermatosis, 213-216
Otobius tick, presence. See Ear canal
Parental steroids, short-terrm use, 363
Otocetic Solution ( Vedco), 407
Parotid gland, 6f
Orodectes, presence. See Ceruminous exudates
Parotid salivary gland, 4f, 5f, 10f 
Otodectes cynotis, 48, 57, 214-215
tubus auris, relationship, 5f
abserice, 58
Parotidoauricularis, 6f
diagnosis, 243
Pars flaccida, 9, 27, 29f
gravid fermale. See Dogs
blood vessel
infestations, 42
dermonstration, 310f
Otodectes infestation, 12-1 13
identification, 293f
Otodectes mites, I14, 215
chronic otitis media, 3 14f 
eggs,116f
presence. See Annulus
infestation, otoscopic view. See Cats
Pars tensa, 9, 28f. See aiso Tyrmpanic membrane
presence. See Otic exudates
layer, 63
Otoliths. See Middle ear
radial collagen fibers, 29f
Otomax (Schering-Plough), 403
Partial alopecia. See Siarmese cat
Otomite Plus (Virbac), 403
Partial-thickness circular skin incisions, 356
Otoplasty. See Cosrmetic otoplasty; Therapeutic
Pastewrella spp., 192, 200, 321
otoplasty
Patericy, 30
Otoscope. See Video otoscope
 Pathognomonic early symptorm. See White dormestic
cone, 29, 31
short-hair cat
 Otoscopic ex armination. See External ear; Middle ear;
 Pathophysiology. See Otitis externa
Toy Poodle
Patient evaluation. See Otitis media
Index
427
Pattern alopecia, 259
Pinna (pinnae)—cont'd
Pattern baldness, 259-260
evolutionary role, 236
PCR. See Polyrmerase chain reaction
extension. See Labrador Retriever
PE. See Perm phigus erytherm atosus
fibrosis. See Cats
Pediculosis, prevalence, 242
folding. See Cats
Peduncle, 344f
hy perkeratosis/hyperpigrmentation. See Dogs
breakage, 324f
hy perkeratotic plaques, 258
endoscopic view, 327f
laser drain perforations, creation. See Ear
presence, 327f
rmass, 359f
Pekingese, M. canis infection, 254
carbon dioxide treatment, 360f
Permphigus, 123
rermoval, 352
complex,256-257
meoplasia, 358-361
Permphigus erythermatosus (PE), 256
partial alopecia. See Siarmese cat
Permphigus foliaceus (PF), 256
polyps,ration,
presence. See Cats; Golden Retriever
proliferative thrormbovascular recrosis, 248, 249
Pendulous-eared breeds, 236
pruritus. See Female atopic Labrador
Penicillin injections, side effects, 247
tragus, epithelial folds (polyp rmolding).
Penicillinase-producing bacteria, 290
See Labrador Retriever
Pentoxifylline, 249, 250
tralrma, 238-239
 Perendoscopic trans-tympanic excision (PTTE), usage.
vascular supply, 8
See Polyps
 Pinnal alopecia. See Doberrman Pinscher
Perforation border, 309
Pinnal cartilage, shape, 156
Perilesional ederma. See Pons
Pinnal rmarginal vasculopathy, 133
Perilymph, cormparison. See Cerebrospinal fluid
Plarit awns (seed packets), 12If
Periodic alopecias, 260
retrieval. See Cocker Spaniels
Peripheral blood smears, evaluation, 44
Plarurm rasale, hyperkeratosis, 211
Peripheral follicular papules/crust, 253
Plaques, 132, 261-262
Peripheral thermal darmage, 358-359, 363
Plasrma cells
Peripheral vestibular disease (PVD), 340, 342-343.
rurmber, 66
See aiso Otitis interna
turmors, 358
Perrmeative lysis. See Left bulla
Plasrmacytorma, 59
Perrmethrin
Platysma, branch, 9f
toxicity, 241
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 321
usage, 240
 Polymorphonuclear neutrophils, presence, 52f
Peroxide, application, 238, 252
Polymyxins, 297, 332
Persian cat
Polypoid cuboidal-to-colurm nar epitheliurm,
cerurminous cysts, 155f
proliferation, 72
cystic apocrine gland, genetic predisposition, 1 55f
Polypoid rmass, diagnosis. See Cats
M canis infection, 254
Polyps. See Canine inflarmmatory polyp; Canine
Persoralized harndouts, 387
polyps; Feline polyps; Labrador Retriever;
Petrobasilar fissure, 14
Solitary-lobed polyps
Petrooccipital canal, 1 3f, 14f
debulking, biopsy forceps (usage), 367f
Petrooccipital fissure, 14
eardrum, absence. See Cats
Petrosal bone, 344f
excision, 365
Petrosal nerve. See Major petrosal nerve; Minor
inaccessibility, 323f
petrosal nerve
rriass
Petrous temporal bone, 19 
growth. See Bulla
bone pattern, association, 82
rmanipulation, 318, 321
Pets
rotation, endoscopic grasping forceps (usage), 324f
disposability, 379
rmolding. See Labrador Retriever
follow-up, 391
obstruction, 143
population
presence. See Kitten
care, increase, 379-380
regrowth,327f
decrease, 378-379
rermoval, 35f
PF. See Permphigus foliaceus
excision, usage, 326f, 327f
Phagocytosis, 52f, 55
PTTE, usage, 324f
Pharyngeal drainage. See Cats
traction, usage, 323
Phosrmet, usage, 240
separation. See Pina
Phospholipids, 62
signalrment/history. See Inflarn rmatory polyps;
Phytate, 211
Nasopharyngeal polyps
irmpact, 257
stalk, extension, 327f
Pinma (pinnae), 3-5
treatrment. See Nasopharyngeal polyps
acquired folding, 252-253
diode laser, usage, 368f
alopecia. See Dogs; Syrmrmetrical pinnal alopecia
video visualization, 324f
amputation, 250,358
Poris
anatormy, 236
full assessment, preclusion, 100f
cartil age, 3
left half, ringlike enhancement, 100f
cleaning, 246
right half, perilesional ederma, 106f
concave surface. See Cats
visualization, interference, 98f
cystic structures, 155f
Poodle
derrmatoses. See Concave pinna
ceruminolith matrix, hairs (inclusion), 227f
428
Inde
Poodle——cont'd
Pruritus, 129. See aiso Female atopic Labrador;
ear
 Norseasonal pruritus 
hair, excessiveness, 142
antiseborrheic treatrments, 267
iatrogenic perforation, 161f
bathing procedure, 268
ulceration,161f
clearnsers/moisturizers, usage, 267
eardrurm, concretion, 227f
clinical treatrment trial, 266-269
hypothyroid disposition, 124
results, analysis, 270
otitis externa. See Miniature Poodle
corticosteroids, usage, 269
otoscopic ex amination. See Toy Poodle
ectoparasites, rermoval, 269
Syndrorme II. See Standard Poodles
endoparasites, removal, 269
vertical canal, hairs/wax (presence), 25f
fatty acid supplermenitation, 268 -269
Positive contrast canalography, 78, 90-91, 286
flea coritrol, 269
technique, 90-91
food elirmin ation diet, 268
Positive Wood’s larmp exarmination. See Cats
genesis, 269
Postclipping alopecia, 259
intensity, 243
Post-cornitrast trarsverse CT irmage. See Cats
oils/conditioners, usage, 267
Posterior armpullary nerve, 20f
recurrence, 137
Postganglionic sympathetic nerves, carotid canal
sharmpoo therapy, 267-268
(accom rmodation), 10f
steps, 267-269
 Post-rmyringotormy. See Normal rmiddle ear
Psewdomonas, 176f, 177, 19l, 321
Postoperative discormfort, 367
antibiotics, impact, 181
Postoperative total ear carnal resection, 371f
culture. See Bulla; External ear canal
Posttraurmatic alopecia, 133
grarn stain. See Dogs
Posture, vestibular control, 342f
identification, 57
Potentiallytotoxic systemic agentst
increase, 150
Potentially ototoxic topical agents, 334t
insensitivity, 192
Potentiated sulfonarmide, 348
isolation, 180
Prednisolone, usage, 324. See aiso Oral prednisolone
orgarisms, 297
Predrisone, 257, 269
presence. See Middle ear; Shih-Tzu
1usage, 280
resistance, 300
Preganglionic parasympathetic rerve fibers, 18
Psewdomongs aeruginosa, 52f, 192, 200, 290
Preoperative total ear canal resection, 372f
Pseudomonas spp., 44
Pressure bone atrophy, 98f
Pseudostratified ciliated colurmnar epitheliurm, 15
Pressure necrosis, creation, 307
PSOM. See Prirmary secretory otitis media
Pretragic incisure, 2f, 4f
PTTE. See Panendoscopic trans-tympanic excision;
Pretympanic bleb, 27
Perendoscopic trans-tympanic excision
Preventive care products, 384
Pugs, ear canal stenosis, 91
Preventive ear care, marketing, 383-393
Pulse duration, 353
Primary canine alopecia, classification, 259
Pupil
Prirmary hypothyroidism, causes, 207
constriction,17
Prirmary idiopathic seborrhea, 205-207. See aso
pinpoint size, 279f
West Highland White Terriers
Purified low-rmolecular-weight polypeptides, 268
Prirmary keratinization defects, 64
Purina CNM HA Formula, 135
Prirmary lesions, 132
 Purina CNM LA Formula, 135
Prirmary otitis rmedia, 181. See aiso Cats
Purple-stairned bacteria, differentiation, 49
Prirmary secretory otitis media (PSOM), 273.
Purpura, 247
See aiso Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
Purulent debris, swab, 45f
Product suppliers, brochures, 387
Purulent exudate, 276
Pro-inflarmmatory fatty acids, 155
elaboratior, 28 1
Proliferative thrormbovascular necrosis. See Pinna
Pus
Prormontory, 6f, 14f
absence, 314f
barrel shape, 13
accurmulation. See Kitten
cut edge, 18f
armount, 121
dorsolateral surface, 15
production (cessation), mucoperiosteurm
visibility, 282f
(impact), 299f
Propentoxifylline, 248
removal,320f
Propylene glycol, 245
Pustular acantholytic derrmatoses, 256
impact, 331
Pustules, 247
Proteolytic enzyrmes, 31, 155
Pyoderma, 267. See aise Bacterial pyoderma;
activity, 131
English Bulldog
elaboration, 281
rmanifestation, 208
quantity, decrease, 312
Pyotraurm atic derrmatitis, 214
Proteus mmirabilis, 200
Pyrethroids, usage, 240
Proteus spp., 44, 177, 19l, 192. See also Ear
increase, 150
Q
Prototheca, 262
Q-tips. See Cotton-tipped applicators
 Protruding cerurmen gland adenoma, 166f. See aiso
Quadritop Ointrment (Vetus), 403
Ear canal
Proxirmal horizontal canal, 37
R
Pruritic dermatoses, 240, 253
Rabbit fleas, 243
Pruritic ears, fleas (irmpact), 120f
Rabies vaccine-related vasculitis, 247
Index
429
Radial collagen fibers. See Pars tensa
Rostral 30-degree ventralcaudodorsal oper-mouth
Radio frequency pulses, sending, 99
oblique radiograph. See Cats; Dogs
Radioallergosorbent test (RAST), 212-213
Rostral auricular rerve, 9f
Radiographic findings, 209. See aiso Abrorrmal radi-
Rostral auricular vessels, 5f
ographic findings; Normal radiographic findings
Rostral interior auricular nerve, 9f
Radiography. See Conventional radiography
Rostrocaudal open-mouth projection, 90
DV projections, 81-83
Rostroventral-caudodorsal closed-mouth oblique
lateral view, 78-80
radiograph. See Cats
oblique views, 81
 patient positioning, 85f
open-rmouth view, 84-86
Rotenone, usage, 240
techrique, 78
Round cell tumor, 1 70
VD projections, 81-83
 Ruptured eardrurm. See Eardrurm rupture
Radioirmrmunoassay (RIA) test, 208
Radiopaque petrosal portions. See Termporal bones
S
RAST. See Radioallergosorbent test
 Sabouraud's rmediurm, 255
Recurrent otitis externa, 132
Saccharorryces, 192
Red rubber catheter, usage. See Beagle
Saccular nerve, 20f
Respiratory epithelium, I1
Saccule, 13f
lining, 321
Safflower oil, supplermentation, 210
Retia, fixed image, 34f
Salicylates, 332
Retinoic acid, usage, 206-207
Saline flushes, usage, 232
Retinoids, usage, 252
Saline infusion, 330
Retroarticular forarmen, 12f, 14f
Salivary staining. See Miniature Poodle
Retroarticular process, 1 8f
Sarcoma, 170
Rhabdormyorma, 358
Sarcoptes rmites, I19
Rhipicephalus tick, attachrment. See Epitheliurm
Sarcoptes scabiei, 58, 215
Rhodotorwla, 192
variants, 240
RIA. See Radioirmrmunoassay
Sarcoptic rmange, 240, 252. See also Early sarcoptic
Ribosormal RNA, 29 1
mange
Right 20-degree venitral-left dorsal oblique view, 78, 81f
SC. See Straturm corneurm
Right bulla
Scabies
hormogeneous dense rmass, lateral position, 99f
in-conitact animals, 270
hypodense rmass, lateral/rostral position, 101f
treatrmerit, 240-241
intensity, increase, 108f
Scala rmedia, 20f, 21
rmass (blood/tissue/fluid), 1 07f
Scala tympani, 13f, 18f, 20f
obliteatisst
Scala vestibuli, 18f, 20f
ventral displacement, 82f
Scales, 133
walls, generalized thickening, 97f
reduction, 207
Right ear canal, atopic derrmatitis. See Dogs
Scaly derrmatoses. See Crusty/scaly dermatoses
Right external acoustic canal, diarmeter (increase).
Scarning, helical/axial rmode (usage), 92
See Beagle
Scapha, 2f, 4f, 237f
Right external ear
Schirmer tear test (STT), 345
canal, large soft tissue mass (serial CT irmages).
Sclerosis, 249
See Cats
Scottish Terrier
cartilages, 2f
craniomandibular osteopathy, 90f
Right hermirmandible
rmiddle ear, lateral radiograph, 90f
angular process, 82f
VD radiographs, usage, 90f
hypodense rmass, extension, 101f
Scout irmage, CT unit generation, 93f
Right horizontal nystagrmus, 343
Screen-film radiography,78
 Right rmiddle ear, sculpted rmedial view, 18f
Scutiform cartilage, 2, 3f, 7
Right pinna, concave surface. See Cats
location, 3f
Right stylohyoid bone, superimposition. See Right
Scutoauricularis superficialis dorsalis rmuscle, 3f
tyrmpanic bulla
SE plus filrm (3M), 78
Right tmrandijint
Sebaceous adenitis, 123
Right tyrmpanic bulla
Sebaceous glands, 7, 60f, 151
lysis, serial CT irmages. See Cats
aderorma, 217
opacity, increase, 86f
cells, cluster, 60f
right stylohyoid bone, superimposition, 82f
concentration, variation, 6 1-62
 Right tyrmpanic rmembrane, bulge, 96f 
density, 119
Rigid endoscope, 350
secretion, decrease, 189
30-degree, treatment end, 352f
tissue, close-up (photormicrograph), 62f
suction/irrigation/laser surgery, preparation, 35 1f
Sebaceous glandular hyperplasia, 65
Rigid polypropylene catheter, usage, 292
Sebaceous hyperplasia, 146f
Rod bacteria, presence, 44, 52f, 176
Seborrhea. See Ear-rmargin seborrhea; Idiopathic
Rods, presence. See Shih-Tzu
 seborrhea; Prirmary idiopathic seborrhea
(100% objective), 5 If
conditions, 38
Roll srmear cytologic evaluation, 177
rmanifestation, 208
 Rostral 30-degree ventral-caudodorsal opern -rmouth
sicca, 242
oblique
Seborrheic derrm atitis, 207
 projection, patient positioning, 84f
Seburm production, increase, 207
view, 78
Second cervical nerve, 8
430
xapul
Secondary bacterial infection, 58, 175f, 206-207
Siamese cat
antibiotics, usage, I17
acquired folding, 253f
predisposition, 216
pinnae, partial alopecia, 253f
Secondary infections, diagnosis, 59
spontaneous pericdic alopecia, 260
Secondary invaders, identification, 206
steroid treatrment, history, 253f
Secondary lesions, 1 32
Siberian Huskies
Secondary Malassezia dermatitis. See Female atopic
Syndrome I, 257
Labrador
zinc-responsive derrm atosis, 211
Secondary otitis media. See Dogs
Sicca, 267. See also Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
pathogenesis, 287-289
Signal void, 101, t02f. See aiso Bulla
Secondarry seborrhea, 212
appearance, 105
Secondary spiral larmina, 18f
presence, I07f
Selamectin, I15
Silicon dioxide, usage, 122
Selarmectin, usage, 24 1
Silvadene Creme 1%, 403
Selectins, 128
Silver, ototoxicity, 182
Self-education, 384
Silver sulfadiazine (Baytril Otic), 182
Self-induced alopecia, 212
usage, 149
Self-induced rmutilation, 246
Single-hair follicular unit, close-up. See Cocker Spaniels
Self-trauma, 249, 355
Skeletal rusces, suppor, 3
Sermicircular canals, 13f, 95f, 342f. See aise Internal ear
Skir
hyperintense signal, 102
diseases, irmpact. See Ear
rotation direction/speed, detection, 341f
hot spot, 287
structure, visualization, 93
inflarmrmatory overreaction, 1 13
Serminoma, 209
reoplasia, 270
Sermiquantitative cytologic criteria, 55
scrapes, 215
Sermisynthetic penicillins, 298 
scrapings, 58
Sensitization phase, 129
suture, 357
Septate pseudohyphae, 54
Skin-prick testing, 133
Septurm, breching, 322
Skull
Septurm bullae. See Bulla
CT scans/radiographs, 68
absence. See Left septurm bullae
positioning, 79f
visibility, 95f
Slide. See Glass slides
Sequestered inflamrmation, 321
Srmall hair follicles, presence (photormicrograph), 61f
Serial CT irmages. See Cats
Srmears, evaluation, 190
Serial cytologic record, 58
Sneezing. See Kitten
Serological testing, 134
irmpact, 308f
Serotonin, 129
Soft palate, 80f
Serous fluid, presenice. See Eardrurm
Soft tissue
Sertoli cell turmors, 209
contrast resolution
Serurm biochemistry, 209
irnproverment, MRI impact, 99
Serurm cortisol (excess), cutaneous rmanifestations, 208
increase, l01f
Serurm LDL, increase, 207
density, replacerment, 96f
Serurm proteins, release, 159
exposure technique, 83f
Serum sickness, 129
opacity, 345. See aiso External acoustic canals
Services, convenience, 387
window, contrast rmaterial (post-injection), 97f
Sessile turmors, cobblestone appeararce, 1 63-164
Soft wax ball, 228f
Severe bacterial otitis, cytology, 52f
 attachrment. See Eardrurm
Severe ceruminous gland hyperplasia, 66f
Soft wax plugs, 226
Sharmpoos, pH adjustrmerit, 267
Soft-tissue proliferation, 86
Shar-Peis
Soil digging, history, 238
ear canal
Solar dermatitis (surburn). See Ear
mucinous derrmis, 145
Solitary cerurmen gland adenorma, I66f. See aiso
stenosis, 91
Ear canal
hypothyroid disposition, 124
Solitary-lobed polyps, 322f
hypothyroidisrm predilection, 207
Solution Ear Rinse (DVM), 408
inherited disorders, 206
Space-occupying mass, impact. See Left bulla
Sheltie
Spayed fermale cat
chronic otitis media, 311f
bilateral otitis, diagnosis, 104f
eardrum, rupture, 31If
bulla, TI-weighted sagittal irmage, 104f
Shetland Sheepdog, hyperplastic epithelium, 146f 
ear, unilateral persistent drainage, 100f
Shih-Tzu
FLASH transverse irmage, 105f
rmiddle ear flushes, 313f
T2-weighted transverse irmage, 104f
mucopurulent discharge, 313f
transverse CT irmage, 100f
neutrophils, presence, 3 13f 
Spayed fermale Chihuahua
Psewdomonas, presence, 313f
gadolinium, injection, 106f
rods, presence, 313f
hermorhage,presence,10
systermic/topical corticosteroids, usage, 313f
inflarm matory fluid, presence, 107f
systermic/topical enroflox acin, usage, 313f
transverse FLASH irmage, I07f
Tris-EDTA flushes, 313f
transverse TI-weighted spin-echo irmage, 106f
Short-acting systermic corticosteroid, 272
Specirmens, heat-fixing, 46f
Short-haired cats, M. canis infection, 254
Spilopsyllus cuniculi, 243
Index
431
Spindle-shaped cells, 59, 167
Suppurative otitis rmedia, 29 1
Spiral ganglion. See Cochlea
Surgical-grade cyanoacrylic tissue adhesive, 371
lesions, 21
Sweat glards, 62
Spiral larmina. See Osseous spiral larmina; Secondary
Sylvatic dermatophytosis, 254
spiral larmina
Syrmmetrical pinnal alopecia, 259-261
Spontareous nystagrmus, 341
Syrmpathetic rerves, 344f
Springer Spaniel
carotid canal, accormrmodation. See Postganglionic
cerurminous glands, 361
sympathetic nerves
ear-margin seborrhea, 252
Sympathetic postganglionic nerves, 17
glardular tissue, increase, 142
Syrmptormatology. See Otitis externa
inherited disorders. See English Springer Spaniels
Syndrorme II, recognition, 257-258
otitis externa, predisposition, 153
Synotic Otic Solution (Ft. Dodge), 404
Squarmous cell carcinorma, 59, 170, 250
Synovial joints, forrmation. See Ear
Squarmous epithelium, 36f
Synthetic retinoid, results. See Cocker Spaniels
Squarmous morphology, cells,63
Systermic acaricide, 115
Stable flies, 243
Systemic agents. See Potentially ototoxic
Staff, education, 384-385
systemic agents
Staffordshire Bull Terriers, pattern baldress, 260 
Systemic antibacterial therapy, 291
Stain, rermoval. See Excess stain
Systermic antibiotic therapy, 55. See also
Standard Poodles, Syndrorme II, 21 1
 Long-term systermic antibiotic therapy
Stapedius, I3f
Systermic antirmicrobials, 30 1-302
rmuscles, accomrmodation, 13
Systemic corticosteroids
Stapes, 13f, 15
doses, 301
Staphylococci. See Coagulase-positive staphylococci
usage, 280. See Shih-Tzu
Staphylococci
Systemic drugs
rmodified Wright-Giermsa stain. See Dogs
reaction, 123
presence, 30f, 44, 267
usage, 332
Staphylococcus, 177
Systemic enrofloxacin, usage. See Shih-Tzu
antibiotics, impact, 181
Systemic lupus erythermatosus, 123, 256
isolation, 180
Systermic retinoids, 250
Staphylococcus aureus, 192
Systermic steroids, response, 114
Staphylococcus epidermis,192
Systermic therapy. See Ear therapy
Staphylococcus intermedius, 19l, 192, 200, 291
infection. See Armerican Cocker Spaniel
Stenosis, 30, 149-150. See also Cocker Spaniels
T.mentagrophytes,254
Stenotic ear, 277f
T suppressor cells, 130
Stenotic ear canals, 144
 TI-weighted dorsal irmage. See Labrador-Golden
exudate, presence, 146f
Retriever
srmoothmess, 146f
TI-weighted sagittal irmage. See Spayed fermale cat
traurma, impact, 144f
TI-weighted spin echo, 103
StentedProlene,usage,357
TI-weighted transverse irmage. See Logs
Steroids
T2-weighted spin echo, 103
adverse effects, 209
irmages. See Intralabyrinthine fluid
irmpact, 245
T2-weighted transverse irmage. See Logs; Spayed
option. See Topical steroids
female cat
short-terrm use. See Parernital steroids
Tail folds, 142
treatrment. See Long-term steroid treatment
absence. See Beagle
usage, 206-207, 298
pyoderma. See English Bulldog
Stick-tight flea infestation, 252
Tail-head region, infestation, 214
Stomoxys calcit rans, 243
T-cells, 129
Stratified squarmous epitheliurm, keratinization, 144
clone, 130 
Stratum corneum (SC), 60f, 61f
TECA. See Total ear canal ablation
Streptococc5, 44
Tectorial mermbrane, 20f
Streptococcu spp.,92200
Telogen/anagen defluxion, 259
Stria vascularis, 20f
Terrmporal bores
Striae formation, rmanifestation, 208
globe, presence, 104f
STT. See Schirrmer tear test
radiopaque petrosal portions, 83
Stylohyoid bones, 80f, 81
zygomatic portion, 94f
Styloid process, 2f
 Termporal bones (petrosal portions), 103
Stylormastoid forarmen, 1 2f
anatormical detail, 94f
Subarachnoid space, inner ear (relationship), 1 3f
CT artifact, 98f
Sublingual salivary glands, 17
detail, 105f
Sucking lice, 242
illustration, 80f, 83f, 95f
Suction, independent function, 33f
rmedial aspect, lysis, 99f
Sulfonarmide. See Potentiated sulfonarmide
opacity, increase, 86f
Sunburn. See Ear
presence, 104f
Sunflower oil, supplementation, 210
syrnmetry, 97f
Sun-related injury, pathognormonic early symptorm.
 thickening. See Left tem poral bone
See White dormestic short-haic cat
Termporalis muscle, 7
Superirmposition, elimination, 99
Termporormandibular joints, visualization, 94f
Superior cervical ganglion, 14
 Termpororm andibular junction, transverse CT image, 94f
432
Inde
Tensor tympani, 13f
Tragus, 2f, 4f
accommodation, 13
epithelial folds, polyp molding. See Labrador
Terrier. See Mixed terrier; Scottish Terrier; Yorkshire
Retriever
Terrier
Trarsepithelial water loss, barrier, 62
pattern baldness. See Boston Terriers; Staffordshire
Transverse CT irmage, 95f. See also Bulla; Cats;
Bull Terriers
Chihuahua; Spayed fermale cat;
solar derrmatitis. See Armerican Staffordshire
Term porormandibular junctior
Terriers; Bull Terriers
Transverse FLAIR irmage. See Dogs;
zinc-responsive derrmatosis. See Bull Terriers
Labrador-Golden Retriever
Testicular turmor. See Doberman Pinscher
Transverse FLASH image. See Spayed fermale
Therapeutic ear care, rmarketing, 383-393
Chihuahua
Therapeutic endoscopic telescopes, 350
Trarsverse sequences, 103
Therapeutic otoplasty, 373-374
Transverse TI-weighted spin-echo irmage.
laser, assistance, 352
 See Spayed fermale Chihuahua
Therapeutics products, 384
Transverse T2-weighted irmage. See Labrador-Golden
Thermal diffusion, 353
Retriever
Thin skin, rmanifestation, 208
Traurma, Il2. See aiso Ear traurma
Thrombocytopenia, 248
cotton-tipped applicators, impact, 158-160
Thyroglobulin autoantibody assays, 124
impact. See Stenotic ear canals
Thyroid atrophy, 207
instrurmentation, irmpact, 160-161
Thyroid cell destruction, 207
precipitating factor, 237
Thyroid gland hyperplasia, 207
Traurmatic facial wound. See Beagle
Thyroid profile, 209
Traumatic myringotormy (creation), cotton-tipped 
Thyroid stirmulating horrmone (TSH), 209
applicator (usage), 159, 307f
increase, 124
Tresaderm (Merial), 404
interpretation, 208
Triarmcinolone, usage, 18 1
Thyrotropic cell function, malformation/suppressiorn, 
Trichodectes canis, 242
207
Trichoepitheliomas, 217
Ticar Sterile Powder for Intrarmuscular or Intraverious
Trichography, 255
Injection (SrmithKline Beecharm), 403
Trichosporon, 192
Ticarcillin, 298, 331
Trigerminal nerve, 8, 342f
Ticarcillin-clavulanic acid, 290
Tri-Otic, 404
Ticks, 118-119 
Tis-EDTA. See Ethylenediarmine tetraacetic acid-tris
grasping, 216
Tritop (Upjohn Pharmacia), 404
presence. See Ear canal
TrizEDTA,273
Tissue rmaceration, confusion. See Broad-based
Trochlear nerves, 340
cerumen gland turmors 
Trochlear nuclei, impact. See Eye rmoverments
Tissue mass increase, fibrosis (impact), 144f
Trombicula. See Chiggers
Tissue traurmatization, 43
Trormbiculiasis, 241 -242
T-lym phocytes, rmurmber, 66
Trurmpet valves, connection. See Catheter
TM. See Tyrmpanic mermbrane
Tryptase, 129
Tobradex Suspension (Alcon), 403-404 
TSH. See Thyroid stirmulating hormone
Tobrarmycin, topical otic use, 330
Tubus auris, 5f
Toluene
relationship. See Auricular vessels; Parotid salivary
derivatives, irritation, 252
gland
irritation, 245
Turmor rmass, 167f
Topagen Ointrment (Schering-Plough), 404
dermal curette (6 rmm), placerment, 168f
Topical agents. See Potentially ototoxic topical agents
protrusion. See Cocker Spaniels
Topical aqueous ivermectin 0.01% solution (Acerexx,
rermoval, 168f
Idexx), I17
 sarmple, histopathologic evaluation, 169f
Topical corticosteroids
Turmors, 277
69s
obstruction, 143
usage. See Shih-Tzu
recurrence, 170
Topical ear formula (gemish), 272
Tympanic bulla (bullae), 15-17 309f
Topical enroflox acin, usage. See Shih-Tzu
access, 118
Topical fipronil, 175
aratormical features. See Left tymparic bulla 
Topical gentarmycin, delayed ototoxicity, 332
aqueous gentarmycin solution, placement, 33 1
Topical hermostatic application, 238
bilateral hyperintense volume, 104f 
Topical insecticide, usage, 272
caudal aspect, 85f
Topical ivermectin, usage, 272
caudal surface, 84
Topical ototoxicity, 297-298
caudal walls, 83f
Topical steroids, option, 249
cerurmen gland adenocarcinorma, 279f
Topical therapy. See Ear therapy; Tympanic bulla
cleaning/drying
Total ear canal ablation (TECA), 314f, 323f, 326, 365
catheter, attachment, 296f
Total ear canal resection. See Postoperative total ear
flush/suction device, usage, 296f
canal resection; Preoperative total ear canal
contrast material, accumulation, 157f
re sectior
dark material, accurmulation, 34
Total thyroxine (tT4), 124
drairnage, 291
Toy Poodle, otoscopic ex amination, 36f
external acoustic meatus, dorsal position, 80f
Traction alopecia, 259
extralurminal aspect, 200
Trade narmes. See Ear cleaners; Ear products
illustration, 13f, 14f, 18f
Index
433
Tympanic bulla (bullae)cont'd
Upper respiratory infection, sequela, 195
irmaging, 283-284
Urinalysis, 209
intralurminal aspect, 200
Urinary catheter, usage. See 5 Fr polypropylene
irrigation, 3 1
urinary catheter
level. See Dogs
Urticaria, 129, 131-132
rmass, infiltration, 170f
U.S. Food and Drug Adrministration (FDA), 216
opacity, increase, 90f
U-shaped head holder, cat (head positioning), 93f
right stylohyoid bone, superirm position.
Utricle, 13f 
See Right tyrmpanic bulla
Utricular nerve, 20f
safe drugs, usage,298
superimposition, 80f
A
thickening, 165f
Vaccines, impact. See Injection site
topical therapy, 298-300
Vagal fibers, 8
visibility, 68f
Vagal nerve, cormrmunication. See Facial nerve
walls, 83f, 87f
Vagus
Tympanic cavity, 6f
mandibular branch, 14f
lining, 64
nerve, 8
Malassezia colonization, 54
auricular branch, 14f
Tyrmpanic rmermbrane (TM), 6f, 13f, 91f. See aiso
Vascular degeneration, derrmatopathology (usage), 249
Ear canal; Normal ear
Vascular dilation, 64
ablatior, 368
Vascular strip, 27, 29f, 309
anatormy. See Logs
disease/traurma, irm pact, 29
changes, 226
visibility, 39f
cystic characteristic, 278f
Vascular supply, 10
destruction, 307
occlusion, 312
flaccid part, IIf
rermoval, 327f
integrity, testing, 90
Vasculitis, 246-248. See also Fermale Malinois
lirmbus, 18f
Shepherd; Male Doberman Pinscher cross
rormal histoaratomy, 63-64
concurrent diseases, 248
opaque characteristic, 278f
dermatopathology, usage, 249
pars tensa, Ilf, 18f
first-line treatrment, 248
perforation, 43-44
precipitating factors, 248
upture, 347
types, 247
structure, visualization, 93
Vasoactive properties, 129
transillumination, high-intensity light (usage), 282f
Vasoactive substances, 155
traurmatic perforations, 306
VD. See Ventrodorsal
urrbo, I If
Vegetable oil, supplermentation, 210
vibrations, transmission, 15
Venous drainage, 8
vibratory response, optimization, 1 1
Ventral buccal nerve, 9f
visibility, 95f
Ventral bulla osteotormy, 322
visual exarmination, prevention, 277f
Ventral displacerment. See Right bulla
visualization, 276
Ventral petrosal vernous sinus, carotid canal
Tympanic nerve, 14f
(accormrmodation), 10f
Tympanic plexus, 14f
Ventrodorsal (VD) projections. See Radiography
Tympanic reflex, I5
Ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph. See Bulldog; Cats;
Tympanormetry, 285
Doberman Pinscher; Middle ear
Tympanooccipital fissure, 14
usage. See Scottish Terrier
Type I hypersensitivity, 128, 129
Ventrodorsal (VD) view, 78
reaction. See Biphasic Type I hypersensitivity
DV view, contrast, 83f
reaction
 patient positioning. See Middle ear
Type I irmrmediate hypersensitivity, 133
Ventrormedial compartrment, 16-17
Type III hypersensitivity, 128, I29
division,94f
Type IV hypersensitivity, 128, 130
separation, 85f
reaction, 130, 134
Vertical canal
cerurmen gland adenorma. See Dogs
U
ceruminous glands, density increase, 144
Ulcerated cerurmen gland adenomas, 163f
exudate, presence, 30f
Ulcerated ear canal, otitis rmedia, 288f
hairs/wax. See Poodle
Ulceration. See Ear canal; Epithelial lining; Poodle
nodule, sarmple (obtaining), 71f
cycle, 288
Vertical ear canal, 144-148 
UItrasonographic findings, 209
closure, 145f
Urmbo. See Tyrm panic rmermbrare
cross-section. See Dogs
Urmbo rmermbrane tym pani, 9
hairs, decrease, 152
UMIN. See Upper rmotor reuron
occlusion, apocrine cyst (impact), 156f
Unbound thyroxine (T4), 124
 photormicrograph. See Norrmal vertical ear canal
Unilateral nasopharyngeal polyp. See Cats
stenosis, ceruminous gland hyperplasia (irmpact).
Unipolar budding. See Yeast
See Cocker Spaniels
Unresolved otitis externa, 132
stenotic condition, 323f
Unresponsive allergy cases, 270
turmors. See Labrador Retriever
Upper rmotor neuron (UMN) tract, 344f
Vestibular aqueduct, 95f
Upper respiratory disease. See Kitter
structure, visualization, 93
434
Inde
Vestibular control. See Posture
Wax-O-Sol (Life Science), 408
Vestibular disease, 276, 340
Wear-and-tearpigent5
signs,228
Well ness program, problerns, 386-387
Vestibular ganglion, 20f
West Highland White Terriers
Vestibular mermbrane, 20f
epidermal dysplasia, 206
Vestibular nerve, 18f, 20f
inherited disorders, 205
Vestibular nuclei
prirmary idiopathic seborrhea, 206
irmpact. See Ipsilateral vestibulospinal tract
Wet cerurmen, 153f
information integration, 34 1f
Wheals, 132
Vestibular open window, 12f
Whippets, pattern baldness, 260
Vestibular window, rmedial positiorn. See Incus; Malleolus
White blood cells, presence. See Ear caral
Vestibulocochlear rerve, 20f, 340
WhiteBulldogs,olardermatitis249
Vestibulocochlear systerm, corm ponents, 340-342
White cats, solar derrmatitis, 249
Vetoquinol, usage, 182
White dormestic short-hair cat
Video otoscope, 31-34
right ear, squarmous cell carcinoma, 250f
biopsy channel, 367
sun-related injury, pathognormonic early
three-way adaptor, 35 1f
synptom, 250f
usage, 163, 170
Wood's larmp examination. See Cats
Video otoscopy, 32f
Working channel
Video printer, usage, 33
 2 mrm, usage. See Video Vetscope
Video Vetscope (MedRx), 115, 163
usage. See Ear canal
assermbly, 36f
Wounds, 156-158
opern-ended tormcat catheter, advance, 34f
routine cleaning, 238
 oval fenestrated endoscopic grasping forceps,
Wright-Giermsa stain, 37, 190. See aiso Dogs
threading, 35f
Wright's stain,usage.SeeModifidWright's stan
positioning, 296
probe, 32f
X
light fibers, conmection, 32
X-ray absorption, usage, 93
working charmel, buck ear curette threaded
X-ray bearr
retrograde, 35f
usage, 170, 230
primary beam
visualization, ability, 33
entry, 81f, 83f
working charinel
trajectory, 84f
endoscopic biopsy tool (1.8 rmm) placerment, 169f
endoscopic grasping forceps, usage. See Logs
Video-endoscopic biopsy forceps, 7f
Yeast
Video-toscopic guided CO, laser, alternative,70
armount, 42
Virus isolation studies, 286
breakpoints, 53
Visual aids, 388
growth,143
Vitamin A
infection, 16l, 175f
application,252
mumber, 190 
deficiency, effects, 211
population
rmetabolic conversion inability. See Cats
isolation,277
Vitarmin A-responsive dermatosis, 2 10-21 1
significance, deterrmination, 1 94
clinical signs, 211
presence, 176
diagnosis/treatrment, 211
secondary growth, 205f
Volurme acquisition protocols, 103
unipolar budding, 49 
Vomiting, 213
Yorkshire Terriers
VoSol HC Otic, 405
alopecia, 260-26 1
M. canis infection, 254
W
Malassezia dermatitis, 175f
Waiting tirme, problerm. See Client
Malassezia otitis externa, 1 75f
Wall-mounited transformers (Welch-Allyn), 383
rmelanoderma, 260-261
Water
severe allergic skin disease, 175f
larrirnar flow, 47f
pumps, usage, 160
Water Pik, usage, 160, 271
Zepp lateral ear resection surgery, 158
Wax
Zinc absorption, modification, 258
accurmulation. See Cats; Ear canal; Horizontal
Zinc chelation, 257-258
ear canal
Zinc methionine, oral ingestion, 211
plugs, 26f
Zinc sulfate, oral ingestion, 211
rermoval, 154f. See aiso Cats
Zinc-responsive derrmatosis, 21l-212, 256-258
production, 162f
clinical signs, 211
rermoval, 35f
diagnosis, 211
Wax balls
syndrome I, 211
attachrment. See Eardrurn
syndrome I, 211
bristly hairs, inclusion, 227f
treatment, 211-212
extraction, Video Vetscope working charinel
Zithromax, 291
(endoscopic grasping forceps usage). See Dogs
Zithrormax Oral Suspension (Pfizer), 287
rermoval, 228-233, 231f. See aiso Cats
Zygomaticus rmuscle, 3f