PATRICKR.GAVINRODNEYS.BAGLEY
PRACTICAL
SMALLANIMAL MRI
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
PRACTICAL SMALL
ANIMAL MRI
Practicai Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
@ 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-8 13-80607-5
PRACTICAL SMALL
ANIMAL MRI
Patrick R. Gavin
DVM, PhD, Diplomate ACVR
Rodney S. Bagley
DVM, Diplomate ACVIM (Internal Medicine and Neurology)
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
 A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
Edition first published 2009
 2009 Wiley-Blackwell
publishing program has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical
business to formn Wiley-Blackwell.
Editorial Ofce
 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
 For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about how
1e aiqam ino aas asald 'yooq stut ut teateuu pauAdos au asat ol uoissuad ioy Aidde o
www.wileycom/wiley-blackwell.
 Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use
of specific clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid
directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,22 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For
those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of
payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service
are ISBIN-13: 978-0-8138-0607-5/2009.
 Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service
 marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book This publication is designed to 
 provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is
sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services.
If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
 professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gavin, Patrick R.
 Practical small animal MRI / Patrick R. Gavin, Rodney S. Bagley.
P.;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-0607-5 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8138-0607-0 (alk. paper)
1. Veterinary radiography. 2. Magnetic resonance imaging. I. Bagley, Rodney S. I1. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Magnetic Resonance Imaging-veterinary. SF 757.8 G283p 2009]
SF757.8G38 2009
636.089'607548-dc22
2008040608
A catalogue record for this bookis available from the US. Library of Congress.
Set in 10/12.5 pt Palatino by Aptara? Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed in Singapore
12009
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding.
 and discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or
 promoting a specific method, diagnosis, or treatment by practitioners for any particular
patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all 
warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of fitmess for a particular
 purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental 
regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment,
and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the
package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other
 things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and
 precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an 
organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of
further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information
 the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers 
should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared
 between when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or
extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author
shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
DEDICATION
This work is dedicated to our former and current radiology and neurology
residents, the animal patients, and their owners.
RodBagley
Pat Gavin
CONTENTS
Preface  ix
1. Physics  1
Section 1. Comparative Imaging 1
Patrick R. Gavin
Section 2. Basic Physics 4
Patrick R. Gavin
Section 3. Sequence Selection  8
Patrick R. Gavin
Section 4. Artifacts 10
Patrick R. Gavin
Section 5. Equipment Consideration and Selection  21
 Patrick R. Gavin
2. Veterinary Clinical Magnetic Resonance Imaging  23
Section 1. Diagnosis of Intracranial Disease 23
Rodney S. Bagley, Patrick R. Gavin, and Shannon P. Holmes 
Section 2. Diagnosis of Spinal Disease 123
Rodney S. Bagley, Patrick R. Gavin, and Shannon P. Holmes
Section 3. Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Peripheral
Nerve Disease  227
Rodney S. Bagley, Patrick R. Gavin, and Shannon P. Holmes
3. Orthopedic 233
Patrick R. Gavin and Shannon P. Holmes
 4. Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Abdominal Disease 273
Patrick R. Gavin and Shannon P. Holmes
5. Thorax 295
Patrick R. Gavin and Shannon P. Holmes
vi
vii Contents
6. Head—Non-CNS 309
Patrick R. Gavin and Shannon P. Holmes
7. Cancer Imaging
333
Susan L. Kraft
Index357
PREFACE
Dr. Rod Bagley and I discussed writing a textbook on
sites. These include the IAMS Pet Imaging Centers in
Veterinary MRI for several years. Rod had already pub-
Vierna, Virginia, Raleigh, North Carolina, and
lished a textbook, and knew the tremendous amount of
Redwood City, Califorria. Examples have also been
work involved. We tackled this text with enthusiasm,
 used from Dr. Michael Broome's Advanced Veterinary
but also with a degree of trepidation due to the daunt-
Medical Imaging Center in Tustin, Califorria. These
ing task.
centers, coupled with the Washington State Uriversity
Our goal in writing this textbook was not to have an
cases make up the bulk of the material for the figures in
 exhaustive referenced rehash of material that is already
the text, but other images come from Dr. Kelley Collins,
 present in text. Our goal was to provide a useful, clin-
Veterinary Imaging Center in Ambler, Pennsylvania,
 ical Veterinary MRI text. We were fortunate in starting
Oakridge Veterinary Imaging in Edmond, Oklahoma,
 magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in 1986. Mag-
Tacoma Veterinary MRI in Tacoma, Washington, and
netic resonance imaging for spontaneous brain tumors
Veterinary Neurological Centers in Phoerix, Arizona.
 in dogs was a foundation for our research project. MRI
 The images chosen are realistic examples of common
 continued to be a cornerstone of our research project to
 abnormalities. We have endeavored to provide good
moritor the response of the brain tumor treatment and
quality images, but not ones that carnot be readily ob-
to evaluate normal tissue toxicities.
tained virtually all superconducting magnets. There are
Washington State Uriversity had the oldest teaching
-ea jo y oi ap sa aue suauad ou
hospital in North America in the 1990s. In 1996, we
ity of such images in our files. The images are shown
moved into a new facility that included a 1.0 Tesla su-
with the patients right on the viewers left, urless oth-
perconducting magnetic resonance urit. We were the
erwise indicated. The images are generally shown with
n n re   r ra i
the dorsal anatomic area to the top of the image, even
with a state-of-the-art in-house superconducting MR
when acquired differently. If the dependence of the im-
 unit. We were enthusiastic to expand beyond the imag-
 age is important, that will be given in the figure legend.
ing of brain tumors, and our initial efforts were in spinal
There is intentional overlap of some diseases in the
disease. Our initial studies were not very good, and
various chapters. For example, neoplasia of a periph-
we had to methodically evaluate rumerous pulse se-
eral nerve may be covered in Chapter 2 (Section 3) on
quences and image planes to arrive at a clirically use-
 the peripheral nervous system, Chapter 3 on orthope-
ful study. Magnetic resonance imaging was evolving
dic disease, and Chapter 7 on MR imaging for cancer.
rapidly in all fields, and some of the anatomical dif-
The studies may have been requested for different rea-
 ferences with our small patients necessitated a change
sons, that is loss of function, lameness, or for radiation
from previous human protocols. We became comfort-
therapy plarning, and this redundancy should help
able in the spine, and then advanced into imaging for
 the reader find the material for the clirical problem as
other conditions of the head, orthopedic disease, tho-
presented.
 rax, and abdomen. We also embarked on the imaging
 We considered an exhaustive library of normal im-
of the limbs of live adult horses. Our equine studies
ages, but discarded that notion. All studies have vari-
will not be covered in this textbook and will need to be
 ability due to species, individual variation, technique,
treated in a separate volume.
and volume averaging. Therefore, it is impossible to
 The superior visualization of soft tissues of the body
show an example that would fit all needs. We have
-od aseasip te Amenua jo sunle aun nog pamoe sey
given limited normal information, and have endeav-
cesses. The improved conspicuity allows cliricians of
 ored to illustrate common misunderstandings.
multiple disciplines to have clear visualization of the
The text has limited information on physics, sequence
disease process. This text is to provide examples of
selection, and artifacts. There are many superb texts
our experiences that have been gained over the past
that delve into these topics in great detail. We have
21 years. In addition to our experiences, some of the ex-
 only provided a skeleton of that material to facilitate
amples come from my active collaboration with other
the discussion of the case material presented in the
这
XPREFACE
various chapters. Magnetic resonance imaging is just
We would like to thank Dr. Susan Kraft, DVM, PhD
now becoming an accepted modality throughout the
 DACVR and Dr. Sharnon Holmes for their superb con-
veterinary profession. We have been fortunate to be
tributions. Finally, we would like to thank the many
 among the early adaptors of this exciting technology.
students, interns, residents, and colleagues that helped
We hope this text will aid you in the continued explo-
us learn from our mistakes.
ration and discovery of new information.
Plate 1.9.
Plate 1.10.
Practical Small Animal MRT Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
@ 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
Plate 2.189.
B
Plate 2.9.
B
Plate 7.6.
H
Plate 2.111.
C
Plate 7.8.
CHAPTER ONE
PHYSICS
SECTION 1
Comparative Imaging
Patrick R. Gavin
Diagnostic imaging has always been a mainstay of
1965. Following this begirning veterinary radiology
the armamentarium for the veterinarian. Veterinari-
advanced rapidly. Diagnostic radiology was utilized
ans have limited resources available as regards history
 in multiple species throughout collges of veterinary
and routine screening procedures. Therefore, diagnos-
medicine and in selected practices. By the early to mid-
tic imaging has a major role in the workup of numer-
1970s, advanced radiographic procedures including
ous veterinary patients. An overreliance on diagnos-
fluoroscopy and angiography were available, though
tic imaging has been observed by numerous cliricians;
primarily at colleges of veterinary medicine. The use of
however, the move toward less invasive diagnostic pro-
diagnostic radiology expanded with improved knowl-
cedures with a high precision of diagnosis has contin-
 edge, especially with beter understanding of its diag-
ued to drive this phenomenon. This chapter deals with
 nosis of various pathologic conditions. The use of diag-
 the advances in diagnostic imaging through the last 60
nostic radiology abated somewhat with the advance of
years.
diagnostic ultrasonography; however, it has remained
fession. At the current time, there is a major push to
DIAGNOSTIC RADIOLOGY
move from conventional analog film screen technology
to computed and/or digital radiography. Itis presumed
that veterinary radiology will continue to follow the
Diagnostic radiology was invented in the late 1800s.
 progression realized in human radiology.
The use of diagnostic radiology was rewarding primar-
ily in the study of skeletal structures. However, due
to the cost of the equipment, lack of education, and
NUCLEAR MEDICINE OR
potential risks, the modality did not penetrate veteri-
 nary medicine until approximately the 1950s. Initially.
GAMMA SCINTIGRAPHY
these were the colleges of veterinary medicine in North
America that possessed the equipment to perform di-
The previously used term, nuclear medicine, fell out
agnostic radiographic examinations. There were no
of favor with the antiruclear movement of the 1970s.
trained radiologists at that time and in some places the
Medical persornel were quick to adopt the softer ter
- a p p pd  aa s
 minology of gamma scintigraphy that facilitated its
veterinarians. Cliricians did not know what to expect as
continued development as an imaging modality. While
they had no prior knowledge of the diagnostic modal-
gamma scintigraphy has the advantage of visualizing
ity. Clinicians were often asked if they wanted a V/D or
pue iamsue au ie ,sak, kes Araau pinom pre jeiaie
 most part its greatest use in veterinary medicine has
accept the outcome. Much was to be learned.
been static studies for the diagnosis of skeletal disease.
The use of the modality for the diagnosis of skeletal dis
 medicine, and the first examinations for veterinary
 ease is well documented. The challenges of using nu-
radiologists were performed by charter diplomates
 clear isotopes, radiation safety concerns, and time de-
for the American College of Veterinary Radiology in
 lays are well documented. Some studies have become
Practicat Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
1
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
2 PHYSICS: COMPARATIVE IMAGING
rather routine in veterinary medicine. These include
have been rumerous technologic advancements that
studies of the thyroid gland that have been published
have improved the quality of this modality. Increased
 and have led to a better understanding of thyroid dis-
ease.
interpretation via teleradiology have improved diag-
 While this modality has been present since the turn
nostic outcomes.
of the century, it became rather commonplace in vet-
 Other specialists utilizing diagnostic ultrasonogra-
erinary medicine in the 1980s. Its involvement as a di-
phy, including cardiologists and internists, have fur-
agnostic modality has undergone little evolution in the
ther fueled the expansion of this modality in veterinary
last two decades.
 medical practice. Currently, most ultrasonographic ex-
 aminations are performed by licensed veterinarians.
 It is this author's opirion that in the future, many of
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
- p q pd a a sd as
 sonographers and interpreted by radiologists, just as
Computed tomography (CT) was first utilized in the
occurs in the human field. In the human field, there
mid-1970s in veterinary medicine, primarily for the
 is a greater medical liability issue, and if physician ra-
diagnosis of intracranial disease. The modality was
 diologists can make it work, certainly veterinary ra-
 modified for the study of large animal species shortly
 diologists can work in this format to further advance
thereafter. CT has had a large expansion in the veteri-
this modality's utility in the diagnosis of our veterinary
nary medical field. Virtually all colleges of veterinary
patients.
medicine provide this diagnostic modality In the last
10 years, extension into private veterinary practices has
 significantly expanded its availability. There are now
MAGNETIC RESONANCE
numerous large specialties, and even general practices,
with CT on site. Many urits were purchased as used
IMAGING
 equipment, but many include state-of-the-art helical
urits.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) came into clirical
CT uses the same basic physical principles as di-
utility in the mid-1980s. It was utilized in veterinary
agnostic x-ray, except it depicts the shades of gray in
medicine primarily as a research tool in the 1980s and
cross-section. It is also possible to better visualize dif-
 early 1990s. In the mid-1990s, some areas began to use
ferent tissues and the pathologic change within them,
 MR as a routine clirical modality. The procedure was
if present. Therefore while the modality is similar to di-
 applied to large animal imaging a few years later. How-
agnostic x-ray, CT is superior in diagnosis because the
 ever, the attitude of "not invented here" plagued the in-
axial images are far superior to the two-dimensional
 clusion of MRI for the diagnosis of veterinary patients at
radiographic projections. CT has led a renaissance in
 many sites in the early years. Many veterinary sites had
the understanding of three-dimensional anatomy and
antiquated equipment or equipment with poor reliabil-
physiologic principles.
ity, which gave it the aura of an unreliable diagnostic
modality. However, as more sites gained modern di-
agnostic equipment, the utility of the modality became
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
apparent.
 Following the change of the millernium, MR became
 Ultrasonography became a clirical imaging modality
the modality of choice for the veterinary neurologist
in veterinary medicine in the late 1970s. It languished
 for the examination of disease processes involving the
in veterinary colleges through much of the 1980s as the
brain and spinal cord. Efforts to expand the use of the
technology advanced. The initial technology of static
B-mode machines was replaced by real-time machines 
tic facilities. At the time of this writing, this author is
that allowed an approximate 80%reduction in scarning
aware of more than 40 sites dedicated to MR imaging of
time. The resolution and utility of the studies improved
animals using what would be considered modern state-
 at the same time. However, diagnostic ultrasonogra-
 of-the-art equipment. One limitation has been the non-
phy did not hit its stride and become mainstream in the 
Urited States until approximately the 1990s. Now, most
 ogists with expertise in this modality capable of provid-
 large veterinary practices (and certairly referral prac-
 ing accurate diagnoses of clinical conditions. Currently.
tices) have diagnostic ultrasonography This modality is
the American College of Veterinary Radiology does not
also available in many smaller private practices. There
require training time minimums in MRI for their core
3 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
curriculum, as not all training sites have this modality
capable low field permanent magnets. It is this author's
 available. Therefore many veterinary radiologists, and
opinion that equipment generally costs what it is worth.
n qof a uo, oraun auassa isn 'sa
Therefore, equipment that is more expensive is of more
in the use of this modality.
diagnostic worth, and conversely, equipment that costs
 There is a broad spectrum of equipment options.
less has less diagnostic capability. The equipment pur-
These options span from the currently available
chase balance will be finding equipment that provides
best, including machines capable of functional MRI,
the utility required for the financial reality of the prac
 commonly utilized super conducting magnets, cost-
 tice. There has been a rapid development of equipment
effective mid-field urits, to even less expensive but less
in the last few years.
SECTION 2
Basic Physics
Patrick R. Gavin
It is beyond the scope of this text to do an extensive
microchips, ameroid constrictors, certain bone plates,
treatise of the physics of MRI. There are several excel-
 gold-plated beads, and coloric contents.
lent texts, as well as numerous study guides, and even
 Paramagnetic materials include ions of various met-
impressive volumes of free information on the Inter-
 als such as iron (Fe), manganese (Mg), and gadolinium
net that can be consulted for more in-depth informa-
(Gd). These substances can alsohave magnetic suscepti-
tion on patient MR physics. This chapter outlines the
bility, but orly about 1/1,0o0 that of ferromagnetic ma-
salient features of the physics of MRI to allow a better
terials. These substances increase the Tl and T2 relax-
understanding of image, and artifact, production, and
ation rates. Because of this property, chelates of these el-
visualization.
ements make ideal components of MR contrast agents.
Current clirical applications for MRI rely on visual-
Gadolinium chelates are the most common agents and
ization of the hydrogen atom's nucleus. This physical
 generally cause an increase in Tl-weighted signal. This
is seen as increased hyperintensity (brightness) in T1-
resonance, that is, the hydrogen atom nuclei resonate.
The word nuclear does not refer to radioactivity, but
tions, as seen in the urinary bladder, loss of signal can
merely refers to the rucleus of the atom. For more po-
 be seen as a result of T2 relaxation effects dominating.
litically correct names it has become known as MRI.
Supraparamagnetic elements are materials that have
The basic physical principle is that a moving electri-
ferromagnetic properties. The most commorly used is
cal charge produces a magnetic field. The size of the
 super paramagnetic iron oxide (SPIO), which is an iron
magnetic field is dependent on the speed of movement
(Fe)based contrast agent for liver imaging. These have
(magnetic movement) and the size of charge. While the 
been used minimally in veterinary MR. Diamagnetic
hydrogen nucleus has a small electric charge it spins
materials have no intrinsic magnetic moment, but can
very fast. These physical attributes in concert with the
weakly repel the field. These materials include water,
abundance of the hydrogen nucleus within the body
 copper, nitrogen, and barium sulfate. They will cause a
 produce a detectable magnetic field.
 loss of signal and have been seen as a loss of MR sig-
Magnetic field strengths are measured in urits of
 nal in images made after the admiristration of barium
 gauss (G) and tesla (T). One tesla is equal to 10,000
sulfate suspensions.
gauss. The earth's magnetic field is approximately
Since hydrogen is the common element used to make
0.5 G. The strength of MRI is similar in strength to the
an MR clirical image, we will discuss the process of
electromagnets used to pick up large heavy scrap metal.
image formation. When hydrogen is placed within a
 Materials can be ferromagnetic, paramagnetic, supra-
large external magnetic field, the randomly spinning
paramagnetic, or diamagnetic. Ferromagnetic materi-
 protons (hydrogen nucleus) will come into aligrment
als generally contain iron, nickel, or cobalt. These ma-
with the external field. Some of the protons align with.
terials can become magnetized when subjected to an
the field and some align against the field, largely cancel-
external magnetic field. In MR images, these materials
ing each other out. A few more align with the field than
cause large artifacts characterized by the properties of
against it. The net number aligning with the magnetic
signal and distortion of the image. These artifacts can be
field is very small. Approximately, three protons align
-as a   a sa  u 
with the field for every one million protons as l.0 T.
stances are too small to be seen on conventional radio-
This rumber is proportional to the external magnetic
graphy Commorly seen sources of these artifacts are
field strength. While this number appears very small,
Practical Small Animal MRIPatrick R. Gavirn and Rodney S. Bagley
@ 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
5 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
the abundance of hydrogen allows for high-quality im-
to the surrounding lattice as occurs in Tl relation. It
ages. For example, in a typical volume imaging element
is, therefore, sometimes referred to as spin-spin re-
termed a voxel, the number of protons aligned with the
laxation. This results in loss of transverse magnetiza-
field would be roughly 6 x 10i5.
tion. In biological materials, T2 time is longer than T1
Basic physics dictate that the energy is proportional
time. T2 relaxation occurs exponentially like T1 and is
 to the nuclei's urique resonant frequency in MR; this is
described as the time required for 63% of the trans-
     a   
 verse magnetization to be lost. In general, T2 values are
 ning of the hydrogen ruclei is relatively low. The res-
urrelated to field strength. In patients, the magnetic
signal decays faster than T2 would predict. There are
 netic field, which for hydrogen is equal to 42.56 MHz/T.
many factors creating imperfections in the homogene-
 MRI is able to make high-quality images, not because of 
 ity of the magnetic field, including the magnet and pa-
 -unqe a ot anpinq 'sunod suds aui po aaua a
 tient inhomogeneities including surface contours, air-
dance of hydrogen protons present in the body The  tissue interfaces, and any metal the patients may have
f within them, including dental work, staples, and or-
unpaired electrons in the orbital shell. Each nucleus
 thopedic appliances. The sum effect of all of these in-
with this characteristic will resonate at a urique fre-
 homogeneities pronounces an effect called T2*. The T2
 s  a  sd s  
 relaxation comes from random interactions, while T2*
wobble as they spin. The rate of wobbling is termed
comes from a combination of random and fixed causes
precession. These precess at the resonance or Larmor
including magnet and patient inhomogeneity.
frequency for hydrogen.
To attempt to negate the fixed causes, a 180° refocus-
 If a radiofrequency (RF) pulse is applied at the res-
ing pulse is used. Consider the following analogy, three
cars in a race going at different speeds. At the start, all
The absorption of energy causes the protons to jump
the cars are obviously together, and can be thought of as
into a higher energy state. This causes the net magne-
 being in-phase. At some time after the start of the race,
tization to spiral away from the main magnetic field,
there is a noticeable difference between them due to dif-
designated Bo. The net magnetization vector, therefore,
moves from its initial longitudinal position a distance
time, everybody will turn around and go back toward
 proportional to pulse, which is determined by its tem-
the starting line. If it is assumed that everyone is still
 poral length and strength. After a certain length of time,
 going at the same rate as before, then they will all ar-
the net magnetization vector would rotate 90° and lie in
rive at the starting line together and in-phase. The time
a transverse plane. It is at this position that no net mag-
 required for the atoms to come back in-phase is equal
netization can be detected. When the RF pulse is turned
 to the time it took for them to lose phase. This total time
s   s s  s
is called the "TE" or echo time. The 180° pulse is used
 to reverse the T2* de-phasing process. As soon as the
1. The absorbed energy is retransmitted at the reso-
spins come back into phase, they will immediately start
nance frequency.
to go out-of-phase again. The two variables of interest in
2.
 The spins begin to return to their original longitu
spin echo (SE) sequences are (1) the repetition time (TR)
dinal orientation, termed the T1 relaxation.
and (2) the echo time (TE). All SE sequences include a
 3.While the precessions were initially in-phase, they
slice-selective 90° pulse followed by one or more 180°
begin to de-phase, termed T2 relaxation.
refocusing pulses. This refocusing pulse can be applied
 multiple times. The use of multiple refocusing pulses
 The return of the excited nuclei from the high energy
 is the basis for fast or turbo spin-echo imaging, FSE, or
state to their ground state is termed Tl relaxation (or
 TSE respectively.
spin-lattice relaxation). The T1 relaxation time is the 
-es Aq paonpoud are uoexeai zi pue ljo sae 
 time required for the magnetization to return to 63% of
 pling the signal at various times. Both effects are al-
its original longitudinal length. The Tl relaxation rate 
 ways present; however, we will often accenfuate one
is the reciprocal of the T1 time (1/T1). T1 relaxation is
 effect over the other such that the sequences are often.
dependent on the magnetic field strength that dictates
  s     
 To produce the cross-sectional images, gradient coils
ciated with longer T1 times.
 are needed, which produce deliberate variation in the
T2 relaxation occurs when spins in high and low en-
 main magnetic field. There is one gradient coil in each
Xiaua asol ou op inq Abiaua aueuoxa sajeis 481a
Cartesian plane direction (X, Y, and Z planes). These
6 PHYSICS: BASIC PHYSICS
slight variations in the magnetic field will allow for slice
Table 1.1.
selection and phase and frequency encoding. The slice
Relationship of image para meters to signal-to-noise ratio
selection gradient will be the Z, X, and Y gradients for
(SNR), resolution, and imaging time
Increase
Acquisition
 and dorsal plane sequences, respectively.
Parameters
SNR
Resolution
A term commonly used in discussing image for-
mation is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). SNR deter-
FOV
+
nc
mines the appearance of the image. This ratio is mea-
NEX
+
nc
+
sured by calculating the difference in signal intensity
Slice thick
+
nc
between the area of interest (the patient) and the back-
Gap
+
nc
 ground. The difference between the signal and back-
TR
+
nc
+
 ground noise is divided by the standard deviation of the
TE
一
nc
nc
Matrix size
一
+
+
signal from the background, which provides an indica-
Bandwidth
一
nc
nc
tion of the variability of the background noise. SNR is
Mag net strength
+
nc
nc
proportional to the volume imaged, called a voxel, and 
the square root of the number of signal averages and
nc, no change.
the number of phase encoding steps. Since signal av-
YNS 'siaed peodat ae sdais aseud pue saseia
longitudinal aligrment is termed TR (repetition time).
is closely related to image acquisition time. Decreas-
Changing TR will affect the Tl-weighting. Since T1 is
ing the voxel size (by decreasing the field of view), in-
relatively short, a Tl-weighted image has a short TR
creasing the phase encoding, and decreasing the slice
and a short TE. To improve T2-weighting, the TR is
thickness will all decrease the SNR. Increasing the voxel
long to allow for a longer TE.
 size (by increasing the field of view, increasing the slice
As can be seen from above, the relationship between
 thickness, or decreasing the matrix size), or decreasing 
signal-to-noise, resolution, and acquisition is complex.
 the phase encoding steps will all improve the SNR. The
Changing one element affects the others. A table is
slice selection gradient will set the slice thickness. The
given to illustrate these direct features (Table 1.1).
two dimensions of the image are then mapped depend-
To develop protocols, a very thorough understand-
Kouanbay pure aseqd au u Asuanba panmua uo Su
ing is needed of these interrelationships. Protocol de-
encoded directions.
velopment is beyond the scope of this text. However.
All of the frequencies in the frequency encoded di-
rection can be encoded at one time; whereas, the num-
der to maximize the protocol for the individual patient.
 ber of phase encodings increases the time of acquisi-
This is more challenging in veterinary patients, which.
tion in a directly proportional marner. Therefore, it is
can vary tremendously in size. The ultimate goal is to
common to map the signal with fewer phase encod-
maximize these relationships to provide the best possi-
ings compared to frequency encodings (e.g., 192 x 256)
ble image in a clirically viable acquisition time. While it
to reducing scan time. Dividing the field of view by
 seems counterintuitive, the smaller patient may require
 the matrix size gives the voxel area, which represents 
thicker slices to maintain sufficient SNR. Another coun-
the displayed element called a pixel. The depth of the
terintuitive imaging principle is the need to reduce the
voxel is determined by slice thickness. Slice thickness
matrix to improve visualization because of its effects on
 is almost always the largest dimension of this imag-
SNR.
ing voxel. Therefore, the resolution perpendicular to
 Image sequences occur as two main types. The
 the image plane is generally the poorest. The signal ob-
first is the SE sequence. This is the most commonly
tained for the image can be improved by increasing the
used sequence for T1-weighted, protor density, or T2-
 number of signal averages. This is done by increasing
weighted images. The variables of interest include TR
the rumber of RF pulses to knock the protons out of
and TE. SE sequences use a 90 RF pulse, followed by
aligrment. The scan time is directly proportional to the
one or more 180° refocusing pulses.
number of signal averages, sometimes termed number
A subset of SE sequences includes the inversion re-
 of excitations (NEX). While doubling the signal aver-
covery (IR) sequences. IR sequences can be used to null
ages will double the acquisiftion time, the increase in
 any substance, but are most commorly used to rull out
the signal obtained will be the square root of 2, or only
cerebral spinal fluid, termed the fluid attenuation in-
a 40% increase.
version recovery or FLAIR sequence, or fat, using the
The T1 and T2 relaxation rates affect the SNR. The
short tau inversion recovery or STIR sequence. An IR
time between RF pulses to move the protons out of
 sequence is a 180° prepulse; time is allowed such that
7 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
the tissue to be nulled has its vector in the horizon-
variables include TR and TE, but there is also the vari-
tal magnetization plane. Then, the 90° RF pulse will
able of flip angle. Generally, flip angles of less than
only affect those tissues that were not at the zero or
 90° are used. GE sequences can be used to acquire im-
 horizontal magnetization plane. Another way to null 
 ages rapidly and are often used for breath holding tech-
fat is through fat saturation. These sequences consist 
 riques and visualization of moving structures, includ-
of multiple 9o RF pulses that have relatively short
ing the cardiovascular system. GE sequences generally
TR.
have less contrast than SE sequences. Lower field MR
 The other basic type of sequence acquisition is the
urits often rely on GE sequences due to short TR and
gradient echo (GE or GRE) sequence. The basic se-
 TE, permitting short imaging duration. The lack of stan-
quences are varied by adding de-phasing and re-  dard Tl and T2 contrast can limit the utility of these
an e a u ss   ns  ro p a ne sra ds
SECTION 3
Sequence Selection
Patrick R. Gavin
It is not the intent of this text to go through all the vari-
fat suppression to further increase conspicuity of fluid,
ous imaging sequences that could be utilized with MR.
and have the advantage of negating the need to ad-
These sequences are often explained similar to a recipe
 ditionally acquire STIR images. Bright fluid in images
in a cookbook. Just as there can be an exhaustive num-
is desirable as most pathologic abnormalities have an
ber of recipes to cook with any given list of ingredients,
increased fluid signal. The fluid can be from either in-
the same is true for the number of imaging sequences.
tracellular fluid, in the case of cellular abnormalities
including neoplasia or granulomatous conditions, or
or GE sequences. The majority of imaging protocols for
intercellular fluid from diseases such as abscessation
conventional clirical MR imaging use SE sequences. GE
or edema.
sequences do have some specific uses. Low field mag-
nets are often heavily dependent on GE sequences to
provide shorter examinations with relatively thin sec-
T1 SEQUENCE
tions. However, many GE sequences suffer from lack of
Because of these limitations, this author favors tradi-
Tl-weighted sequences are generally utilized with con-
tional SE sequences over GE sequences. GE sequences
trast agents. The Tl-weighted precontrast study is "al-
and their specific use(s) will be highlighted throughout
ways" necessary. One carnot definitively assess con-
the book, but the coverage in this book is not exhaus-
trast enhancement without the pre-erhanced study.
tive.
and a shortcut eliminating this sequence can lead to
 Standard clirical imaging sequences most commonly
 serious misinterpretation. In Tl-weighted images, fat
utilize T2-weighted sequences, STIR sequences, and T1-
is hyperintense and fluid is hypointense. Following the
weighted sequences. Tl sequences are fundamental in
administration of contrast, abnormal tissue often has
contrast studies with the administration of a paramag-
an increased vascular supply leading to increased sig-
netic gadolinium-based contrast agent.
s n s  n s s  n 
Other sequences that are commorly utilized are the
structure, such as the blood-brain barrier, that allow
 FLAIR sequence, the GE sequence for the detection
the contrast agent to leak into the tissue and change
of hemorrhage, and heavily T2-weighted images for
the relaxation of the tissue leading to increased signal
the visualization of fluid structures, including the sub-
intensity. It must be remembered that the gadolirium
arachnoid CSF columns, the biliary system, or the fluid
contrast agent is not visualized. The only element that
containing irner ear structures of the cochlea and semi-
can be visualized at this time is the element hydrogen.
 Therefore, the gadolinium-based agents affect the re-
circular canals.
laxation of the protons in the molecules. This fact needs
to be remembered, as the amount of contrast required
for the paramagnetic effect on the proton relaxation is
T2 SEQUENCE
not as concentration dependent as iodine-based con-
 trast agents for CT.
T2-weighted sequences are often the bulwark of imag-
 If a Tl-weighted image (prior to the administration
ing protocols. When performed with fast SE techriques,
 of gadolirium) has hyperintensity in tissues that are
reasonable imaging time is achieved and it produces 
 not related to fat, then paramagnetic substances must
images in which both fat and fluid are seen as relatively
be present. The orly paramagnetic substances within
high signal intensity. Some systems use T2-weighted
 the body are iron and manganese. Since the amount
Practicat Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
8
@ 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-8 13-80607-5
9  PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
of manganese present is in a very small degree, the
uation appearance of cerebral spinal fluid is somewhat
only reasonable element that could be present would
dependent on time of inversion as well as other factors
be iron. For iron to be bright on Tl-weighting, it re-
specific to MR urit. With some protocols, one is capable
quires a degradation of iron through normal processes
until it reaches extracellular methemoglobin. The vari-
 pearance on the FLAIR sequence. The abnormal signal
ous stages of the iron degradation process that can be
 appearance could be due to increased protein content
seen in MR images will be given with examples utiliz-
and /or cellularity or associated CSF flow.
ing the brain. Again, since Tl-weighted images result
 This sequence can be useful when applied to other
in high signal intensity with fat, it is often preferable
fuids. A FLAIR sequence can be used to get a T2-
 t0 perform Tl-weighted images with fat suppression.
 weighted image of a urinary bladder tumor Since urine
However, following the administration of contrast, it is
 is basically acellular and with no proteins, the TI for CSF
possible that the lesion can have a relaxation time simi-
can be used. The nulling out of fluid from conditions
    s s     n 
such as hydrothorax allows darkering of the effusion
it is advisable to always have some postcontrast stud-
 ies used without fat suppression to make certain that
 characteristics of the thoracic wall and organs. IR times
lesions are not lost.
for such studies vary due to many parameters, but es-
sentially all fluid, including urine, synovial fluid, tho
racic and abdominal effusions, or cerebral spinal fluid
STIR SEQUENCE
can be nulled with the FLAIR techrique.
The STIR sequence is a workhorse sequence as it allows
 ss  y  n a p e r
GRADIENT ECHO SEQUENCE
the fat signal. The IR sequence is an easily performed
study utilizing a 180° prepulse, prior to the 90° excita-
GE techriques are the most commonly used sequence
tion pulse. The relaxation time of fat is known for all
for rapid studies, and as such are often utilized for local-
magnet strengths. Therefore, it is easy to set the time
 ization sequences. In the brain, its most common clini-
of inversion (TI) for a specific magnetic field strength,
which will ensure uniform and generalized suppres-
 pi o i as a a ss 
sion of the fat signal. STIR sequences should always
 mogeneities. Therefore, the iron concentration within.
be performed prior to the admiristration of contrast. It
 hemorrhagic tissue is detected as a magnetic field inho
 is possible that contrast enhancement could change the
 mogeneity Urfortunately, this same degree of inhomo
relaxation time of the tissues similar to fat, and again the 
geneity can cause massive image artifacts from small
tissue's signal will be nulled on a STIR sequence if per-
metallic implants including BBs, steel bird shot, the
formed after contrast administration. STIR sequences 
are utilized as they display normal vascular or other
cal tissue differences including the frontal sinuses (air)
fluid-filled structures as bright on a generalized dark 
 next to the brain. Other than the benefit of detecting
hemorrhage, the overall tissue contrast is poor with GE
s yp e u ,sris, se pp a
sequences, even though Tl- and T2-weighted GE se-
quences are available. Therefore, this author tends to
limit them to the detection of hemorrhage in studies
FLAIR SEQUENCE
of the CNS. GE sequences are commonly used in the
thoracic and abdominal studies to minimize motion ar-
The FLAIR sequence is similar to the STIR sequence ex-
tifact.
cept it uses an inversion time to get null fluid signal. In
 In the subsequent chapters, we will utilize a few addi-
 general, the FLAIR is utilized in the brain and gets rid of
tional sequences for the visualization of specific struc-
the usually hyperintense fluid signal from the cerebral
tures. These are often heavily T2-weighted images that
spinal fluid. Therefore, lesions that are periventricular 
allow the visualization of structures including vascular
are easier to detect as increased signal intensity, adjacent
structures, the equivalent of an MR myelogram, or the
to a black or darkened cerebral spinal fluid. The atten-
fluid in the semicircular canals and cochlea.
SECTION 4
Artifacts
Patrick R. Gavin
The goal of all imaging modalities is to aid in visual-
instance, if the patient is in the right decubitus position,
ization of normal anatomy and disease states. Urfortu-
then the Y gradient would be used for the sagittal slices
nately, all imaging modalities have some artifacts that
of the body.
can mimic pathologic change and lead to misdiagnosis.
 The other two gradients map the signal in the two
MR is no different. Knowledge of the common MR ar-
 dimensions of the slice plane. The signal is mapped ac
tifacts and the ability to distinguish artifactual change.
 cording to its phase and frequency. The frequencies of
which may be mimicking pathologic change from a true
the signals are similar to the range frequencies of dif-
ferent radio stations. Think of the phase as a time zone.
tation of MR images.
There could be an FM 10l.1 station in Denver, Colorado,
and a station with the same frequency in Los Angeles,
HARDWARE ARTIFACTS
Califorria. Then, if one were to realize that the time
zones are a continuum from east to west, this allows
for many more time zones than the current artificially
Some artifacts come from the magnetic field inhomo-
drawn time zones for a 24-h clock. The rumber of fre-
  '    s a 
 '  a ssd g    s
An artifactual bending of the spine may be seen when
can go much higher.
at the edge of the main magnetic field (Figure 1.1). The
patient should be repositioned in the gantry if this is
creating a diagnostic dilemma.
PHASE AND FREQUENCY
Artifacts can also occur from defects in the RF shield.
ing. The shield could be faulty but often these artifacts
ARTIFACTS
are from transient breaks in the shielding and most of-
 ten are seen if someone enters the magnet room during a
Some artifacts are propagated in the frequency direc-
papra aq ues iere , addz, o ad s auanbas
tion while others are propagated in the phase clirection.
by waiting until the end of a sequence to enter the room
 Therefore, a prior knowledge of the direction of these
(Figure 1.2).
encodings is needed to determine the image artifact.
The advantage of MRI over CT is its ability to visual
Some institutions print this information in the images.
ize the body in any plane. As mentioned, the three com-
It is always part of the DICOM header information that
mon planes are (i) transverse (axial), (2) dorsal (coro-
can be assessed if one can access this file. It is often
nal), and (3) the sagittal plane. The images are made
simpler to find some ubiquitous motion artifact from
from different slices within these planes, which are
flowing blood, for example, that will be propagated in.
formed from the three magnetic gradients used. When
the phase direction. By changing the background of the
understanding the orientation gradients, it is useful to
image, one can readily depict this in the background
assume that the patient went into the bore of the magnet
(Figure 1.3). Motion artifact can be from gastrointesti-
head first and supine for the imaging study. One of the
nal motion, respiratory motion, blood flow, or patient
gradients is selected for the slice selection to provide
 motion. Attempts to limit some of this motion can be
the desired plane. In this scenario, the gradient in the
 made by gaiting the acquisition to the respiratory or car-
Z direction is used for transverse or axial slices, the X
 diac cycles. This form of image acquisition will prolong
direction is used for sagittal slices, and the Y direction
 the study to a degree and may limit its clinical utility.
is used for coronal or dorsal slices. All gradients can
 Therefore, some motion is generally an accepted con-
sequence of MRI.
Practicat Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
10
@ 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-8 13-80607-5
11  PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
S    e      e         ()  
from magnetic inhomogeneity at the periphery of the imaging volume. (B) Sagiftal STIR sequence of the lumbar spine of the
same patient showing bending at the opposite end of the patient from the same affect.
The signal from flowing blood is often accentuated
encoding directions allows one to ascertain, with cer-
following the administration of contrast due to the in-
 tainty, if this is artifactual or real (Figure 1.4).
creased signal intensity of the blood with the contrast
agent. Pseudolesions can be seen that would mimic
CHEMICAL SHIFT ARTIFACT
Another artifact that can be corfused with pathologic
change is a chemical shift artifact. This artifact is a
 mis-mapping that occurs at water-fat interfaces and in
the frequency direction. The artifact is often easily rec-
 ognized in abdominal studies, but in other areas can
mimic pathologic change (Figure 1.5). The same ability
p  na p ard a deas o
and to change the direction of the chemical shift artifact
helps clarify the existence of the artifact versus patho-
logic change (Figure 1.6).
FOLD-OVER OR ALIASING
ARTIFACT
 Fold-over or aliasing is another artifact that occurs in
the phase direction. This artifact occurs when a portion
of anatomy is outside the selected image field of view.
This anatomy can be wrapped around to the opposite
side of the image as a mirror image into the area of
Figure 1.2. Zipper artifact: T2-weighted transverse image
interest. This can corfuse the interpretation (Figure 1.7)
with a horizontal zipper artifact (arrows).
Field of view should be large enough to encompass
12PHYSICS:ARTIFACTS
Figure 1.3. Motion artifact. (A) Apparent small lesion in the left occipital cortex on T1 postcontrast. (B) Lesion gone.
background with phase left to right.
13 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 1.4. (A) STIR sagiftal sequence of the lumbosacral spine showing the presence of hyperintensity of the endplates
sequence of the same location as (B). Hyperintensity is somewhat obscured due to flow artifact from the aorta. Phase direction
is in the foot-to-head direction such that the aorfic signal is bleeding into the spine at this site. (D) Confrast enhancement T1-
dorsal spinous processes of the first few thoracic vertebrae. This type of flow artifact could be prevented by changing the phase
   r       e   i s     i  sn  
phase is going in the direction of the arrows on the leff-hand side of the image. The phase is left to right in this image and the
confrast enhancements carnot be substanfiated on multiple planes, they should be suspect. If one needs to prove the presence
of artifacts, the change in phase direction with a repeating of the sequence, as in this case, can be helpful.
14PHYSICS:ARTIFACTS
B
Figure 1.5. (A) Phase direction is ventrodorsal, which means the frequency direction is foot to head. This chemical shift
arfifact can readily be seen as the black line at the posterior aspect of the spleen and the white line at the cranial aspect. This
chemical shift artifact occurs due to the water signal from the spleen interacting with the abdominal fat signal. When the phase
direction is changed, as in (B), to a ventrodorsal orientation, the change in direction of the chemical artifact is readily seen.
A
B
Figure 1.6. (A) Chemical shift artifact in the spinal column. The phase direction is in the direction of the arrows on the leff-
hand side of the image, in a leff-to-right direction. Therefore, the chemical shift is of a ventrodorsal nafure. There is a decreased
signal intensity at fhe dorsal aspect of the subarachnoid space, which is arfifactual and slighfly brighter venfrally, which is also
artifactual. (B) The phase direction is ventrodorsal and the frequency direction is left to right. Now, there is a black line at the
lefft-hand side of the subarachnoid space and a bright line at the right side. These are both artifacfual due to the chemical shiff
 between the water of the subarachnoid space and the epidlural fat. This type of chemical shif artifact is often seen in large dogs
due to the amount of epicdural fat. This should not be mistaken as a dural lesion.
15 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
凸
Figure 1.7. (A) Fold-over or aliasing artifact of the pinna of the ear superimposed over the brain. These artifacts can be
negated by a slight increase in the field of view to include the pinnae. One should also try to keep the pinnae close to the
surface of the head when imaging to help alleviate this problem while maintaining a relatively smallfield of view. (B) Aliasing
artifact where the head is being superimposed over the caudal portion of the abdomen. The small arrows show the eye and
see this fold-over, if one was at a different sagittal plane, the artifact could be easily misinterpreted for a pathologic lesion.
One of the best ways to prevent these corfusions is to always obtain sequences in multiple planes, and be able to corfirm
lesions on more than one sequence and more than one plane.
 the anatomy visualized or techriques for fold-over sup-
 encoding steps to save time. With excessive reduction in
pression need to be employed to avoid this artifact.
 phase encoding steps there may be a mis-mapping of
Urfortunately, many of these suppression techriques 
the image in the phase direction. Truncation artifacts
result in increased scan time. Therefore, where possible,
can make conditions such as a dilated central canal
fold-over suppression should not be used to either re-
 within the cervical spinal column or the appearance
duce acquisition time or improve signal-to-noise levels.
m  r  e aas e n
Since fold-over is in the phase direction, the phase must
 in fact, none exists. Often, this artifact is readily seen
often be set in a certain direction to prevent blood flow  and ignored when the change is only seen on one
related artifacts within the area of interest. For instance,
 plane and carnot be corfirmed on an orthogonal view
in sagittal images of the lumbar spine, it is preferred to
(Figure 1.8).
have phase oriented in a foot-to-head direction and,
 thus, the frequency going anterior to posterior If one
were to have the phase encoding direction going ventral
to dorsal, the blood flow artifact from the aorta would
MAGNETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY
superimpose on the spinal cord leading to erroneous
ARTIFACT
interpretation. In this instance, the phase must be ori-
 ented foot to head and fold-over suppression is needed
 One of the more sizable artifacts is from magnetic sus-
 to prevent wrap-around artifact.
ceptibility This artifact occurs when magnetic material
is present within the patient. Ferrous metal is espe-
TRUNCATION ARTIFACT
cially problematic, including BBs and steel bird shot.
 Other sources of this artifact can come from the spring
Truncation artifact occurs when the number of phase
 on the identification microchips, orthopedic devices
 encoding steps is decreased in relation to the frequency
 or small bits of metal left behind from a surgery. It is
16 PHYSICS: ARTIFACTS
Figure 1.8. (A) Truncafion artifact. Truncation arfifacts create a mis-mapping of the signal. In this case, the subarachnoid
signal is being mis-mapped into the center of the spinal cord making it appear as an erlarged central canal or syrinx. This
happens when the phase and coding steps are reduced too much in an effort to save time. By increasing the phase and coding
important to appreciate that small metal fragments that
nal views must be assessed to evaluate partial volume
are too small to be seen on a conventional radiograph
average artifact.
can create very large artifacts in the MR image. Other
problem substances come from ingested rocks contain-
ing minerals and even from barium sulfate suspen-
MAGIC ANGLE ARTIFACT
sion. High concentrations of gadolirium, especially in
the urinary tract from excretion of the contrast agent,
 p   pe  e n is 
This artifact affects structures of low signal intensity
that are oriented at a 55° angle off the main magnetic
sequences, which is a magnetic susceptibility artifact
- s ps sn i   
(Figure 1.9-1.11).
tense on short TE sequences. There are two 55° cones,
one positive and one negative within the bore of the
magnet. This artifact is common in orthopedic studies,
VOLUME AVERAGING
recogrized most commonly in tendinous or ligamen-
ARTIFACT
tous structures. These, in a normal state, have low signal
intensity and in diseased states are hyperintense. Thus,
this artifact produces lesion in certain orientations, and
The signal intensity of the voxel is the average of all the
is avoided by the inclusion of a T2-weighted (long TE)
different signal intensities from different tissues within
SE sequence in all studies (Figure 1.13).
the slice thickness. When a slice "cuts" through areas
of disparate intensity or contour, the intensity mapped
into the voxel is a misrepresentation of the different
CROSS-TALK ARTIFACT
structures. This is referred to as volume average or slice
thickness artifact. It can greatly affect spatial resolution.
This is often seen where the change or difference is of
This artifact occurs when setting up multiple stacks
small volume (some disc herriations) or when there
of images and their fields of view intersect, which re-
is a marked change in contour. The curvature of the
sults in loss of signal (Figure 1.14). This can be avoided
calvarium at the frontal sinus and brain interface can
by adding an additional sequence to allow for proper
make lesions, like a meringioma, appear to cross the 
placement of all slices. This is especially a problem in
bone and occupy the sinus (Figure 1.12). The orthogo-
the lumbosacral region.
17 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 1.9.  (A), (B) Arfifact from a small BB in the region of the subcutaneous fissues of this cat. A small BB still causes a very
Part (B) is a T2-weighted sequence showing some visualization of the spine, but marked warping of the image is due to the
some magnetic susceptibility artifact, it is nowhere near that seen with the steel of a BB. However, part (D) shows the warping
of the image from these stainless steel screws in the facets. The curvafure of the spinal cord that appears in C3 is artifacfual due
to the magnetic susceptibility artifact. (See Color Plates 1.9C,D.)
18PHYSICS:ARTIFACTS
C
showing a small steel shot next to the vertebra. (B) This small piece of steel creates a huge magnetic susceptibility artifact
negating visualization of the spine in the L4 through L6 region. Part (C) is a radiograph of an animal that has suffered a gunshot
wound. In this case, the metal is lead. While the radiograph shows fragmentafion of the lead, the radiograph cannot depict
the spinal cord. Numerous small fragments of lead are identified with the arrows. (D) The MR shows that the lead does not
been created from the gunshot wound. The hyperintensity on this STIR sequence is hemorrhage and edema from the gunshot
wound. (See Color Plates 1.10A-D.)
Figure 1.11. (A) T1 fat-saturated postcontrast sagiftal image. The very low signal intensity within the renal pelvis is due to the
high concentration of gadolinium contrast agent that is being excreted by the urinary system. The concentrafion is so high that
instead of being "enhanced," it acfually gets a low signal intensity with this high concenfration. (B) T2-weighted sagiftal image
following the admiristration of contrast showing the same low signal intensity of the renal pelvis due to the high concenfration
of gadolirium. This is also commonly seen in the urinary bladder and should not be mistaken for a lesion.
Figure 1.12. Volume averaging artifact. (A) Sagittal T2 image. Dotted line (large white arrow) is the location of (B). The
smallest white arrows depict the air-filled frontal sinus. The black arrows point to the periphery of the olfactory bulb of the
cerebrum. (B) T2 transverse image. This image is the average of the signals from a 4 mm slice thickness, 2 mm on eifher side of
the dofted line in (A). The smallest white arrows depict the air-filled frontal sinus. The black arrows point to the periphery of
the olfactory bulb of the cerebrum. The larger white arrows indicate the volume averaging of the brain and frontal sinus in this
4-mm-thicksection.
Figure 1.13.  Magic angle artifact. (A) Proton density fat-saturated image with hyperintensity in the biceps tendon (arrows).
(B) T2 image of same slice as in (A) with normal intensity of the tendon (arrows). (C) Same image as (A) showing location of
(D). (D) Transverse T2 image of the biceps tendon with uniform signal.
20PHYSICS: ARTIFACTS
commonly occurs at the lumbosacral area due to the change in the angulation. The fransverse images should be perpendicular
to the spinal canal. This can result in intersection between the images through the caudal lumbar area and those through the
 of slices through the lumb osacral area with no intersection of neighboring slices.
SECTION 5
Equipment Consideration and Selection
Patrick R. Gavin
The main component of the magnetic resonance urit
maintenance. In initial designs, the liquid helium was
is obviously the magnet. The main magnetic field is
surrounded by liquid nitrogen to decrease helium con-
called the Bo field. Within the magnet are gradient coils
 sumption. Currently, cryo-coolers are used to maintain
needed to produce a GE in the X, Y, and Z directions or
 the liquid helium temperature and have eliminated the
a gradient in Bo. Within the gradient coils are RF coils
 need for liquid nitrogen. Early magnets required ap-
that provide the RF energy needed to rotate the nuclear
 proximately four refills per year of liquid helium. Cur-
spins by 90° or any other value selected by the sequence.
 rent machines can be filled less than yearly and some
The strength of the gradient coils determines the ability
every ten years.
 d         
The gradient coils within the main magnet are fun-
distance. The strength of the gradient coils will have
damental to image creation. While the "body coil" can
the largest contribution to end-plane resolution. The RF
be used for a receiver coil, often specialized RF detector
coil, besides an emitting RF coil, is also a receiving coil
coils designed specifically for certain body areas are uti-
capable of detecting the signal from the spins within
lized to receive the image. There are numerous types of
the body.
coils. Some of these are volume or quadrature coils with
Most modern magnets are self-shielded with an op-
the anterna coils running at right angles to each other
 posing magnetic field such that they do not need to be
         
 magnetically shielded. All magnets do, however, need
 Linear coils are often flexible to allow for contouring
to have some form of RF shielding. This shield not orly
of the coil to the patient. Circular coils are commonly
prevents RF pulses from radiating out from the magnet,
used for extremity work. The depth of penetration of
but also prevents RF signals from television, radio, cell 
a circular coil is equal to its radius. One of the more
 phones, etc. from being detected by the imager.
useful coils for veterinary imaging is a multi-element
spine coil. Multiple element spine coils allow for the
ponent is under the control of the computer. The com-
 entire patient's spine to be imaged without physically
puter controls the shape and amplitude of the gradient 
 reposifioning the patient. This can greatly speed the
fields, and the strength and duration of the RF pulses.
 imaging process while providing various fields of view
The computer also provides the necessary method to
 for proper examination of the spinal column.
 convert the received RF energy into an image.
The imaging magnet is the most expensive compo-
SAFETY
nent. Permanent magnets are present as smaller field
units. These magnets must be pure and uniform. Per-
manent magnets have the advantage of not requiring
Safety is of critical importance with MRl. The safety
cryogens. They are heavy but their main drawback
 issues are related to dangers associated with ferromag-
 is their field strength. Most higher field MR units are
netic objects near the magnet. Ferromagnetic objects
superconducting magnets. A superconducting magnet
that are often forgotten include pagers, cell phones,
keeps the temperature close to zero kelvin by immers-
hoof krives, scissors, and other sharp or heavy objects
 ing it in liquid helium. Once electrical current is initi-
 Obviously, items such as ferrous oxygen tanks, stan-
ated in the coil, it will continue so long as it is main-
dard ECG machines, etc. can become flying, and poten-
  - i si u pinbtt ad s ie pae
tially lethal, projectiles inside an MR suite. All person-
Or 4° above absolute zero. Large volumes of liquid he-
 nel entering an MRI suite should be given instructions
 lium are required, which is also costly with regard to 
 on MR safety. Of special concern are those people that
Practicat Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
21
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
22 PHYSICS: EQUIPMENT CONSIDERATION AND SELECTION
would rarely need to enter the suite, including mainte-
the small wire used in identification crystals can also
 nance personnel.
create an artifact. The veterinary profession will need
Some safety issues of extreme importance that are
to find a better site for implantation of these crystals,
-   px  ss r
other than the neck of small dogs and cats, as the pop-
 diologists deal with patients having pacemakers or
ularity of MR continues. Cervical spinal studies can be
aneurysmal clips being exposed to the magnetic field.
 compromised by these identification chips in small and
This is less common in veterinary medicine; however,
toy breeds. These chips must occasionally be removed
pacemakers are a definite contraindication. Typical or-
 to allow for proper evaluation of the study.
 thopedic appliances may cause an artifact, but do not
The amount of energy absorbed during an exami-
create a hazard for the patient. Similarly, small objects 
nation is of concern. However, for the time utilized in
that are ferrous, including BBs, "gold beads," and steel
veterinary imaging due to the anesthetic concerns, the
shot used for water fowl hunting, all create large imag-
 amount of energy for MR studies has not been a prob-
 ing artifacts but actually create no problem for the pa-
lem to date. If medically indicated and anesthesia con-
tient. They will not become dislodged or move signifi-
 cerns can be answered, there is no reason why pregnant
cantly within tissue, but will create a large artifact and
patients and neonates carnot be imaged with conven-
may prevent imaging in an area of interest. Similarly.
tional MR units.
CHAPTER TWO
VETERINARY CLINICAL
MAGNETIC RESONANCE
IMAGING
SECTION 1
Diagnosis of Intracranial Disease
Rodney S. Bagley, Patrick R. Gavin, and Shannon P. Holmes
One of the initial clinical uses of magnetic resonance
and blood vessels. Additionally, neuronal extensions
(MR) imaging in animals was in the diagnosis of in-
and cornections of these intracrarial structures impor-
tracranial disease. Intracranial disease may affect the
tant for functions in and around the head are formed
function or anatomical structure of the intracrarial ner-
into discrete peripheral nerves referred to as CNs. CNs
 ad s    s s
are analogous to the spinal nerves in that they have
helpful in identifying diseases that result in anatomical
 cell bodies either within CN ganglia or in localized in-
abnormalities of the brain, crarial nerves (CNs), and
traparenchymal regions of the brain referred to as a
associated anatomical structures. As with all anatomi-
 nucleus. The following overview of neuroanatomy is
cal imaging modalities, knowledge of both normal MR
intended not as an extensive treatise but rather as an
appearance of anatomical structures as well as the MR
 introductory overview of important structural con-
appearance of pathological alterations of the nervous 
 siderations to consider when interpreting intracrarial
system is imperative for this imaging modality to be
 uodn Supuadaa 'seo pue shop uo sae  
clirically useful and the images accurately interpreted.
strength of the magnet, slice orientation, and other
The iritial portions of this chapter will review impor-
 imaging parameters, the appearance of the anatomical
tant normal anatomical characteristics of the intracra-
 components of the intracranial nervous system may be
nial nervous system structures, followed by a discus-
 more or less apparent, and therefore, more or less dis-
 sion of the appearance of the representative intracranial
cretely identifiable. The relative signal intensity of in-
disease processes when viewed with MR imaging. Ad-
tracrarial elements may also vary based on sequences
ditionally, key individual caveats to populational gen-
used, individual sequence characteristics, and view-
eralizations will be noted.
 ing parameters. All imaging appearances are relative
in comparison to some "standard" tissue's imaging ap-
pearance and can be manipulated at the time of the
NEUROANATOMICAL
 umana nog paeindureu aenip pre Apns sueeun
CONSIDERATIONS
when describing image characteristics. As an MR image
provides, in essence, a view of in vivo anatomy, it is nec-
The intracrarial nervous system primarily includes 
 essary for the evaluator of clirical MR images to have
what is generically referred to as the "brain" as well as  a working knowledge of intracrarial neuroanatomical
the associated structures such as the skull, meringes,
structures.
Practical Small Animal MRIPatrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
24 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
SUPRATENTORIAL NERVOUS
SYSTEM
The supratentorial region anatomically includes the
cerebral hemispheres, basal ruclei, diencephalon, and
rostral portion of the mesencephalon (Beitz and
Fletcher 1993; deLahunta 1983; Jenkins 1978; King
1987). This region may also be referred to as the pros-
encephalon or forebrain. The anatomical structures re-
side rostral to the division of the intracranial contents
Spuxa au are aexdde re aq pa
parallel to the tentorium cerebelli (Figure 2.1). Struc-
Figure 2.2. Lateral view of the formaldehyde-fixed brain
tures in this supratentorial region are responsible for
from a normal dog. The gyri and sulci of the cerebral hemi-
many functions requiring or associated with conscious-
sphere are apparent.
ness, awareness, behavior, sensory recogrition, and co-
 ordinated responses of the body.
 individuals within a breed. Each cerebral hemisphere is
The cerebral hemispheres (also referred to as the te
divided into fourregions based on associated functions.
lencephalon) are made up of neuronal cell bodies (gray
These are the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital
matter) and supporting cells as well as white matter
cortex.
 po r A a (s go ssd x)
The white matter of the cerebral hemispheres, or
cerebral cortex has been divided into six cellular lay-
corona radiata, consists of axonal projections from
ers; however, these layers are not always discernable in
 nerve cell bodies. These white matter tracts can be asso-
dogs and cats. The cerebral cortex is located between
ciation axons (axons from one cortical area to another in
the white matter and the pia mater (i.e., the irnermost
the same hemisphere), commissural axons (axons that
layer of the meringes).
cross from one cortical area to an area in the opposite
The surface of the cerebral hemispheres resembles
 hemisphere), or projection axons (axons that project to
collections of interwoven tubular structures (Figure
nuclear areas in the brain stem and spinal cord). Pro
2.2). The convex portiors of the cerebral hemispheres 
jection axons to and from the cerebral hemispheres are
are referred to as gyri, and the depressions between
found as collections of tracts referred to as the internal
the convex portions are referred to as sulci. There are
capsule.
numerous gyri and sulci of the cerebral hemisphere.
 As a general rule, cerebral cortical elements are
The number, location, configuration, and pattern of gyri
used as a "standard" tissue imaging appearance to
and sulci, however, are anatomically diverse and in-
which other anatomical structures, and intracrarial
consistently present between breeds and even between
pathologies, are compared. Therefore, these cortical
or compacted neuronal elements often are relatively
"isointense." Neural elements with similar tissue char-
acteristics such as, for example, cerebral hemisphere
cortical tissue or brain stem tissue, tend to have sim-
ilar imaging characteristics. This is one reason why
concentrations of neurons such as in individual ruclei
 may not be easily distinguished from surrounding tis-
sue elements in individual instances.
Standard MR imaging sequences have been dis-
cussed previously in Chapter 1. As image acquisition
may influence anatomical appearance, it is important
to asses MR images in light of these influences. The
 more standardized imaging appearances of intracra-
rial structures using more urniversally accepted MR se-
quences willbe described here as astarting point for MR
Figure 2.1. Sagiftal, T2-weighted MR image of a dog brain.
image interpretation. The appearance of these struc
The dofted line represents an imaginary anatomical division
tures in individual arimals may vary somewhat, how-
befween the supra- and infratentorial strucfures at the level
Sugeu n pue jeuue qenpiaipu yqoq o anp taaa
of the tentorium cerebelli.
influences.
25PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
sequences, cerebral cortical tissue and cerebral white
mater tissue may be indistinguishable. White matter
on T2-weighted sequences tends to appear isointense
 to hypointense relative to cerebral cortical signal, and
obviously hypointense relative to cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) signal (Figure 2.5). Similarly, white matter signal
with proton density weighting tends to be relatively hy-
pointense compared to cortical tissue (Figure 2.6). The
proton density image usually provides the most obvi-
ous distinction between gray and white matter of the
cerebral hemispheres.
 In the supratentorial region, the most rostral intracra-
rial structures are associated with the olfactory bulb
(Figure 2.7). Progressing caudally from this region, the
next most identifiable structures include the rostral ex-
tensions of the lateral ventricles and the caudate nu-
cleus (Figure 2.8). Ventral and medial to the frontal cor-
tex of the cerebral hemispheres at approximately this
level are the basal nuclei (sometimes referred to as the
Figure 2.3. Transverse T1-weighted MR image at the level
 Of fthe third ventricle. The cerebral white mafter (W) is slightly
tain types of movements in association with the cerebral
cortex and brain stem.
hyperintense in this study compared with cerebrocortical
 The diencephalon is the portion of the brain cau-
gray matter (G).
dal to the basal nuclei and rostral to the mesen-
cephalon (Figures 2.9 and 2.10). The thalamus and
The white matter of the cerebral hemisphere tends
 hypothalamus are located within the diencephalon.
 to appear isointense to mildly hyperintense relative to
 The pituitary gland or hypophysis is located immedi-
the cerebral hemisphere cortical signal on T1-weighted
 ately ventral to this area (Figure 2.1l). The caudal pi-
B
Figure 2.4. Transverse T2-weighted (A) and proton density (B) MR images at the level of the cerebellum and brain stem. The
cerebral white matter (W) in this study is hypointense relative to cerebrocortical gray matter (G).
26 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
B
Figure 2.5. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from two separate dogs ((A) and (B) at the level of the geniculate bodies (A)
and the thalamus (B). The cerebral white mafter (W) in these studies is hypointense relative to cerebrocortical gray mafter (G).
from the hypothalamus. The rostral pituitary (adenohy-
in the normal pituitary, the origin of which is debat-
pophysis) is responsible for the production of many en-
able but may, in fact, be from various neurotransmitters
docrine hormones such as ACTH (adrenocorticotropic
(Figure 2.11).
hormone) and thyroid stimulating hormones. There
 ro i, e on pna u sy s a
may be an associated focal hyperintense signal present
station" and is an area where projections to and from the
cerebral hemispheres synapse or traverse. In the sagit-
tal image, the circular interthalamic adhesion is readily
apparent with a discretely circular shape. Ventral in the
thalamus and immediately dorsal to the pituitary is the
hypothalamic region. The hypothalamus is associated
with many rudimentary functions oflife,such as eating.
drinking, water homeostasis, body temperature, and
reproductive functions. This area is responsible for pro-
duction of many of the endocrine hormones that have
global body effects. The pituitary gland functions in
association with the hypothalamus in many endocrine
functions via either the production (anterior pituitary)
or release (posterior pituitary or neurohypophysis) of
hormones and metabolically active elements.
INFRATENTORIAL NERVOUS
SYSTEM
The infratentorial structures include much of what is
Figure 2.6.  Transverse proton density MR image from a dog
commorly referred to as the brain stem (Beitz and
at the level of the geniculate region. The cerebral white mafter
Fletcher 1993; Jenkins 1978; King 1987) (Figures 2.12-
(W) in these studies is hypointense relative to cerebrocortical
2.16). The cerebellum resides in this region dorsal to
gray mafter (G).
the brain stem. For this discussion, the brain stem
27 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
Figure 2.7. Transverse proton density MR images from a dog at the level of the olfactory bulb (A) and slightly more caudal
(C). Associated gross brain structures at similar levels ((B) and (D)) are provided for comparison.
includes part of the mesencephalon (midbrain), the me-
 regard to posture. A portion of the cerebellum (floccu-
tencephalon (pons), and the myelencephalon (medulla
lonodular lobe) is primarily responsible for vestibular-
oblongata). Many of the CN ruclei (CNs HI through XII)
 associated functions such as balance in the equilibrium.
and neurons responsible for important vital functions,
 The vestibular system has an important influence over
such as wakefulness and respiration, reside in the brain
 body, head, and eye posture.
stem.
The CNs are nerve projections to and from neurons
The vestibular system (CN VIll and its cornections)
in brain stem nuclei and structures in the head and
works in close association with the cerebellum with
 neck (deLahunta 1983; Evans and Kitchell 1993; Jenkins
28 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
C补
C小
Figure 2.8. Transverse proton density MR images from a dog at the level of the rostral commissure (A) and slightly more
caudal at the level of the caudate nucleus (C). Associated gross brain strucfures at similar levels ((B) and (D)) are provided for
 s  ) s   s e e ()   e ( i  se
fornix; L, lateral ventricle; RC, rostral commissure).
29 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
B
Figure 2.9. Transverse proton density MR image (A) and gross brain image (B) from a dog at the level of the thalamus (T,
thalamus; D, diencephalon). (See Color Plate 2.9B.)
1978; King 1987)(Figure 2.17). There are 12 pairs of CNs
 (including CN VIIl) plays a significant role in balance
ordered I through X1. CNs I (olfactory nerve important
  dsn un a pm
for smell) and II (optic nerve important for vision) are
functiorally associated with the supratentorial struc-
Crania! Nerve (CN) Olfactory Nerves
tures. CNs Ill through XIl have cell bodies that reside
within or adjacent to (in ganglia) the brain stem. Affer-
 CN Iis, in reality, a constellation of multiple nerve fibers
d sn       n
and synapses (deLahunta 1983; Evans and Kitchell
 into the intracrarial nervous system.
1993). The first-order neuron is a bipolar neuron in
Information flowing to and from the cerebral cortex,
the caudodorsal olfactory epithelium in the nose and
 thalamus, and other components of the supratentorial
functionally acts as chemoreceptors. The distal (toward
structures travels through the brain stem to and from
 the nose) portion of these cells consists of ciliated pro-
 brain stem nuclei and the spinal cord. The brain stem
 cesses (numbering 6-8) that penetrate the olfactory mu-
contains functional systems such as the vestibular sys-
 cous membranes. Urmyelinated axons from these cells
tem and the reticular systems that have important roles
 project caudally to penetrate the cribriform plate and
in extensor tone and maintenance of body position rel-
 synapse on neurons (brush or mitral cells) in the olfac-
ative to the influence of gravity. Brain stem structures
tory bulbs.
also have significant roles in gaiting and walking.
Cranial Nerve Il (CN Il) Optic Nerve
INDIVIDUAL CRANIAL NERVES
CN Il is one of the components of the visual system (de-
Lahunta 1983; Evans and Kitchell 1993). Nerve fibers
The CNs are similar to other peripheral nerves except
originate in the retina and form CN II proper as the
that the cell bodies associated with these nerves are ei-
 discrete optic nerve, which travels from the retina cau-
ther within intracranial nervous system or in ganglion
 dally toward the brain, entering the skull in the optic
in close proximity to the head (Figures 2.18-2.20). CNscanal of the presphenoid bone. Depending upon the
provide for numerous special functions such as sight,  species, a majority (75% in dogs; 65% in cats) cross
hearing, taste, and smell. These nerves are also impor-
at the optic chiasm immediately rostral to the pitu-
tant for sensation and proprioception from the head
 itary. The remaining fibers remain ipsilaterally. Visual
region and provide motor innervation to many of the
 fibers then continue dorsally and caudally in the optic
muscles of the head and face. The vestibular system
 tract to synapse in the lateral gericulate rucleus of the
30 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Figure 2.10. Transverse T1-weighted MR image (A) and gross brain image (B) from a dog at the level of the caudal thalamus
and geniculate bodies. Transverse proton density MR image (C) and gross brain image (D) from a dog at the level of the caudal
thalamus and gericulate bodies. Transverse T2-weighted MR image (E) and gross brain image (F) from a dog at the level of the
31 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
showing the focal, hyperintense signal from the pifuitary (arrows).
thalamus. From here, visual fibers travel further cau-
Cranial Nerve IV Trochlear Nerve
dally in the optic radiations to synapse in the visual
The trochlear nerve is urique in that it is the orly CN in
cortex of the occipital hemisphere.
which 100% ofits axons decussates, or crosses, and this
nerve is the only CN that exits the dorsal aspect of the
Cranial Nerve ll Oculomotor Nerve
brain stem (deLahunta 1983; Jenkins 1978; King 1987).
The trochlear nucleus is located in the caudal mesen-
The oculomotor nerve has two main functions, move-
cephalon at the level of the caudal colliculi. The axons
ment of the eye and pupillary constriction (deLahunta
 course dorsally and caudally to exit the brain stem just
1983; Jenkins 1978; King 1987). The extraocular muscle
caudal to the caudal colliculus. The nerve crosses mid-
motor nucleus of CN IlI is located in the rostral mesen-
line and travels ventrally and in close proximity to the
cephalon at the level of the rostral colliculus. The cell
cavernous sinus. Axons exit the skull in the orbital fis-
bodies of the parasympathetic division of this nerve
 sure to innervate the dorsal oblique muscle of the eye.
associated with pupillary constriction are found in the
parasympathetic nucleus of CN II, which is found me-
dial to the associated motor rucleus. Axons pass ven-
Cranial Nerve Vl Abducent
trally through the tegmentum, exit the brain stem on
 the lateral side, course rostrally lateral to the hypoph-
The abducent nucleus is located in the rostral medulla
ysis close to the cavernous sinus to exit the skull in the
 oblongata adjacent to midline ventral to the floor of the
orbital fissure. The nerve divides near the orbit into a
fourth ventricle at the level where the caudal cerebellar
dorsal and ventralbranch. The dorsal branch irnervates
 peduncles merge with the cerebellum (deLahunta 1983;
the dorsal rectus and the levator palpebrae muscles.
Jenkins 1978; King 1987). This nerve carries orly motor
The ventral branch travels near, lateral to, and slightly
(somatic efferent) fibers to some extraocular muscles
ventral to the optic nerve. The fibers of this branch in-
- The axons pass ventrally through the reticular forma-
nervate the ventral and medial rectus and the ventral
 tion and exit the brain stem through the trapezoid body
oblique muscles. These fibers also terminate on the cil-
 lateral to the pyramids. This nerve travels close to the
 iary ganglion, which supplies postganglioric parasym-
cavernous sinus on the floor of the skull and leaves the
pathetic irnervation to the iris.
skull through the orbital fissure. Crarial VI irnervates
32 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
  l      e  (   s  ()    d s  
mesencephalic aqueduct. Transverse proton density MR image (C) and gross brain image (D) from a dog at the level of the
s  g  n   e  (   s e (    d  o 
caudal to the mesencephalic aqueduct at the level of the more rostral aspects of the cerebellum.
33 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
md
zle areas enter the skull through the rostral alar canal
(externally) and the round foramen (internally)
Crania! Nerve Vll Facia! Nerve
CN Vll supplies innervation to the facial muscles, to the
lacrimal and salivary glands, to the middle ear and the
blood vessels of the head, and to the palate and the ros-
tral two-thirds of the tongue associated with branches
of the trigeminal nerve (deLahunta 1983; Jenkins 1978;
King 1987). Neurons supplying irnervation to the mus-
cles of facial expression are located in the facial rucleus
 in the brain stem. This nucleus lies caudal to the trape-
zoid body and the attachment of the caudal cerebel-
lar peduncle. The axons pass dorsomedially to midline
 near the floor of the fourth ventricle, where they pass
 rostrally over the nucleus of CN VI in the genu (knee)
G
of the facial nerve. These fibers then course ventrolat-
Figure 2.12. (Continued) Transverse T2-weighted MR image
erally through the medulla and emerge from the brain
(G) at the level of the rostral and caudal colliculi.
stem through the trapezoid body next to CN VIll. The
facial nerve courses through the facial canal in the pet-
rosal bone, and exits the skull through the stylomastoid
foramen. The facial nerve runs through the middle ear
the lateral rectus and retractor bulbi extraocular
before branching in the petrosal bone.
muscles.
In the petrosal bone, the major petrosal nerve exits
initially, prior to the geniculate ganglion, to innervate
the lacrimal glands. The chorda tympari branch next
Crania! Nerve V Trigemina! Nerve
exits and projects to the tongue, salivary glands, and
CN V, the trigeminal nerve, as the name suggests, con-
stapedius muscle. The facial nerve proper then exits
tains three main branches or divisions (deLahunta 1983;
the stylomastoid foramen, courses ventral to the exter-
Jenkins 1978; King 1987). The three major branches
nal ear canal, and gives rise to three branches: (1) the
of this nerve are the ophthalmic, the maxillary, and
 auriculopalpebral branch, which innervates the eye and
the mandibular nerves. The ophthalmic and maxillary
ear muscles; (2) the dorsal buccal branch to the muscles
branches provide afferent sensory information, and the
 of the maxilla; and (3) the ventral buccal branch to the
 mandibular nerve is responsible for both sensory and
muscles of the maxilla and mandibular areas. These
motor functions. The trigeminal nerve, therefore, has
branches of the facial nerve irnervate the muscles of
both a larger sensory nucleus, and a more discrete mo-
the ear, eyelids, nose, cheeks, lips, and caudal portion
tor rucleus found in the brain stem region. The sensory
of the digastricus muscle.
nucleus extends from the mesencephalon to the caudal
medulla into the crarial spinal cord. The motor nucleus
Cranial Nerve VIl!!
is found in the rostral brain stem at the level of the ros-
Vestibufocochlear Nerve
tral cerebellar peduncle.
The motor portions of this nerve originate in the mo-
CN VIll has two main divisions: vestibular and
 tor nucleus, exit the lateral and slightly ventral aspects
cochlear. These serve to maintain the position of
of the brain stem, and travel through the trigeminal
the head in space (vestibular) and function in hear-
canal in the petrosal bone to exit the skull through the
ing (cochlear) (deLahunta 1983; Jenkins 1978; King
oval foramen. The cell bodies of the ophthalmic and
1987).
maxillary nerves are present in the trigeminal ganglion,
which lies in the trigeminal canal. Nerve fibers travel-
Vestibular Division
 ing toward these cell bodies from peripheral structures
in or around the eye enter the skull through the orbital
The vestibular division of CN VII is responsible for
fissure. Nerve fibers traveling toward these cell bodies
maintenance of the head and other structures rela-
from peripheral structures in or around nose and muz-
tive to gravity The receptors for both the vestibular
34 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Figure 2.13.  Transverse proton density MR image (A) and gross brain image (B) from a dog at the level of the mid cerebellum.
() e () on  r s  an e  e  ()   ss  ()   s nd sa
35 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
Img Tm.
D
Figure 2.14.S
 Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) T2-weighted MR images from a dog at the level of the mid to caudal cerebellum.
Sagiftal (C) and transverse (D) MR images from a dog at a level slightly more caudal than (A) and (B).
Figure 2.15. Transverse proton density MR image (A) and gross brain image (B) from a dog at the level of the caudal
(A) and (B).
37 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
Figure 2.16.  Transverse proton density MR image (A) and gross full slice head image (B) from a dog at the level of the foramen
magnuim.
B
Figure 2.17. Sagittal T1-weighted MR imaging showing the approximate locations of the nuclei associated with the various
  a p d  o   n     s        ( I  () s
(VC) in the occipital lobe. (B) Approximate location of the nuclei of CNs Il, IV, and VI (circle II, IV, VI).
38 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
+
Figure 2.17.  (Continued) (C) Approximate location of the nuclei of CN V. (circle V) (D) Approximate location of the nuclei of
CNs VII and VII (circle VII, VmI). (E) Approximate location of the nuclei of CNs IX, X, and XII (circle IX, X, XI) and the course
of CN XI (dofted line XI).
B
 hm p An e  s  p ( d e ()  d as dh a
approximate location of the oculomotor nerve (CN ml) (arrows).
39 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.19. Transverse (A) and parasagiftal (B) T2-weighted MR images from a healthy dog showing the approximate
location of the trigeminal nerve (CN V) (arrows).
A
B
Figure 2.20. Transverse (A) and parasagiftal (B) T2-weighted MR images from a healthy dog showing the approximate
location of the vestibular cochlear nerve (CN Vml) (arrows).
and cochlear portions of CN VIll are contained within
of the motor (visceral efferent) fibers are located with
the inner ear structures. Vestibular receptors are con-
CN X and CN XIin the nucleus ambiguus, an ill-defined
tained within the membranous labyrinth. There are
column of neurons in the ventrolateral medulla oblon-
three semicircular ducts containing a fluid substance
 gata. CN IX emerges from the medulla lateral and cau-
called endolymph. During movement of the head, the 
dal to CN Vll. The nerve courses through the jugular
endolymph flows in the semicircular ducts to stimulate
foramen and the tympanooccipital fissure to innervate
the hair cells.
the stylopharyngeus and other pharyngeal muscles.
 The maculae within the peripheral vestibular appa-
ratus are important in sensing gravitational forces via
Crania! Nerve X Vagus Nerve
 the force of gravity affecting the statoconia.
The dendritic zone of the vestibular division of CN
The vagus nerve is important for motor and sensory in-
VIlI is in synaptic relationship with the hair cells.
 nervation of the pharynx and provides a major compo-
The axons from these cells course through the internal
 nent of the parasympathetic irnervation to the esoph-
acoustic meatus with those of the cochlear division. The 
agus and the gastrointestinal tract (deLahunta 1983;
cell bodies are located in the vestibular ganglion. The
Jenkins 1978; King 1987). Other functions of the va-
 axons enter the brain stem at the cerebellomedullary
 gus include taste sensation and salivation. Motor cell
angle at the level of the trapezoid body and the attach-
bodies (visceral efferent) of this nerve are similarly lo-
 ment of the caudal cerebellar peduncle. After entering
cated in the nucleus ambiguus as are those for CN IX.
the brain stem, the majority of these axons terminate
 The axons of CN X traverse the skull through the jugu-
in the vestibular nuclei. Some enter the cerebellum di-
lar foramen and tympanooccipital fissure. Some fibers
rectly through the caudal cerebellar peduncle and ter-
join the pharyngeal plexus and irnervate the muscles
minate in the fastigial nucleus and flocculonodular lobe
of the palate, pharynx, and cervical esophagus. Some
 of the cerebellum. While there are central and periph-
leave the vagus nerve in the crarial laryngeal muscle
eral vestibular components, it should be remembered 
to innervate the cricothyroid muscle, with the recurrent
 that CN VIll never actually projects beyond the limits
laryngeal nerve and its caudal laryngeal branch inner-
of the skull.
vating all the other muscles of the larynx, cervical, and
Axons from the vestibular nuclei also project to
 cranial esophagus. In cats, these latter axons have been
the cerebellum via the caudal cerebellar peduncle to
noted to arise from the caudal nucleus ambiguus and
terminate in the flocculus of the cerebellar hemisphere
course to the vagus by the internal branch of the ac-
and the nodulus of the caudal vermis (flocculonodular
 cessory nerve. Cell bodies from the nucleus ambiguus
 lobe) as well as the fastigial nucleus.
innervate the entire length of the esophagus.
Cochlear Division
Crania! Nerve Xl Spina! Accessory Nerve
 The cochlear division of CN VIll is important for au-
 The spinal accessory nerve provides motor innervation
ditory stimulus recognition (deLahunta 1983; Jenkins
to the trapezius as well as portions of the sternocephali-
1978; King 1987). Receptors of the cochlear division of
cus and brachiocephalicus muscles (deLahunta 1983;
CN VIll are located in the cochlear duct within the ear.
Jenkins 1978; King 1987). Spinal accessory nerve (vis-
The dendritic zone of the cochlear portion of CN VIll is
ceral efferent) axons project from the caudal nucleus
in synaptic relationship with the base of the hair cells.
 ambiguus and emerge from the ventrolateral aspect of
The cell bodies are located in the modiolus at the ori-
the medulla with the visceral efferent fibers of CN X.
gin of the spiral lamina, forming the spiral ganglion.
The crarial roots join to form the internal branch. The
The axons course through the internal acoustic mea-
internal branch passes laterally and joins the external
tus where they join the vestibular division of CN VIll.
 branch to form the accessory nerve. Other visceral ef-
These axons terminate on cell bodies in the cochlear
ferent cell bodies of the external branch are located in
rucleus that bulges on the lateral side of the medulla.
the motor nucleus of the accessory nerve in the lateral
portion of the ventral spinal cord gray matter from the
Cranial Nerve IX Glossopharyngeal Nerve
first (Cl) to possibly the seventh (C7) cervical spinal
cord segments. The axons leave the spinal cord later-
ally as roots of the accessory nerve. The external branch
sory innervation to the pharynx, as well as parasympa-
passes through the foramen magrum. This nerve enters
thetic functions for salivation and taste sensation (de-
the jugular foramen and leaves the tympanooccipital
 Lahunta 1983; Jenkins 1978; King 1987). The cell bodies 
 fissure. Here the internal branch leaves the accessory
41 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
nerve and joins the vagus nerve. The external branch
then forms the accessory nerve to innervate the trapez-
ius as well as portions of the sternocephalicus and bra.
tively hyperintense, most likely due to the fat signal in.
chiocephalicus muscles.
these bones. This hyperintense signal may be more ob-
vious on the Tl sequences compared to T2 sequences.
These regions of bone are most noticed in the sagit-
Cranial Nerve Xll Hypoglossal Nerve
tal crest, zygomatic arch, as well as the frontal, pari-
The hypoglossal nerve provides motor function to the
etal, temporal, occipital, sphenoid, and petrous tem-
muscles of the tongue (deLahunta 1983). Cell bodies
poral bones. It is important to not overinterpret these
of these motor (somatic efferent) axons are located in
  e    s s 
 the hypoglossal nucleus in the medulla oblongata, ad-
 Air-filled sinus structures are hypointense on both
 jacent to midline on floor of the fourth ventricle. Ax-
 T1 and T2 sequences (Figure 2.22). Not all breeds and
 ons of this nerve cross the lateral aspect of the olivary
 species, however, have air-filled frontal sinuses (Figure
nucleus in the brain stem, and emerge as numerous
 2.23). The lining of these cavities (mucoperiosteum) is
longitudinal small roots lateral to the pyramids. These
roots merge at the small hypoglossal canal to form CN
in pathological state, especially following intravenous
Xll proper. This nerve innervates the extrinsic muscles
contrast (gadolinium) administration.
of the tongue (styloglossus, hyoglossus, and genioglos-
 sus), the intrinsic muscles of the tongue, and the genio-
The Meninges
hyoideus. A few cell bodies of neurons to the intrinsic
lingual muscles are located in the caudal area of the
The meninges are the "covering tissues" of the central
facial rucleus. Each gerioglossus muscle is irnervated
nervous system (CNS) (deLahunta 1983; Jenkins 1978;
by neurons from both hypoglossal nuclei.
King 1987). There are three layers of the meringes: the
dura, arachnoid, and pia mater extending from outer to
 inner surfaces respectfully. The dura mater is the most
NON-NEURAL INTRACRANIAL
external layer, which is primarily a fibrous tissue of col-
lagen matrix. The arachnoid is usually intimate in ven-
ELEMENTS
tral or medial contact with the dura. The space present
ventral or medial to the arachnoid (subarachnoid space)
In addition to neural elements, the intracranial ner-
is where CSF is present. The pia is a thin tissue layer that
vous system also contains a rumber of non-neural
is intimate with the outer surface of the nervous tissue.
 elements that are intimate with components of the
The pachymerirx refers to the dura mater. The lep-
nervous system. These non-neural elements may con-
tomerinx or leptomeringes refers to the arachnoid and
pia mater as a function urit. These meringeal structures
system and, in some instances, these normal structures
 are also found encircling the spinal cord.
may be misconstrued for pathological abnormalities. In
 An invagination of the meringes is located between
other instances, these non-neural structures may con-
the dorsal cerebral hemispheres. This is the falx cere-
tain pathology that secondarily affects the intracrarial
 ose   al n s ( ) 
neural elements.
found more centrally around or within the ventricular
system (tela choroidea).
 The normal meninges are usually not apparent on
The Skul!!
standard T1 and T2 sequences. Also, normal meningeal
The components of the skull surround the majority of
tissue does not erhance following contrast administra-
the intracrarial neural elements. Some of the neural el-
tion as a general rule.
ements, such as the CNs, traverse the skull through
foramen and fissures. The olfactory elements traverse
Ventricular System and CSF
the cribriform plate in the rostral calvarium. The brain
stem becomes contiguous with the spinal cord at the
The brain normally contains areas that are devoid of
foramen magnum.
cells but filled with CSF (Beitz and Fletcher 1993; de-
Cortical (compact or dense) bone tends to be hy-
Lahunta 1983; Jerkins 1978; King 1987). These areas
pointense on both T1- and T2-weighted sequences
 are collectively known as the ventricular system (Fig-
(Figure 2.2l). Other elements of the skull bones such
ures 2.25 and 2.26). From rostral to caudal, beginning
as fat, blood vessels, and air, may influence the imag-
in the cerebral hemispheres, the components of this
C
Figure 2.21.  Transverse T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) MR images from a dog at the level of the caudal thalamus and
bone (larger arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR image from a dog at the level of the colliculi (C). Note the hyperintense signal
from fat in pertous temporal bone (arrow).
43PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.22.  Transverse T2-weighted (A) and T1-weighted (B) MR images from a dog at the level of the frontal sinus. Note the
(E) MR images from a dog with an air-filled frontal sinus.
44 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
bulb. The third ventricle is present in a circular pattern
around the thalamus. The mesencephalic aqueduct is
the relatively smaller cornection between the third and
fourth ventricle in the mesencephalon. The fourth ven-
tricle is present between the brain stem (ventrally) and
the cerebellum (dorsally). The fourth ventricle is contin-
ued into the spinal cord via the central canal. The ven-
tricular system is lined by specialized columnar cells
with microvilli known as ependymal cells. These cells
 are important as a partial barrier between the CSF and
the brain parenchyma, and also play an important role
in production of CSF. In some areas of the ventricu-
lar system, there are concentrations of a vascular struc-
ture and an associated ependymal liring known as the
choroid plexus. This tissue also has an important role
in CSF production, and pulsations in these structures
may result in the movement of CSF.
CSF originates from the choroid plexus of the lateral,
third, and fourth ventricles, directly from the brain by
way of the ependymal liring of the ventricular system,
- d a g  aq    a
brane covering the external surface, and from the blood
vessels of the pia and arachnoid (deLahunta 1983). Flow
 of CSF is dependent on the pulsation of the blood (sys-
tole and diastole) in the choroid plexus. With each pul-
sation, CSF pressure increases aided by the cilia of the
B
ependymal cells. CSF flow occurs in both directions
(cranial and caudal), but primarily flows caudally in
dogs. The pressure exhibited by the CSF contributes to
intracranial pressure (ICP).
The major site of CSF absorption is in the arach-
noid villus within a venous sinus or a cerebral vein
(deLahunta 1983). The villus is a prolongation of the
arachnoid and the subarachnoid space into the venous
sinus. Collections of these villi are known as arach-
noid granulations. The venous endothelium acts like
a ball valve (from transient transcellular charnels that
 develop for the passage of fluid) so as to be open when
 CSF pressure exceeds the venous pressure (the normal
C
relationship). If venous pressure rises above CSF pres-
Figure 2.23. Sagiftal T1-weighted MR images from two
sure, the villi will collapse. Directional flow, therefore,
separate dogs, one with (A) and without (B) and air-filled
 is always from CSF to blood.
frontal sinus. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image (C) from a
 Normal CSF has a relatively hypointense signal on
brachycephalic dog breed without an air-filled frontal sinuus
T1 sequences and a relatively hyperintense signal in
(Moure)
T2 images compared to surrounding neural elements.
The ependymal liring of the ventricles is normally
pou aeuu st pure 'sauanbs qoq uo juaredde jou
enhanced following contrast administration. Normal
system include the lateral ventricles, the third ventri-
choroid plexus, however, does contrast enhance follow-
cle, the mesencephalic aqueduct, and the fourth ven-
ing intravenous contrast admiristration.
tricle. The lateral ventricles are somewhat C-shaped
The blood-CSF barrier exists at the choroid plexus
structures within the cerebral hemispheres. There is
and consists of two cell layers separated by a
an extension of the lateral ventricle into the olfactory
thin basement membrane. This is a semi-permeable
45 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
E
Figure 2.24. Pathologic specimen (ventral view (A) of the dural meninges from a dog. The falx (larger arrows) and mem-
branous tentorium cerebelli are shown (smaller arrows). (The top aspect of the photo is rostral.) Transverse T2-weighted (B),
T1-weighted (C), FLAIR (D), and proton density (E) MR images of a dog's brain. The falx cerebri is shown by the arrow.
membrane between the CSF and the plasma. The CSF-
extracellular fluid (ECF) barrier occurs over the outer
surface of the brain and in the ventricles. This barrier is
formed primarily by the ependymal cells. On the sur-
face of the brain, a pial-glial membrane is present to
 limit exchange from the CSF and the nervous system
parenchyma.
Importantly, there is also a barrier between the vas-
cular system and the brain parenchyma, termed the
"blood brain barrier" (BBB). This barrier exists between
the plasma and the ECF and consists of non-fenestrated,
tightly joined endothelial cells of the blood vessel, sur-
rounded by a relatively complete layer of astrocyte foot
 processes. The BBB plays an important role in prevent-
Figure 2.25. Sagittal T1-weighted MR image from a dog.
The third (T), mesencephalic aqueduct (smaller arrows), and
 ing the free exchange of various substances within the
the fourth ventricle (larger arrows) are shown.
vascular system and brain cells.
46 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
differences in the anatomical arrangement of vessels
responsible for cerebral perfusion from the carotid
level. In dogs, blood flows into the circle of Willis
from the internal carotid artery (deLahunta 1983; King
1987). In cats, the internal carotid artery is appar-
ently non-existent shortly following birth, and blood
is directed from the external carotid artery through
the maxillary artery to the ventral arterial system
(King 1987).
 The circle of Willis supplies the majority of arterial
blood flow to the cerebral cortex. Blood also reaches
the caudal brain stem from the subclavian arteries via
the vertebral arteries and ultimately the basilar artery
In cats, blood flow has been suggested to be reversed in
the basilar artery and the majority of the blood supply
to the intracrarial nervous system results from blood
flow from the maxillary artery (King 1987). This re-
Figure 2.26. Transverse T1-weighted MR image from a dog
versed blood flow in the basilar artery in cats, however,
at the level of the thalamus. The interventricular foramen
is debatable.
(arrows) is shown between the lateral (L) and the third (T),
Flowing blood in cerebral vessels that are large
ventricle.
-e jo ia e aa u uaas a o yno
ances based on flow characteristics. Blood in the dor-
sal sagittal sinus is most often hypointense on T1
Intracranial Blood Flow
and T2 sequences, however the region of the cav-
Blood flows to the brain from the heart, aorta, brachio-
ernous sinus is often hyperintense on T2 sequences
cephalic trunk, and carotid arteries. There are species
(Figure 2.27).
A
B
image, and relatively hyperintense in the T2-weighted image.
47 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
IMPORTANT AND DEFINABLE
LANDMARKS
It only takes a comparison of a standard brain atlas
or anatomical textbook brain views to determine that
appearance of the intracrarial nervous system struc-
s  si    s s
commonly employed for diagnostic imaging) is not as
distinct as with pathologically prepared specimens. It
is also apparent that most brain atlas publications are
taken from a single individual, whereas the spectrum of
anatomical nuances between individuals may be rela-
the surface of the specimen is viewed, whereas, with
clirical MR imaging the appearance is based on the
magnetic properties of all the tissues contained within
 the slice thickness. Therefore, when imaging anatomi-
cal diverse individuals, it is not urreasonable to expect
some individual"normal" anatomic variations. In some
instances these "normal" variations in anatomy oc-
cur without apparent associated clirical consequences,
whereas in other instances, it has not been established
whether these normal anatomical variants have clirical
Figure 2.28.
 Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a
effects (such as seizure activity).
boxer dog.
As an example of normal anatomical diversity, the
cortical gyral and sulcal patterns of individual dogs
-p Aeu poins io iag qenpiipu ie se os Area Ae
fer in size, shape, location, or may not even exist at
Identification of individual CNs has been somewhat
all. In addition, Boxers, for example, have a very char-
more troublesome, as not all nerves are actually "seen"
 and the course of the CNs may be varied, traveling in
easily identifiable. (Figure 2.28). It is important for the
various directions relative to the slice plane. Therefore,
evaluator of an individual MR study to become famil-
normal CNs may be imaged in a variety of transverse or
iar with these various anatomical differences so as to
 sagittal planes throughout their normal course. While
avoid overidentification of these "normal" variations.
some portions of the nerve may be apparent, the lo-
While some anatomical differences in appearance
cation for where many of the CNs are located is often
of the intracrarial nervous system structures when
 merely inferred (Figures 2.18-2.20). In some instances
normalintracrarial structures may be corfused for CNs
ance are the result of variation in animal positioning in
(Figures 2.31 and 2.32).
the MR scarner or the result of differences in slice plane
 As many of the CNs enter, exit, or travel ventral
 angulation (Figures 2.29 and 2.30). Again, the evaluator 
 and or lateral to the brain stem region, the appear-
of individual studies needs to be aware of how animal
    sN     
even obscured by the associated vascular and other
 mal" anatomical appearance of an individual patient.
non-neural anatomical elements. For example, the cav-
Even with these limitations, some more consis-
ernous sinus is a venous vascular structure that sur-
tently appearing anatomical structures can be used as
rounds the pituitary region, and in which or immedi-
anatomical landmarks to aid in localization within the
 ately adjacent to a number of the CNs travel (Figure
intracrarial nervous system. For example, the colliculi
 2.27). This structure often appears hyperintense on T2-
jnpanbe seqdasuasau al pue (iepnes pue jenson)
 weighted sequences and hypointense on Tl-weighted
 have a reasonably standard anatomical appearance in
 sequences. Normal CNs associated with this sinus are
MR studies of dogs and can be used to identify this
region of the intracrarial nervous system.
enlarged.
C
Figure 2.29. (A) Schematic relafionship of direction of slice plane. (B), (C) Schemafic representafion of possible effects on
anatomical images of differing animal head posiftions within the MR gantry.
DIAGNOSIS OF
   d n  
 of neurons, metabolic alterations in neuronal or glial
PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL
cells, impairment of vascular supply to normal tissue
CONDITIONS OF THE
(ischemia or hypoxia), impairment of autoregulation,
INTRACRANIAL NERVOUS
hemorrhage, irritation (seizure generation), obstruction
 of the ventricular system, edema formatior, produc-
SYSTEM
tion of physiologically active substances, and increased
 ICP (Bagley 1996b). These processes may initiate and
Intracranial disease can alter normal physiological re-
perpetuate each other. Regardless of the pathophysio-
 lationships in numerous ways. These include, but are
logic effects, intracrarial disease that results in structure
49PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.30. (A), (B) Sagittal T2-weighted MR images from fwo dogs posiftioned differenfly at the time of MR imaging. (C),
angulations. Note the subtle alteration in the appearance of the anatomical structures. (E), (F) Transverse T2-weighted MR
images from the same dog at the level of the mesencephalon at slightly differing transverse plane angulations. Note the subtle
50 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
may persist for a week or more (Figure 2.33). Brain
edema has been categorized as either vasogenic, cy-
totoxic, or interstitial based upon cause and anatomic
 areas of involvement (Fishman 1975; Reulen 1976). Any
or all of these types of edema may be present in an an-
imal with brain disease.
Cytotoxic edema (intracellular edema) results from
failure of cellular energy with resultant failure to ex-
trude sodium from within the cell. Intracellular water
increases and cells swell. This edema most often re-
sults in disease processes such as toxicity, ischemia, or
hypoxia.
 Interstitial edema is increased water content of the
 periventricular white matter due to movement of CSF
Figure 2.31. Transverse anatomical specimen of a dog's
across the ventricular walls in instances of hydro
brain showing the lateral extension of the cerebellum (ar-
cephalus. Periventricular white matter is reduced due
rows) (flocculus or paraflocculus) that is often confused on
MR interpretations wifth either the seventh or eighth CNs.
increases in white matter hydrostatic pressure or de-
creases in periventricular white matter blood flow
(Rosenberg et al. 1983).
alterations can add to the overall volume of a compo-
Vasogeric edema is the most common form of edema
nent of the intracrarial tissues. This additional volume
associated with CNS neoplasia. This type of edema re-
can subsequently expand or displace normal anatomy
 sults from vascular injury secondary to physical dis-
This distortion of anatomy is often referred to as "mass
ruption of the vascular endothelium or functional al-
effect," and is common with many intracranial struc-
terations in endothelial tight junctions. Differences in
tural anatomical alterations (Figure 2.33).
transmural pressure gradients result in extravasation
of fluid from cerebral vessels to the ECF spaces of the
brain (Rosenberg et al. 1983). These abnormalities al-
CEREBRAL EDEMA
low for fluid to move from the vascular to perivascu-
lar spaces. Areas of the brain where ECF is normally
Many intracranial diseases result in, or are associated
1 enlarged provide a natural conduit for fluid move-
with, brain edema. With acute injury, brain edema be-  ment. Increases in intravascular pressure due to loss of
       m  ss
 autoregulation, vascular obstruction, or hypertension
A
B
the lateral extension of the cerebellum (smaller arrows) and the eighth CN (larger arrows).
51PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
SDE
D
Figure 2.33. Transverse T2-weighted (A) MR image at the level of the thalamus in a dog showing edema and mass effect
(arrows). Transverse T2-weighted (B) MR image at the level of the thalamus in a dog showing a glioma (larger arrows) and
associated edema and mass effect (smaller arrows). Transverse T2-weighted (C) and FLAIR (D) MR images at the level of
 ih an u dis asuaad e se sisiid ea (sme) yoa ss pe ea ms  e u s 
(arrows).
(Cushing's response, cerebral ischemic response) may
blood flow in normal white matter. Deep white mat-
perpetuate edema formation. Vasogenic edema mi-
 ter of the affected cerebral hemisphere is preferentially
affected.
flow. Fluid movement depends upon a balance between
 Edema, as a general rule, appears hypointense rela-
the opposing forces of capillary hydrostatic pressure
and tissue resistance pressure. Vasogenic edema usu-
intense relative to neural parenchyma on T2 sequences.
ally spreads readily through the white matter, pos-
 It has been suggested that vasogeric edema tends to
sibly because of the orderly arrangement of nerve
 travel long white matter which is why edema may
fibers found there. Also, the movement of this type
outline the cerebral white matter of the corona radi-
of edema may be related to low capillary density and
 ate in some instances. This provides for a "crown-like"
52 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
or spiked appearance of the edema within the cerebral
thought to result from the hyperosmolar envirorment
white matter (Figure 2.33).
of the resorbing hematoma increasing the movement
of fluid (water) into the hematoma, actually increasing
its volume; however, this is not always found. Increas-
ing hematoma volume may ultimately cause worsening
INTRACRANIAL VASCULAR
clinical signs as compared to those associated with the
DISEASE
initial hemorrhagic event.
Intracrarial hemorrhage can have some of the most
Primary cerebrovascular disease is increasingly being
variable MR imaging appearances of any pathologic
identified in animals as a cause of acute intracrarial
alteration. The MR appearance of hemorrhage will
 deterioration. Diseases of the cerebral vasculature may
depend on the time frame of when the hemorrhage
result from excessive blood flow through cerebral ves-
 occurred relative to when the animal was imaged, the
sels (hypertension), transmural extravasation of blood,
field strength of the magnet, the imaging sequences ob-
ischemia, thrombosis, and embolization. Hypertension, 
 tained, the oxygen content of the blood (arterial vs. ve-
associated with a variety of diseases in arimals such as
-d)  al y  n pe (
renal disease and hyperadrenocorticism, can result in
mal vs. extradural vs. subdural). In some instances an
 increases in cerebrovascular hydrostatic forces leading
obvious fluid line interface can be present. Simplistic
to intracranial hemorrhages. Disorders of coagulation
 guidelines for interpretation of hemorrhage have been.
(coagulopathies, DIC) and platelet function (throm-
established (Table 2.1); however, the spectrum of ap-
bocytopenia and thrombopathies) can also result in
 pearance of hemorrhage is much more complex.
cerebral hemorrhage. Diseases that predispose one to
With MR, hemorrhage less than 12-24 h old will
hypercoagulability, such as glomerulonephritis, may
not be differentiated from vasogenic edema. In the
 result in intramural emboli and subsequent thrombo-
circulating blood, hemoglobin alternates between
sis of cerebral vessels. Bacteremias (endocarditis) may
the oxyhemoglobin state and the deoxyhemoglobin
result in septic embolization of intracrarial vessels. Ves-
state. The heme iron in both oxy and deoxy is in the
sel wall integrity can be disrupted by neoplastic infil-
ferrous (Fe?+) state. When hemoglobin is removed
tration or inflammatory diseases, including vasculitis
from the high-oxygen envirorment of the circulation,
syndromes, and can result in thrombosis and hemor-
the heme iron undergoes oxidative denaturation
rhage. Less commorly, arteriovenous malformations
to the ferric state (Fe3+), forming methemoglobin.
and aneurysms have been reported in dogs. All of these
Continued  oxidative denaturation  forms ferric
intracrarial vascular abnormalities may predispose one
hemochromes (hemosiderin). As red blood cells
to cerebral hypoxia and ischemia, as well as intracrarial
(RBCs) break down, the various forms of hemoglobin
hemorrhage.
have changing paramagnetic properties influencing the
Cerebrovascular disease primarily results in is-
 appearance of the clot in the various images (Tl- and
chemia, infarction, and hemorrhage (Figures 2.34-2.43).
T2-weighted). The appearance of the varying stages
Other secondary consequences include edema forma-
of hemorrhage also depends upon the strength of the
tion, mass effect, and increases in ICP. Ischemic dam-
magnet. Table 2.1 is a rough guide to the appearance
age, regardless of cause, results in endothelial cell
of parenchymal hematomas imaged with a 1.5 T MR
damage predisposing to thrombosis, necrosis, and
system.
 hemorrhage. One of the most devastating effects of se-
The use of gradient echo imaging helps identify hem-
vere intracrarial vascular disease is intracrarial hem-
       
orrhage. Hemorrhage into and around the brain can re-
the iron concentration. The signal intensity will be hy-
sult in an associated inflammatory reaction, increases
in overall intracrarial volume, and increases in ICP. In-
of the hemorrhagic area.
 traventricular and subarachnoid bleeding is irritating
to local nervous tissue and may result in inflammation
(meringitis, myelitis, or encephalitis). If bleeding
SEIZURES
is substantial enough hematomas may subsequently
form, altering CNS volume /pressure relationships and
potentially increasing ICP and decreasing cerebral
Seizure activity is a common sequelae to intracra-
blood flow. While the initial hematoma will create a
rial disease. Seizure activity may result in anatomical
certain degree of pressure, clinical signs may worsen as
 changes in intracranial nervous elements. Often, there
the hematoma is resorbed ("ages"). This was originally
are associated focal (possibly coalescing) hyperintense
53PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.34. Transverse proton density (A), T2-weighted (B), T1-weighted before (C), and following intravenous confrast
admiristraftion (D) MR images from a dog with an infracranial hematoma (arrows).
may result in neural tissues that may be apparent on MR
imaging sequences.
VENTRICULAR OBSTRUCTION
(ALSO SEE SECTION
"HYDROCEPHALUS" IN
THIS CHAPTER)
Hydrocephalus can result from obstruction of the ven-
tricular system, irritation of the ventricle (from inflam-
mation or hemorrhage), increased size of the ventri-
cles due to loss of brain parenchyma (hydrocephalus
ex vacuo), be present without an obvious cause (con-
gerital), or rarely, be the result of overproduction of
CSF associated with a choroid plexus tumor. Ventric-
ular obstruction can occur due to intraventricular or
extraventricular obstruction.
With most Tl-weighted sequences, normal CSF will
be hypointense relative to neural and specifically cor-
tical elements. With T2 sequences, normal CSF will
A
 appear hyperintense. With FLAIR sequences (used to
 suppress signal from normal CSF), CSF will usually be
black.
Ventricular size, however, is difficult to quantitate.
As a general rule, T2 sequences may slightly overrepre-
sent ventricular size. Additionally, ventricular size does
not consistently correlate with clinical abnormalities.
Therefore, apparently enlarged ventricles may not be
associated with clinical dysfunction. Finally, ventricu-
lar size is not always correlated with intraventricular
pressure, the latter of which is also an important cause
of clinical dysfunction. In some instances, especially in.
the acute situation, intraventricular pressure may be
 pathologically elevated while ventricular size remains
B
within normal limits. Occasionally, the contour of the
ventricle can provide a clue to the associated intraven-
Figure 2.35. Transverse T2-weighted (A) and T1-weighted
tricular pressure.
 (B) before contrast adlministration MR images from two dogs
 Generalized ventricular enlargement suggests con-
with infracranial hematomas (arrows).
 genital ventricular dilation or obstruction at the level
of the lateral aperfures or foramen magnum, or diffuse
parenchymal loss (Figures 2.45-2.47). Focal ventricular
regions on T2 sequences following seizure activity (Fig-
 enlargement suggests focal obstruction or parenchymal
ure 2.44). The exact nature of the pathologic changes
cell loss. It is not uncommon to have bilateral lateral
in these regions is not known; however, these changes
ventricle enlargement that is asymmetric. Animals with.
may represent focal edema, vascular change, neu-
asymmetric appearance of the ventricles should be crit-
 rotransmitter accumulation, or some other chemical
ically evaluated for focal obstruction of or impingement
     s  
on the ventricular system due to mass effect. Hemor-
in the days or weeks following seizures. These ab-
rhage into the ventricular system can occur with head
normalities are usually more obvious if seizures are
 trauma, hypertension, and bleeding disorders. Blood
prolonged or frequent over a shorter time span. With
products are irritating to the ependyma, and result in
chroric seizure activity, permanent anatomical changes
associated inflammation.
55 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
C
[ e m  e  s  () h pe a) A d  m   n
infarction (arrows).
If the ventricular system is obstructed, CSF will be
the CSF signal, more so on the FLAIR and Tl sequences.
trapped behind the level of obstruction. This may also 
 In these situations, the CSF signal can appear relatively
 be referred to as a non-communicating hydrocephalus
 hyperintense compared to the relatively hypointense
(deLahunta 1983). As some inadequate amounts of CSF
normal CSF (Figures 2.45C and 2.47).
 may pass the level of the obstruction, this may not al-
 Anatomically smaller areas of the ventricular sys-
ways be the most appropriate description of the patho-
 tem are common sites of obstruction. These include the
physiological state. CSF that is trapped in this way will 
 interventricular foramen and the mesencephalic aque-
often have sigrificant elevations in protein content. This 
 duct. Obstruction can result from tumor, granuloma,
 hemorrhage, or inflammation. Rarely, abnormalities of
56 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
B
C
              
57 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
Figure 2.38.
(arrows).
A
58 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
B
   m  e  s  () a e ()  n  
(arrows).
ependymal cilia function can result in ventricle dila-
increased water content of the periventricular white
tion, probably due to poor or absent CSF flow; immotile
matter due to movement of CSF across the ventricu-
  a s s,   
lar walls in instances of hydrocephalus. Periventricu-
amples.
lar white matter is reduced due to the disappearance
Hydrocephalus can result in clirical signs due to
of myelin lipids secondary to increases in white mat-
loss of neurons or neuronal function, alterations in
 ter hydrostatic pressure or decreases in periventricular
ICP, and associated pathophysiological effects of in-
white matter blood flow. Increased CSF pressure may
tracrarial disease. Interstitial edema, for example, is
contribute to intracrarial disease through alterations
in ICP. The periventricular white matter may have a
relatively hyperintense appearance in these instances.
 Additionally, when CSF is trapped in a region of the
ventricle, the lining of the ependyma can be enhanced
following intravenous contrast administration (Figure
2.47).
INCREASES IN INTRACRANIAL
PRESSURE
Intracranial pressure (ICP) is the pressure exerted be-
tween the skull and the intracrarial tissues. As the skull
is relatively inelastic compared to the other intracrarial
tissues, ICP is determined primarily by changes in in-
Figure 2.41.Sagittal, FLAIR MR image from a dog with
tracrarial tissue volume and the compensatory ability
cerebellar infarction (arrows).
of these tissues to accommodate for volume changes.
59 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
E
Figure 2.42.  Transverse proton density (A), T2-weighted (B), FLAIR (C), T1-weighted before (D), and following infravenous
confrast administration (E) MR images from a dog with cerebellar infarction (arrows).
Figure 2.43.
(arrows).
Table 2.1.
Parenchymal hematoma 12
Stage
Tme
Hemoglobin
T1
T2
Hyperacute
<24 h
Intracellular
Oxyhemoglobin
Hypo
Hyper
Acute-subacute
1-3 days
Intracellular
Deoxyhemoglobin
Hyper
Hypo
Early
3+ days
Intracellular
Methemoglobin
Hyper
Hypo
Late
7+ days
Extracellular
Methemoglobin
Hyper
Hyper
Chronic
14+ days
Extracellular
Hemichromes
Hypo
Hyper
Intracellular
Hemosiderin
Hypo
Hypo
Increases in ICP carnot be determined, per se, with
with subsequent compression of the oculomotor nerve.
standard MR imaging as this is a physiological rather
With unilateral herriations, an ipsilateral dilated pupil,
than anatomical measurement. As ICP increases, the
urresponsive to light stimulation, may be seen. Moni-
pressure within the intracrarial space decreases cere-
toring for clirical signs of this type of herriation, there-
bral blood flow. With decreased cerebral perfusion, neu-
fore, should include periodic pupillary evaluations. If
ronal ischemia, hypoxia, dysfunction, and ultimately
unilateral mydriasis is noted in this setting, immedi-
neuronal death result. These pathologic changes may
ate and aggressive attempts to decrease ICP should be
 result in anatomical abnormalities in neural elements,
instituted.
and these anatomical abnormalities may result in ab-
 Foramen magnum herriation may occur quickly and
 normal appearances with MR imaging.
results in respiratory arrest due to associated pressure
on the respiratory centers in the caudal brain stem.
Foramen magnum herriation is often fatal, and surgical
TERMINAL EFFECTS OF
attempts at decompression after this type of herriation
COMPARTMENTALIZED ICP
have not been helpful in affected dogs.
 Herriation of intracranial tissues is usually readily
INCREASES -BRAIN
apparent with MR imaging if the evaluator is famil-
HERNIATION
iar with the normal anatomical appearance of the as-
sociated brain structures prior to herniation. Acutely.
herriated tissue may be isointense relative to its nor-
As intracrarial volume continues to increase beyond
mal appearance. As the tissue becomes vascularly
the limits of compensation, ICP may increase so precip-
compromised, the herriated tissue may appear rela-
itously that shifts of brain parenchyma, termed brain
tively hyperintense. If this tissue becomes edematous
herniation, will occur (Kornegay et al. 1983). Coma
and eventually necrotic, the appearance of the tissue
and severe neurological impairment are noted. Urfor
will reflect the associated tissue pathology (edema,
tunately, in many instances, brain herniation becomes
hemorrhage).
a terminal event.
 Five major types of brain herniation have been de-
scribed: rostral or caudal transtentorial, subfascial or
DIAGNOSIS OF SPECIFIC
cingulate gyrus, foramen magnum, and herniation
through a craniotomy defect (Fishman 1975; Kornegay
INTRACRANIAL DISEASES
et al. 1983). Of these, caudal transtentorial, subfas-
cial, and foramen magnum occur most commonly
MR imaging can be used as an aid in the ante mortem
(Figures 2.45E and 2.48). Clinical signs of caudal
diagnosis of many diseases of intracrarial structures.
transtentorial herriation are frequently the result of
While some disease processes have distinct imaging
 pressure distributed downward through the midbrain
appearances, many diseases have more characteristic,
61 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
weighted and FLAIR studies) (arrows).
SE5M
SLS
SE/N
E
Figure 2.45.  Transverse T1-weighted MR images before (A), and following intravenous confrast administrafion (B), (C) from
three separate dogs and one cat (D) with ventricular obstruction (small arrows). In (B) and (C) there are intraventricular
     a  (    ( d  s
T2-weighted MR image (E) from a dog with obstruction of the ventricles at the level of the third ventricle.
63 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
FH-31fe
FH-29f
FH-26fee
SE/M
FH-20
SE/M
SE/M
A
Figure 2.46.
hydrocephalus (A).
64 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
SEM
SELMG
SL13
H7
SE/M
FH24he
SEM
Figure 2.46. (Continued) Transverse T1-weighted MR images before intravenous contrast administrafion (B) from a dog with
hydrocephaluis.
65PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
  a      ( m     ()  
syringomyelia (arrow).
 but less absolute, imaging characteristics. This is in part
 processes result in associated edema (either intra- or
due to the fact that many different disease processes re-
extracellular edema), the appearance of many of these
sult in similar associated pathophysiological alterations
 same disease processes is hyperintense in T2 images
(Figure 2.33). This, in turn, is also why T2-weighted
ical processes contribute to the MR appearance of the
 images are a good general screering sequence for a va-
disease. For example, as numerous intracrarial disease
riety of intracrarial diseases. In fact, many intracranial
       
diffusely and therefore, are apparent on T2-weighted
 d   s   
Tl-weighted images. FLAIR sequences are used sub-
sequently to accentuate these T2-weighted alterations
due to the nulling out of the normal CSF signal from
the brain tissues.
Degenerative Diseases
Many primary degenerative intracranial diseases of
dogs and cats are inherited or congenital, and occur pri-
marily in young animals. The majority of these diseases
result in neurologic dysfunction without alterations in
gross anatomical structure of the brain. Therefore, ad-
vanced intracranial imaging studies, such as MR imag-
ing, are invariably normal in affected animals. If the
degenerative process results in atrophy or loss of in-
tracranial cells and structural elements, this atrophy
Figure 2.47. Transverse T1-weighted MR image following
may be evident with MR imaging. For example, with
intravenous confrast administration from a dog with ven-
 some cerebellar diseases, the cerebellum is hypoplas-
tricular obstruction due to an infraventricular mass (choroid
tic or becomes atrophied. A smaller than normal or
plexus fumors) (larger arrows). Note the hyperintense signal
- pe   p n p
from the lining of the ventricle (small arrows).
trol arimal might be found in MR evaluations of these
Figure 2.48.  (A) Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a dog with bilateralcaudal transtentorial herniafion (smaller arrows)
and associated venfricular obstruction (larger arrow). (B) Transverse T1-weighted MR image from a dog with unilateral caudal
  l ()  ( r s  ss  (se   s
from a cat with bilateral caudal transtentorial herniation (arrows).
67 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.48.  (Continued) Sagiftal (D) and transverse (E) T2-weighted MR images from a cat with both bilateral caudal transten-
level of the transverse imaging plane at the region of the caudal transtentorial herniation. Sagiftal T2-weighted (F) and trans-
the region of the foramen magnum herniation.
68 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
animals. In some instances, the cerebellum will be re-
mal regions within the nervous system in MR stud-
duced to a fluid-filled cyst.
ies (Jeffery et al. 2003) (Figure 2.50). As an example,
Other diseases may result in diffuse alterations in
with lissencephaly, the cortical gyri may be more promi-
   n r  r   ra
nent and thicker than normal (Dewey et al. 2003). Other
et al. 200l). Some degenerative diseases in dogs, such
types of dysplasia are evident as anatomic abnormali-
 as those similar to Leigh's syndrome in humans, may
ties. In other instances, specific regions of the brain may
show bilateral hyperintense lesiors (T2-weighted se-
be malformed or underdeveloped.
quences) on MR imaging of the intracrarial structures.
 Intracrarial arachnoid cysts may be congerital in ori-
These abnormalities may be present in various regions
gin, or may result as out-pocketing of the cerebral ven-
of the intracrarial structures, but often involve the
 supratentorial (thalamic) structures. Similar types of
 These cystic abnormalities are usually readily apparent
MR abnormalities may be seen with other metabolic-
with MR imaging; however, it is often difficult if not im-
based encephalopathies such as electrolyte abnormali-
 possible to distinguish whether the cystic abnormality
ties (e.g., sodium) and thiamine deficiency (see Section
is a distinct cystic structure (has a wall or lining) or
"Metabolic Encephalopathies" in this chapter).
anl extension of the third ventricle (Figure 2.51). The
Otherwise normal older arimals (usually older than
borders of these cystic abnormalities may be slightly
10-12 years of age depending upon the breed) if eval-
overestimated on T2 sequences.
uated with MR imaging may show decreased size of
 Epidermoid and dermoid cysts result from abnormal
the cortical layers of the hemispheres and resultant in-
development of the neural tube (Figure 2.52). These
creases in cerebral ventricular dimensions. There may
abnormalities are often found in the fourth ventricle
also appear to have more prominent sulci (possibly the
  s   g 
 result of smaller than normal gyri). It is important to rec-
e an uo sanns lueuo-pg ard
Depending upon the cellular constituents of the cyst,
age-related change within the intracrarial structures,
s o  s eis jo srde xn
most likely the result of cortical atrophy with increas-
 ranging from hypo- to hyperintense regions within the
 ing age. Occasionally in MR images of older animals
 abnormality. Generally, these types of abnormalities
there will be concurrent increased signal intensity in
 are relatively hypointense on Tl-weighted sequences,
and relatively hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences.
a, ue aq Ae s (6tz am) sem ren
 Contrast enhancement (following intravenous admin-
change in many of these dogs; however, the significance
istration of contrast media) may be present heteroge-
of this finding is under investigation. In still other in-
neously within the tissues and/or more uniformly en-
stances, cortical atrophy may result from diffuse or focal
hanced on the periphery of the cystic structures.
vascular-related celloss. This may also accompany sec-
 ondary hypertensive disease affecting the brain cells.
Hyperadrenocorticism may also result in brain atro-
Hydrocephalus
 phy, possibly from vascular-based ischemia, secondary
hypertension, cerebral vessel disease, or primary cell
Hydrocephalus can result from obstruction of the ven-
death.
tricular system, irritation of the ventricle (from inflam-
 Older dogs with progressive cogritive decline, which
mation or hemorrhage), and increased size of the ventri-
 is unusual for the normal aging process, have been sug-
cles due to loss of brain parenchyma (hydrocephalus ex
 gested to have evidence of brain atrophy on MR evalu-
ations. This has been suggested to primarily be evident
 by information obtained from a variety of imaging and
as thalamic atrophy with a small appearance of the in-
electrophysiologic modalities.
 terthalamic adhesion (Figure 2.49). This same appear-
 MR imaging affords evaluation of the ventricular
ance, that is, the decrease in size of the interthalamic
system (Harrington et al. 1996). The ventricular sys-
adhesion, however, has also been seen in clirically nor-
()  e     
mal older dogs.
on a Tl-weighted, and hyperintense (whiter) on a T2-
weighted imaging sequence. The ability of MR imaging
Anomalous Disease
 to provide anatomical views in multiple planes with-
 out reductions in image quality allows for a more thor-
 Development anomalies such as aplasia, hypoplasia, or
ough assessment of the ventricular system. Focal dila-
dysplasia, may alter the normal intracrarial anatomi-
tion of portions of the ventricular system is also readily
cal relationships and be evident as anatomically abnor-
 determined. MR imaging features and considerations
69 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.49.  Transverse FLAIR MR image (A) from a dog with periventricular hyperintense signal. Transverse T1-weighted
(B), transverse T2-weighted (C), and sagiftal T2-weighted (D) MR images from an older dog with cognifive decline. Note the
(E) from a clinically healthy older dog with a relatively smaller interthalamic adhesion.
70 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Sch
SEM
SEM
Figure 2.50.  (A) Transverse T1-weighted MR image from a dog with congerital supratentorial anafomical defect and associ-
ated ventricular enlargement. (B) Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a sheep with a congenital defect of the dorsal cerebellar
region with an associated encephalocele (arrows). Transverse T2-weighted (C) and FLAIR (D) MR images from a dog with
congenital supratentorial anatomical defect and porencephaly (arrow).
of hydrocephalus are discussed in Section "Ventricular
malities of the liver and portal system. Liver biopsy and
Obstruction" in this chapter.
direct visualization of the liver and portal system at la-
 parotomy may be used for diagnosis of abnormalities
Metabolic Encephalopathies
of the portal system and liver parenchyma.
Abnormalities on MR imaging of the brain in
Numerous metabolic abnormalities may alter intracra-
arimals with HE may be found (Figure 2.53). In some
rial functions. Clues to the diagnosis of many of these
instances, these abnormalities are independent of clin-
diseases can be present on routine database blood and
ical signs. In our hospital, the most consistent in-
urine assessments. A diagnosis of hepatic encephalopa-
 tracrarial imaging feature associated with HE is hy-
thy (HE) is supported by clirical signs and abrormal
 perintense signal on T2-weighted sequences from the
liver function studies such as bile acids testing. Vari-
cerebral white matter and, in some instances, the
ous ultrasound, scintigraphic, portal angiography, and
 periventricular white matter. The exact histologic na-
MR-angiography studies of the liver and abdominal
ture of these signal changes is not consistently identi-
vasculature may show the anatomical vascular abnor-
fied. This abnormality may represent edema. In other
71 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.51.  Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from five dogs (A)-(E) with cystic intracrarial strucfures (arrows).
72 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
SEM
SL6
 Figure 2.52. Sagittal T1-weighted MR image following intravenous contrast administration from a dog with an epidermoid
cyst of the fourth ventricle (arrow).
situations, similar abnormalities are found in animals 
Some metabolic abnormalities, such as hypo-
with HE but also have seizure activity. Therefore, the:
glycemia, are not associated with any alteration of brain.
 structure on MR. Obvicusly, if any metabolic derange-
is not established. Some of these changes are reversible
 ment results in cerebral edema, ischemia, or hemor-
following appropriate medical or surgical treatment for
rhage, these secondary alterations may be present on
portosystemic shunting. In these latter cases, MR ab-
 MR evaluations of the intracranial space. Abnormal-
dominal angiography may additionally be used toiden-
ifies associated with imbalances of sodium and wa-
ter in the brain are sometimes associated with more
mD
 abnormalities bilaterally within the cerebral white mafter and grey matter (arrows).
73 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
[s n  a   m  e       s n 
intensity in the thalamus.
characteristic MR abnormalities. With MR, these lesions
 d sn n    
 sistent, insulin-resistant hyperglycemia may suggest
MR imaging of the intracranial structures may reveal a
are present in the thalamus. The degree of T2-weighted
 pituitary mass in these animals.
MR signal intensity is often correlated with the dura
With some of the primary metabolic encephalo
tion of the abnormality (more hyperintense earlier in
pathies such as mitochondrial encephalopathies, there
the disease).
is increased CSF lactate and pyruvates in humans;
These lesions are most often found in association
 however, this is not established in dogs (Dewey et al.
with too rapid correction of hyponatremia that may ac-
2003). CSF analysis is usually normal. MR may show
company hypoadrenocorticism, or occasionally other 
bilaterally symmetric, cavitary lesions of brain and
 diseases associated with persistent hyponatremia, and
 spinal cord. With MR, these lesions are hypointense in
 are referred to in dogs as osmotic myelinolysis (Fig-
T1-weighted images and hyperintense in T2-weighted
ure 2.54). While the cellular nature of these abnormal-
images.
ities is not defiritively established, these lesions may
represent localized edema or demyelination. In human
beings this pathologic change is referred to as cen-
Neoplasia
tral pontine myelinolysis. In dogs, however, lesions are
 characteristically in the thalamus compared to those in
 Neoplastic diseases affecting the intracrarial space of-
 the brain stem (pons) in humans. Some of the animals
ten alter the anatomical structure of the affected in-
may have associated cerebrovascular disease and evi-
tracrarial structures. The diagnosis of an intracranial
dence of cerebralinfarction in MR studies. These lesions
mass is readily made using advanced imaging modali-
 may persist on MR imaging for weeks even with asso-
ties such as MR imaging either primarily as due to sec-
ciated clirical improvement.
ondary pathophysiologic structural alterations (mass
Some endocrine diseases are associated with alter-
effect) (Figures 2.56-2.81). Imaging features of primary
ations in the structure or function of the hypothala-
brain tumor have been reviewed (Tucker and Gavin
mus or the pituitary gland (Figure 2.55). The most com-
1996). While some tumors have more characteristic
monly recognized of these are macroadenomas of the
imaging features, specific neoplastic processes may
pituitary gland in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (see
 have diverse imaging characteristics.
Figure 2.55. (A), (B) Sagiftal T1-weighted MR images following infravenous contrast administration from two dogs with
       ) m     
administration (D) from a cat with a pifuitary macroadenoma (arrows). Transverse T2-weighted (E) and T1-weighted (following
75 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
G
 ( aq s    m  (m)  d e m  e  ()
following intravenous contrast administration (K) from a dog with a pituitary macroadenoma (arrows).
 Tumors have a propensity for creating associated
 orrhagic regions or be mineralized (calcified). Hemor-
 -de ea g adi s ( a) ea pn
 rhage may have a varied appearance with MR depend-
pears most often as the vasogenic type, as this type of
 ing on the duration of the hemorrhage.
edema is more prominent in, and tends to follow the
 Meningiomas can have a varied appearance in
 course of, the cerebral white matter. This gives a spike
T1- and T2-weighted images (Figures 2.56-2.68). Per-
 or crown-like appearance to the lesion.
ifumoral edema can contribute to the imaging appear-
ance as well as associated mass effect. Occasionally, sec-
 ondary pathophysiologic sequelae are more obvious in
 images obtained prior to contrast enhancement.
Meningioma
As a general rule, meningiomas are isointense to cor-
 Meningiomas are the most common brain tumor of 
tical tissue in T1-weighted MR images prior to contrast
both dogs and cats, and often appear as a broad-  administration. In some instances, these tumors are hy-
parenchyma) contrast-enhancing mass on MR imaging 
 miristration. The T2-weighted appearance is often hy-
(Figures 2.56-2.68). These tumors may contain hem-
 perintense. Meningiomas tend to be contrast enhanced
76 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
istration from a dog with a meningioma (arrows).
77 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.56. (Continued) Transverse T1-weighted MR images before (D) and following intravenous contrast admiristration
(E) in a dog with a meningioma.
SE/M
/V
B
2.3:1)
H-
-
-
B
Figure 2.58. Dorsal (A) and transverse (B) T1-weighted MR images following intravenous contrast admiristrafion from fwo
79 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
There is often a relatively uniform enhancement of
these tumors following intravenous contrast admiris-
tration (Figures 2.56, 2.62-2.64, 2.67, and 2.68). In some
instances, there is heterogenous enhancement, more
likely centrally compared to peripherally. Occasionally,
the dura immediately adjacent to the tumor will have
increased enhancement, which is often referred to as a
"dural tail sign."
 Meningiomas may sometimes be primarily of a cys-
tic character (Figure 2.68). These cystic meningiomas
have imaging characteristics of those of a CSF-contain
cyst. These tumors tend to be more round or oval, and
are hypointense in Tl-weighted images, and conversely
hyperintense in T2-weighted images. Often there is an
associated focal, sometimes plaque-like tissue on the
periphery of the cystic lesion that is contrast enhanc-
 ing. Occasionally, the limiting lining of the cystic cavity
may enhance following contrast administration giving
more common in the olfactory bulb regions of the in-
tracranial cavity, but can occur in other regions of the
intracranial space.
Figure 2.59. Dorsal T1-weighted MR image following in-
 The tela choroidea (area where pia mater contacts
 travenous contrast administration from a dog with a menin-
ependyma) may become neoplastic with meningeal tis-
 gioma (arrows) of the olfactory region.
sue. These tissues are located in the floor of each lateral
ventricle and in the roof of the third and fourth ven-
following intravenous contrast administration. These
     s  
tumors tend to displace tissue from a peripheral to cen-
ent intraventricular location. This is more common in
tral direction. Depending on the slice plane, the largest
 cats (Figure 2.65). Meningiomas are commonly solitary
abnormalities in dogs. Cats and, rarely, dogs may have
tered (broad-based). The overlying skull may be hyper-
multiple intracranial meringiomas (Figures 2.6l and
plastic (thickened) (Figure 2.64).
2.64).
cat with a meningioma (arrows).
80 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
m
B
arrows) of the tentorium cerebelli. Transverse T1-weighted MR images before (B) and following infravenous contrast admin-
istration (C) from the same dog. There is also an associated cystic (hypointense) structure with the larger meningioma (*).
Gliomas
general types of tumors contain multiple cells popu-
lations making differentiation into specific diagnoses
 Gliomas arise from the supporting cells of the brain
difficult and inconsistent. Similar to the variety of his-
parenchyma. These include astrocytes and oligoden-
 tologic characteristics of gliomas, the MR appearance of
drogliocytes. There are varying subtypes within some
gliomas is varied and enhancement after contrast ad-
of these gliomas, ranging from relatively more benign to
miristration is inconsistent (Figures 2.69-2.73).
relatively more malignant varieties. Also, some of these
81 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
()  a s e  s  (  d e () im   
With MR imaging, gliomas often appear hyperin-
 some instances, contrast erhancementis present orly at
  d  s m  
the margins of the tumor, providing for the description
weighted imaging sequences relative to cerebral cor-
 of a "ring-enhancing" lesion. This type of erhancement
fical tissue. In more advanced tumors, necrosis and
 pattern while characteristic of gliomas is certainly not
 hemorrhage may create a heterogenous appearance to
 pathognomoric for them as other processes including
the tumor. Diffuse gliomas (throughout the intracra-
 inflammatory disease may appear similarly. In other
nial neural axis) may result in multiple abnormal areas
gliomas, the contrast-erhancement pattern is faint or
within the intracrarial space mimicking an inflamma-
 heterogenous. Additional disease processes such as in-
tory process or cerebrovascular disease. Gliomas as a flammatory condifions may also have heterogenous or
general rule may not be enhanced sigrificantly or even poorly marginated enhancement following contrast ad-
at all following intravenous contrast admiristration. In miristration (Figure 2.74).
Choroid Plexus Tumors
Choroid plexus tumors arise from the choroid plexus
tissue (Figures 2.75-2.77). These tumors are also com-
morly hyperintense in T2-weighted images, and isoin
 tense in Tl-weighted images. In other instances, these
tumors may be hypo- or hyperintense in Tl-weighted
images. Due to the tissue of origin, these tumor types
tend to be located in or around the ventricular system.
Obstruction of the ventricle system may result in hy-
drocephalus in association with these tumors. Because
of the concentration of blood vessels within the tumor,
      s 
venous contrast administration. Other tumor types, be-
sides choroid plexus tumor, may appear to arise from
within the ventricles (Figure 2.78).
Figure 2.63. Transverse T1-weighted MR image following
Pituitary Tumors
intravenous contfrast administration from the same cat as in
        
Figure 2.62 with a meningioma (arrows).
suprasellar location and expand into the diencephalon
82 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
+
cat with two separate meringiomas (small arrows and medium arrows). Note the hyperostosis of the skull overlying the more
frorm a cat with two separate meningiomas (small arrows and larger arrows).
(Figure 2.55). Smaller tumors are more readily seen with
MR imaging especially with dynamic contrast studies.
trast administration, some adenomas may actually not
Macroadenomas may erlarge dorsally and invade or
take up as much contrast as the normal surrounding tis-
compress the diencephalon. Macroadenomas are usu-
sues. Microadenomas, commonly associated with hy-
ally hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences, and isoin-
 peradrenocorticism, may be more difficult to appreciate
tense on T1-weighted sequences. Most macroadenomas
for similar reasons, that is, the tumor is lost within the
are enhanced following contrast administration. As the
normally enhanced pituitary tumor.
83 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
spheres, but obviously can be present at any location in
the intracranial space.
Tumors Extending from Local Structures
Neoplastic diseases may also extend into the intracra-
nial cavity from the skull, nasal cavities, ear canals, and
of the nasal passages may extend caudally through
the cribriform plate and invade the olfactory bulb
(Figure 2.80). These tumors often have irregular mar-
gins and are commorly contrast enhancing. Addition
ally, there may be a significant amount of associated
cerebral edema, primarily in the ipsilateral (to the ma-
jor lesion) cerebral white matter. Similar appearances
Figure 2.65. Transverse T1-weighted MR image following
 may occur, however, with meningiomas in this location
intravenous confrast administraftion from a caft with an intra-
(see previous discussion).
ventricular meningioma (arrows).
Tumors of the skull (multilobular tumors of bone)
often will compress the intracrarial contents as these
tumors expand (Figure 2.8l). These tumors obviously
Metastasis
have a primary focus of skull bone involvement, which
can aid in their differentiation from other types of in-
Metastatic neoplasia to the brain can also occur (Figure
tracrarial tumors.
2.79). As these are generally more aggressive varieties
FLAIR sequences, and are normally contrast enhanced
Nutritiona!
following intravenous contrast admiristration. Classi-
Thiamine deficiency is the most commorly recogrized
cally, metastatic disease is found primarily at the junc-
nutritional abnormality affecting the intracrarial struc-
fion of the gray and white matter in the cerebral hemi-
tures of animals. Bilaterally symmetrical hyperintense
abnormalities may be seen in these nuclear areas, and
possibly the cerebellum (in dogs) with MR imaging of
affected animals (Garosi et al. 2003). Cats may have
similar lesions as well, and may have abnormalities
within the colliculi, brain stem, and thalamus. These
lesions tend to be hyperintense on T2-weighted se-
quences and are focal, round to oval, and relatively dis-
crete. Similar lesions may be found in other metabolic
encephalopathies.
InflammatoryDiseases
Encephalitis and meningitis may result from both in-
fectious and non-infectious etiologies. Common infec-
tious etiologies in cats include toxoplasmosis, feline in-
fectious peritonitis, cryptococcus, and other as yet un-
classified but suspected viral agents. In upto 60% or
more cases of encephalitis in dogs and cats, however.
an infectious etiology is not identified.
 se rns sns h sisurp sads 
Figure 2.66. Transverse T1-weighted MR image following
cal lesions associated with primary inflammation (Fig-
 intravenous contrast administration from a dog with a menin-
ures 2.82-2.91). Lesions are often most obvious on T2-
gioma (arrows) along the floor of the skull.
weighted or FLAIR imaging sequences as hyperintense
84 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Figure 2.67.  Transverse T1-weighted MR images (A)-(C) following infravenous confrast administration from three dogs with
a meningioma (arrows) which are more plaque-like in structure. In the third dog (C), the meningioma also involves the falx
cerebri (small arrow). Transverse T1-weighted MR images before (D) and following intravenous contrast administration (E)
from a cat with a meningioma (arrows) which are more plaque-like in structure (arrow).
85 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
before infravenous confrast admiristrafion from a dog with a cystic meringioma (arrows) of the rostral falx cerebri. Transverse
the cerebellar region.
86 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Figure 2.69. Transverse T1-weighted MR images ((A) and (B)) from two dogs with gliomas (arrows).
(2.5.1)
 (  e  ()  e  s  () m    ()    
gliomas (arrows).
87 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
ic3
'SE/M
L13
Ec2
Figure 2.71.
 Transverse T2-weighted MR images (A)-(C) from three dogs with gliomas (arrows). Note the associated cerebral
edema in dog (C) (smaller arrows).
88 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
istration (C) from a dog with a glioma (arrows).
89 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
3512
SL11
SL10
SL12
dog with a glioma (arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR images before (C) and following intravenous confrast admiristrafion
(D) from a dog with a glioma (arrows).
90 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
1555-
AXGAD
1996
mTT
Figure 2.73.  (Continued) Transverse T1-weighted MR image (E) following intravenous contrast administration from a dog
and following infravenous confrast administration (G) from a dog with a glioma (arrows). Transverse T2-weighted MR image
 m aa (me s a g  osse e pe (sme r  e m  e  ()
images before (I) and following intravenous confrast administration (J) from a dog wifh a glioma (arrows).
91  PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
lature. In some diseases, notably toxoplasmosis, lesions
 may be seen on T2-weighted and FLAIR sequences,
however, are not enhanced following contrast admin-
istration. This may also be found in instances of GME
(Figure 2.88).
There are a number of CNS inflammatory diseases
that occur in specific breeds of animals, referred to as
breed-specific encephalitis (Figure 2.87). MR and other
advanced imaging studies may show edema, focalmass
effect, diffuse hyperintense abnormalities in T2-studies,
or focal or multifocal contrast-enhancing lesions. Ab-
 normalities apparent in MR images, however, are not 
pathognomonic for these diseases.
 Infection or inflammation external to the brain can
occasionally be extended into the intracranial cavity In-
ner/middle ear disease and nasal disease are most often
Figure 2.74. Transverse T1-weighted MR image following
present in these conditions (Figures 2.92 and 2.93). MR
intravenous contrast administration from a dog with GME
 imaging can show these foci of inflammation/infection
(arrows).
as well as any intracranial extension. Curiously, we
- d  s g   p os a
tracranial tumors of the posterior fossa that have as-
regions. Abnormalities are often iso- to hypointense
 sociated middle/inner ear disease (Figure 2.94). The
on Tl-weighted pre-contrast sequences. In some dis-
 relationship of these two abnormalities is unclear, but
eases, such as focal granulomatous meningoencephali-
 can be problematic when attempting to determine if
tis (GME), focal inflammatory mass lesions can re-
the intracrarial abnormality is an extension of an ear
semble focal neoplastic diseases with similar features
infection or a second primary disease (such as tumor).
      
With middle and inner ear (bulla) disease, there is
anatomical lesions may be present within the nervous
 often a hyperintense abnormality within the bula on
system, and these lesions may be especially conspicu-
 proton density or T2-weighted sequences. Contrast en-
ous after intravenous contrast medium admiristration
 hancement can be variable. In some instances, only
suggesting alterations in the BBB or the cerebral vascu-
- the lining of the bulla will be enhanced preferentially.
( e        ()    
from a dog with a choroid plexus tumor of the lateral ventricles (arrows).
92 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
angle (arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR image (B) following intravenous confrast administration from a cat with choroid
 plexus tumor (arrows) of the third ventricle.
Contrast enhancement of the bulla, however, is not
t  tologic evaluations over years of observation, no eti-
pathognomonic for infection/inflammation, as mid-
 ology has been established for the disease process.
dlle /inner ear fumors may also show contrast enhance-
 Idiopathic epilepsy, for example, would fulfill these di-
ment.
 agnostic criteria. Some dogs with idiopathic epilepsy
when imaged with MR following their seizure (usually
Idiopathic Disease
more than one) will have structural alterations in the in-
tracrarial structures (Figure 2.44). Persistent structural
Any disease that does not have a specific etiology is re-
alterations in brain tissue due to chroric seizures and
ferred to as idiopathic. With some disease processes,
associated brain atrophy may also be evident on MR
even with exhaustive clirical, biochemical, and his-
imaging.
SE/M
SL6
Figure 2.77. Sagittal T1-weighted MR image following in-
Figure 2.78. Sagittal T1-weighted MR image following
travenous contrast administration from a dog with a choroid
intravenous contrast administration  from a dog  with  a
plexus tumor (arrows) of the fourth ventricle.
cholesteatoma (arrows) of the rostral fourth ventricle.
93 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.79.  Transverse T1-weighted MR images following infravenous confrast administration from two dogs ((A) and (B))
with metastatic neoplasia to the brain (arrows).
mgTm:14012
Figure 2.80. Sagiftal T1-weighted MR images following infravenous contrast admiristration from three dogs (A)-(C) with
nasal fumors extending into the olfactory region of the brain (arrows).
Figure 2.81.  Transverse T1-weighted MR images following infravenous confrast administrafion from fwo dogs (A) and (B))
with tumors of the skull (arrows).
95 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
B
dog with encephalitis. Note the multifocal parenchymal contrast enhancement (arrows).
Trauma
ing characteristics of hemorrhage) is most often appar-
ent with MR imaging studies (Figure 2.95). Occasion-
Traumatic injury remains a common cause of brain dys-
ally, a subdural or extradural hematoma or focal intra-
function in dogs and cats.
parenchymal hematoma is found.
Evidence of cerebral edema or hemorrhage (see the
 With exogenous head injury, there may be associated
 previous discussion in this chapter regarding MR imag-
trauma to the skull (fracture) and associated soft tissues
(such as the temporalis muscles). When injury is present
in these structures, it can be difficult to determine if the
arimal had an underlying intracrarial disease where
 in it fell and injured the head, or if the head injury was
 due to a primary traumatic injury.
Cerebrovascular Diseases
 Cerebrovascular disease should be suspected in any an-
imal with acute onset intracrarial signs (Thomas 1996).
A thorough examination of the body for petechia is im-
portant, including the mucous membranes (especially
of the penis, prepuce, and vulva) and the retina. Pal-
lor, low-grade heart murmurs, weakness, and tachy-
cardia are hallmark signs of anemia, which may be as-
 sociated with coagulopathies. These signs may result
      s 
ties. Thoracic auscultation for pleural fluid and abdom-
inal palpation for hemoperitoneum is important. Ra-
diographs and ultrasound may help when the physical
examination is urrewarding but large amounts of in-
Figure 2.83. Transverse T1-weighted MR image follow-
ternal bleeding are suspected. Large amounts of blood
ing intravenous confrast administration from a dog with
can be lost through the gastrointestinal tract and ex-
encephalitis. Note the multifocal parenchymal contrast en-
amination of the stool for hematochezia or melena is
hancement (arrows).
important.
R-TSE/M
L10
10
10
Figure 2.84. Transverse FLAIR MR image (A) from a dog with meringitis and encephalitis. Note the hyperintense signal on the
surface of the brain (arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR images before (B) and following intravenous contrast administration 
97 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
T
LE
1998.AL
m
Figure 2.85. Transverse T2-weighted MR image (A) from a dog with meningifis and encephalitis. Note the hyperintense
contrast administrafion (D) and (E)) from the same dog wifh meningifis and encephalifis. Note the contrast enhancement of
the surface of the brain (arrows).
Figure 2.86.  Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a cat with meningitis and encephalitis. Note the hyperintense signal
within the brain stem (arrows). Final diagnosis was toxoplasmosis.
encephalitis. Note the contrast enhancement of the cerebral cortex of the brain (arrows).
99 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
As cerebrovascular disease often alters the structural
(10
ImgTm:
 integrity of the brain, clarification of the cause of the
clirical signs often requires some advanced imaging
modality to evaluate brain structure (Figures 2.34-2.42.
2.96, and 2.97). Depending upon the degree of the cere-
bral disease (i.e., ischemia vs. overt hemorrhage), and
the relationship between onset of the disease and the
time of imaging, the characteristics of cerebrovascular
disease may vary.
With MR imaging, hemorrhage can have a varied
appearance, primarily based on the duration of the
hemorrhage and alterations in blood hemoglobin (see
Table 2.1) (Thomas 1996). As different regions within
hemorrhagic focus may contain differing stages of
A
hemoglobin breakdown, a heterogenous appearance to
the lesion may be encountered. In addition to the form
of hemoglobin present, the signal intensities of a blood
clot may vary depending on the operating field strength
and the type of sequence used for imaging. Hemor-
 rhage may also vary in appearance depending on the
cavity (subdural, intraparenchymal, or subarachnoid)
where the bleeding ocurred. With MR imaging, cere-
brovascular disease may vary from evidence of a focal
mass to diffuse or multifocal changes. Often there is ev-
idence of edema, which may be cytotoxic or vasogeric,
in the area of the cerebrovascular damage. Therefore,
the initial abnormality is usually apparent as hyperin-
tense in both T2-weighted and FLAIR studies. If the
animal is imaged acutely (within hours) following the
onset of clirical signs, however, smaller lesions may
be not apparent. In this situation a gradient echo
sequence may reveal abnormalities not previously
detectable
Infarcts can be relatively smaller (lacunar; a few mil-
-  ()    (
日
 gions of infarction are usually more round or spherical
 in shape. Classically, larger regions of infarction have
Figure 2.88. Sagittal (A) and fransverse (B) T2-weighted
MR images from a dog with histologically confirmed GME.
a wedge-shaped pattern may be encountered with the
 Note the hyperintense signal within the brain stem (arrows).
point of the wedge being directed more centrally. The
This lesion did not enhance following intravenous confrast
common sites of infarction are the corona radiata, inter-
administration.
nal capsule, thalamus, or periventricular white matter
of the cerebrum. The white matter of the cerebellum
is another common site. In other instances, infarcted
Besides documenting any hypertension via either di-
 regions are more "comet-tail" shaped.
rect or indirect methods, complete blood cell count,
Contrast enhancement following gadolinium admin-
with special attention to red cell and platelet counts,
istration of the infarcted region will depend on the in-
is often helpful. Specific coagulation testing (bleed-
 terval between the time of the vascular damage and
ing time, PT, PTT, FDPs) is also commorly evaluated.
the MR examination, the resulting inflammatory re-
Biochemical evidence of a predisposition to hyperco-
sponse, and the degree of vascular disruption (break
agulability such as proteinuria should be collected.
in the BBB). Most cases are imaged within 48 h after the
 Diseases associated with hypertension such as renal
 insult due to the severity of signs, and therefore contrast
disease and hyperthyroidism certainly should also be
enhancement in the majority of the infarcted region is
considered.
uncommon. When present, contrast erhancement in
100 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
SE/N
SL12
SL11
SL12
B
Figure 2.89. Transverse T1-weighted MR images before (A) and following intravenous confrast administrafion (B) from a
dog with histologically confirmed GME. Note the confrast enhancement within the cerebral hemisphere (arrows).
101 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
7
 e e e ( sse  e a o e  ()      
with the subdural abscess. Note the contrast enhancement of the surface of the cerebellum (arrow). Transverse T2-weighted MR
to a suspected bite wound to the skull (larger arrow).
A
Figure 2.91. Transverse proton density MR image (A) from a dog with encephalitis. The caudal nuclei are bilaterally hyper-
intense (arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR image (B) prior to intravenous contfrast administration from the same dog as in
102 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
A
B
Figure 2.92. Transverse T1-weighted MR images from two separate dogs ((A) and (B)) with middle/inner ear infections
(arrows).
cerebrovascular lesions is minimal, heterogenous, or
 and inflammation of CNs often result in enlargement
 peripheral to ring-like. Depending on the imaging char-
of the affected nerves. Nerves may be more hyperin-
acteristics, focal inflammatory brain diseases and some
tense on T2-weighted MR sequences, and may enhance
neoplastic processes such as gliomas may have a sim-
following intravenous contrast admiristration. Occa-
ilar appearance in MR images. It is also important to
sionally, however, animals with no apparent clinical
 remember that other pathologic processes (such as tu-
abnormalities will show contrast enhancement of some
mor or inflammation) may affect cerebral vessels and
 CNs, most often the trigeminal nerve. The significance
result in secondary infarction of intracranial nervous
 of this contrast enhancement is urknown, and may rep-
tissue.
resent normal variations in blood flow or occult CN
pathology.
Diseases of Cranial Nerves
 Surprisingly common, CNs are often infiltrated with
diffuse neoplastic diseases such as myelomonocytic
Anatomical abnormalities of the CNs are most often ap-
leukemia or lymphoma. In these animals, cytologic
parent with MR imaging (Figures 2.98-2.100). Tumors 
evaluation of CSF may reveal the neoplastic cells.
103 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.93.  Transverse proton density MR image (A) from a cat with bilateral middle /inner ear infection (arrows). Transverse
T1-weighted MR images before (B) and following (C) infravenous confrast administrafion. Note the confrast enhancement of
the bulla (arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR image following infravenous confrast admiristrafion from a snow leopard (D).
104 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Figure 2.94.  Transverse T1-weighted MR image following infravenous confrast administrafion from a cat wifth a CN V ftumor 
(smaller arrows). Note the associated fluid signal in the ipsilateral bulla (larger arrows).
m
There is also an associated skull fracture.
105 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.96.
Transverse T2-weighted MRimage (A) from a dog with a cerebral infarction (arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR
image following infravenous confrast administration (B) from the same dog as in (A). Note the minimal confrast enhancement
present within the lesion (arrows).
Figure 2.97. Transverse T1-weighted MR image following
 intravenous contrast administration from a dog with cerebral
Figure 2.98.
3. Transverse T1-weighted MR image following
infarction. Note the contrast enhancement present within the
intravenous confrast administration from a dog with a fumor
lesion (arrows).
of the oculomotor nerve (CN II) (arrows).
Figure 2.99. Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a dog with arn extracranial fumor of the oculomotor nerve (CN I)
(arrows).
D
Figure 2.10o. Transverse T2-weighted MR image (A) from a dog with a fumor of CN V (smaller arrows). Note the atrophy
of the ipsilateral temporalis muscle (larger arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR image (B) following infravenous contrast
arrows). Transverse T1-weighted MR image (C) following intravenous contrast administration from a cat with a fumor of CN
extension. Note the atrophy of the ipsilateral temp oralis muscle (larger arrows).
107 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.102. Transverse proton density MR image show-
ing a metal artifact (arrows).
Figure 2.101.
. Transverse T1-weighted MR image following
(surgical implants, BBs, other missile projectiles) and
contrast administrafion with a mass wifhin the cavernous si-
 gold bead implants (usually used as a possible seizure
nus region (arrow).
treatment) Metal artifacts result in a "black-hole" type
appearance, being hypointense rounded to oval to ob-
long shaped. There is usually a hyperintense rim or
edge to abnormalities.
Lesions of the cavernous sinus may also result in crarial
 Movement of the animal during the imaging pro-
nerve signs (Figure 2.101).
cess results in a wavy or "window blind" appear-
The facial, vestibular, as well as the sympathetic
-0d Aeu sunddenm pue nao-pg a aq oi aue
nerves may be affected with disease of the middle and
duce superimposition of structures on one another,
 irner ear. MR imaging provides superior anatomical
 the appearance of which may mimic pathologic alter-
evaluations of the middle and irner ear, and concur-
ations. Intravenous contrast in vessels external to the
rently has an advantage of allowing for anatomical as-
intracrarial structures may "bleed" this contrast into
sessment of the brain stem for evaluation of the nu-
the intracrarial structures. This appears as focal, usu-
clear regions associated with these CNs. Lesions and
 ally more than one, hyperintense regions within brain
associated brain stem structures, however, are often bet-
parenchyma.
ter seen with MR imaging as compared to CT as beam-
Jo insan a ose are suuqe puaredde Are
hardening artifact with the latter commonly obscures
animal position during imaging combined with im-
 structural detail in this area.
age slice selection. Even subtle malposition of the head
and neck can result in slightly tangential image acqui-
sitions resulting in slightly asymmetrical appearance
INTRACRANIAL IMAGING
of intracranial anatomy. As symmetry is one of the im-
ARTIFACTS
of disease, slight asymmetry of intracrarial structures
 if often interpreted as abnormal. It is important when
Artifacts can result in misinterpretation of MR images
evaluating an MR study to keep in mind the effect of
leading to erroneous diagnoses (Figures 2.102-2.104).
animal positioning and slice plane acquisition when
While artifacts should always be considered when an
 interpreting asymmetry within the brain. Evaluation
unexplained abnormality exists in an MR study, some
 Of normal symmetric anatomical structures external to
of the more common artifacts are more readily defined
 the intracrarial structure such as the bulla may help
(see Chapter 3).
in determining the degree of asymmetry of animal po-
Certain types of metal obviously create artifacts that
sition during image acquisition. Finally, overall poor
can result in inability to interpret the MR image. Metal
 quality images may preclude subsequent interpretation
artifacts can result from metals such as stairless steel
(Figure 2.105).
108 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Sc4
Sc4
SE/M
SE/M
SL5
SL6
79fe
00
mg Tm: 00
mg Tm:
B
Figure 2.103. Transverse T1-weighted MR images following intravenous contrast administration from two dogs (A) and
(B) showing a flow artifact (arrows).
109 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.103.  (Continued) Transverse, T1-weighted image following infravenous contrast administrafion from a dog showing
a flow artifact (C). In part (D), the frequency direction has been changed 90° and the artifact is no longer present. (E) Transverse 
proton density image from a dog showing fold-over artifact.
110 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Hudson LC. 1993. Nervous system. In: Hudson LC and
Hamilton WP (eds), Aflas of Feline Anatomy for Veteri-
narians, WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 190-226.
 Jenkins TW. 1978. In: Jenkins TW (ed),Functional Mammalian
 Neuroanatomy, 2nd edn, Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 264
p.
 King AS. 1987. Physiological and Clinical Anatomy of the
 Domestic Mammals, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Kitchell RL. 1993. Introduction to the nervous system. In:
 Evans HE (ed), Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3d edn, WB
 Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 758-799.
Pathophysiology
Bagley RS. 1996a. Intracranial pressure in dogs and cats. Phys-
iology and treatment. Comp Contin Ed Pract Vet 18:605-
Figure 2.104. Transverse T1-weighted MR image showing
621.
a fold-over artifact.
Bagley RS. 1996b. Pathophysiologic sequelae of intracrarial
disease. Vet Clin North Am 26:711-733.
Enevoldsen EM and Jensen FT. 1979. Autoregulation and CO2
responses of cerebral blood flow in pafients with acute se-
vere head injury. J Neurosurg 48:689-703.
Fishman RA. 1975. Brain edema. N Eng J Med 293:706-711.
 Kornegay IN. 1993. Pathogenesis of diseases of the central
nervous system. In: Slafter D (ed), Textbook of Small Ani-
malSurgery,2nd edn, WBSaunders, Philadelphia, pp. 1022-
1037.
 Kornegay JN, Oliver JE, and Gorgacz EJ. 1983. Clinicopatho-
logic feafures of brain herniation in animals. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 182:1111-1116.
March PA. 1998. Seizures: classificaftion, etiology, and patho-
physiology. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 13:119-131.
 Olby N and Jeffery N. 2003. Pathogenesis of diseases of the
central nervous system. In: Slatfter D (ed), Textbook of Small
 Figure 2.105.  Transverse MR image of poor quality making
Animal Surgery, WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 1132-
interpretation difficult.
1147.
Reulen HJ. 1976. Vasogenic brain oedema. New aspects in its
BIBLIOGRAPHY
formafion, resolution and therapy. Br J Anaesth 48:741-752.
Rosenberg GA, Saland L, and Kyner WT. 1983. Pathophys-
Neuroanatomy
iology of periventricular tissue changes with raised CSF
pressure. J Neurosurg 59:606-611.
Beitz AJ and Fletcher TF. 1993. The brain. In: Evans HE
Russo ME. 1981. The pathophysiology ofepilepsy. Cornell Vet
(ed), Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edn, WB Saunders,
71:221-247.
Philadelphia, pp. 894-952.
Shapiro HM. 1975. Intracrarial hypertension: therapeutic and
deLahunta A. 1983. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical
anesthetic consideraftions. Anesthesiology 43:445-471.
 Neurology, 2nd edn, WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Summers BA, Cummings JF, and deLahunta A. 1995. Veteri
Dyce KM, Sack WO, and Wensing CJG. 1996. The nervous
nary Neuropathology, WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
system. In: Dyce KM, Sack WO, and Wensing CJG (eds)
Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy, 2nd edn, WB Saunders,
Philadelphia, pp. 259-324.
Intracranial MR Bibliography
 Evans HE and Kitchell RL. 1993. Cranial nerves and cuta
Dogs
neous innervafion of the head. In: Evans HE (ed), Miller's
Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edn, WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
Abramson C, Garosi L, Platt S, and Penderis J. 2001. Metabolic
pp. 953-986.
defect in Staffordshire bull terriers. Vet Rec 149(17):532.
 Fletcher TF. 1993. Spinal cord and meninges. In: Evans HE
Abramson C, Plaft S, Garosi L, and Penderis J. 2003a. L-2-
(ed), Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edn, WB Saunders,
Philadelphia, pp. 800-828.
Rec 153(3):95-96.
111  PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Abramson CJ, Plaft SR, Jakobs C, Verhoeven NM, Dernis
Behrend EN and Kemppainen RJ. 2001. Diagnosis of carine
R, Garosi L, et al. 2003b. L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria in
hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Staffordshire bull terriers. J Vet Intern Med 17(4):551-556.
Pract 31(5):985-1003.
Adamo PF, Crawford JT, and Stepien RL. 2005. Subdural
Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Clark TP, Salman MD, and
 hematoma of the brainstem in a dog: magnetic resonance
Peterson ME. 2002. Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorficism in
findings and treatment. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41(6):400-
dogs: a survey of internists and dermatologists. J Am Vet
405.
Med Assoc 220(11):1643-1649.
Ahmed SH, Shaikh AY, Shaikh Z, and Hsu CY. 2000. What
 Benczik J, Terhunen M, Snellman M, Joensuu H, Farkkila M,
animal models have taught us about the treafment of acute
Joensuu R, et al. 2002. Late radiation effects in the dog brain:
stroke and brain protection. Curr Atheroscler Rep 2(2):167-
 correlation of MRI and histological changes. Radiother On-
180.
col 63(1):107-120.
Allen JW, Horais KA, Tozier NA, Wegner K, Corbeil JA, Mat-
 Benigni L and Lamb CR 2005. Comparison of fluid-
trey RF, et al. 2006. Time course and role of morphine
aftenuated inversion recovery and T2-weighted magnetic
dose and concentration in infrathecal granuloma forma-
resonance images in dogs and cats with suspected brain
tion in dogs: a combined magnetic resonance imaging and
disease. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46(4):287-292.
 histopathology investigation. Anesthesiology 105(3):581-
Berg JIM and Joseph RJ. 2003. Cerebellar infarcts in two dogs
589.
diagnosed with magnetic resonance imaging. J Am Arim
Anderson ML, Smith DS, Nioka S, Subramanian H, Garcia
Hosp Assoc 39(2):203-207.
 JH, Halsey JH, et al. 1990. Experimental brain ischaemia:
Bergstrom K, Thuomas KA, Ponten U, Nilsson P, Zwetnow
Adosoads aueosar oaueu Aq Amu po juassasse
NN, and Vlajkovic S. 1986. Magnetic resonance imaging of
 and histology. Neurol Res 12(4):195-204.
brain tissue displacement and brain tissue wafer contents
Anor S, Sturges BK, Lafranco L, Jang SS, Higgins RJ,
during progressive brain compression. An experimental
 Koblik PD, et al. 2001. Systemic phaeohyphomycosis
study in dogs. Acta Radiol Suppl 369:350-352.
(Cladophialophora bantiana) in a dog—clinical diagno-
Bertoy EH, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Dublin AB, Reid MH,
sis with stereotactic computed tomographic-guided brain
and Feldman MS. 1996. One-year follow-up evaluation
biopsy. J Vet Intern Med 15(3):257-261.
of magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in dogs with
Bagley RS. 1997. Common neurologic diseases of older ani-
piftuitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med 
 mals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27(6):1451-1486.
Assoc 208(8):1268-1273.
Bagley RS and Gavin PR 1998. Seizures as a complication of
Bertoy EH, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Duesberg CA, Kass
brain ftumors in dogs. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 13(3): 179-
PH, Reid MH, et al. 1995. Magnetic resonance imaging of
184.
the brain in dogs with recently diagnosed but unfreated
Bagley RS, Harrington ML, and Moore MP. 1996a. Surgi-
pifuitary-dependent hyperadrenocorficism. J Am Vet Med
  s   s e  
Assoc 206(5):651-656.
North Am Small Anim Pract 26(4):827-842.
 Bischoff MG and Kneller SK. 2004. Diagnostic imaging of the
Bagley RS, Harrington ML, Pluhar GE, Gavin PR, and Moore
canine and feline ear. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 MP. 1997. Acute, urilateral transverse sinus occlusion dur-
34(2):437458.
Bishop TM, Morrison J, Summers BA, deLahunta A, and
tracranial disease. Vet Surg 26(3):195-201.
 Bagley RS, Kormegay IN, Lane SB, Thrall DL, and Page RL.
a case series and literafure review. J Vet Intern Med
1996b. Cystic meningiomas in 2 dogs. J Vet Intern Med
18(4):522-528.
10(2):72-75.
Bohn AA, Wills TB, West CL, Tucker RL, and Bagley RS. 2006.
 Bagley RS, Silver GM, and Gavin PR 2000. Cerebellar cystic
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis and magnetic resonance imag-
meningioma in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36(5):413-
ing in the diagnosis of neurologic disease in dogs: a retro-
415.
spective study. Vet Clin Pathol 35(3):315-320.
Bagley RS, Wheeler SJ, Klopp L, Sorjonen DC, Thomas WB
 Brady CA, Vite CH, and Drobatz KJ. 1999. Severe neurologic
Wilkens BE,et al. 1998. Clinical feafures of trigeminal nerve
sequelae in a dog after treafment of hypoadrenal crisis. J
sheath tumor in 10 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34(1):19-
Am Vet Med Assoc 215(2):222-225, 210.
25.
Brernan KM, Roos MS, Budinger TF, Higgins RJ, Wong ST,
 Bailey MQ. 1990. Diagnostic imaging of intracranial lesions
and Bristol KS. 1993. A study of radiafion necrosis and
[Review]. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5(4):232-
edema in the canine brain using positron emission to-
236.
mography and magnetic resonance imaging. Radiat Res
Barone G, deLahunta A, and Sandler J. 2000. An unusual neu-
134(1):43-53.
rological disorder in the Labrador retriever. J Vet Intern Med
Buback JL, Schulz KS, Walker MA, and Snowden KF. 1996.
14(3):315-318.
 Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain for diagnosis
Bayens-Simmonds J, Purcell TP, and Nation NP. 1997. Use
of neurocysticercosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
of magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of central
208(11):1846-1848. Errafum in: 1996 J Am Vet Med Assoc
vestibular disease. Can Vet J 38(1):38.
209(6):1113.
112 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Bush WW, Barr CS, Darrin EW, Shofer FS, Vite CH, and
  s    
Steinberg SA. 2002. Results of cerebrospinal fluid analy-
287-293.
sis, neurologic examinafion findings, and age at the onset
Dewey CW, Berg JM, Barone G, Marino DJ, and Stefanacci
of seizures as predictors for results of magnetic resonance
JD. 2005. Foramen magnum decompression for treatment
imaging of the brain in dogs examined because of seizures:
of caudal occipital malformation syndrome in dogs. J Am
115 cases (1992-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 220(6):781-784.
Vet Med Assoc 227(8):1270-1275, 1250-1251.
Bush WW, Throop JL, McManus PM, Kapatkin AS, Vite CH,
Di Terlizzi R, Plaft SR, and Dennis R. 2004. What is your di-
and Van Winkle TJ. 2003. Intravascular lymphoma involv-
 agnosis? Cerebrovascular hemorrhage. J Small Anim Pract
ing the central and peripheral nervous systems in a dog. J
45(10):483, 526-528.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39(1):90-96.
 Drake JIM, Pofts DG, and Lemaire C. 1989. Magnetic reso-
Caruso K, Marrion R, and Silver G. 2002. What is your diag-
nance imaging of silastic-induced canine hydrocephalus.
nosis? Retrobulbar mass indenfing the inferior aspect of the
Surg Neurol 31(1):28-40.
right globe. J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(11):1553-1554.
 Duesberg CA, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Bertoy EH, Dublin
Castillo V, Giacomini D, Paez-Pereda M, Stalla J, Labeur M,
 AB, and Reid MH. 1995. Magnetic resonance imaging for
Theodoropoulou M, et al. 2006. Retinoic acid as a novel
 diagnosis of pituitary macrotumors in dogs. J Am Vet Med
 medical therapy for Cushing's disease in dogs. Endocrinol-
Assoc 206(5):657-662.
ogy 147(9):4438-4444.
 Dvir E, Kirberger RM, and Terblanche AG. 2000. Magnetic
Cherubiri GB, Mantis P, Martinez TA, Lamb CR, and Cappello
resonance imaging of otitis media in a dog. Vet Radiol Ul-
 R 2005. Utility of magnetic resonance imaging for distin-
trasound 41(1):46-49.
guishing neoplastic from non-neoplastic brain lesions in
Ellinwood NM, Wang P, Skeen T, Sharp NJ, Cesta M,
dogs and cats. Vet Racdiol Ultrasound 46(5):384-387.
Decker S, et al. 2003. A model of mucopolysaccharido
Cherubiri GB, Plaft SR, Anderson TJ, Rusbridge C, Lorenzo V,
sis IIB (Sanfilippo syndrome type IIB): N-acetyl-alpha-D-
Mantis P, et al. 2006. Characteristics of magnetic resonance
glucosamiridase deficiency in Schipperke dogs. J Inherif
images of granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis in 11
Metab Dis 26(5):489-504.
dogs. Vet Rec 159(4):110-115.
Ellison GW, Donnell RL, and Dariel GB. 1995. Nasopha-
Cizinauskas S, Lang J, Maier R, Fatzer R, and Jaggy A.
ryngeal epidermal cyst in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2001. Paradoxical vestibular disease with trigeminal nerve-
207(12):1590-1592.
Esteve-Ratsch B, Kneissl S, and Gabler C. 2001. Comparaftive
425.
evaluation of the venfricles in the Yorkshire Terrier and
Clifford C, Jernings D, Maslin WR, and Weigand C. 2000.
the German Shepherd dog using low-field MRI. Vet Radiol
What is your neurologic diagnosis? Urilateral otiftis externa
Ultrasound 42(5):410-413.
or media, cerebellar meningioma, and a solitary mammary
Farrow CS and Tyron K. 2000. Fathoming the mysteries
adenoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(8):1217-1219.
 Of magnetic resonance imaging. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Coates JR, O'Brien DP, Kline KL, Storts RW, Johnson GC, Shel-
36(3):192-198.
ton GD, et al. 2002. Neonatal cerebellar ataxia in Coton de
Feldman EC, Nelson RW, and Feldman MS. 1996. Use of
Tulear dogs. J Vet Intern Med 16(6):680-689.
low- and high-dose dexamethasone tests for distinguishing
Coderre JA, Gavin PR, Capala J, Ma R, Morris GM, But-
pifuitary-dependent from adrenal tumor hyperadrenocor-
ton TM, et al. 2000. Tolerance of the normal canine brain
ticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209(4):772-775.
Fernandez T, Diez-Bru N, Rios A, Gomez L, and Pumarola
boronophenylalanine. J Neurooncol 48(1):27-40.
 M. 2001. Intracranial metastases from an ovarian dysger-
Coufurier L, Degueurce C, Ruel Y, Dennis R, and Begon D.
minoma in a 2-year-old dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 2005. Anatomical study of cranial nerve emergence and
37(6):553-556.
skul foramina in the dog using magnetic resonance imag-
 Fisher M. 2002. Disseminated granulomatous meningoen-
ing and computed tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
cephalomyelitis in a dog. Can Vet J 43(1):49-51.
46(5):375-383
 Fransson B, Kippenes H, Silver GE, and Gavin PR. 2000. Mag-
Cozzi F, Vite CH, Wenger DA, Victoria T, and Haskins ME.
neftic resonance diagnosis: cavernous sinus syndrome in a
 1998. MRI and electrophysiological abnormalities in a case
dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41(6):536-538.
of canine globoid cell leucodystrophy. J Small Anim Pract
Frendin J, Funkquist B, Hansson K, Lonnemark M, and Carl-
39(8):401-405
sten J. 1999. Diagnostic imaging of foreign body reactions in
Dennis R. 2000. Use of magnetic resonance imaging for the
dogs with diffuse back pain. J Small Anim Pract 40(6):278-
investigafion of orbital disease in smal animals. J Small
285.
Arim Pract 41(4):145- 155.
Fujisawa I, Asato R, and Kawata M. 1989. Hyperintense sig-
Dennis R. 2003. Images in medicine. The haunted brain. Vet
nals of the posterior lobe of the pifuitary gland on MR im-
Radiol Ultrasound 44(5):593.
 ages. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 10(6):1280-1282. No abstract
Deo-Narine V, Gomez DG, Vullo T, Manzo RP, Zimmer-
available.
man RD, Deck MD, et al. 1994. Direct in vivo observafion
Fukuhara T, Luciano MG, Brant CL, and Klauscie J. 2001.
of transventricular absorption in the hydrocephalic dog
Effects of ventfriculoperiftoneal shunt removal on cerebral
113 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
 oxygenation and brain compliance in chronic obstructive
Gavin PR 1997. Future of veterinary radiation oncology. Vet
hydrocephalus. J Neurosurg 94(4):573-581.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27(1):157-165.
Fulton LM and Steinberg HS. 1990. Preliminary sfudy of lo
Gavin PR, Fike JR, and Hoopes PJ. 1995. Central nervous sys-
 mustine in the treatment of infracranial masses in dogs fol-
tem fumors. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 10(3):180-
lowing localization by imaging techriques. Semin Vet Med
189.
Surg (Small Anim) 5(4):241-245.
Gavin PR, Kraft SL, DeHaan CE, Swartz CD, and Griebenow
Galloway RL, Jr, Maciunas RJ, and Failinger AL. 1993. Factors
ML. 1994. Large arimal normal tissue tolerance with boron 
affecting perceived tumor volumes in magnetic resonance
neutron capfure. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 28(5):1099-
imaging. Ann Biomed Eng 21(4):367-375.
1106.
Galloway RL, Jr, Maciunas RJ, Failinger AL, and Whelan
Gavin PR, Kraft SL, Huiskamp R, and Coderre JA. 1997. A
HT. 1990. Volumetric measurement of canine gliomas using
 review: CNS effects and normal tissue tolerance in dogs. J
MRI. Magn Reson Imaging 8(2):161-165.
Neurooncol 33(1-2):71-80.
Ganz JC, Thuomas KA, Vlajkovic S, Nilsson P, Bergstrom K,
George MS, Malloy LC, Slate SO, and Uhde TW. 1994/1995.
 Ponten U, et al. 1993. Changes in intracranial morphology,
Pilot MRI study of brain size in nervous pointer dogs. Anx-
 regional cerebral water content and vital physiological vari-
iety 1(3):129-133.
 ables during epidural bleeding. An experimental MR study
Glass EN, Kapafkin A, Vite C, and Steinberg SA. 2000. A
in dogs. Acta Radiol 34(3):279-288.
 modified bilateral transfrontal sinus approach tothe canine
Garosi L, McConnell JE, Plaft SR, Barone G, Baron JC,
frontal lobe and olfactory bulb: surgical techrique and five
de Lahunta A, et al. 2005a. Results of diagnostic in-
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36(1):43-50.
vestigations and long-term outcome of 33 dogs with
Goossens MM, Feldman EC, Theon AP, and Koblik PD. 1998.
brain infarction (2000-2004). J Vet Intern Med 19(5):725-
Efficacy of cobalt 60 radiotherapy in dogs with pituitary-
731.
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Garosi L, MeConnell JF, Plaft SR, Barone G, Baron JC, de
212(3):374-376.
Lahunta A, et al. 2006. Clinical and topographic magnetic
Gopal MS and Jeffery ND. 2001. Magnetic resonance imaging
resonance characteristics of suspected brain infarction in 40
 in the diagnosis and treatment of a canine spinalcord injury.
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 20(2):311-321
J Small Anim Pract 42(1):29-31.
Garosi LS, Denris R, Penderis J, Lamb CR, Targeff MP, Cap-
Graham JP, Newell SM, Voges AK, Roberts GD, and Harrison
 pello R, et al. 2001. Results of magnetic resonance imaging
JM. 1998. The dural tail sign in the diagnosis of menin-
in dogs with vestibular disorders: 85 cases (1996-1999). J
giomas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39(4):297-302.
Am Vet Med Assoc 218(3):385-391.
 Graham JP, Roberts GD, and Newell SM. 2000. Dynamic mag-
Garosi LS, Derris R, Plaft SR, Corlefto F, de Lahunta A, and
netic resonance imaging of the normal canine pifuitary
gland. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41(1):35-40.
icopathologic, and magnetic resonance imaging findings. J
Gruber A, Leschnik M, Kneissl S, and Schmidt P. 2006.
Vet Intern Med 17(5):719-723.
Gliomatosis cerebri in a dog. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol
Garosi LS, Dennis R, and Schwarz T. 2003. Review of diag-
Clin Med 53(8):435-438.
nostic imaging of ear diseases in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol
Hamann F, Kooistra HS, Mol JA, Gottschalk S, Bartels T, and
Ultrasound 44(2):137-146.
 Rijnberk A. 1999. Pituitary function and morphology in tw0
Garosi LS, Lamb CR, and Targett MP. 2000. MRI findings in a
German shepherd dogs with congenital dwarfism. Vet Rec
dog with otifis media and suspected otitis interna. Vet Rec
144(23):644 -646.
146(17):501-502.
 Harkin KR, Goggin IM, DeBey BM, Kraft SL, and de Lahunta
Garosi LS and MeConnell JF. 2005. Ischaemic stroke in dogs
 A. 1999. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain of a dog
and humans: a comparative review. J Small Anim Pract
with hereditary polioencephalomyelopathy. J Am Vet Med
46(11):521-529.
Assoc 214(9): 1342-1344.
Garosi LS, McConnell JF, and Lujan A. 2005b. What is
 Harrington ML, Bagley RS, and Moore MP. 1996. Hydro.
your diagnosis? Pneumocephalus. J Am Vet Med Assoc;
cephalus. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 6(4):843-
226(7):1057-1058.
856.
Garosi LS, Penderis J, Brearley MJ, Brearley JC, Dennis R,
Hasegawa D, Yayoshi N, Fujita Y, Fujita M, and Orima H. 2005.
and Kirkpatrick PJ. 2002. Intraventfricular tension pneumo
 Measurement of interthalamic adhesion thickness as a cri-
cephalus as a complication of transfrontal craniectomy: a
teria for brain atrophy in dogs with and without cogniftive
case report. Vet Surg 31(3):226-231.
   
Garosi LS, Penderis J, McConnell JF, and Jakobs C. 2005c. L-2-
457.
hydroxyglutaric aciduria in a West Highland white terrier.
Hasegawa T, Taura Y, Kido H, Shibazaki A, and Katamoto H.
Vet Rec 156(5):145-147.
 2005. Surgical management of combined hydrocephalus,
Garosi LS, Platt SR, McCornell JF, Wrayt JD, and Smith
syringohydromyelia, and ventricular cyst in a dog. J Am
 KC. 2005d. Intracranial haemorrhage associated with An-
Anim Hosp Assoc 41(4):267-272.
giostrongylus vasorum infection in three dogs. J Small
Higgins RJ, LeCouteur RA, Vernau KM, Sturges BK,
Anim Pract 46(2):93-99.
Obradovich JE, and Bollen AW. 2001. Granular cell tumor
of the canine central nervous system: two cases. Vet Pathol
ing on the brain in beagle dogs with aging. J Vet Med Sci
38(6):620-627
67(10):961-967.
Itoh T, Nishimura R, Matsunaga S, Kadosawa T, Mochizuki
Kippenes H, Gavin PR, Kraft SL, Sande RD, and Tucker RL.
M, and Sasaki N. 1996. Syringomyelia and hydrocephalus
 2001. Mensuration of the normal pifuitary gland from mag-
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209(5):934-936.
netic resonance images in 96 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Jakobsson KE, Thuomas KA, Bergstrom K, Ponten U,
42(2):130-133
and Zwetnow NN. 1990. Rebound of ICP after brain
Kipperman BS, Feldman EC, Dybdal NO, and Nelson RW.
compression. An MRI study in dogs. Acta Neurochir (Wien)
1992. Pifuitary tumor size, neurologic signs, and relafion
104(3-4):126-135.
to endocrine test results in dogs with pifuitary-dependent
 Jeffery N. 2005. Ethmoidal encephalocoele associated with
hyperadrenocorticism: 43 cases (1980-1990). J Am Vet Med
 seizures in a puppy. J Small Anim Pract 46(2):89-92.
Assoc 201(5):762-767.
Jeffery ND, Lakatos A, and Franklin RJ. 2005. Autologous ol-
Kitagawa M, Kanayama K, and Sakai T. 2002. Cystic menin-
factory glial cell transplantation is reliable and safe in nat-
gioma in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 43(6):272-274.
urally occurring canine spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma
Kitagawa M, Kanayama K, and Sakai T. 2003. Quadrigeminal
22(11):1282-1293.
cisterna arachnoid cyst diagnosed by MRIin five dogs. Aust
Jeffery ND, Watson PJ, Abramson C, and Notenboom A.
Vet J 81(6):340-343.
 2003. Brain malformations associated with primary adip-
 Kitagawa M, Kanayama K, and Sakai T. 2004a. Cerebellopon-
sia identified using magnetic resonance imaging. Vet Rec 
tine angle meningioma expanding into the sella turcica in
152(14):436-438.
a dog. J Vet Med Sci 66(1):91-93.
Johnson RP, Neer TM, Partington BP, Cho DY, and Partington
Kitagawa M, Kanayama K, Satoh T, and Sakai T. 2004b. Cere-
CR. 2001. Familial cerebellar ataxia with hydrocephalus in
bellar focal granulomatous meningoencephalifis in a dog:
bull mastiffs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(3):246-249.
clinical findings and MR imaging. J Vet Med A Physiol
 Jull BA, Merryman JI, Thomas WB, and McArthur A. 1997.
Pathol Clin Med 51(6):277-279.
Necrotizing encephalifis in a Yorkshire Terrier. J Am Vet
Kitagawa M, Kanayama K, and Sakai T. 2005a. Subdural ac-
Med Assoc 211(8):1005-1007.
cumulation of fluid in a dog affer the inserfion of a ven-
Kacher DF, Frerichs K, Petfit J, Campbell PK, Meunch T,
triculoperitoneal shunt. Vet Rec 156(7):206-208.
and Norbash AM. 2006. DuraSeal magnetic resonance and
Kitagawa M, Kanayama K, and Sakai T. 2005b. Subtotal age-
computed tomography imaging: evaluation in a canine
nesis of the cerebellum in a dog. Aust Vet J 83(11):680-681.
crariotomy model. Neurosurgery 58(Suppl. 1);:ONS140-
Kitagawa M, Okada M,Kanayama K, and Sakai T. 2005c. Trau-
ONS147.
        
Kaneda T, Minami M, Curtin HD, Utsunomiya T, Shirouzu
clinical findings. J Vet Med Sci 67(8):843-846.
I, Yamashiro M, et al. 1998. Dental bur fragments caus-
Kitagawa M, Okada M, Oogushi N, Dei H, Yamamura H,
ing metal arfifacts on MR images. AJNR Am JNeuroradiol
Kanayama K, et al. 2002. A canine case of gliosis with cyst
19(2):317-319
formafion in the posterior fossa. J Vet Med Sci 64(7):611-614.
Katayama KI, Kuroki K, Uchida K, Nakayama H, Sakai M,
Kitagawa M, Okada M, Yamamura H, Kanayama K, and Sakai
Mochizuki M, et al. 2001. A case of canine primitive neu-
T. 2006. Diagnosis of olfactory neuroblastoma in a dog by
roectodermal tumor (PNET). J Vet Med Sci 63(1):103-105.
 magnetic resonance imaging. Vet Rec 159(9):288-289.
Kaye EM, Alroy J, RaghavanSS, Schwarting GA, Adelman LS,
Kneissl S, Probst A, and Konar M. 2004. Low-field magnetic
 Runge V, et al. 1992. Dysmyelinogenesis in animal model
resonance imaging of the canine middle and inner ear. Vet
of GM1 gangliosidosis. Pediatr Neurol 8(4):255-261.
Radiol Ultrasound 45(6):520-522.
 Kent M, Delahunta A, and Tidwell AS. 2001. MR imaging
Knutzon RK, Poirier VC, Gerscovich EO, Brock JM, and
findings in a dog with intravascular lymphoma in the brain.
 Buonocore M. 1991. The effect of intravenous gadolinium
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(6):504-510.
on the magnetic resonance appearance of cerebrospinal
KiS, Uzuka Y, Taura Y, Nakaichi M, Inokuma H, and Orishi T.
fluid. Invest Radiol 26(7):671-673.
1998. Developmental change of lateral ventricular volume
Koie H, Shibuya H, Sato T, Sato A, Nawa K, Nawa Y, et al.
and ratio in Beagle-type dogs up to 7 months of age. Vet
Radiol Ulrasound 39(3):185-189.
fuscinosis in a border collie. J Vet Med Sci 66(11):1453-1456.
Ki S, Uzuka Y, Taura Y, Nakaichi M, Takeuchi A, Inokuma H,
Kraft SL and Gavin PR. 1999. Infracranial neoplasia. Clin Tech 
Small Arim Pract 14(2): 112-123.
cles in beagle-type dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(6):430-
Kraft SL, Gavin PR, DeHaan C, Moore M, Wendling LR, and
433.
Leathers CW. 1997. Retrospective review of 50 canine in-
Kim H, Itamoto K, Watanabe M, Nakaichi M, and Taura Y.
tracrarial fumors evaluated by magnetic resonance imag-
 2006. Application of ventriculoperitoneal shunt as a treat-
ing. J Vet Intern Med 11(4):218-225.
ment for hydrocephalus in a dog with syringomyelia and
Kraft SL, Gavin PR, Leathers CW, Wendling LR, Frerier S,
Chiari I malformafion. J Vet Sci 7(2):203-206.
and Dorn RV, Il. 1990. Diffuse cerebral and leptomeningeal
 Kimotsuki T, Nagaoka T, Yasuda M, Tamahara S, Matsuki N,
and Ono K. 2005. Changes of magnetic resonance imag-
14(4):555-560.
115 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
 Kraus KH and MeDonnell J. 1996. Identification and manage-
Loffi D, Capucchio MT, Gaidolfi E, and Merlo M. 1999. Necro-
ment of brain fumors. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
tizing encephalitis in a Yorkshire Terrier: clirical, imaging.
11(4):218-224
and pathologic findings. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(6):622-
Krisht AF, Yoo K, Arnautovic KI, and Al-Meffy O. 2005.
626.
Cavernous sinus fumor model in the canine: a simulation
Lu D, Lamb CR, Pfeiffer DU, and Targett MP. 2003. Neuro
model for cavernous sinus fumor surgery. Neurosurgery
 logical signs and results of magnetic resonance imaging in
56(6):1361-1365; discussion 1365-1366.
40 Cavalier King Charles spaniels with Chiari type 1-like
Kube SA, Bruyefte DS, and Hanson SM. 2003. Astrocytomas
malformations. Vet Rec 153(9):260-263.
in young dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39(3):288-293.
Lynch GL, Broome MR, and Scagliotfi RH. 2006. What is your
Kucharczyk J, Kucharczyk W, Berry I, de Groot J, Kelly W,
diagnosis? Mass originating from the pifuitary fossa. J Am
 Norman D, et al. 1989. Histochemical characterization and
Vet Med Assoc 228(11):1681-1682.
functional significance of the hyperintense signal on MR
Mariari CL, Clemmons RM, Graham JP, Phillips LA, and
 i   d    s
Chrisman CL. 2001. Magnetic resonance imaging of spongy
152(1):153-157
 degeneration of the central nervous system in a Labrador 
 Kuwabara M, Tanaka S, and Fujiwara K. 1998. Magnetic reso
Retriever. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(4):285-290.
 nance imaging and histopathology of encephalitis in a Pug.
Mariari CL, Plaft SR, Newell SM, Terrell SP, Chrisman CL,
J Vet Med Sci 60(12):1353-1355.
and Clemmons RM. 2001. Magnetic resonance imaging of
Kuwamura M, Adachi T, Yamate J, Kotani T, Ohashi F, and
 cerebral cortical necrosis (polioencephalomalacia) in a dog.
 Summers BA. 2002. Necrotising encephalitis in the York-
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(6):524-531.
shire Terrier: a case report and literafure review. J Small
Matsuki N, Yamato O, Kusuda M, Maede Y, Tsujimoto H,
Anim Pract 43(10):459-463.
and Ono K. 2005. Magnetic resonance imaging of GM2-
Lamb CR, Croson PJ, Cappelo R, and Cherubini GB. 2005.
 gangliosidosis in a golden retriever. Can Vet J 46(3):275-
Magnetic resonance imaging findings in 25 dogs with
278.
inflammatory cerebrospinal fluid. Vet Radiol Ulrasound
 Mattoon JS and Walker MA. 1998. MRI case presented as
46(1):17-22.
part of the 1997 A.C.V.R oral certification examinafion:
 Lamb CR and Garosi L. 2000. Two little ducks went swimming
computed tomography/magnetic resonance imaging elec-
 One day. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41(3):292.
five. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39(2):154-155. No abstract
Larocca RD. 2000. Urilateral external and internal ophthal-
available.
moplegia caused by intracranial meningioma in a dog. Vet
Mazur WJ and Lazar T. 2005. What is your diagnosis? Chon-
Ophthalmol 3(1):3-9.
drosarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 226(8):1301-1302.
Lavely J and Lipsitz D. 2005. Fungal infections of the cenfral
McCornell JF, Garosi L, and Plaft SR 2005. Magnetic res-
nervous system in the dog and cat. Clin Tech Small Anim
onance imaging findings of presumed cerebellar cere-
Pract 20(4):212-219.
 brovascular accident in twelve dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
LeCouteur RA. 1999. Current concepts in the diagnosis and
46(1):1-10.
 treatment of brain fumours in dogs and cats. J Small Anim
McConnell JF, Hayes A, Plaft SR, and Smith KC. 2006. Calvar-
Pract 40(9):411-416.
Lester NV, Hopkins AL, Bova FJ, Friedman WA, Buaffi JM,
Ultrasound 47(1):72-77.
 Meeks SL, et al. 2001. Radiosurgery using a stereotactic
 McConnell JF, Platt S, and Smith KC. 2004. Magnetic res-
 headframe system for irradiation of brain fumors in dogs.
onance imaging findings of an infracranial medulloblas-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 219(11):1562-1567, 1550.
toma in a Polish Lowland Sheepdog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Lipsitz D, Higgins RJ, Kortz GD, Dickinson PJ, Bollen AW,
45(1):17-22.
Naydan DK, et al. 2003. Glioblastoma multiforme: clinical
McConnell JF, Platft SR, and Feliu-Pascual AL. 2005. What is
findings, magnetic resonance imaging, and pathology in 
your diagnosis? Intracranial meningiomas. J Small Anim
five dogs. Vet Pathol 40(6):659-669.
Pract 46(11):555-557.
Lipsitz D, Levitski RE, and Berry WL. 2001. Magnetic reso
MeGowan JC, Haskins M, Wenger DA, and Vite C. 2000. In-
nance imaging feafures of multilobular osteochondrosar-
vestigating demyelination in the brain in a canine model of
 coma in 3 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(1):14-19.
globoid cell leukodystrophy (Krabbe disease) using mag-
Lipsitz D, Levitski RE, and Chauvet AE. 1999. Magnetic
netizafion transfer contrast: preliminary results. J Comput
resonance imaging of a choroid plexus carcinoma and
Assist Tomogr 24(2):316-321
meringeal carcinomatosis in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Meij B, Voorhout G, and Rijnberk A. 2002. Progress
40(3):246-250
Liu CH, Liu CI, Liang SL, Cheng CH, Huang SC, Lee CC, et
pifuitary-dependent hyperadrenocorficism in dogs and
al. 2004. Intracrarial granular cell fumor in a dog. J Vet Med
cats. Mol Cell Endocrinol 197(1-2):89-96.
Sci 66(1):77-79.
Mellema LM, Koblik PD, Kortz GD, LeCouteur RA, Che-
Lorenzo V, Pumarola M, and Munoz A. 1998. Meringioarn-
chowitz MA, and Dickinson PJ. 1999. Reversible mag-
netic resonance imaging abnormalities in dogs following
ropathological studies. J Small Anim Pract 39(10):486 489.
seizures. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(6):588-595.
116 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Mellema LM, Sami VF, Vernau KM, and LeCouteur RA. 2002.
in the diagnosis of canine brain fumors. Vet Surg 31(1):65
Meringeal enhancement on magnetic resonance imaging
69.
in 15 dogs and 3 cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43(1):
Platft SR, Chrisman CL, Graham J, and Clemmons RM. 1999.
10-15.
 Secondary hypoadrenocorticism associated with cranio
Miyabayashi T, Smith M, and Tsuruno Y. 2000. Comparison
 ss do   I o e   
of fast spin-echo and convenfional spin-echo magnetic res-
122.
onance spinal imaging techniques in four normal dogs. Vet
Platt SR and Garosi L. 2003. Canine cerebrovascular disease:
Radiol Ultrasound 41(4):308-312.
do dogs have strokes? J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39(4):337-
Moore MP, Bagley RS, Harrington ML, and Gavin PR 1996.
342.
 Intracrarial tumors. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 Plaft SR, Graham J, Chrisman CL, Adjiri-Awere A, and Clem-
26(4):759-777.
mons RM. 1999. Canine infracranial epidermoid cyst. Vet
Morozumi M, Miyahara K, Sato M, and Hirose T. 1997. Com-
Radiol Ultrasound 40(5):454 458.
puted tomography and magnetic resonance findings in two
Plaft SR, Scase TJ, Adams V, Wieczorek L, Miller J, Adamo F,
dogs and a cat with intracranial lesions. J Vet Med Sci
et al. 2006. Vascular endothelial growth factor expression
59(9):807-810.
 in canine infracranial meningiomas and association wifh
 Muhle AC, Kircher P, Fazer R, Scheidegger J, Lang I, and 
patient survival. J Vet Intern Med 20(3):663-668.
Polizopoulou ZS, Koutinas AF, Souftas VD, Kaldrymidou E,
old puppy. Vet Rec 154(11):338-339.
Kazakos G, and Papadopoulos G. 2004. Diagnostic correla-
Nakaichi M, Taura Y, Nakama S, Takeuchi A, Matsunaga N,
 m so   Aos   n 
Ebe K, et al. 1996. Primary brain fumors in two dogs treated
neoplasms. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 51(5):226-
231.
diation therapy. J Vet Med Sci 58(8):773-775.
Ponten U, Thuomas KA, Bergstrom K, Nilsson P, Zwetnow
O'Brien DP, Kroll RA, Johnson GC, Covert SJ, and Nelson MJ.
NN, Vlajkovic S, et al. 1986. Evaluation of infracranial pres-
1994. Myelinolysis after correction of hyponatremia in fwo
sure rebound affter evacuation of intracranial expanding le-
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8(1):40-48.
Ohashi F, Kotari T, Orishi T, Katamoto H, Nakata E, and Fritz-
369:360-364.
Zieroth B. 1993. Magnetic resonance imaging in a dog with
Ramsey IK, Derris R, and Herrtage ME. 1999. Concur-
choroid plexus carcinoma. J Vet Med Sci 55(5):875-876.
rent central diabetes insipidus and panhypopifuitarism in
Olby N, Munana K, De Risio L, Sebestyen P, and Hansen B.
a German shepherd dog. J Small Anim Pract 40(6):271-
2002. Cervical injury following a horse kick to the head in
274.
two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38(4):321-326.
 Rusbridge C, Greitz D, and Iskandar BJ. 2006. Syringomyelia:
Ota S, Komiyama A, Johkura K, Hasegawa O, and Kondo
current concepts in pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment.
 K. 1994. Eosinophilic meningo-encephalo-myelitis due to
 JVet Intern Med 20(3):469-479.
Toxocara canis [Japanese]. Rinsho Shinkeigaku 34(11):1148
Rusbridge C and Knowler SP. 2003. Hereditary aspects of oc-
1152.
cipital bone hypoplasia and syringomyelia (Chiari type I
O'Toole TE, Sato AF, and Rozanski EA. 2003. Cryptococcosis
malformafion) in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. Vet Rec
of the cenfral nervous system in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
153(4):107-112.
222(12):1722-1725, 1706. Errafum in: 2003 J Am Vet Med
Rusbridge C, MacSweeny JE, Davies JV, Chandler K, Fitz-
Assoc 223(5):653.
maurice SN, Dennis R, et al. 2000. Syringohydromyelia in
Owen MC, Lamb CR, Lu D, and Targett MP. 2004. Material in
Cavalier King Charles spaniels. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
the middle ear of dogs having magnetic resonance imaging
36(1):34-41.
for investigation of neurologic signs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Sage JE, Sami VF, Abramson CJ, Green EM, Smith M, and
45(2):149-155.
Dingus C. 2006. Comparison of conventional spin-echo and
Pafterson EE, Mickelson JR, Da Y, Roberts MC, McVey AS,
fast spin-echo magnetic resonance imaging in the canine
O'Brien DP, et al. 2003. Clirical characteristics and inher-
brain. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(3):249-253.
itance of idiopathic epilepsy in Vizslas. J Vet Intern Med
Saito M, Sharp NJ, Kortz GD, de Lahunta A, Leventer RJ,
17(3):319-325.
Tokuriki M, et al. 2002. Magnetic resonance imaging fea-
Pease A, Sullivan S, Olby N, Galano H, Cerda-Gonzalez S,
fures of lissencephaly in 2 Lhasa Apsos [Review]. Vet Ra-
Robertson ID, et al. 2006. Value of a single-shot furbo spin-
diol Ultrasound 43(4):331-337..
echo pulse sequence for assessing the architecfure of the
Sarwar M, Virapongse C, and Carbo P. 1985. Experimental
subarachnoid space and the constifutive nafure of cere-
production of superior sagiftal sinusthrombosis in the dog.
brospinal fluid. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(3):254-259.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 6(1):19-22.
Pellegrino FC and Sica RE. 2004. Carine electroencephalo-
Saunders JH, Clercx C, Snaps FR, Sullivan M, Duchateau
 graphic recording technique: findings in normal and
L, van Bree HJ, et al. 2004. Radiographic, magnetic reso-
epileptic dogs. Clin Neurophysiol 115(2):477-487.
nance imaging, computed tomographic, and rhinoscopic
 Plaft SR, Alleman AR, Lanz OI, and Chrisman CL. 2002. Com-
feafures of nasal aspergillosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
parison of fine-needle aspiration and surgical-tissue biopsy
225(11):1703-1712.
117 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Saunders JH, Poncelet L, Clercx C, Snaps FR, Flandroy P, Ca-
treatment of otogenic infracrarial infecfion in 11 cats and 4
 passo P, et al. 1998. Probable trigeminal nerve schwannoma
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 20(3):648-656.
in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39(6):539-542.
Su MY, Head E, Brooks WM, WangZ, Muggenburg BA, Adam
Sawashima Y, Sawashima K, Taura Y, Shimada A, and
GE, et al. 1998. Magnetic resonance imaging of anatomic
 Umemura T. 1996. Clinical and pathological findings of a
and vascular characteristics in a canine model of human
Yorkshire terrier affected with necrotizing encephalitis. J
aging. Neurobiol Aging 19(5):479-485.
Vet Med Sci 58(7):659-661.
Su MY, Tapp PD, Vu L, Chen YF, Chu Y, Muggenburg B, et
Schoeman JP, Stidworthy MF, Penderis J, and Kafka U. 2002.
al. 2005. A longifudinal study of brain morphometrics us-
Magnetic resonance imaging of a cerebral cavernous hae-
ing serial magnetic resonance imaging analysis in a canine
mangioma in a dog. JS Afr Vet Assoc 73(4):207-210.
model of aging. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychi-
 Seiler G, Cizinauskas S, Scheidegger J, and Lang J. 2001. Low-
atry 29(3):389-397.
 field magnetic resonance imaging of a pyocephalus and a
 Suzuki M, Nakayama H, Ohtsuka R, Yasoshima A, Katayama
suspected brain abscess in a German Shepherd dog. Vet
 K, Uetsuka K, et al. 2002. Cerebellar myxoid type menin-
Radiol Ultrasound 42(5):417-422.
gioma in a Shih Tzu dog. J Vet Med Sci 64(2): 155-157.
    1  e fI  
Swensen SJ, Keller PL, Berquist TH, McLeod RA, and
 mass on the meningeal surface of the left brain in a dog. Vet 
 Stephens DH. 1985. Magnetic resonance imaging of hem-
Clin Pathol 33(2):111-114
orrhage. AJR Am J Roentgenol 145(5):921-927.
 Sheppard BJ, Chrisman CL, Newell SM, Raskin RE, and
Takagi S, Kadosawa T, Ohsaki T, Hoshino Y, Okumura M,
 Homer BL. 1997. Primary encephalic plasma cell tumor in
and Fujinaga T. 2005. Hindbrain decompression in a dog
a dog. Vet Pathol 34(6):621-627.
with scoliosis associated with syringomyelia. J Am Vet Med
 Shores A. 1993a. Magnetic resonance imaging. Vet Clin North
Assoc 226(8):1359-1363, 1347.
Am Small Anim Pract 23(2):437-459..
Tamura S, Tamura Y, Tsuka T, and Uchida K. 2006. Sequenfial
 Shores A. 1993b. New and future advanced imaging tech-
magnetic resonance imaging of an intracranial hematoma
 niques. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 23(2):461-
in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(2):142-144.
469.
Taoda T, Hara Y, Takekoshi S, Itoh J, Teramoto A, Osamura
Shubitz LF and Dial SM. 2005. Coccidioidomycosis: a di-
RY, et al. 2006. Effect of mitotane on pifuitary corticofrophs
agnostic challenge [Review]. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 
in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 67(8):1385-1394.
20(4):220-226.
 Tapp PD, Head K, Head E, Milgram NW, Muggenburg BA,
Singh M, Thompson M, Sullivan N, and Child G. 2005. Thi-
and Su MY. 2006. Applicafion of arn automated voxel-based
amine deficiency in dogs due to the feeding of sulphite
morphometry technique to assess regional gray and white 
preserved meat. Aust Vet J 83(7):412-417.
mafter brain atrophy in a canine model of aging. Neuroim-
Snellman M, Benczik J, Joensuu R, Ramadan UA, Tanttu J, and
age 29(1):234-244.
 Savolainen S. 1999. Low-field magnetic resonance imaging
Tapp PD, Siwak CT, Gao FQ, Chiou JY, Black SE, Head
of beagle brain with a dedicated receiver coil. Vet Radiol
E, et al. 2004. Frontal lobe volume, function, and beta-
Ultrasound 40(1):36-39.
amyloid pathology in a canine model of aging. J Neurosci
 Snyder JM, Shofer FS, Van Winkle TJ, and Massicotte C. 2006.
24(38):8205-8213.
Canine intracranial primary neoplasia: 173 cases (1986
Targett MP, McIrnes E, and Dernis R 1999. Magnetic reso
2003). J Vet Intern Med 20(3):669-675.
nance imaging of a medullary dermoid cyst with secondary
Steiss JE, Cox NR, and Hathcock JT. 1994. Brain stem auditory-
hydrocephalus in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(1):23-26.
evoked response abnormalifies in 14 dogs with confirmed
Theisen SK, Podell M, Schneider T, Wilkie DA, and Fer-
 central nervous system lesions. J Vet Intern Med 8(4);:293-
ner WR. 1996. A refrospective study of cavernous sinus
298.
syndrome in 4 dogs and 8 cats. J Vet Intern Med 10(2):65-
      1   
71. Errafum in: 1996 J Vet Intern Med 10(3):197.
 Acoustic rhinometry in dog and cat compared with a fluid-
Thomas WB. 1996. Cerebrovascular disease. Vet Clin North
 displacement method and magnetic resonance imaging. J
Am Small Anim Pract 26(4):925-943.
Appl Physiol 95(2):635-642.
Thomas WB. 1998. Inflammatory diseases of the cenfral ner-
 Strother CM, Unal O, Frayne R, Turk A, Omary R, Korosec FR,
vous system in dogs. Clin Tech Small Arim Pract 13(3):167-
et al. 2000. Endovascular treatment of experimental canine
178.
aneurysms: feasibility with MR imaging guidance. Radiol-
 Thomas WB. 1999. Nonneoplastic disorders of the brain. Clin
ogy 215(2):516-519.
Tech Small Arim Pract 14(3):125-147.
Stubbs JB, Frankel RH, Schultz K, Crocker I, Dillehay D, and
Thomas WB, Adams WH, McGavin MD, and Gompf RE.
Olson JJ. 2002. Preclirical evaluafion of a novel device for
1997. Magnetic resonance imaging appearance of intracra-
delivering brachytherapy to the margins of resected brain
nial hemorrhage secondary to cerebral vascular malforma-
fumor cavities. J Neurosurg 96(2):335-343.
tion in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(5):371-375.
Sturges BK, Dickinson PJ, Kortz GD, Berry WL, Vernau KM,
Thomas WB, Sorjonen DC, Hudson JA, and Cox NR. 1993.
Wisner ER, et al. 2006. Clirical signs, magnetic resonance
 Ultrasound-guided brain biopsy in dogs. Am J Vet Res
imaging feafures, and outcome after surgical and medical
54(11):1942-1947.
118 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Thuomas KA, Vlajkovic S, Ganz JC, Nilsson P, Bergstrom
Vernau KM, LeCouteur RA, Sturges BK, Sami V, Higgins RJ,
K, Ponten U, et al. 1993. Progressive brain compression.
 Koblik PD,et al. 2002. Intracrarial intra-arachnoid cyst wifh
Changes in vital physiological variables, correlated with
intracystic hemorrhage in fwo dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
brain tissue water content and brain ftissue displacement.
43(5):449-454.
Experimental MR imaging in dogs. Acta Radiol 34(3):289-
Vitmaa R, Cizinauskas S, Bergamasco LA, Kuuusela E, Pascoe
295.
 P, Teppo AM, et al. 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging find-
Tiches D, Vite CH, Dayrell-Hart B, Steinberg SA, Gross S,
and Lexa F. 1998. A case of canine cenfral nervous system
Med 20(2):305-310.
Vite CH, Insko EK, Schofland HM, Panckeri K, and Hendricks
Hosp Assoc 34(2):145-151.
 JC. 1997. Quantification of cerebral ventricular volume in
Tidwell AS and Jones JC. 1999. Advanced imaging concepts:
English bulldogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(6):437-443.
a pictorial glossary of CT and MRI technology. Clin Tech
Vite CH and McGowan JC. 2001. Magnetization transfer
Small Anim Pract 14(2):65-111
imaging of the canine brain: a review [Review]. Vet Radiol
Tidwell AS, Ross LA, and Kleine LJ. 1997. Computed tomog-
Ultrasound 42(1):5-8.
raphy and magnetic resonance imaging of cavernous sinus
Vlajkovic S, Zwetnow NN, Thuomas KA, Bergstrom K, Pon-
enlargement in a dog with unilateral exophthalmos. Vet 
ten U, and Nilsson P. 1986. Magnetic resonance imaging
Radiol Ultrasound 38(5):363-370.
Tidwell AS, Solano M, and Schelling SH. 1994. Pediatric ne-
Radiol Suppl 369:353-355.
roimaging. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 9(2):68-85.
von Praun F, Matiasek K, Grevel V, Alef M, and Flegel T.
Tieber LM, Axlund TW, Simpson ST, and Hathcock JT. 2006
 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging and pathologic findings
Survival of a suspected case of central nervous system
associated with necrotizing encephalitis in two Yorkshire
terriers. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(3):260-264.
ing findings. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 42(3):238-242.
Vullo T, Korenman E, Manzo RP, Gomez DG, Deck MD, and
Torisu S, Washizu M, Hasegawa D, and Orima H. 2005. Brain
Cahill PT. 1997. Diagnosis of cerebral ventriculomegaly in
normal adult beagles using quantitative MRI. Vet Radiol
cats with congenital portosystemic shunts. Vet Radiol Ul-
Ultrasound 38(4):277-281.
trasound 46(6):447-451.
Vullo T, Manzo R, Gomez DG, Deck MD, and Cahill PT. 1998.
Triolo AJ, Howard MO, and Miles KG. 1994. Oligoden-
A canine model of acute hydrocephalus with MR correla-
droglioma in a 15-month-old dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
tion. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 19(6):1123-1125.
205(7):986-988.
Vural SA, Besalfi O, Ihan F, Ozak A, and Haligur M. 2006.
Troxel MT, Drobatz KJ, and Vite CH. 2005. Signs of neuro-
Ventricular ependymoma in a German Shepherd dog. Vet
J 172(1):185-187.
vestibular disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227(4):570-574.
Wakshlag J, de Lahunta A, Robinson T, Cooper BJ, BrennerO)
Tucker RL and Gavin PR. 1996. Brain imaging. Vet Clin North
 O'Toole TD, et al. 1999. Subacute necrotising encephalopa-
Am Small Anim Pract 26(4):735-758.
thy in an Alaskan husky. JSmall Anim Pract 40(12):585-589.
Van Der Merwe LL and Lane E. 2001. Diagnosis of cerebellar
Walmsley GL, Herrtage ME, Dernis R, Platt SR, and Jeffery
corfical degeneration in a Scoffish terrier using magnetic
ND. 2006. The relafionship between clinical signs and brain
resonance imaging. J Small Anim Pract 42(8):409-412.
herniafion associated with rostrotentorial mass lesions in
Van Der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Voorhout G, and Meij BP. 2002.
fhe dlog. Vet J 172(2):258-264.
 Imaging of the pituitary gland in dogs with pituitary-
Webb AA, Cullen CL, Rose P, Eisenbart D, Gabor L, and Mar-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Mol Cell Endocrinol
tinson S. 2005. Intracranial meningioma causing internal
197(1-2):81-87.
ophthalmoparesis in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 8(6):421-425.
Varejao AS, Munoz A, and Lorenzo V. 2006. Magnetic res-
Weingarten K, Zimmerman RD, Deo-Narine V, Markisz J,
onance imaging of the intratemporal facial nerve in idio
Cahill PT, and Deck MD. 1991. MR imaging of acute in-
pathic facial paralysis in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
tracranial hemorrhage: findings on sequential spin-echo
47(4):328-333.
and gradient-echo images in a dog model. AJNR Am J Neu-
Vermeersch K, Van Ham L, Caemaert J, Tshamala M, Taey-
roradiol 12(3):457-467.
mans O, Bhaffi S, et al. 2004. Suboccipital craniectomy, dor-
Weiss KL, Schroeder CE, Kastin SJ, Gibson JP, Yarring-
sal laminectomy of C1, durotomy and dural graff place-
ton JT, Heydorn WE, et al. 1994. MRI monitoring of
ment as a treafment for syringohydromyelia with cerebel-
vigabatrin-induced inframyeliric edema in dogs. Neurol-
lar tonsil herriafion in Cavalier King Charles spariels. Vet
ogy 44(10):1944-1949.
Surg 33(4):355-360.
Wenger DA, Victoria T, Rafi MA, Luzi P, Vanier MT, Vite C,
Vernau KM, Kortz GD, Koblik PD, LeCouteur RA, Bailey
 et al. 1999. Globoid cell leukodystrophy in cain and West
CS, and Pedroia V. 1997. Magnetic resonance imaging and
Highland white terriers. J Hered 90(1):138-142.
computed tomography characteristics of intracranial intra
Whelan HT, Clanton JA, Wilson RE, and Tulipan NB. 1988.
arachnoid cysts in 6 dogs. Vet Radiol Ulfrasound 38(3):171-
Comparison of CT and MRI brain tumor imaging using a
176.
canine glioma model. Pediatr Neurol 4(5):279-283.
119 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Whelan HT, Schmidt MH, Segura AD, McAuliffe TL, Bajic
q paadns m seo pue soop u seu aosa
DM, Murray KJ, et al. 1993. The role of photodynamic ther-
disease. Vet Radiol Ulfrasound 46(4):287-292.
apy in posterior fossa brain tumors. A preclinical study in
Berry I, Brant-Zawadzki M, and Manelfe C. 1988. MRI study
a canine glioma model. J Neurosurg 79(4):562-568.
 Of a feline model of acute cerebral ischaemia. Contribution
Widmer WR and Kneller SK. 1997. Artifacts and technical
of paramagnetic confrast media fo the diagnosis. J Neuro
errors presented as part of the 1996 ACVR oral certification
radiol 15(2):95-107.
examination. Vet Radiol Ulfrasound 38(2):156-158.
Bischoff MG and Kneller SK. 2004. Diagnostic imaging of the
Wilson J. 2001. Solving the neurological dilemma. J Small
carine and feline ear. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Anim Pract 42(2):98.
34(2):437-458.
Wood AK, Kundel HL, McGrath JT, and Wortman JA. 1987.
Bockhorst KH, Smith JM, Smith MI, Bradlley DP, Houston GC,
Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and
Carpenter TA, et al. 2000. A quantitative analysis of corfical
 pathologic observations of the effects of intrathecal metriza-
spreading depression events in the feline brain character-
 mide and iohexol on the carine central nervous system.
Invest Radiol 22(8):672-677.
12(5):722-733.
 Yamada K, Miyahara K, Nakagawa M, Kobayashi Y, Furuoka
 Boisvert DP, Lazareff JA, and Allen PS. 1990. Quantita
 H, Matsui T, et al. 1999. A case of a dog with thickened 
tive magnetic resonance imaging assessment of manni-
calvaria with neurologic symptoms: magnetic resonance
tol's effect on peritumoral brain edema. Adv Neurol
imaging (MRI) findings. J Vet Med Sci 61(9):1055-1057.
52:560.
Yamaya Y, Iwakami E, Goto M, Koie H, Watari T, Tanaka S,
Bose B, Jones SC, Lorig R, Friel HT, Weinstein M, and Liffle
           
JR 1988. Evolving focal cerebral ischemia in cats: spafial
dachshund. J Vet Med Sci 66(9):1159-1160.
correlation of nuclear magnetic resonance imaging, cere-
Zwetnow NN, Vlajkovic S, Thuomas KA, Bergstrom K, Pon-
 bral blood flow, tetrazolium staining, and histopathology.
ten U, and Nilsson P. 1986. Magnetic resonance imaging of
Stroke 19(1):28-37.
cerebral compression and local brain fissue water content 
Bottcher P, Maierl J, Hecht S, Matis U, and Liebich HG. 2004.
during continuous extradural bleeding. An experimental
Automatic image registraftion of three-dimensional images
study in dogs. Acta Radiol Suppl 369:356-359.
of the head of cats and dogs by use of maximization of
mutual information. Am J Vet Res 65(12):1680-1687.
Bradley DP, Smith JM, Smith MI, Bockhorst KH, Papadakis
Cats
NG, Hall LD, et al. 2002. Cortical spreading depression in
the feline brain following sustained and transient stimuli
Allgoewer I, Grevel V, Philipp K, Schmidt P, and Brunnberg L.
 studied using diffusion-weighted imaging. J Physiol 544
1998. Somatotropic pituitary adenoma with lesions of the
(Pt 1):39-56.
oculomotor nerve in a cat [German]. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K
Branch CA, Ewing JR, Helpern JA, Ordidge RJ, Butt S, and
Klientiere Heimtiere 26(4):267-272.
Welch KM. 1992. Atraumatic quantitation of cerebral per-
Allgoewer I, Lucas S, and Schmitz SA. 2000. Magnetic reso
fusion in cats by 19 F magnetic resonance imaging. Magn 
nance imaging of the normal and diseased feline middle
Reson Med 28(1):39-53.
ear. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41(5):413-418.
Buonanno FS, Pykett IL, Kistler JP, Vielma J, Brady TJ, Hin-
Bagley RS. 1997. Common neurologic diseases of older ani-
shaw WS, et al. 1982. Cranial anatomy and detection of
 mals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27(6): 1451-1486.
ischemic stroke in the cat by nuclear magnetic resonance
 Bagley RS and Gavin PR 1998. Seizures as a complication of
imaging. Radiology 143(1):187-193.
 brain tumors in dogs. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 13(3):179-
Chan KH, Swarts JD, Hashida Y, Doyle WJ, Kardatzke D,
184.
and Wolf GL. 1992. Experimental otitis media evaluated by
Bailey MQ. 1990. Diagnostic imaging of intracranial lesions.
magnetic resonance imaging: an in vivo model. Ann Otol
 Semin Vet Medl Surg (Small Anim) 5(4):232-236.
Rhinol Laryngol 101(3):248-254.
Baraffi C, Barnett AS, and Pierpaoli C. 1999. Comparafive MR
Cherubiri GB, Mantis P, Martinez TA, Lamb CR, and Cappello
imaging study of brain mafuraftion in kiftens with T1, T2
 R 2005. Utility of magnetic resonance imaging for distin-
and the trace of the diffusion tensor. Radiology 210(1);:133
guishing neoplastic from non-neoplastic brain lesions in
142.
dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46(5):384-387.
Barnes D, Harvey I, McDonald WI, Ron MA, and Moore S.
Chew W, Kucharczyk J, Moseley M, Derugin N, and Norman
1991. The effect of chlorpromazine and methylpredrisolone
 D. 1991. Hyperglycemia augments ischemic brain injury:
 on NMR relaxation times in the normal cat brain. Magn
Reson Med 18(1):232-236
in cats with occluded middle cerebral arteries. AJNR Am J
Bayens-Simmonds J, Boisvert DP, Castro ME, and Johnson ES.
Neuroradiol 12(4):603-609.
1988. A feline model for experimental studies of perifumor
 De Crespigny AJ, Wendland MF, Derugin N, Kozniewska E,
brain edema. J Neurooncol 6(4):371-378.
and Moseley ME. 1992. Real-time observation of ftransient
Berigni L and Lamb CR. 2005. Comparison of fluid-
focal ischemia and hyperemia in cat brain. Magn Reson
aftenuated inversion recovery and T2-weighted magnetic
Med 27(2):391-397.
120 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
de Crespigny AJ, Wendland MF, Derugin N, Vexler ZS, and
Ide H, Kobayashi H, Handa Y, Kubota T, Maeda M, Itoh S, et
 Moseley ME. 1993. Rapid MR imaging of a vascular chal-
 al. 1993. Correlation between somatosensory-evoked po
 lenge to focal ischemia in cat brain. J Magn Reson Imaging
tentials and magnetic resonance imaging of focal cerebral
3(3):475-481.
ischemia in cats. Surg Neurol 40(3):216-223.
 Derris R. 2000. Use of magnetic resonance imaging for the
Inada S, Mochizuki M, Izumo S, Kuriyama M, Sakamoto H,
investigation of orbital disease in small animals. J Small
Kawasaki Y, et al. 1996. Study of hereditary cerebellar de-
Arim Pract 41(4):145-155.
generation in cats. Am J Vet Res 57(3):296-301.
Detre JA, Subramanian VH, Mitchell MD, Smith DS,
Kaser-Hotz B, Rohrer CR, Stankeova S, Wergin M, Fidel J, and
Kobayashi A, Zaman A, et al. 1990. Measurement of re-
 Reusch C. 2002. Radiotherapy of piftuitary tumours in five
gional cerebral blood flow in cat brain using infracarotid
cats. J Small Anim Pract 43(7):303-307.
2H2O and 2H NMR imaging. Magn Reson Med 14(2):389-
Kim HJ, Lee CH, Kim HG, Lee SD, Son SM, Kim YW, et al.
395.
 2004. Reversible MR changes in the cat brain after cerebral
Dewey CW, Coates JR, Ducote JM, Stefanacci JD, Walker MA,
fat embolism induced by triolein emulsion. AJNR Am J
and Marino DJ. 2003. External hydrocephalus in two cats.
Neuroradiol 25(6):958-963. Erratum in: 2004 AJNR Am J
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39(6):567-572.
Neuroradiol. 25(7):1301.
 Dickinson PJ, Keel MK, Higgins RJ, Koblik PD, LeCouteur RA,
Kitagawa M, Koie H, Kanayamat K, and Sakai T. 2003. Medul-
Naydan DK, et al. 2000. Clirical and pathologic feafures
 loblastoma in a cat: clinical and MRI findings. J Small Anim
of oligodendrogliomas in two cats. Vet Pathol 37(2):160
Pract 44(3):139-142.
167.
Kline RA, Negendank WG, MeCoy LE, Lester M, and Berguer
Elliott DA, Feldman EC, Koblik PD, Sami VF, and Nelson RW.
 R 1990. MRI quantitation of edema in focal cerebral is-
2000. Prevalence of pifuitary fumors among diabetic cats
chemia in cats: correlafion wifth cyfochrome aa3 oxidafion
with insulin resistance. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(11):1765-
state. Magn Reson Med 13(2):319-323.
1768.
Klopp LS, Hathcock JT, and Sorjonen DC. 2000. Magnetic res-
Foley JE, Lapointe JM, Koblik P, Poland A, and Pedersen NC.
onance imaging feafures of brain stem abscessafion in fwo
1998. Diagnostic feafures of clinical neurologic feline infec-
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41(4):300-307.
tious peritonifis. J Vet Intern Med 12(6):415-423.
Kobayashi H, Ide H, Kabuto M, Handa Y, Kubota T, and Ishii
Forterre F, Tomek A, Konar M, Vandevelde M, Howard J, and
Y. 1995. Effect of mannitol on focal cerebral ischemia eval-
 Jaggy A. 2006. Multiple meningiomas: clinical,radiological,
uated by somatosensory-evoked potentials and magnetic
 surgical, and pathological findings with outcome in four 
resonance imaging. Surg Neurol44(1):55-61; discussion 61-
cats. J Feline Med Surg 9(1):36-43.
62.
Foster SF, Charles JA, Parker G, Krockenberger M, Churcher
 Kobayashi H, Ide H, Kodera T, Handa Y, Kabuto M, Kubota
RM, and Malik R. 2001. Cerebral cryptococcal granuloma
T, et al. 1994. Effect of mannitol on focal cerebral ischemia
in a cat. J Feline Med Surg 3(1):39-44.
evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging. Acta Neurochir
Garosi LS, Dennis R, and Schwarz T. 2003. Review of diag-
Suppl (Wien) 60:228-230.
nostic imaging of ear diseases in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol
 Kraft SL and Gavin PR. 1999. Intracranial neoplasia. Clin Tech
Ultrasound 44(2):137-146
Small Anim Pract 14(2):112-123.
Gavin PR, Fike JR, and Hoopes PJ. 1995. Central nervous sys-
 Kraus KH and MeDonnellJ. 1996. Identification and manage-
tem fumors. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 10(3):180
ment of brain fumors. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
189.
11(4):218-224.
Graham JP, Newell SM, Voges AK, Roberts GD, and
Kroll RA, Pagel MA, Roman-Goldstein S, Barkovich AJ,
Harrison JM. 1998. The dural tail sign in the diagno-
D'Agostino AN, and Neuwelt EA. 1995. White matter
sis of meningiomas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39(4):297-
 changes associated with feline GM2 gangliosidosis (Sand-
302.
hoff disease): correlation of MR findings with pathologic
Hayman LA, McArdle CB, Taber KH, Saleem A, Baskin D,
and ultrastructural abnormalifies. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
 Lee HS, et al. 1989. MR imaging of hyperacute intracranial
16(6):1219-1226.
hemorrhage in the cat. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 10(4):681-
Kucharczyk J, Vexler ZS, Roberts TP, Asgari HS, Mintorovitch
686.
 J, Derugin N, et al. 1993. Echo-planar perfusion-sensiftive
 Henderson LA, Frysinger RC, Yu PL, Bandler R, and Harper
MR imaging
of acute cerebral ischemia. Radiology
RM. 2001. A device for feline head posiftioring and stabi-
188(3):711-717.
lization during magnetic resonance imaging. Magn Reson
Kudrig ST. 2002. Nasopharyngeal polyps in cats. Clin Tech
Imaging 19(7):1031-1036.
Small Arim Pract 17(4):174-177.
Holland M. 1993. Confrast agents. Vet Clin North Am Small
Kuwabara M, Kitagawa M, Sato T, Ohba S, and Tsubokawa
Anim Pract 23(2):269-279.
T. 2002. Early diagnosis of feline medulloblastoma in the
Hossmann KA, Szymas J, Seo K, Assheuer J, and Krajewski S.
vermis. Vet Rec 150(15):488-489. No abstract available.
1989. Experimental transplantation gliomas in the adult caf
Lavely J and Lipsitz D. 2005. Fungal infections of the cenfral
 brain. 2. Pathophysiologyand magnetic resonance imaging.
nervous system in the dog and cat. Clin Tech Small Anim
Acta Neuurochir (Wien) 98(34):189-200.
Pract 20(4):212-219.
121 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
LeCouteur RA. 1999. Current concepts in the diagnosis and
identify metabolic changes in the striafum in the MPTP
 treatment of brain fumours in dogs and cats. J Small Anim
feline model of Parkinsonism. Exp Neurol 179(2):159-166.
Pract 40(9):411-416.
Podell M, Maruyama K, Smith M, Hayes KA, Buck WR,
LeCouteur RA. 2003. Advanced diagnostic techniques in fe-
Ruehlmann DS, et al. 1999. Frontal lobe neuronal injury
line brain disease. J Feline Med Surg 5(2):117-119.
correlates to altered function in FIV-infected cats. J Acquir
Lu D, Pocknell A, Lamb CR, and Targett MP. 2003. Concurrenf
Immune Defic Syndr 22(1):10-18.
 berign and malignant multiple meningiomas in a cat: clini
Podell M, Oglesbee M, Mathes L, Krakowka S, Olmstead R,
cal, MRI and pathological findings. Vet Rec 152(25):780-782.
and Lafrado L. 1993. AIDS-associated encephalopathy with
No abstract available.
experimental feline immunodeficiency virus infection. J
 Lujan A, Philbey AW, and Anderson TJ. 2003. Intradural ep-
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 6(7):758-771.
ifthelial cyst in a cat. Vet Rec 153(12):363-364.
 Quesnel AD and Parent JM. 1995. Paradoxical vestibular syn-
Maeda M, Itoh S, Ide H, Matsuda T, Kobayashi H, Kubota
drome in a cat with a cerebellar meningioma. Can Vet J
T, et al. 1993. Acute stroke in cats: comparison of dynamic
36(4):230-232. No abstract available.
susceptibility-contrast MR imaging with T2- and diffusion-
Quesnel AD, Parent JM, MeDonell W, Percy D, and Lumsden 
weighted MR imaging. Radiology 189(1):227-232.
JH. 1997. Diagnostic evaluation of cats with seizure disor
Maftoon JS and Wisner ER 2004. What's under the cat's hat:
ders: 30 cases (1991-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 210(1):65-
feline intracranial neoplasia and magnetic resonance imag-
71.
ing. J Vet Intern Med 18(2):139-140.
Runge VM, Kirsch JE, Wells JW, Dunworth JN, and Woolfolk
McKay JS, Targeft MP, and Jeffery ND. 1999. Histological char-
CE. 1994. Visualization of blood-brain barrier disruption on
acterizafion of an ependymoma in the fourth ventricle of a
MR images of cats with acute cerebral infarction: value of
cat. J Comp Pathol 120(1):105-113.
administering a high dose of contrast material. AJR Am J
Meij B, Voorhout G, and Rijnberk A. 2002. Progress
Roentgenol 162(2):431-435.
 Sato T, Ikebata Y, Koie H, Shibuya H, Shirai W, and Nogami S.
 2003. Magnetic resonance imaging and pathological find-
cats. Mol Cell Endocrinol 197(1-2):89-96.
 ings in a cat with brain contusions. J Vet Med A Physiol
Mellanby RJ, Jeffery ND, Gopal MS, and Herrtage ME. 2005.
Pathol Clin Med 50(4):222-224.
Sharp NJ, Davis BJ, Guy JS, Cullen JM, Steingold SF, and Ko
 J Feline Med Surg 7(2):135-139.
negay JN. 1999. Hydranencephaly and cerebellar hypopla-
Mellema LM, Samii VF, Vernau KM, and LeCouteur RA. 2002.
sia in two kiftens atftributed to intrauterine parvovirus in-
Meningeal enhancement on magnefic resonance imaging in
fection. J Comp Pathol 121(1):39-53.
15 dogs and 3 cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43(1):10-15.
Shirakuri T, Nagashima T, Tamaki N, and MatsumotoS. 1985.
Moore MP, Bagley RS, Harrington ML, and Gavin PR 1996.
Magnetic resonance imaging of experimental brain edema
 Intracrarial tumors. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
in cats. Neurosurgery 17(4):557-563.
26(4):759-777
 Sturges BK, Dickinson PJ, Kortz GD, Berry WL, Vernau KM,
Morozumi M, Miyahara K, Sato M, and Hirose T. 1997. Com-
Wisner ER, et al. 2006. Clinical signs, magnetic resonance
 puted tomography and magnetic resonance findings in fwo
imaging feafures, and outcome after surgical and medical
dogs and a cat with intracranial lesions. J Vet Med Sci
treatment of otogenic intracranial infection in 11 cats and
59(9):807-810.
4 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 20(3):648-656.
Morozumi M, Sasaki N, Oyama Y, Uetsuka K, Nakayama H,
Tanaka S, Tanaka T, Kondo S, Hori T, Fukuda H, Yonemasul
aueu pue Audersoun pandu '6t 'N oo pue
Y, et al. 1993. Magnetic resonance imaging in kainic acid-
resonance findings of meningeal syndrome in a leukemic
induced limbic seizure stafus in cats. Neurol Med Chir
cat. J Vet Med Sci 55(6):1035-1037.
(Tokyo) 33(5):285-289.
Okada Y, Hoehn-Berlage M, Bockhorst K, Tolxdorff T, and
 Tani K, Taga A, Itamoto K, Iwanaga T, Une S, Nakaichi M,
 Hossmann KA. 1990. Magnetic resonance imaging and re-
et al. 2001. Hydrocephalus and syringomyelia in a cat. J Vet
gional biochemical analysis of experimental brain fumours
Med Sci 63(12):1331-1334.
in cats. Acta Neurochir Suppl (Wien) 51:128-130.
Theisen SK, Podell M, Schneider T, Wilkie DA, and Fenner
Parent JM and Quesnel AD. 1996. Seizures in cats. Vet Clin
WR. 1996. A retrospective sfudy of cavernous sinus syn-
North Am Small Anim Pract 26(4):811-825.
drome in 4 dogs and 8 cats. J Vet Intern Med 10(2):65-71.
Pease A, Sullivan S, Olby N, Galano H, Cerda-Gonzalez S,
Errafum in: 1996 J Vet Intern Med 10(3):197.
Robertson ID, et al. 2006. Value of a single-shot furbo spin-
Torisu S, Washizu M, Hasegawa D, and Orima H. 2005. Brain
echo pulse sequence for assessing the architecfure of the
magnetic resonance imaging characteristics in dogs and
subarachnoid space and the constifufive nafure of cere-
brospinal fluid. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(3):254-259.
trasound 46(6):447-451.
Pfohl JC and Dewey CW. 2005. Infracrarial Toxoplasma
Troxel MT, Vite CH, Massicofte C, McLear RC, Van Winkle TJ,
 gondi granuloma in a cat. J Feline Med Surg 7(6):369-374.
Glass EN, et al. 2004. Magnetic resonance imaging feafures
Podell M, Hadjiconstantinou M, Smith MA, and Neff NH.
of feline intracranial neoplasia: refrospective analysis of 46
 2003. Proton magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy
cats. J Vet Intern Med 18(2):176-189.
122 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF INTRACRANIAL DISEASE
Vexler ZS, Ayus JC, Roberts TP, Fraser CL, Kucharczyk J, and
herited CNS disease in a large arimal model. Ann Neurol
Arieff A1. 1994. Hypoxic and ischemic hypoxia exacerbate
57(3):355-364.
brain injury associated with metabolic encephalopathy in
Wallack ST, Wisner ER, and Feldman EC. 2003. Mensuration
laboratory animals. J Clin Invest 93(1):256-264.
 of the pituitary gland from magnetic resonance images in
Vexler ZS, Roberts TP, Kucharczyk J, and Arieff AI. 1994.
17 cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44(3):278-282.
Severe brain edema associated with cumulafive effects of
Widmer WR and Kneller SK. 1997. Arfifacts and techni-
hyponatremic encephalopathy and ischemic hypoxia. Acta
cal errors presented as part of the 1996 ACVR oral cer-
Neurochir Suppl (Wien) 60:246-249.
tification examinafion. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(2):156
Vite CH, MeGowan JC, Braund KG, Drobatz KJ, Glickson JD,
158.
Wolfe JH,et al 2001. Histopathology,electrodiagnostic test-
Yamada K, Miyahara K, Sato M, Hirose T, Yasuigi Y, Mat-
ing, and magnetic resonance imaging show significant pe-
suda Y, et al. 1995. Magnetic resonance imaging of the cen-
ripheral and cenfral nervous system myelin abnormalifies
tral nervous system in the kiften. J Vet Med Sci 57(1):155-
 in the cat model of alpha-mannosidosis. JNeuropathol Exp
156.
Neurol 60(8):817-828.
Yamada K, Miyahara K, Sato M, Miyabayashi T, and Hirose T.
Vite CH, McGowan JC, Niogi SN, Passini MA, Drobatz KJ,
1998. The confrecoup injury in a cat case of traffic accident:
 Haskins ME, et al. 2005. Effective gene therapy for an in-
MRI findings. J Vet Med Sci 60(5):647-649.
SECTION 2
Diagnosis of Spinal Disease
Rodney S. Bagley, Patrick R. Gavin,
and Shannon P. Holmes
 Similar to intracrarial disease processes, spinal dis-
mally contains 8 of these spinal segments, the thoracic
eases may result in anatomical alterations of spinal tis-
 area has 13 segments, and the lumbar region has 7 seg-
sues or affect spinal cord elements at a microscopic,
ment structures. The sacral segments are generally di-
physiologic, or functional level. Magnetic resonance 
 vided into three segments, with the caudal segments
(MR) imaging yields the most complete anatomical in-
 being somewhat variable, but often five segments. The
-Teaa ioy ,prepueis pios, un auauns si pue uoe
spinal cord segmental arrangementis variable, both be-
uation of the spine and spinal cord. MR imaging yields
tween species and even among individuals within the
superiorimages of the softissue such as the spinal cord,
species. Spinal segments are encased within the verte-
 intervertebral disks, nerve roots, or peripheral nerves 
 brae from the foramen magnum to approximately the
in close proximity to the spinal cord, as well as other 
 caudal aspect of the lumbar 6 (L6) vertebrae in dogs.
paraspinal anatomical structures.
 In relatively smaller dogs, the spinal cord may termi-
nate more caudally; in larger dogs, the spinal cord may
terminate more cranially. In cats, spinal cord segments
ANATOMY
may be found more caudally extending into the sacral
Norma! Neuroanatomy
vertebrae.
In the cervical area, there are 7 cervical vertebrae (ver-
At the level of the foramen magnum, the brain stem
tebral segments) and 8 associated spinal cord segment
becomes contiguous with the spinal cord (Figure 2.106).
structures. Therefore, there is a slight discontinuity be-
The spinal cord serves as a conduit for transmission
 tween the location of the cervical spinal cord segments
of information to and from the intracrarial structures.
and the cervical vertebral segments, with the spinal
Also, the spinal cord contains, primarily in the gray
cord segments lying within or slightly crarial to the
matter, the neuronal cell bodies that are responsible for
vertebrae. A single spinal cord segment will give rise to
motor functions in the limbs and trunk.
a paired set of associated spinal nerves numbered simi-
Both the spinal cord and the overlying vertebral
 larly as the spinal segment. For example, the first cervi-
structures are divided into segments (Figure 2.107). The
 cal, or Cl, spinal cord segment will produce the first cer-
vertebral segments are defined by the individual verte-
vical, or C1, nerve. There is also a first cervical vertebrae,
 bral structures. The spinal segments, comparatively, are
the C1 vertebrae. To reiterate, it is important not to con-
not as anatomically discretely identifiable, but are often
1 fuse the spinal cord segments, associated spinal nerves.
within proximity to the overlying vertebral segments.
 and cervical vertebrae during clirical commurication
In some regions of the spinal cord, notably in the cau-
even though each of these structures is commorly re-
dal cervical and lumbar regions, the individual spinal 
ferred to as "Cl." Obviously there is anl extra cervi-
cord segments may not lie within the associated ver-
cal spinal segment and associated nerves (C8 segment
tebral segments of the same number. The relationship
and nerves) compared to orly seven cervical vertebrae.
between spinal segments and the vertebral segments
Spinal nerves that arise from a spinal segment must tra-
may also vary between differing species such as cats
verse the vertebral canal to terminate peripherally on
and dogs.
a muscle or organ or to provide afferent information
 ss ds g axe a 
 d   n  d  
some variability in this absolute number occurring be-
traverse between vertebrae in the intervertebral fora-
tween individual arimals. The cervical spinal cord nor-
 men just ventral to the articular facets of the adjacent
Practical Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
123
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
h.579
ag:R041Col)
12X256
Figure 2.106. (A) Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image of a dog at the level of caudal brain stem and cranial cervical spinal cord.
(B) Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image of a dog at the cervical spinal cord. (C) Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image of a dog at the level
of thoracolumbar spinal cord. (D) Sagittal T2-weighted MR image of a dog at the level of lumbar spinal cord.
125 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
C
D
Figure 2.107. Gross section of the spinal cord (A) showing the associated dorsal nerve roots (arrows). The spinal cord (B)
associated peripheral connections to a muscle (C). Schemafic drawing of adjacent spinal cord segments (D).
vertebrae. In the cervical area, the first cervical nerve
foramen cranial to the vertebrae of the same number.
will traverse from the vertebral canal peripherally
 For example, the C7 spinal nerve will traverse the fora-
through the lateral vertebral foramen located within
men between the C6 and C7 vertebrae and the C8 spinal
the dorsal arch of C1 vertebrae. The C2 spinal nerve
nerve will traverse the foramen between the C8 and T1
will traverse between Cl and C2 vertebrae. The addi-
vertebrae. The T1 spinal nerve will exit the spinal canal
tional cervical spinal nerves will traverse the vertebral
through the foramen between Tl and T2.
126 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
The thoracic spinal cord contains 13 thoracic spinal
Peripheral nerves are formed usually by the combi-
cord segments and 13 associated pairs of spinal nerves.
nation of extensions of axonal processes from nerve cell
Generally, the spinal segments overlie the vertebrae of
bodies (ventral nerve) and the entering afferent fibers
the same number. The spinal nerves traverse the fora-
from sensory fibers (dorsal nerve) (Figures 2.107A, B).
 men caudal to the vertebrae of the same spinal cord
These fibers form the paired dorsal and ventral nerves
segment. For example, the T6 spinal nerve will traverse
or roots associated with each spinal cord segment. The
the foramen between the T6 and T7 vertebrae.
dorsal root consists primarily of axons projecting into
The discontinuity between spinal segment location
the spinal cord from the periphery. The cell bodies of
 and associated vertebral segment is more pronounced
these axons primarily reside with an enlargement of the
in the lumbar and sacral areas of the spine. In the mid to
 dorsal root referred to as the dorsal root ganglion. Prior
caudal lumbar area, the spinal cord segments lie cranial
to their entrance into the spinal cord proper, the nerve
to the corresponding vertebral segments, even though
roots form multiple rootlets. The ventral root is formed
there are the same number of vertebral segments and
primarily from axons of efferent or exiting nerves to the
spinal segments (i.e., 7). In dogs, the sacral segments
 periphery. At the origin of these nerve roots are nerve
 generally are found within the lumbar (L) 5 vertebrae.
rootlets, which coalesce to form the nerve root and, ul-
Remembering that an S for sacral segments looks like a
timately, the peripheral nerve. While the dorsal root
   d a g a   
usually contains sensory axons and the ventralroot con-
relationship between these segments and the lumbar
 tains motor axons, these are not exclusive relationships.
vertebrae. Generally, the Ll and L2 spinal segments lie 
A cross-section of a spinal segment reveals the rela-
approximately over the L1 and L2 vertebrae, respec-
 n       
tively. Spinal segments L3 to L7 lie between L3 and L5
 peripheral white matter structures (Figures 2.107C, D).
vertebrae.
Spinal cord white matter contains groups of axons
The spinal cord terminates in the caudal half of the
or tracts traversing through the spinal cord from pe-
L6 vertebrae to the crarial half of L7 in dog structures
ripheral sensory receptors and their projections to the
(Figure 2.106D). In larger breeds, the spinal cord may
intracrarial structures. In addition, within the white
terminate more crarially. In smaller breeds, the spinal
matter, there are tracts descending from the intracra-
cord may terminate more caudally. In cats, the spinal
rial structures that traverse through the spinal cord to
cord ends at the L7 vertebrae or the sacrum.
 synapse on the neuronal cells that form nerves that exit
Spinal nerves that arise from a spinal segment must
the spinal cord and project to the peripheral axial or
 traverse the vertebral canal to terminate peripherally
appendicular structures.
on a muscle or organ or to provide afferent informa-
The central gray matter of the spinal cord tends to
tion from the periphery into the spinal cord structures.
have the appearance of an H, but has also been de-
Spinal nerves traverse between vertebrae in the inter-
scribed as a butterfly or arimal horns. The dorsal and
vertebral foramen just ventral to the articular facets of
ventral arms of the H are contiguous with the nerve
the adjacent vertebrae. In the lumbar area, as in the tho-
 rootlets either entering (dorsal) or exiting (ventral). The
racic area, the first lumbar nerve will traverse from the
white matter is isolated more peripherally by the H-
vertebral canal peripherally through the foramen be-
shaped gray matter and associated nerve rootlets into
tween Ll and L2 vertebrae or caudal to the vertebrae of
discrete regions. These regions of white matter are re-
the same number. The additional lumbar spinal nerves
ferred to as furiculi. Between the parallel sides of the
will traverse the vertebral foramen caudal to the verte-
H and the cross bar dorsally is the dorsal furiculus (or
brae of the same rumber. The L7 spinal nerve will tra-
bilateral funiculi). Lateral to the parallel sides of the H
verse between L7 and the cranial aspect of the sacrum.
is the lateral funiculus (funiculi). Ventral to the parallel
The sacral spinal nerves will traverse through foramen
sides of the H and the cross bar is the ventral furiculus
within the sacrum.
(furiculi).
As the spinal cord proper terminates at approxi-
The peripheral nerves often coalesce distal to their
 mately the L6 vertebrae and the spinal nerves traverse
 traversing the intervertebral foramen. This coalescence
 of nerves is commorly referred to as a plexus. In the
segment origin, the nervous system overlying the L6,
thoracic limb axillary area, these nerves are referred to
L7, and sacral vertebrae is more a collection of spinal
as the brachial plexus. In the medial pelvic limb area,
nerves than spinal cord proper. This collection ofnerves
 these peripheral nerves form the pelvic plexus.
viewed grossly gives off the appearance of hairs within.
The innervation of regional nerves, as well as the
a horse's tail, and thus is often referred to as the cauda
 ds  sa  o  ds
equina.
ments forming the plexus, may vary between arimals.
127 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
When regional nerves are formed by more crarial spinal
While many animals have these more standard
rootlets than is usually seen, the plexus is said to be
vertebral features, not all individual animals will
prefixed. When the nerves originate from more caudal
have this "normal" vertebral column components.
spinal cord segments than normal, the plexus is said to
Abnormalities of formation of vertebral structures are
be post-fixed. Allam studied the nerves that form the 
important to identify to avoid misinterpretation of
 -d sumoy aul punoy pue shp u snxand jeonq
 spinal segment location. For example, some animals
 centages of dogs had the brachial plexus derived from
 will have one less lumbar vertebrae structures. The in-
the associated spinal segments: 58.6% were formed by
 terpreter of any MR image should be aware of these
C6, C7, C8, and T1; 20.7% were formed by C5, C6, C7,
 types of anatomical diversity to avoid mislabeling of a
C8, and T1; 17.24% were formed by C6, C7, C8, T1, and
 vertebral level. Other vertebral defects such as block
T2; and 3.4% were formed by C5, C6, C7, C8, T1, and
 vertebrae or hemivertebrae may result in abnormal
 T2 (Allam et al. 1952). The ratio of dogs with prefixed,
 anatomical orientation of the spinal column (see con-
auxdde si sadi snxad pax-isod pue 'ra
 genital spinal cord defects within this chapter).
1:3:1.
The Meninges
The Vertebral Structures
As within the intracrarial region, the neural tissue of
The spinal cord is contained within the vertebral
  s  xd p  ds 
canal formed by adjacent vertebral structures (Figure
 by the meninges (Figure 2.112). The normal meninges,
2.108). The vertebrae are relatively complex bony struc-
 however, are usually not apparent on standard T1- and
tures, which vary in configuration and size throughout
 T2 sequences. Normal meringeal tissue does not en-
the spinal column. In the cervical region, essentially
 hance following contrast admiristration as a general
 all of the vertebral structures have a urique shape;
rule.
however, C3 through C5 are more similarly shaped
(Figure 2.109). The first (C1) and second (C2) vertebrae
 have distinct appearances (Figure 2.109). The promi-
Spina! Cord Blood Flow
nent dorsal spinous process of C2 affords a commonly 
used landmark for establishing this vertebral segment
 The spinal cord receives blood flow segmentally at mul-
in the sagittal MR image of this area (Figure 2.110). The
 tiple levels along the vertebral axis. In the cervical area,
 more prominent transverse processes of C6 often serve
- ' n      s  
as an anatomical landmark and are more obvious in the
chiocephalic trunk, and left subclavian arteries. From
transverse image (Figure 2.11l).
these arteries, blood flows into the vertebral arteries.
The thoracic vertebrae also have relatively urique
 as well as the dorsal scapular artery, deep cervical
shapes. The cranial most vertebrae have prominent dor-
 artery, and thoracic vertebral artery. The vertebral ar-
sal spinous processes. The dorsal spinous process of
-as ds  o i a Ains Ad m s
 -dn a aoa pe re aaeo a i
 ments. The dorsal scapular artery gives rise to the C8
right compared to the relatively smaller and directed
 cervical spinal branch. The deep cervical artery gives
more crarial dorsal spinous process of C7 can be used
 rise to the first thoracic spinal branch. The thoracic
as an anatomical landmark to distinguish this verte-
 vertebral artery gives rise to the spinal branches be-
bral level. In general, the crarial thoracic vertebrae have
tween T2 and T4. Primarily in the lumbar vertebrae,
"heart or V-shaped" vertebral bodies, prominent dorsal
the arterial vascular canals that erter the center of the
spinouses, and articulations with the associated ribs.
At the anticlinal region, the crarial/caudal direction
(Figure 2.113).
 of the dorsal spinous processes changes from being
Within the spinal canal, the spinal branch arteries di-
relatively more caudally directed to a more cranially
vide into a dorsal and ventralbranch. The dorsal branch
directed process. From this point to the last thoracic ver-
is smaller than the ventral branch. The ventral branches
tebrae, the articular facets become independent struc-
 become contiguous and form the ventral spinal artery.
tures compared to the ribs. At the first lumbar vertebrae,
a an n nsd si p p s  s 
the transverse process becomes apparent, and the ver-
 median fissure. The ventral spinal artery extends lon-
         
gitudinally along the ventral aspect of the spinal cord.
 last lumbar vertebrae. The unique shape of the sacrum
  s  pdde o nsn si  s
 is another useful anatomical landmark for determining
quences urless it is erlarged. The ventral spinal artery
the location of the associated vertebral segments.
will give rise to numerous dorsally directed branches
128 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
C
D
：
Figure 2.108. Transverse gross appearance of the cranial (A), ventral (B), and dorsal (C) aspect of the C1 vertebrae. Dorsal
(D), lateral (E), and transverse (cranial aspect) (F) of the C2 vertebrae.
129
PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
[)   (   )     )       s   
aspect) (E), andC7 (F).
C
D
Figure 2.110. Transverse gross appearance of two thoracic vertebrae ((A)—T2; (B)—T3). Lateral gross appearance of the
thoracic vertebrae (C)T1; (D)—T3;
131 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
G
Figure 2.110. (Continued) (E)—T5; (F)—T7; (G)—T8; (H)—T10;
that enter the spinal cord ventrally to supply the ventral
 gray matter and ventral funiculi.
The dorsal branches enter the spinal cord around the
 dorsal nerve roots to primarily supply the dorsal lat-
 eral gray and white matter. On the surface of the cord
in the pia there are incomplete anastomotic cornects
which may encircle the spinal cord. In some instances,
the dorsal lateral arteries can also travel longitudinally
along the length of the spinal cord in a dorsal lateral
direction. While this basic pattern occurs in the arterial
blood supply to the spinal cord, there is often signifi-
cant individual variation among these arterial charnels.
The ventral spinal artery system is more consistent in
location and anatomy.
Within a spinal cord segment, the arteries that pen-
etrate into the parenchyma tend to be relatively small
 and thirn-walled. While some regior of a spinal segment 
 pai uisas e rd auo q pdns st
 dorsal), some regions of the spinal cord are in an over-
lapping zone, being supplied partially by both arterial
systems. These areas of arterial overlap may be more
 susceptible to ischemic changes and subsequent spinal
damage.
The venous drainage from within and around the
 spinal cord occurs through the associated vertebral ve-
Figure 2.110. (Continued) (I)—T11)
nous plexus (venous sinuses) and associated branches.
The venous vascular system exits the intervertebral
A
Figure 2.111. Transverse gross appearance of three lumbar vertebrae (A)—L4 (caudal aspect);(B)—L5 caudal aspect;
133PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.111. (Continued) (C)—L5 crarial aspect; (D)—L7). Lateral gross appearance of the thoracic (E)—T12; (F)—T13) and
lumbarvertebrae
134
Figure 2.111. (Continned) (G)—L1; (H)—L2; (I)—L3; (J)—L5;
135 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
GENERAL TYPES OF SPINAL
CORD PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
There are a number of pathophysiologic changes that
occur in association with spinal cord diseases. These in-
clude, but are not limited to, ischemia, edema, demyeli-
nation, obstruction to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow,
hemorrhage, syringo- and hydromyelia, and malacia.
These nonspecific pathophysiologic events often oc-
cur in the presence of a specific disease entity. The
MR signal changes associated with the various spinal
cord diseases reflect the combination of these primary
disease entities and associated secondary pathophysi-
ologic events.
DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL CORD
K
DISEASE PROCESSES
Figure 2.111. (Continued) (K)—L6). (See Color Plate
2.111H.)
In the following section, MR features of differing
spinal cord diseases are discussed. Diseases are pre-
 foramen ventral to exiting nerves, and is contiguous
 sented following major categories of disease using
with the venous sinus. These vascular structures may
a DAMNNITTV scheme (Degenerative, Anomalous,
be apparent primarily in MR images of the spinal canal
Metabolic, Neoplastic, Nutritional, Irflammatory, Idio-
and vertebral column (Figures 2.114-2.116).
pathic, Traumatic, Toxic, Vascular).
Degenerative Disease
Early-onset degenerative spinal cord disease usually
 Occurs in specific breeds of animals and younger an-
imals are more often affected. Examples of primary
degenerative spinal cord diseases of younger animals
include Afghan myelomalacia, hereditary ataxia of
smooth-haired fox terriers and Jack Russell terriers,
Labrador retriever axonopathy, encephalomyelopathy
of young cats, leukoencephalomyelopathy of Rottweil-
ers, and miniature poodle demyelination. An etiology
for the neural element degeneration in many of these
diseases has rot been established.
Antemortem diagnostics either have not been con-
 sistently performed or are invariably normal in ani-
Figure 2.112. Dorsal view of the formaldehyde-fixed
mals with primary degenerative spinal cord disease.
meninges and spinal cord from a normal dog. The outer
 MR imaging features of many of these primary degen-
meninges have been incised to reveal the underlying spinal
erative diseases either have not been identified or have
cord.
not been evaluated for. In many of the degenerative
Figure 2.113. Sagiftal T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) MR images of the lumbar spinal cord. The arterial vascular
channels are apparent at approximately the middle of the vertebral body (arrows).
Figure 2.114. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from two separate dogs ((A) and (B)) showing the appearance and location
of the vertebral venous sinuses and veins (arrows).
137 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
protrusion and degenerative myelopathy is currently
unknown. Most likely, these are separate disease enti-
ties with, urfortunately, similar clinical features. Con-
current disease processes such as spinal cord compres-
sion (i.e., with intervertebral disk disease (IVDD) may
occur in association with degenerative myelopathy in
the same arimal. This creates a diagnostic dilemma
as there are no currently established pathognomonic
MR imaging features that will indicate the presence
of degenerative disease. Definitive diagnosis of a true
degenerative myelopathic condition is made only at
necropsy.
Figure 2.115. Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a
dog showing different signal characteristics due to differing
flow characteristics in the venous sinuses (arrows).
Intervertebral DiskDisease
IVDD is one of the most common abnormalities seen in
clirical practice in arimals with spinal disease. Selected
breeds of dogs such as dachshunds have a greater in-
spinal cord diseases where MR evaluations have been
cidence of IVDD, however, this problem can be found
performed, no defiritive changes have been identi-
in almost all breeds. Clinical features such as spinal
fied.
1nq CaAI jo aansasans are sisflered 1o 'sisared 'ued
 are also associated with other spinal cord conditions.
Degenerative Myelopathy
 Importantly, there is no pathognomonic clirical feafure
of IVDD.
Degenerative myelopathy is the name commonly used
 MR images can be collected in multiple planes to al-
to describe a specific degenerative spinal cord disease
 low for viewing of IVDD in various dimensions (Fig-
of mature dogs and cats that results in paraparesis,
ures 2.1l8-2.135). Degeneration of the nucleus pulpo-
eventually evolving to tetraparesis and possibly, CN
 sus and the anatomical structure of the disk itself is
signs. Dogs most often become paralyzed in the pelvic
 readily seen in the T2-weighted sagittal and transverse
limbs prior to clirically detectable thoracic limbs ab-
(axial) images of the spinal column (Figures 2.122-
 normalities. This disease most commorly is reported
 2.124). Normal hydrated nucleus pulposus has a hyper-
in middle-aged to older German shepherds, but also
 intense signal compared to the arnulus fibrosis (Figure
affects other breeds of dogs and has been occasion-
2.118). As the rucleus pulposus loses hydration (seen in
ally reported in cats. Similar disease processes have
 chondroid metaplasia or Hansen's type I disk disease),
been described in young (<2 years of age) dogs in-
the signal becomes less intense and may appear iso- or
cluding German shepherds and Siberian huskies. Clin-
hypointense relative to the arnulus fibrosis. Most acute
ical signs are usually more gradual in onset, chroric
disk extrusions of this type of degenerated disk mate-
 in duration, and progressively worsen. Clinical fea-
 rial appear primarily as a hypointense lesion surround-
tures most notably reflect an abnormality of the T3-L3
 ing the spinal cord in the T2-weighted sagittal image
spinal cord segments; however, the actual histopatho-
(Figures 2.118-2.132). Traumatic rupture of previously
logicallesions may be more severe in the caudal cervical
healthy nucleus pulposus results in a high signal in-
area.
tensity (hyperintense) material in or around the spinal
Conventional MR images from affected dogs are also
cord as this material is usually (at least initially) nor-
 normal. In many dogs with clinical features suggestive
mally hydrated (Figures 2.128C, D). The axial MR view
of "degenerative myelopathy" evaluated in the modern
 provides important information regarding the location
era with MR spinal imaging there is evidence of disk
 of any compressive material surrounding the spinal
 protrusion affecting various regions of the spinal cord.
cord in a cross-sectional dimension (Figures 2.120
In some instances this disk protrusion occurs at a single
2.121, 2.126, 2.127, 2.130-2.132). If one area (side) of
site. In other instances compression is present at mul-
 s a  asx si  ds a
tiple intervertebral disk spaces (Figure 2.117). The re-
others, this can readily be determined with spinal MR
lationship between the presence of intervertebral disk
imaging.
Figure 2.116. Gross anatomical view (A) following removal of the dorsal vertebral elements showing the location and course
venous strucfures of the cervical region (arrows). Gross anatomical view (C) following removal of the dorsal vertebral elements
showing the locafion and course of the vertebral sinuses in the lumbar region (arrows). Transverse MR angiographic appearance
139 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
had multiple chronic protrusions of the intervertebral disk components (arrows).
 Oftentimes and especially with acute IVD extrusions,
this section. Ventrally extruded or protruded IVD ele-
there is associated hemorrhage and inflammation in
1 ments have been suggested to contribute or result in
 the region of the IVD rupture. Hemorrhage usually is  spondylosis deformans.
the result of damage or rupture of the ventral verte-
 Laterally extruded or protruded elements may not af-
 bral venous sinus (venous blood). In some instances,
fect the spinal cord, but can result in compression and
epidural hematomas may form as a result of this hem-
impingement of the peripheral nerves as these nerves
orrhage. This hemorrhage or hematoma formation can
extend for multiple disk space levels in or around the
regions of the acute disk rupture. Hemorrhage associ-
ated with IVD extrusion may be present in the ventral,
lateral, or even dorsal aspects of the spinal canal. Also
commonly, the acutely extruded IVD material will be-
come admixed with hemorrhage to result in spinal corc
compression. The combination of varying consistencies
of extruded intervertebral disk material and /or stages
 of hemorrhage mixed with disk material may create a
spectrum of MR imaging characteristics of disk material
herriation. Most often, the combination of herriated in-
 tervertebral disk material and hemorrhage often results
in a heterogeneous signal intensity in T2-weighted MR
images.
Intervertebral disk extrusion or protrusion can oc-
cur at multiple levels of the spinal column. Historically.
thoracolumbar and cervical IVDD has been recogrized
commorly. In some dogs, however, crarial to mid tho-
racic verterbral level IVDD have been found with MR
 imaging (Figure 2.133). These types of IVDD are more
often protrusions with hypertrophy of the dorsal lon-
gitudinal ligament. In rarer instances, acute extrusions
may occur
In addition to the variety of levels of spinal column
 that may be affected with IVDD, IVD elements may ex-
Figure 2.118. Transverse T2-weighted MR image at the
trude or protrude dorsally, laterally, ventrally, or some
level a lumbar IVD from a healthy dog. Note the hyperin-
combination of these directions at the affected IVD
space. Dorsally extruded or protruded disk elements
6 compared to the hypointense signal from the annulus fibrosis
enter the spinal canal as described previously within
(smaller arrow).
foramen. In these situations, however, the degenera-
tive disk is generally identifiable in the T2-sagittal MR
image as decreased signal intensity and an abnormally
shaped (smaller) nucleus pulposus. The transverse (ax-
 panx Ae a sos u s (e
impinging on a nerve root.
Occasionally, and especially with more chroric IVD
 extrusion or protrusion, IVD material within or around
the spinal canal may show contrast enhancement fol-
lowing intravenous administration of contrast media
(Figure 2.135). Contrast enhancement is most likely due
 to increased vascularization within the extruded or pro-
truded disk material and/or associated inflammation.
In some instances, the contrast enhancement will occur
at the peripheral edges of the IVD material ("ring en-
hancement"). It is important to recogrize this feature of
 IVDD to avoid misdiagnosis of other disease processes
showing contrast enhancement such as spinal tumors.
 As with all imaging studies, knowledge of the lo-
cation of the lesion in a sagittal as well as axial plane
is imperative, especially if surgical correction is to 0c-
cur. Localization can be slightly more difficult using
MR imaging as body landmarks such as ribs are not
always present within the plane of section. Additional
views, such as a dorsal plane image, may be helpful
in establishing lesion location and normal anatomical
variations (Figure 2.136).
Imaging Following Spinal Surgery
While currently used as a pre-surgical diagnostic tool,
ing the status of the spinal cord following spinal sur-
 gical decompressive surgeries such as laminectomies
and ventral slots (Figures 2.137-2.141). MR imaging
in the immediate time (within hours) following spinal
surgery may show the degree of decompression, ongo-
ing hemorrhage, and other information that may help
 in assessing potential complications following surgery.
In some instances, MR imaging is performed days,
weeks, or months following spinal surgery because of
D
 persistence or recurrence of clinical signs. In some in-
Figure 2.119. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from two
stances where animals have recovered poorly or even
dogs ((A) and (C) with intervertebral disk extrusions (ar-
worsened following surgery, persistent spinal cord
rows). Parts (B) and (D) show erlarged views of (A) and (C),
 compression can be identified. In most instances of IVD,
respectively.
this persistent compression from IVD elements is not
the result of "new" extrusion or protrusion of IVD ma-
exit the spinal column through the intervertebral fora-
terial, but rather the result of unsuccessful IVD element
men (Figure 2.134). In instances of lateral disk extru-
 removal at the time of surgery In other instances, even
sion, the location of the lesion may not be identified
 animals that have recovered well following surgery
  pxa a  aa a 
may have persistent compression at the surgery site.
terial is either within or lateral to the intervertebral
Therefore, it may be difficult, based on evaluation of MR
141 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.120. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from two dogs ((A) and (B)) with intervertebral disk extrusions (arrows)
Figure 2.121.Sagittal T2-weighted MR images from a dog (A) with an intervertebral disk extrusion (arrow). Adjacent trans-
( a  a  g   e  s a  ()  (a) s  
142 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
Figure 2.122. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog with an acute lumbar intervertebral disk extrusion (arrow).
Figure 2.123. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a cat with an acute lumbar intervertebral disk extrusion (arrow).
143 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.125.
(arrows).
Figure 2.126.Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a
Figure 2.127. Transverse T2-weighted MR image from
dog with an intervertebral disk profrusion (arrow).
a dog with two separate intervertebral disk protrusions/
extrusions (arrows) at the same intervertebral level.
Figure 2. 128. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from three dogs (A)-(C) with cervical intervertebral disk extrusions (arrows).
hence the hyperintense signal (arrow) rather than the hypointense signal.
145 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
(arrow).
disk extrusion (arrows).
Sc5
TSE/M
SL4
C3
Sc3
SE/M
TSE/M
L15
SL14
FH 12he
FH8h
Figure 2.132.  Transverse T2-weighted MR images from two dogs ((A) and (B) with more laterally displaced cervical inter-
vertebral disk extrusions (arrows).
147 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
dogs (B)-(D) with thoracic intervertebral disk protrusion (arrows).
Figure 2.135.  Transverse T1-weighted MR image following intravenous confrast (gadolirium) from a dog with intervertebral
149 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
SC4
SEM
Figure 2.136. Dorsal plane, T2-weighted MR image
through the lumbar and caudal thoracic region from a healthy
dog showing the relationship of the last rib and the sacrum.
B
Figure 2.137. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from a
Aoaureau e sumoy Aiaeaurn (a) pue () so
(arrow).
A
B
Figure 2.138.
(arrow).
B
(    (  () s         
where intervertebral disk material (smaller arrow) has been incompletely removed.
151 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.140. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog following a ventral slot procedure (arrow).
C
 Figure 2.141. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from three dogs (A)-(C) immedliately following a ventral slot procedure
(arrows).
152 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
images alone, to predict ou tcome following surgery MR
assessing vertebral changes, spinal cord atrophy, and
imaging performed weeks to months following spinal
the degree of spinal cord compression. The transverse
imaging view afforded by these imaging modalities
ties such as syringomyelia or focal gray matter mala-
provides for the most accurate visualization of spinal
cia, usually at the level of the previous spinal injury or
 cord compression in a 360° orientation surrounding
IVD compression. Obviously, if metal surgical implants
 the spinal cord. With ventral compression from annu-
have been placed for spinal stabilization, metal artifacts
lus fibrosis or hypertrophied spinal ligaments, a ven-
in the local spinal region will distort the MR signal and 
 tral extradural compressive lesion is more apparent.
This tissue is usually hypointense on T2-weighted se-
2.142).
quences. It is common to have focal hyperintense ab-
normalities within the central spinal cord (gray matter)
in T2-weighted images directly dorsal to the ventral
Wobbler's Syndrome
spinal compression (Figures 2.148 and 2.149). As both
dynamic and static spinal cord compression may be
-nu e sssedoua ,apus s, rm, t a
 present with these diseases, flexed and extended (posi-
ber of cervical  vertebral abnormalities. These in-
tional) imaging views may be needed to reveal the dy-
clude vertebral malarticulation/malformation, inter-
namic nature of the compressive lesion if the disease is
vertebral disk extrusion and protrusion, articular facet
Commonly in dogs with lesions such as those classi-
 general clinical presentations, however, are usually
 cally seen in Doberman pinschers ventral compression
-uey ,aupuas s,aom, au rpun papnu
is worse when the head (and neck) is extended dorsally.
One of these clinical presentations is classically seen
Younger, large-breed dogs, such as Great Danes, mas-
in middle-aged to older Doberman pinschers. Other
tiffs, and Saint Bernards, have a similarly named dis-
breeds, however, including both large and small body 
ease, but with a differing pathophysiology. In these
types can also be affected. The disease in these animals 
 younger and larger dogs, the disease involves the dor-
is characterized primarily by ventral compressive le-
sal articular facets with secondary hypertrophy of the
sions of the caudal cervical area resulting from liga-
associated joint capsules and ligaments (Figures 2.150-
mentous hypertrophy and intervertebral disk (usually
2.155). This hypertrophy results in a more dorsal and
arnulus fibrosis) protrusion (Figures 2.143 and 2.144).
 lateral anatomical location of spinal compression. If
While the pathophysiology of this disease is not fully
the compressive tissue is fibrous cornective (ligamen-
understood, some caudal cervical instability coupled
tous) tissue or cortical bone, the compressive lesion
with increased flexion force due to the pull of grav-
 asodsipand Ae azis peay alrel aiaageredo e u ai
  s  7 1 '17 '17 s
one to damage to the intervertebral disk space and the
congerital bony malformations of the articular facets
associated articulations. Damage to the intervertebral
 predisposing to a stenotic vertebral canal. The articular
disk elements may contribute to vertebral urit insta-
facet joints may inherently degenerate, or may be dam-
bility. Hypertrophy of the associated ligamentous sup-
aged due to ineffectual ability to support the weight
porting structures (dorsallongitudinal ligament, dorsal
of the head. This will result in hyperintense (on T2
intervertebral ligament, or ligamentum flavum) is most
 sequences) alterations in these joints. In still other in-
likely an attempt by the body to decrease this instability
stances, small portions of synovial tissue may become
 and to naturally fuse these articulations. This hyper-
pm peaous sumeuos ,o paqoud, pue paddeua
trophied tissue, in combination with protruded inter-
(Figures 2.156-2.158). These sacs of inspissated syn-
vertebral disk elements (arnulus) however, encroaches
ovial fluid are known as synovial cysts and are usually
into the vertebral canal leading eventually to spinal
 hyperintense in T2-weighted images. These cysts may
cord compression (Figures 2.143-2.145). This compres-
also compress the spinal cord, either statically or with.
sion may be static or dynamic (Figures 2.145-2.149).
vertebral movement (dynamic compression). A similar-
 In addition to compressive damage to axons and neu-
type spinal compression from hypertrophied dorsal lig-
 rons, impingement of spinal cord vessels can result in 
aments and abnormal articular facet joints is possible
ischemic damage to the spinal cord. In some instances,
(Figure 2.154).
there are acute extrusions of IVD nucleus pulposus (Fig-
As some animals with this category of disease are
ure 2.145).
 treated surgically, MR imaging may be performed fol-
 a  n   s  
lowing surgery (Figures 2.161 and 2.162). Assessments
act location of any spinal cord compressed segments
made are similar to those as described under treatment
(Figures 2.143-2.145). MR imaging may be helpful in
of IVDD.
153 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
Figure 2.142. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from four dogs (A)-(D) with ventral cervical spinal cord compression (arrows)
associated with cervical vertebral malformation/malarticulation or "Wobbler's syndrome."
Figure 2.143.  Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a dog with venfral cervical spinal cord compression (arrow) associated
with cervical vertebral malformation/malarticulation or "Wobbler's syndrome.
Sc17
TSEM
15
     a           (   
compression (arrow) associated with an acute IVD extrusion.
155 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.145. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from a dog wifh ventral cervical spinal cord compression (arrow) associated
with cervical vertebral malformafion/malarticulation or "Wobbler's syndrome" when the head and neck is placed in an
extended (A) compared to a flexed (B) position.
Figure 2.146. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from a dog with ventral cervical spinal cord compression (arrow) associated
with cervical vertebral malformation/malarfticulation or "Wobbler's syndrome" when the head and neck is in a neutral position
() u pe p a  pnd si an r e m o ped ()
associated with cervical vertebral malformafion/malarticulation or "Wobbler's syndrome."
Figure 2.148. Sagittal (A) and (C)) and transverse ((B) and (D)) T2-weighted MR images from two large dogs (A), (B) and (C),
(D)) with intramedullary increased signal intensity (arrows) associated with cervical vertebral malformation/malarticulation
Or "Wobbler's syndrome."
157 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Cm
Figure 2.149. Pathologic vertebral specimen from a young dog with "Wobbler's syndrome" showing the malformation of
the dorsal articuilar facets (arrow).
Figure 2.150. Pathologic vertebral specimen (A) from a young dog with "Wobbler's syndrome" showing the malformation
of the dorsal arficular facets (arrow). Transverse T2-weighted MR image (B) from a similarly affected dog showing bony
impingement on the spinal canal (arrow).
Figure 2.151. Parasagittal T2-weighted MR image from a
of the dorsal articular facets (arrow). The focal, round, hy-
perintense signal at this level was the result of an associated
synovial cyst.
Figure 2.153. Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a
young dog with "Wobbler's syndrome" due to bony spinal
canal stenosis (arrow) with associated inframedullary gray
matter hyperintense signal.
Figure 2.152. Dorsal plane, T2-weighted MR image from a
Audonad ot anp .auorpus s, raom, vm sop sumon
of the dorsal articular facets (arrow).
B
Figure 2.154. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from a
young large dog with the head and neck in a neutral posi
fion (A) compared to a dorsally extended posifion (B). Note
the dorsal spinal cord compression which is more evident in
the extended head position (arrows).
159 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
() ss s m (a)  () so s  om    am  t n
B
Figure 2.156.  Transverse T2-weighted MR images from a young large dog (A) and (B) with a synovial cyst (arrows)
Figure 2.157. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from two young large dogs (A) and (B)) with a synovial cyst (arrows).
Transverse T2-weighted MR images from a young large dog (C) with a synovial cyst (arrow). Appearance of the cyst (arrow)
at suirgery (D).
161 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
TH
Figure 2.158.  Transverse T2-weighted MR images from a young large dog with multiple synovial cysts (arrows)
Figure 2.159. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a large dog following a venfral slot (arrow).
Figure 2.160.  Lateral radiograph (A) and sagiftal T2-weighted MR image (B) from a large dog following a failed ventral slot
(afrow).
Figure 2.161. (A) Lateral radiographic view of a dog with metal surgical implants (cortical bone screws) through the C2-3
dorsal articular facets (arrow). (B) Sagiftal T1-weighted MR image from the same dog showing metal arfifact (arrow).
163 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.162. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from fwo healthy dogs (A) and (B)) with normal appearing LS arficulafiors.
Lumbosacral Disease
diskospondylitis can result in LS nerve compression.
Lumbosacral (LS) disease can occur as a congenital
Primary inflammation of these nerves (cauda equina
stenosis of the LS region or be acquired due to malartic-
neuritis) is rare.
ulation, malformation, occult osteochondritis dessicans 
MR imaging is often helpful in establishing disease
 lesions, or, most commonly, IVD degeneration and pro-
 of the LS region, especially as myelography is generally
 trusion. The associated spinal nerve compression usu-
poor in establishing nerve compression in this region.
ally affects the L7, sacral, and caudal nerve roots as
Sagiftal, parasagittal, and transverse plane images may
these traverse through the LS area. Compression can
be needed to determine the spectrum of compression
result dorsally from the interarcuate ligament, or ven-
present (Figures 2.162-2.167). Both parasagittal and
trally from the bulging or tearing of the arnulus fibrosis.
 transverse images allow for an assessment of the foram-
 The L7 nerves are oftern also compressed from a ventral  inal areas where exiting nerves are often compressed
 and lateral direction as they exit the vertebral canal at  as well as the spinal cord and associated paraspinal
 the intervertebral foramen from collapse of the foram- vertebral, ligament, and joint structure. However, in-
 inal area or secondary osteophyte production. Occa- terpretation of these advanced imaging studies may be
sionally, other diseases such as neoplasia, fracture, or 
instances, parasagifttal as well as transverse flexed and
200
extended MR views may show alterations in foraminal
size in various positions (Figures 2.170 and 2.171).
Spondylosis Deformans/Ventra!
Bridging Spondylosis
Spondylosis deformans or ventral bridging spondylo-
sis is commorly encountered on survey radiographic
 spinal evaluation in dogs. This bony proliferation is
thought to be the result of an age-related, degenera-
five vertebral and paravertebral abnormality and most
 likely initiated by ventral extrusions or protrusions of
Figure 2.163. Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a
IVD components. Spondylosis can be found at all ver-
healthy dog through the LS intervertebral articulation.
-e raoa u pame aq ueo  am saai n
imals (disseminated skeletal hyperostosis), it is most
often found in middle-aged to older dogs and cats. In
cats, hypervitaminosis A results in severe spondylitic
change in the vertebrae, usually affecting the cervical
region.
In many older animals, spondylosis deformans is
spinal and nerve compression. It is important in the di-
found incidentally on spinal MR evaluations (Figures
 agnosis of LS disease, as with any disease, to correlate
2.172 and 2.173). Spondylosis deformans may have
any imaging abnormality with the appropriate clirical
either a hypointense or hyperintense signal in T2-
signs.
weighted images. If spondylosis results secondarily to
With degenerative LS diseases, pathophysiologic al-
intervertebral disk disease, alterations in vertebral ar-
terations in vertebral units are similar to those de-
scribed with "Wobbler's syndrome." Protruded LS IVD
 ally, spondylosis may extend into or around the in-
elements and hypertrophied ligamentous structures
 tervertebral foramen and compress the exiting spinal
are usually hypointense in T2-weighted images. Al-
nerves. In these instances, transverse spinal imaging
teratiors in the dorsal articular facet joints may show
with MR may reveal bony proliferation into or around
abnormal hyperintense alterations in T2-weighted im-
exiting spinal nerve.
 ages. It is more difficult, however, to determine foram-
inal alterations due to inconsistencies in slice plane an-
 gulation and level.
 There is both clinical and radiological evidence that
Dural Ossification
instability may exist in many instances of LS disease.
Dynamic imaging studies of the LS joint tend to show
 Ossification of the dura can occur in older animals,
that the LS joint is movable and that LS compression is
more commorly in the cervical area. A radiopaque,
worse in most instances when the joint is in a neutral or
usually relatively thin, linear density is noted on radio-
 graphs in the area where the dura would normally be
ure 2.168). We have had similar experiences when us-
found. The pathologic significance of this radiographic
ing MR imaging to image the LS articulation in various
finding is unknown, however, most feel that this ab-
 positions. Compression of the spinal cord is worsened
 normality is not associated with clirical signs of spinal
when the animal's lower spine is dorsally extended,
 or peripheral nerve disease. Occasionally, mineralized
and improved when the spine is in a ventrally flexed
dura plaques will be adherent to the underlying spinal
position. Because of this dynamic compression, the po-
cord, which could result in a spinal cord abnormality
sition that the animal is placed in at the time of imag-
These focal dura mineralizations are rarely evident on
ing study may influence the detection of any LS com-
 survey spinal radiographs. Dural ossification has been
pression. Synovial cysts may be found associated with
difficult to determine with MR imaging if the lesion
the dorsal LS articular joints (Figure 2.169). In some
does not increase the size of the dura.
165 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
GUNTE
J0670
T2 AX flex
2001dan
an
111
(con)
10
mgim.
vertebral foraminal region (arrows).
Figure 2.165. Sagiftal T2-weighted MRimages from six dogs (A)-(F) with LS disease showing a spectrum of MR abnormalities.
166 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
Figure 2.165.(Continued)
167 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
282fee
B
Figure 2.166. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from two dogs (A) and (B)) with LS disease due to protrusion into the
 spinal canal of the intervertebral disk elements (arrows).
Figure 2.167. Sagittal T2-weighted MR image from a dog with spinal and nerve compression at both L6-7 and at the LS
intervertebral cdisk levels.
 ) ) )         
169 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
2005
Img Tm: 15:
G
Figure 2.168. (Continued) (E), (F); and (G), (H)) with LS disease showing the degree of compression in a neutral ((A), (C), (E)
and (G) compared to a flexed ((B), (D), (F), and (H)) spine position (arrows).
%T2AXER
M1
2003
Figure 2.169.  Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a dog with a synovial cyst of the dorsal L7-sacrum arficulation (arrow).
B
Figure 2.170. Parasagiftal T2-weighted MR images from a dog with LS disease showing the intervertebral foramen in a
neutral (A) compared to a flexed (B) spine posiftion (arrows).
D
Figure 2.171. Parasagittal T2-weighted MR images from a dog with LS disease showing the intervertebral foramen in a
neutral (A) compared to a flexed (B) spine posiftion (arrows). Transverse T2-weighted MR images from the same dog in a
neutral (C) compared to a flexed (D) spine posiftion (arrows).
the cervical (A), thoracic (B), and lumbar (C)-(E) regions.
173 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.173. Sagiftal (A) and transverse (B) T2-weighted MR images from a dog wifh spondylosis deformans (arrows)
Anomalous Diseases
A variety of spinal cord congerital abnormalities may
spinal cord architecture. In instances where the spine is
 involve the vertebrae, the meninges, or the spinal cord
permanently deviated, proper aligrment of the patient
 proper. Spina bifida is a failure of the dorsal aspect of
for MR imaging may be difficult and subsequently af-
the vertebrae to fuse during development. This may be
fect image quality by creating positional artifacts. CSF
seen on a dorsal ventral survey spinal radiograph as an
ununited dorsal lamina and spinous process. A dorsal
tein, nucleated cell counts, or both.
ans e uo pdde aq ru oe A ssrd snus
Rhodesian ridgeback dogs, and occasionally other
radiograph in affected animals. Protrusion or adhesion
breeds of dogs such as Shih tzus, Yorkshire terriers, and
of the meringes (meringocele), or meninges and spinal
 boxers, have a congenital cornection from the spinal
cord (meningomyelocele) through an associated verte-
cord to the skin referred to as a dermoid sinus. This is
 se iq   s    
with the result of failure of separation of the skin from
clarified with MR imaging. Myelography may show
underlying tissues during closure of the neural tube.
commurication of these meringeal structures with
The characteristic urusual hair pattern on the dorsal
the spinal cord. Myelodysplasia or abnormal spinal
 neck and back of Rhodesian ridgeback dogs is a reflec-
cord development is best evaluated with MR imaging.
tion of the defect, however, this abnormality does not
 Abnormalities of the normal spinal architecture usually
 always cornect to the spinal cord. Dermoid sinus may
result in a distortion of the anatomical appearance of the
 appear as small indentations or openings in the skin.
spinal cord. Often, on T2-weighted imaging sequences,
In some instances, fluid will be present from the abnor-
the spinal cord contains abnormal hyperintense regions
mal skin area with an associated dermatitis. Dermoid
suggesting increases in fluid, malacia, or possibly, hem-
sinuses usually occur on midline in the cervical, tho-
orrhage (Figures 2.174-2.176).
racic, or sacrococcygeal regions. MR imaging is used
Vertebral abrormalities such as hemivertebrae, block
for diagnosis of spinal cord involvement with this dis-
vertebrae, or transitional vertebrae are often evident onl
ease (Figure 2.177).
survey radiographs. These abnormalities result in ab-
normally shaped vertebrae. Vertebral defects may re-
Scoliosis
sult in malaligrment of the vertebral segments with
associated scoliosis, kyphosis, or lordosis. Spinal cord
Scoliosis is usually evident on physical evaluation. Sur-
compression is orly determined with myelography, CT,
 vey radiographs of the affected spinal areas confirm the
or MR imaging. Associated spinal cord defects such as
lateral deviation of the vertebral column. This devia-
tion is often associated with abnormalities of the ver
 tebral structures. The vertebrae may be misshapen and
174 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
A
512×512
B
Figure 2.174. Lateral radiograph (A) and sagiftal, T2-weighted MR image (B) from a dog with hemivertebrae and kyphosis
irregular in appearance and contour. In animals that are
alterations such as increases in protein concentration,
still growing, abnormalities of the growth plates may
nucleated cells, or both.
be present. However, these vertebrae may rot be inher-
ently misshapen, but may develop abnormally due to
Atlantoaxial Subluxation
abnormal forces being placed on the vertebral urit from
 the pressures associated with spinal bending.
Atlantoaxial (AA) instability occurs in numerous, usu-
Scoliosis has most commonly been associated with
ally small, but occasionally large, dog breeds. Yorkshire
terriers, Chihuahuas, Lhasa Apsos, and Pomeranians
ringomyelia and hydromyelia in dogs. Evaluation for 
are most often affected. Other breeds affected include
underlying spinal cord defects in association with sco-
the Japanese Chin, toy poodle, Pekingese, Rottweiler,
 and Doberman pinscher. This disease is occasionally
 evaluations. With MR imaging, the lateral deviation of
reported in cats.
the vertebral column may make it difficult to achieve
 This disease is most often the result of some degree
acceptable positioring for sagittal imaging. This may 
 of abnormal articulation between the Cl and C2 ver-
create positional artifacts in the images produced. Elec-
 tebrae. This abnormal articulation may be the result of
tromyography of the paraspinal muscles may show ab-
 exogenous trauma with either fracture of the occiput,
 axis, or atlas, or disruption of the atlantooccipital lig-
these muscles. CSF may be normal or reveal nonspecific
aments. There may also be a congerital abnormality
175 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
      s   n        )   
the level of the transverse section. The transverse image shows the associated cystic abnormality of the spinal cord (arrow).
of the ligamentous or bony structures associated with
this joint is also commorly malformed. Many of these
this articulation. Various degrees of ligamentous and
ligamentous abnormalities are assumed to affect the
joint capsule abnormalities may be present. The ventral,
stability of the odontoid process or dens. AA instability
cranial aspect of C2 forming the caudal articulation of
二
B
Figure 2.177. Sagiftal (A) and transverse (B) T2-weighted MR images from a dog with a dermoid sinus (arrows)
absent dens. In some instances, there is a fracture of the 
 is most accurately determined with MR imaging (Fig-
dens. In still other cases, the dens is present but abnor-
mally angulated in a dorsal direction to compress the
 association with AA instability and may contribute to
spinal cord. Clinical signs result from spinal cord com-
s  s p ss  s 
pression or alterations in spinal cord blood flow. As
 Imaging of the spinal cord with MR is the most accu-
this abnormality results in vertebral instability, spinal
rate way to determine the presence of syringomyelia
cord compression may be dynamic depending on the
(Figure 2.179).
 position of the head.
The diagnosis of AA instability is supported by
demonstrating an increased distance (greater than a
Syringomyelia and Hydromyelia
few millimeters) between the dorsal aspects of Cl and
C2 when viewed on a lateral survey radiograph. Flex-
With the increased utilization of MR imaging for evalu-
ion of the neck may exacerbate the radiographic fea-
ation of animals with CNS disease, syringomyelia and
tures, but may also exacerbate clirical signs so should
 be performed cautiously if not mirimally. AA instabil-
cord disease processes. Syringomyelia refers to abnor-
ity may also be associated with an abnormal or absent
mal cavities filled with fluid in the substance of the
odontoid process, which also may be evident on sur-
spinal cord. A syrirx refers to one of these cavities. Hy-
vey radiographs. Assessment for associated spinal cord
dromyelia refers to a pathologic condition character-
compression or spinal cord parenchymal abnormalities
ized by accumulation of fluid within an erlarged central
canal of the spinal cord. In both of these instances, the
177 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
M
C
(arrows).
fluid that accumulates is similar, if not identical, to CSF.
are frequently associated with both hydrocephalus and
Some authors refer to hydromyelia as a commuricat-
 syringo-/hydromyelia in dogs. Obstruction ofCSFflow
ing syringomyelia and use the term "syringomyelia" to
 at the foramen magnum and alterations in CSF pressure
 describe all intraspinal abnormal fluid accumulations.
d s  s d   n 
Clinically and diagnostically, it is often difficult to
changes. Similar abnormalities may occur in dogs and
differentiate between syringomyelia and hydromyelia.
     
Therefore, the term "syringo-/hydromyelia" is used.
hydrocephalus and a dilated fourth ventricle may also
 Ultimately, the diagnosis is made at a histologic eval-
 be associated with syringomyelia. The Dandy-Walker
uation. The fluid cavity within the spinal cord in hy-
 syndrome is one such example. With this disease there
 dromyelia is lined by ependymal cells characteristic
is a malformation of the cerebellum resulting in a cyst-
 of the central canal. A syringomyelic cavity, on the
 like abnormality in the cerebellum. The lateral and third
other hand, is located within the spinal cord external
ventricles are commonly concurrently dilated. This is
to the central canal and is lined by glial cells. Again, in
1 a congenital problem assumed to be associated with
many instances, these pathologic processes occur con-
abnormal embryogenesis. Examples of a similar syn-
currently.
 drome have been described in dogs and other ani-
 Malformations of the foramen magnum and infraten-
mals. Spinal cord abnormalities have not been histori-
cally described. However, the spinal cords of affected
4
Figure 2.179. Sagittal T2-weighted MR images from three dogs with varying degrees of AA instability/subluxation (larger
() uoar eupenh erodoo an   aaissaxa pue (smoe alre) (a) pue ()) eauosus paenosse pe (smoie
(smaller arrow).
d pxa aq aa p a s
parenchyma may be indistinct. MR images of the caudal
 -as ym srenq pue shop go rqnu e iounsaa
brain stem and cerebellum (infratentorial area) should
ringomyelia have associated scoliosis (see above under
-se se eauas m pe aue u pd aq
scoliosis).
sociated abnormalities of this portion of the nervous
   n  g  s
o puaredde jou ose Aensn pue uogeneaa sqdeoin
sociated with this disease process (Figures 2.184-2.193).
myelography. If during myelography, contrast enters or
CSF may be normal or reveal nonspecific alterations
is injected into the central canal of the spinal cord, hy-
such as increases in protein concentration, nucleated
dromyelia may be evident. While this is sometimes at-
cells, or both. If syringomyelia results secondary to
tributed to the force of the injection,the enlarged central
myelitis, more obvious evidence of inflammatory CNS
canal is usually present prior to the injection. That is,
disease may be found. CSF should be collected with
the injection is not the cause of the central canal dilation.
 caution or not at all from the cisterna magna region of
If syringomyelia is associated with scoliosis, vertebral
 arimals with syringomyelia as the associated anatom-
deviation may be evident on survey spinal radiographs.
ical abnormalities may result in an increased potential
psat susouaeip ,preps pros, al st suaeu 
 for iatrogenic nervous system injury from misplaced
 for detection of these spinal intramedullary processes 
 needle penetration.
(Figures 2.179-2.183). These cavities are hyperintense
or whiter regions compared to the spinal cord in T2-
Arachnoid Cysts
weighted MR images shown, while in Tl-weighted MR
images these cavities are hypointense or blacker com-
Spinal arachnoid cysts have been reported with increas-
pared to the spinal cord. Often these cavities are more
 ing frequency in dogs. The term "arachnoid cyst" is mis-
conspicuous with T2-weighted images, but the actual
 leading as there are extramedullary expansion and cord
borders of the cavity with the associated spinal cord
 cavitation rather than cyst formation. Additionally.
179 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
C
Figure 2.180. Sagittal T2-weighted MR images from three dogs (A)-(C) with syringomyelia (arrows). In dog (C), the spinal
cord contains diffuse edema, an early stage of syringomyelia.
there is no epithelial liring to the cyst. A congerital
the spinal cord, and may be in a location dorsal to an
etiology for lesion is most likely, although trauma has 
 area of chroric disk protrusion. Clirical signs are reflec-
        
beings and dogs. Scarring and local inflammation of 
 the pia or other meninges may result in the creation of
   s    s 
pockets of CSF accumulation. These cystic cavities may
 cally cystic spinal cord abnormalities have fecal inconti-
expand with each heartbeat and with respirations due
   sd d  s 
to alteration in intracystic pressures. It is also possible
of these dogs, the gross appearance of the lesion is that
that abnormal subarachnoid CSF dynamics contribute
of a focal cicatrix or scarring involving the pia mater
to cyst formation.
and subarachnoid structures. Fibrous adhesion to the
Arachnoid cysts are not apparent on survey spinal
 spinal cord is common. In some instances, these abnor-
radiographs. Classically, an arachnoid cyst appears as
malities resemble arachnoid cysts and may, in fact, be
a teardrop-shaped expansile abnormality of the dorsal,
a variant of this disease. It is also possible that some
 Or occasionally ventral or lateral, subarachnoid space  arachnoid cysts are actually the result of arachnoid and
on myelography. With CT or MR, a similar expansile,
pial scarring, adhesion, and fibrosis from an inflamma-
fluid-filled structure with a teardrop shape (on a sagittal
tory or chroric irritation etiology. Diagnosis has been
view) is seen (Figures 2.194-2.199). With MR, this cys-
 made with MR imaging to reveal the location and char-
tic structure is hypointense (darker) and hyperintense
 acteristics of these lesions and surgical biopsy of the
(whiter) relative to the spinal cord parenchyma on T1-
offending tissue.
and T2-weighted MR sequences, respectively. CSF may
be normal or reveal nonspecific alterations associated
Neoplasia
with increases in protein concentration, nucleated cells,
or both. Surgical biopsy confirms the type of abnormal-
Spinal neoplasms are often categorized iritially by the
ity present.
anatomical area, in relation to the dura and spinal
 We have seen a number of Pug dogs with focal cys-
cord, of spinal involvement. Tumors are grouped into
tic abnormalities of the dorsal and lateral subarachnoid
space. Lesions are usually in the thoracolumbar area of
tradural), within the dura but outside the spinal cord
Figure 2.181. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from immediately adjacent cervical spinal cord levels from a dog wifh
syringomyelia(arrows).
Figure 2.182. (A) Transverse T1-weighted and (B) T2-weighted MR images from immediately adjacent cervical spinal cord
181 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
B
Figure 2.183.  Transverse T2-weighted (A) and T1-weighted (B) MR images from the same spinal cord levels from a dog with
syringomyelia (arrows) showing the differing appearance of the cavity on each sequence.
Figure 2.184. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a healthy dog at the foramen magnum level.
C
D
   s  s a s   s     
fossa/foramenmagnuumregion.
183 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
 s   ()   s  (  ()) s    t 
syringomyelia (small arrows) and abnormalities of the fourth ventricle (larger arrows).
SC5
SE/M
SL6
arrow), syringomyelia (smaller arrows) and abnormalifies of the fourth ventricle (medium arrow).
184 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
Figure 2.188. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog with a caudal displacement of the cerebellum (largest arrow),
syringomyelia (smaller arrows), and a protrusion of the C2-3 intervertebral disk (medium arrow).
B
Figure 2. 189. Sagiftal T1-weighted MR images from two dogs ((A) and (B) with crowding and malformation of the foramen
magnum region (arrows).(See Color Plate 2.189A.)
185 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
SE/IM
9
C2
Figure 2.190. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a sheep with a meningoencephalocele (arrow).
三
401/14
715
g:R10.5(COl)
2x512
B
the foramen magnum region.
Figure 2.192.  Transverse T2-weighted MR images from a Cavalier King Charles spariel with syringomyelia (arrows).
Figure 2.193. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image (A) from a normal dog showing fruncation artifact (arrows). Transverse T2-
187PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
((    m          (   
B
 Figure 2.195. Sagittal (A) T2-weighted and myelogram effect (B) MR images from a dog with a cervical arachnoid cyst
(arrows).
Figure2.196.
 Transverse T2-weighted MR images from two dogs ((A) and (B)) with complex or multiple arachnoid cysts
(arrows).
189 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
() s   a  e  sn   (   ()   a
associated with a chronic intervertebral disk protrusion.
(sm) ss re e m  e e  s  piam- (a) sa p ()   n
associated with a chronic intervertebral disk protrusion.
 graphs. Nerve sheath tumors, however, may involve ex-
iting peripheral nerves within the intervertebral foram-
 ina. The foramen where the abnormal nerve is exiting
may be erlarged due to associated bone atrophy and
visible on survey radiographs.
Myelography is used to outline the subarachnoid
 space and determine if spinal cord compression or ex-
 pansion is present. With extradural tumors, one or both
of the contrast columns may be deviated axially (to-
ward the center of the spinal canal). Clues to the pres-
 ence of an extradural tumor on myelography include
compression of the spinal cord primarily overlying a
vertebral body rather than the intervertebral disk space
and arnular compressive lesions of the dura. These
same myelographic features may also be seen with
IVDD and other spinal cord compressive diseases, and
therefore should not be considered pathognomoric for
extradural spinal tumor.
With intradural but extramedullary tumor, myelo-
graphic spinal imaging will often result in a charac-
 teristic pattern of expansion of the subarachnoid space
and outlining of the tumor in negative shadow referred
-xa ose A si yeqs aarn ,'an gos, e 5e 0
Figure 2.199.  Transverse FLAIR MR image from the same
 Pug dog as in Figure 2.198 showing the hypointense arach-
pand on either side of where the nerve traverses the
noid cyst (arrow).
dura, giving these tumors a "dumbbell-shaped" ap-
pearance. Conversely, expansion of the dural tube in
90° opposed radiographic views is most indicative of
proper (intradural/extramedullary), or arising within
an intramedullary or intradural lesion.
the spinal cord parenchyma proper (intramedullary).
Advanced imaging studies such as computed CT and
 - o pe ss m n uada
 MR imaging have greatly improved the ability to deter-
 gressiveness, a tumor can expand and extend from one
mine the location and extent of any spinal tumor. With
of these strict anatomical areas to involve another. This
CT, a myelogram is often performed initially to out-
 is most often seen with peripheral nerve sheath tu-
line the subarachnoid space. In some instances, a series
mors that may begin in an extradural location but may
 of scans are performed before and after intravenous in-
 traverse the dura into the intradural/extramedullary
jection of an iodinated contrast material. Abnormalities
   s   a  '
disrupting the blood-spinal cord or blood-nerve barrier
sd  s  s e  si
 may become more apparent with this technique. Loss
Qqderlonaau 'sqdenorpen peuds faans Susn apeu
of integrity of these barriers or increased vascularity
or advanced imaging (CT, MR). Tumors involving
 may result in an area of increased uptake (whiteness)
the vertebral bone may be evident on survey radio-
after intravenous contrast enhancement. Contrast en-
 graphs as osteolytic and/or osteoproliferative pro-
hancement is most often seen with tumors, vascular
cesses. These bony changes need to be differentiated
 abnormalities, and inflammatory foci; however, it may
from diskospondylitis and vertebral body osteomyeli-
also be seen with intervertebral disk disease.
tis. Classically, vertebral tumors donot traverse the joint
 MR imaging affords superior anatomical evaluation
of soft tissue structures, and therefore is usually excel-
adjacent one. Vertebral tumors are found, however, to
lent in providing detail as to the extent and location of
invade adjacent vertebral bodies in some instances. Ex-
spinal tumors (Figures 2.200-2.214). Tumors may have
tradural compression of the spinal cord overlying the
a variety of appearances with MR imaging, and need
vertebral body rather than the intervertebral disk space
to be differentiated from other spinal disease processes
 is suspicious for, but not pathognomonic of neoplastic
such as intervertebral disk herriation. Many epidural
disease.
 tumors invade the surrounding vertebral body before
 Soft tissue tumors of the spinal cord or peripheral
impinging on the spinalcord. Thus, bony destruction of
the vertebrae may be a clue to an underlying neoplastic
191 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.200. Lateral cervical radiograph (A) and sagiftal, T2-weighted MR image (B) from a dog with an extradural tfumor.
(C) Transverse T1-weighted MR image following infravenous confrast administrafion from the same dog showing confrast
enhancement of the vertebrae (larger arrow) and within the spinal canal (smaller arrow).
B
Figure 2.201. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image (A) from a dog with a dorsally located extradural tumor (arrows). Sagiftal
T2-weighted MR image (B) from a dog with multiple vertebral masses (arrows).
extradural tumor showing contrast enhancement of the mass (arrows).
Figure 2.203. Lateral cervical radiograph (A), sagiftal (B), and transverse (C) T2-weighted MR images from a cat with a
vertebraltumor(arrows).
193PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
Figure 2.204. Sagiftal (A) and transverse (B) T2-weighted MR images from a dog wifth a vertebral body fumor (arrows).
Transverse T1-weighted MR images from similar levels before (C) and following (D) infravenous contrast administration from
194 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
Figure 2.205. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from a dog at the cervical (A) and thoracolumbar (B) levels with mulfiple
cartilaginous exostoses (arrows).
B
Figure 2.206. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image (A) from a dog with an infradural but extramedullary spinal fumor (arrows).
from the same dog showing contrast enhancement of the mass (arrow).
195 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
Figure 2.208. Sagiftal (A) and transverse (B) T2-weighted MR images from a dog wifh a calcified meningioma (arrows)
Figure 2.209.  Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a dog with an extradural nerve sheath tumor (arrow).
196 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
C6
E/M
L9
Figure 2.210.  Transverse T1-weighted MR image following intravenous confrast admiristrafion from a dog showing contrast
enhancement of a cervical meningioma (arrow).
Figure 2.211. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog with an intramedullary spinal tfumor (arrow).
197 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
()  s exi q  r m o e e () a  im   a
 Histologic diagnosis was a nephroblastoma. Transverse T1-weighted MR images from adjacent levels from the same dog as
 in (A) before (B) and following (C) intravenous contrast administration showing contrast enhancement of the tumor (arrow).
enhancement of the tumor (arrow).
198 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
B
      s n   e  n    )  s
contrast administration showing no contrast enhancement in the region of the previous fumor (arrows).
199 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
MR images as they may have litle contrast difference
with respect to the adjacent spinal cord and may be pri-
marily located lateral to the spinal cord. Intravenous
 gadolirium administration usually results in enhance-
in Tl-weighted images. Dorsal and transverse contrast-
tumors.
 Intramedullary tumors generally cause the spinal
cord to be expanded. In Tl-weighted images, most in-
tramedullary neoplasms have diminished signal inten-
sity with respect to the spinal cord. In T2-weighted im-
ages, they usually have a brighter (hyperintense) signal
compared to spinal cord, which often reflects associated
spinal cord edema or hemorrhage. Most tumors have a
gins between tumor and surrounding normal cord.
CSF collected caudal to the location of a spinal tu-
 mor may show nonspecific increases in nucleated cells
and protein. CSF can also be normal. Classically, CSF
will show increases in protein content without con-
B
current increases in nucleated cell counts. Depending
Figure 2.214. Sagittal T2-weighted MR images from the
d   r e  as  
same dog as in Figure 2.212A before (A) and following surgi
sion, CSF may show a variety of abnormalities includ-
cal removal (B) of the fumor (arrow).
ing increases in protein content, increases in nucleated
cell counts, or evidence of hemorrhage (with RBCs and
process. In general, in Tl-weighted images, marrow sig-
ated cell counts in CSF are a reflection of inflammation,
 nal should be roughly equivalent to disk material. In
degeneration, or combination of these. Lymphocytes
 cases of diffuse marrow involvement, the disk spaces
 and monocytes are the predominant cell types present,
will show greater signal intensity than the vertebral
however, neutrophils may also occasionally be present.
marrow.
Xanthochromia may accompany associated spinal or
Tumors are typically vascular and invasive, disrupt-
 subarachnoid hemorrhage. Rarely, tumor cells will be
ing the normal integrity of the BBB. Thus, intravenous
 evident on CSF cytologic analysis. This is most com-
injection of a contrast agent generally results in some
morly found in instances of lymphoma, ependymoma
degree of either diffuse or focal enhancement in the area
and carcinoma.
affected by tumor. Contrast enhancement (intravenous
gadolirium-DTPA) does not precisely define the tu-
mor borders as neoplastic cells are generally found out-
Multiple Cartilaginous Exostoses
side the enhanced portion of the mass. Gadolirium en-
 hancement of tumors is inconsistent but, if present, may
Multiple cartilaginous exostoses are proliferations of
support a diagnosis of tumor. Other extradural disease
bone and cartilage that are thought to result from aber-
processes, such as intervertebral disk herriation, may
 rant growth displaced chondrocytes from the metaphy-
also show contrast enhancement on MR (Figure 2.135).
 seal growth plates of bone. Subqeuently, this disease
Contrast erhancement characteristics alone, therefore,
 is most often seen in younger animals (<18 months
       
of age). Dogs, cats, as well as other species includ-
neoplasia.
 ing humans have been reported with this disease. The
Intradural, extramedullary tumors often have a
bony and cartilaginous proliferations often are nu-
"golf-tee" appearance in the subarachnoid space sim-
merous and can affect the long bones, ribs, or ver-
ilar to the appearance of these tumors on myelogra-
 tebrae. The bony protuberances may be palpable. If
phy. This golf-tee appearance is most evident in T2-
 this bony proliferation affects the vertebrae, varying
weighted images as the CSF creating this appearance is
degrees of spinal pain, paresis, and /or paralysis may
white. These tumors may not be as obvious in sagittal
result. Radiographs of the affected bones often show
200 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
proliferations of bone that are smooth, contoured, ir-
tis, including intramedullary spinal cord swelling (hy-
regular, multilobulated.
perintense signal), hemorrhage, or contrast enhance-
With MR imaging, these vertebral lesions are expan-
ment. Multifocal discrete, anatomical lesions are often
sile, irregular massses, and often involve the articular
 present within the nervous system, and may be espe-
facets (Figure 2.205). The center of the mass has sig-
cially conspicuous after intravenous contrast medium
 nal characteristics similar to medullary bone. A catilage
 administration suggesting alterations in the BBB to the
 cerebral vasculature. Occasionally, myelitis will appear
may be present at the periphery of the lesion. Surgical
as a focal mass lesion on MR spinal imaging mim-
 biopsy is necessary to definitively confirm the lesion.
icking a spinal tumor or hematoma. Surgical biopsy.
with aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal culturing of any
collected lesions should provide for a more defiritive
diagnosis.
Infectious/Inflammatory Diseases
Myelitis, encephalomyelitis, or meningoencephalo-
myelitis can result from a variety of infectious and ron-
Diskospondylitis
infectious causes. Inflammation may occur anywhere
along the spinal cord and can be focal or diffuse. In
Diskospondylitis is an infection in the IVD space and
many animals with encephalitis and meringitis, the car-
surrounding vertebral end plates and bodies. This dis-
dinal signs of systemic inflammatory processes such as
ease can occur focally in any area of the spinal col-
the presence of a fever and increases in white blood
umn or be present in multiple intervertebral disk sites.
cells in the leukogram may not be found, as localized
The most common class of infectious organisms as-
 inflammatory disease in the CNS may not elicit a sys-
sociated with this disease is bacteria. Specific bacteria
 temic inflammatory response.
As some myelitis can result in or be associated with
lococcus intermedius, Brucella canis, and Escherichia coli.
structural changes in the spinal cord, spinal cord imag-
Rarely, fungal infections such as paecilomycosis and as-
pu jxa a n u rd aq  a
 pergillosis may be causative. Importantly, in situations
character of any regions of spinal cord inflammation
 of diskospondylitis, there are usually underlying pro-
(Figures 2.215 and 2.216). Survey radiographs are nor-
 cesses that predispose to persistent bacteremia within
mal in cases of myelifis. Myelography may reveal a
 the body This may be due to persistent or recurrent in-
fections in parts of the body (such as the skin, urinary
myelography, an irregular distribution of contrast agent
tract, and prostate). Additionally, animals may have
in the subarachnoid space, or even contrast media be-
 suppressed or otherwise abnormal immune responses
that allow for persistent or unresolved bacteremias to
seen. Computed tomographic scarning may show ev-
 continue. Immunosuppresion is commonly the result
idence of spinal cord disruption; however, MR imag-
 Of exogenously administered corticosteroids.
ing is more likely to show alterations in spinal cord
 Vertebral body osteomyelitis may result in similar
parenchyma with myelitis. A variety of abnormalities
clirical features. When present in the midlumbar ver-
may be evident on MR spinal imaging in cases of myeli-
tebrae, osteomyelitis is often associated with a foreign
-s0 jo saseo aiaaas u ume ssia e jo uogianu Apog
teomyelitis or diskospondylitis, a fistula may form from
the vertebrae to the skin through the muscle and sub-
cutaneous tissues. In the lumbar area, this fistula often
is present in the lateral flank.
Diskospondylitis is usually evident on survey radio-
of lysis of the end plates of the vertebral bodies result
 in an irregular intervertebral disk, vertebral end plate
margin. Within the surrounding vertebral structures,
there is often sclerosis. Very early (i.e., <14 days) in
 the disease course, no radiographic abnormalities may
Figure 2.215. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog
be apparent. In the earlier stages of diskospondylitis,
with inflammafion of the cerebellum and the cervical spinal
the intervertebral disk space appears widened as the
cord (arrows).
 disease erodes the vertebral end plate. As sigrificant
201 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.216.
Sagiftal (A) and transverse (B) T2-weighted MR images from a dog with inflammation of the cervical spinal
cord (arrows).
amounts of bone are damaged over time, the adjacent
ing trauma. Grass awn and porcupine quill migration
vertebrae may collapse resulting in decreases in the in-
may enter the spinal canal and result in focal infection.
tervertebral disk space. In rare instances, this disease
Actinomyces and Nocardia may be present in these lo-
may predispose one to vertebral luxation and fracture.
 cations. Fungal granulomas may also occur in the spinal
These pathologic vertebral changes result in further col-
canal. In some instances of diskospondylitis, the in-
lapse and malaligrment of the spine.
fectious process may extend from the disk into the
 Osteomyelitis can involve the vertebrae. On survey
perispinal tissues and fat. Diagnosis is supported by
radiographs of affected animals, varying combinations
finding evidence of a compressive (most commonly ex-
   nsd are d  p sisi n
terations primarily involve the vertebral body. The
2 ography, CT, or MR studies. CSF may show evidence of
location of the vertebrae involvement (body vs. end
septic inflammation. If the abscess occurs extradurally.
plate) is used in differentiating vertebral osteomyelitis
 nonspecific increases in protein concentration and nu-
from diskospondylitis. Osteomyelitis results in combi-
cleated cell counts can occur. Occasionally, CSF will be
nations of bone lysis, new bone proliferation, and scle-
 normal.
rosis. It is common that the vertebral body, lamina,
facets, or dorsal spinous processes are also involved.
 In areas where grass awn migrations are endemic, os-
External Trauma to the Spinal Cord
teomyelitis is often found in the ventral aspect of the
Spinal cord trauma is relatively common in small ani-
middle lumbar (L2 through L4) vertebrae. This area is
 mals. This occurs either from exogenous or endogenous
associated with the attachment of the diaphragm (and
 possible termination of foreign body migration) and is
 mon exogenous cause of trauma to the spine in small
a common place for abscessation to occur.
animals, with falls, trauma from falling objects, and
Vertebral diskospondylitis and osteomyelitis may
projectile missile damage also occurring. Intervertebral
also be evident in MR studies (Figures 2.217-2.220).
 disk extrusion remains the most common endogenous
In the T2-weighted images, an increase in signal (hy-
 perintense) is seen in the involved vertebral bodies or
cause.
 MR imaging is used to establish the presence of as-
intervertebral disk area. Disruption of the low signal
 sociated acute spinal pathology (Figures 2.221-2.224).
end plates in both Tl and T2 images is a hallmark
When examination with MR is abnormal, the area af-
of diskospondylitis/osteomyelitis that enables distinc-
 fected may then be accessed by CT, if further clar-
tion of this entity from neoplasms, which rarely breach
ification of vertebral involvement is necessary CSF
the end plates but frequently and extensively involve
collected caudal to the lesion may show increases in
the marrow. Contrast erhancement is often present in
 the affected intervertebral disk space.
 RBCs, xanthochromia, and erythrophagocytosis. In-
 creases in nucleated cells and protein concentration
Spinal abscessation is rare in dogs and cats but can
 result from hematogenous infection or local penetrat-
may be present with concurrent spinal cord inflamma-
tion (Figures 2.221-2.224).
B
Figure 2.217.  Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from two dogs (A) and (B) with diskospondylifis (arrows).
1
C
(arrows) of the LS region.
203 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
ulated cause of the infarction centers around fibrocar-
tilage material, similar to that found in intervertebral
disks, entering the vascular system and resulting in
the embolization of the spinal cord vasculature. How
this fibrocartilage enters the vascular system is unclear.
Theories include disk extrusion into the vascular sys-
tem, either directly or through neovascularization of the
IVD associated with disk degeneration. It has also been
suggested that the fibrocartilage actually arises from
within the vascular system and subsequently becomes
dislodged. A reasonable pathophysiologic explanation
for this disease has been elusive.
 Diagnosis is supported by the appropriate clinical
signs and exclusion of other disease processes. Defini-
tive diagnosis can orly be made at necropsy. Myelogra-
phy is often normal or may show cord swelling during
the acute phases of the disease. Computed tomographic
assessment may show similar changes as with myelog-
raphy. An intramedullary spinal cord lesion is usually
 ds p      
B
(Figures 2.225-2.230). This abnormality usually has the
Figure 2.219. Sagiftal T1-weighted MR images from a dog
 appearance of edema or fluid (hyperintense or whiter
before (A) and following (B) infravenous confrast admiristra-
signal in T2-weighted studies). The abnormality within
fion showing contrast enhancement of the intervertebral disk
the spinal cord is usually focal but may extend for a few
space with diskospondylitis (arrow).
disk spaces in the vicirity. These lesions may also con-
tain imaging features suggestive of spinal cord hemor-
rhage. CSF, collected caudal to the lesion, may be nor-
Fibrocartilaginous Emboli
mal or contain increases in nucleated cells and protein
Ischemic myelopathy, or fibrocartilaginous emboli
 A predisposition to formation of thrombi should be in-
vestigated with platelet counts, bleeding times, coagu-
(FCE), is a disease entity diagnosed with increasing fre-
quency in dogs over the last 15 years. This disease has
lation profiles, and antithrombin Ill measurements.
been thought to result secondary to vascular thrombo-
The antemortem diagnosis of FCE is somewhat con-
 founded by the fact that similar clirical, myelographic,
 s   s n n n  s
and CSF findings may occur in acute, noncompressive
   e s   
intervertebral disk herriation, vascular infarction, fo-
cal spinal hemorrhage, or myelitis. Intervertebral disk
"explosions" have been previously reported in dogs.
In these situations an otherwise normal disk is sub-
jected to such acute and extreme pressure that the nu-
cleus pulposus is rapidly transported into the spinal
canal and impacts the spinal cord. The disk material,
    s ns s 
impact with the spinal cord is dissipated within the
spinal canal and does not result in persistent spinal cord
compression. The spinal injury related to these types of
disk extrusions results more from spinal cord confusion
than displacement of nucleus pulposus into the spinal
cord parenchyma. In these dogs, in addition to the focal
spinal cord edema and injury evident in MR studies, the
associated nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral disk
Figure 2.220. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog
space may be distorted and irregular compared to ad-
with vertebral body osteomyelitis due to fungal infection
jacent or normal disk spaces (Figures 2.226-2.230).
(arrow).
204 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
205 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
C
Figure 2.222. Transverse T2-weighted MR images from three dogs with external spinal trauma and associated fracfure and/or
associated inframedullary MR signal abnormalities.
Spina! Cord Hemorrhage or Hematoma
bleeding disorder. A thorough examination of the body
for petechia is important, including the mucous mem-
Spinal cord hemorrhage or hematoma may result in
 branes (especially of the penis, prepuce, and vulva) and
clinical signs of spinal cord dysfunction (Figures 2.231-
the retina. Pallor, low-grade heart murmurs, weakness,
spinal cord. In most instances, extradural hematoma
with larger amounts of bleeding into body cavities. Tho-
occurs from trauma, intervertebral disk extrusion, or
racic auscultation for pleural fluid and abdominal pal-
underlying coagulopathies, platelet dysfunction, or
pation for hemoperitoneum is important. Radiographs
 vasculopathies. Extradural hematomas often appear
and ultrasound may help when the physical exami-
as compressive spinal abnormalities. Intramedullary 
 hematomas have also been reported. In rarer instances,
nation is urrewarding but large amounts of internal
bleeding are suspected. Remember that large amounts
focal spinal cord hemorrhage may result secondary to
of blood can be lost through the gastrointestinal tract,
lumbar CSF collection (Figure 2.234).
and examination of the stool for hematochezia or me-
Hemorrhagic CNS complications should be sus-
lena is important.
 pected in any animal with acute neurologic signs and
Complete blood cell count, with special attention to
associated signs of either thrombocytopenia or coagu-
 red cell numbers and platelet counts, is important espe-
lopathy. In some instances, the nervous system signs
 cially for the diagnosis of anemia and thrombocytope
will occur prior to any obvious systemic signs of a
ria. Specific coagulation testing (bleeding time, PT, PTT,
() pe (a) ()) sop om y sa  patoam- ((a) a) es pe (() ()) ydor iaie  an
(D)) with spinal fractures (arrows).
Figure 2.224. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog with intramedullary MR signal abnormality associated with a gun
shot injuury (arrow).
207PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.225. Sagiftal (A) and transverse (B) T2-weighted MR image from a dog with a fibrocartilagenous emboli (arrows).
Figure 2.226. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog with an acute intervertebral disk nucleus pulposus extrusion. Note
arrow).
A
B
C2-3. Note the abnormal MR signal of the nucleus pulposus (small arrow) and the associated infraspinal cord signal abnormality
Figure 2.228. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog with an acute intervertebral disk nucleus pulposus exfrusion in the
thoracolumbar area (small arrow). Note the extensive abnormal MR infraspinal cord signal abnormality (larger arrows).
B
Figure 2.229. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image (A) from a dog wifth an acute intervertebral disk nucleus pulposus extrusion
in the thoracolumbar area (small arrow). Note the extensive abnormal MR exfradural cord signal abnormality (larger arrows).
( ( ( () o dss m ( 7  sd asa an y sia a ms  m s  ()
and (E) (3).
209 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
Figure 2.229. (Continued) Note the normal nuclear signal of the intervertebral disks cranial (C) and cauidal (E) compared to
the abnormal one (D). Also note the extradural abnormal signal in (D) (arrows).
B
C
Figure 2.230. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image (A) from a dog with an acute intervertebral disk nucleus pulposus extrusion
into the spinal cord. Note the abnormal MR signal of the nucleus pulposus (smaller arrow) and the extensive abnormal MR cord
  s     )   ()   (   s
the abnormal spinal cord at the level of the intervertebral disk extrusion Note the hypointense curvilinear abnormal signal
wifhin the spinal cord in the T1-weighted study which was intraspinal abnormal intervertebral disk material.
Figure 2.232. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog wifth diffuse spinal hemorrhage (arrows).
211 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
E
Figure 2.234.  Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image (A) from a dog with intramedullary spinal abnormality subsequent to a lumbar
 e   s n  ()  )        
 Transverse T1-weighted MR images before (D) and following infravenous confrast admiristrafion (E) from the same dog af
adjacent levels.
212 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
FDPs) is also commonly evaluated. Biochemical evi-
most common. Some of this motion may occur from
within the normal structures of the patient such as CSF
 proteinuria should be documented.
 pulsation, blood flow through vessels, respiratory mo-
With most vascular diseases of the spinal cord sur-
tion, and cardiac movements. Wrapping is where struc-
tures from outside the field of view are seemingly su-
 reveal evidence of extradural or intramedullary ab-
perimposed upon the region of interest. This is most
normalities that distort the subarachnoid space. With
often the result of aliasing where samples from a high
extradural compression, the subarachnoid columns
frequency signal are not distinguished from samples of
may be distorted inward toward the center of the
a much lower frequency. Flow of blood in vessels in or
spinal canal with myelographic evaluation. With in-
around the spine, and especially the venous sinus, may
tramedullary hematoma, the spinal cord appears fo-
result in confusing MR imaging characteristics. In gen-
 cally enlarged.
       , 
Clarification of the cause of the clinical signs often
ate a "flow void." In other instances, depending upon
 requires advanced spinal imaging such as MR imag-
the direction and velocity of flow, iso- or hyperintense
 ing (Figures 2.231-2.234). On MR, hemorrhage less than
signal from vessels may result. Artifacts associated with
12-24 h old may not be distinguishable from vasogenic
 blood flowing in arteries or veins around the spine may
edema. In the circulating blood, hemoglobin fluctuates
result in artifacts superimposed upon normal nervous
between the oxyhemoglobin state and the deoxyhe-
tissue elements as well. Motion of flow of artifacts oc-
moglobin state. The heme iron in both oxyhemoglobin
curs along the phase-encoding axis.
and deoxyhemoglobin form is in the ferrous Fe2+
+ state.
 Chemical shift artifact occurs along the frequency-
When hemoglobin is removed from the high-oxygen
 encoding direction and results in misregistrafion be-
envirorment of the circulation, the heme iron under-
tween fat and water tissues. This misregistratior most
 goes oxidative denaturation to the ferric state (Fe3+)
often results in a hypointense (darker) contour be-
forming methemoglobin. Continued oxidative denat-
tween these tissues and is most often present imme-
uration forms ferric hemichromes (hemosiderin). As
diately adjacent to the spinal cord. This artifact can
RBCs break down, the various forms of hemoglobin
be confused with spinal cord compression, however,
 have changing paramagnetic properties influencing the
the discrete crescent shape associated with this arti-
appearance of the clot in the various images (Tl- and
fact is usually apparent. Chemical shift artifact may
T2-weighted). Besides the form of hemoglobin present,
u i jo s  m yuee a a
     e  s  
strength.
ing on the operating field strength, the type of sig-
Truncation artifacts are apparent as discrete lines that
nal the operator chooses, and the techrique (Tl- vs.
run parallel with the spinal cord and can be seen in
T2-weighted). Hemorrhage may also vary in appear-
    s   
 ance depending on where the bleed occurred, for ex-
weighted images and occur usually at fat-CSF inter-
ample in the tissue (subdural vs. intraparenchymal vs.
faces. These artifactual lines many mimic either central
subarachnoid).
spinal cord gray matter or, more commonly, the central
canal (Figure 2.193). Depending upon the width of this
artifact, a misdiagnosis of hydromyelia may result. An
Artifacts
absence of this apparent abnormality on the transverse
 The common artifacts that influence the MR images of
 image supports its artifactural nature.
more standard pulse sequences have been discussed
Finally, another important factor that influences the
previously in Chapter 4 (Figures 2.235-2.248). Artifacts 
utility of an MR examination of a clirically affected pa-
of image acquisition may result in misdiagnosis of clin-
tient centers around overall image quality Poor qual-
ical disease. The more common artifacts thatresult with
ity MR examinations result in an inability to gleam
spinal imaging are discussed further.
useful clinical information (Figure 2.249). Addition-
"Ghosts" are replica images that occur in the direc-
 ally, inappropriate neuroanatomical localization may
tion of the phase encoding. While this type of artifact
result in misinterpretation of MR apparent abnormali-
may result for numerous reasons, motion may be the
ties (Figure 2.250)
213 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
Figure 2.235. Sagiftal and parasagiftal T2-weighted MR images from a dog. Some of the parasagiftal slices show the tangenfial
nafure of the slice plane (arrows).
214 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
Figure2.236.
.Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog showing the tangenfial nafure of the slice which caused distortion
Of the image (arrow).
B
Figure 2.237. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images from a dog. The initially posiftioned image (A) showing the tangential nafure
of the slice (arrow). Once the animal was more appropriately posifioned (B), the true lesion can more easily be idenfified (arrow).
215 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
TOTMTECAN
E:1a0121
1H18
8
：16
B
Figure 2.238. Sagiftal T2-weighted MRimages ((A) and (B))
from a dog showing the potenftial differing angles for the
transverse slice plane (lines).
B
Figure 2.239. Sagiftal (A) and transverse (B) T2-weighted
C
D
 mus sop e ug sas  piam- (a) pue () asiaan pe (a) esred () es hz an
differing appearance to the sagiftal and parasagiftal images due to the differing angulation of the slice place (C) and (D),lines).
217 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
CAN
WSU IMAGING
AN
WSUIMAG
0403
RESTAS,KO
103
PRESTA
T1COR
hh
Feb04M102
T1COR
1994 Feb 04
2005Jur
8(CO)
ImgTm:15:36:36
(CO)
6p
LinDC
M/IdID
_in:DCM /IdID
293
DFOV:40.0x40.
810
DFOV:40.0
B
C
Figure 2.241. Lateral radiograph (A) image from a dog with gold bead implants along the spine. Dorsal plane, T1-weighted
 MR images (B) and (C)) from the same dog at adjacent levels showing artifact produced by the gold beads (arrows).
F小M
C
D
Figure 2.242. Lateral radiograph (A) image from a dog with surgical screw implants in the cervical region. Sagiftal plane
artifact produced by the BB (arrow).
219PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
F
Figure 2.242.  (Continued) Lateral radiographic view (E) from a dog with a gun shot lesion in the lumbar spinal region. Sagiffal
25￥2
Figure 2.243. Sagiftal T2-weighted MR image from a dog
dorsal cranial thoracic region. The arfifact shown is the result
of the metal within the chip (arrow).
B
Figure 2.245. Transverse T2-weighted MR image (A) from
a dog with chemical shift artifact (arrow). Transverse T2-
weighted MR image (B) taken from the same dog after chang-
ing the phase and frequency direction when performing the
image acquisition and subsequent elimination of the arfifact.
Figure 2.244. Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a
dog with chemical shift artifact (arrow).
Figure 2.246.Transverse T2-weighted MR image from a
dog with a wrapping artifact (arrows).
221 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 2.247.Dorsal MR images from a dog with a motion artifact (arrow).
E/M
E
Figure 2.248. Sagiftal T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) MR images from a dog with a tumor (arrow) at L5-6 level. The
tumor is easily missed on the T1-weighted image.
Figure 2.249. Sagiftal MR image from a dog, which is poor quality making objective assessment difficult.
B
arrow). The dog had a previous missed myelitis ((B), arrows).
223 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
MR BIBLIOGRAPHY
Carlson GD, Gorden CD, Oliff HS, Pillai JJ, and LaMarna
JC. 2003. Sustained spinal cord compression: part I: time
Dogs
dependent effect on long-term pathophysiology. J Bone
Joint Surg Am 85-A(1):86-94.
Abramson CJ, Garosi L, Platt SR, Dennis R, and MeConnell
Cauzinille L and Kormegay JN. 1992. Acquired syringomyelia
 JF. 2005. Magnetic resonance imaging appearance of sus-
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201(8):1225-1228.
pected ischemic myelopathy in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultra-
Cerda-Gonzalez S and Olby NJ. 2006. Fecal incontinence as-
sound 46(3):225-229.
Adams WH. 1999. The spine. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
disk extrusion in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 228(2):230-235.
14(3):148-159.
Chambers JN, Selcer BA, Sullivan SA, and Coates JR 1997.
Allam MW, Lee DG, Nulsen FE, and Forfune EA. 1952.
 Diagnosis of lateralized lumbosacral disk herriation with
 The anatomy of the brachial plexus of the dog. Anat Rec
114:173-180.
33(4):296-299.
al-Meffy O, Harkey HL, Marawi I, Haines DE, Peeler DF,
Chen AV, Bagley RS, West CL, Gavin PR, and Tucker RL. 2005.
Wilner HI, et al. 1993. Experimental chronic compressive
 Fecal incontinence and spinal cord abnormalities in seven 
cervical myelopathy. J Neurosurg 79(4):550-561.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227(12):1945-1951, 1928.
An HS, Andreshak TG, Nguyen C, Williams A, and Daniels D.
Cherubini GB, Cappello R, Lu D, Targett M, Wessmann A, and 
1995. Carn we distinguish between berign versus malignant
Mantis P. 2004. MRI findings in a dog with discospondylitis
compression fracfures of the spine by magnetic resonance
caused by Bordetella species. J Small Anim Pract 45(8):417--
imaging? Spine 20(16):1776-1782.
420. Errafum in: 2004 J Small Arim Pract 45(9):vii.
 An HS and Masuda K. 2006. Relevance of in vitro and in vivo
Chuma A, Kitahara H, Minami S, Goto S, Takaso M, and
models for intervertebral disc degeneration. J Bone Joint
 Moriya H. 1997. Strucfural scoliosis model in dogs with ex-
 Surg Am 88(Suppl. 2):88-94.
 perimentally induced syringomyelia. Spine 22(6):589-594.
An HS, Nguyen C, Haughton VM, Ho KC, and Hasegawa
Churcher RK and Child G. 2000. Chiari 1/syringomyelia com-
 T. 1994. Gadolinium-enhancement characteristics of mag-
plex in a King Charles Spariel. Aust Vet J 78(2):92-95.
Coates JR. 2000. Intervertebral disk disease. Vet Clin North
  5   5 3 
Am Small Anim Pract 30(1):77—110.
discussion 2095.
da Costa RC, Parent JM, Parflow G, Dobson H, Holmberg
Armbrust LJ, Hoskinson JJ, Biller DS, and Wilkerson M. 2004.
DL, and Lamarre J. 2006. Morphologic and morphomet-
Low-field magnetic resonance imaging of bone marrow in
ric magnetic resonance imaging feafures of Doberman Pin-
the lumbar spine, pelvis, and femur in the adult dog. Vet
schers with and without clinical signs of cervical spondy-
Radiol Ultrasound 45(5):393-401.
lomyelopathy. Am J Vet Res 67(9):1601-1612.
Benninger MI, Seiler GS, Robinson LE, Ferguson SJ, Bonel
da Costa RC, Parent JM, Poma R, and Duque MC. 2004. Cer-
HM, Busato AR, et al. 2004. Three-dimensional motion pat-
vical syringohydromyelia secondary to a brainstem fumor
tern of the caudal lumbar and lumbosacral porfions of the
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 225(7):1061-1064, 1048.
vertebral column of dogs. Am J Vet Res 65(5):544-551.
da Costa RC, Poma R, Parent JM, Partlow G, and Monteith
Benninger MI, Seiler GS, Robinson LE, Ferguson SJ, Bonel
G. 2006. Correlation of motor evoked potentials with mag-
HM, Busato AR, et al. 2006. Effects of anatomic conforma-
netic resonance imaging and neurologic findings in Dober-
 tion on three-dimensional motion of the caudal lumbar and
man Pinschers wifh and without signs of cervical spondy-
lumbosacral portions of the vertebral column of dogs. Am
lomyelopathy. Am J Vet Res 67(9):1613-1620.
J Vet Res 67(1):43-50.
Daniel GB, Edwards DF, Harvey RC, and Kabalka GW. 1995.
Besalti O, Ozak A, Pekcan Z, Tong S, Eminaga S, and Tacal T.
Commuricating hydrocephalus in dogs with congenitalcil-
 2005. The role of extruded disk material in thoracolumbar
iary dysfunction. Dev Neurosci 17(4):230-235.
Davies ES, Fransson BA, and Gavin PR 2004. A confus-
Can Vet J 46(9):814-820.
ing magnetic resonance imaging observation complicating
Besalti O, Pekcan Z, Sirin YS, and Erbas G. 2006. Magnetic
surgery for a dermoid cyst in a Rhodesian Ridgeback. Vet
resonance imaging findings in dogs with thoracolumbar
Radiol Ultrasound 45(4):307-309.
intervertebral disk disease: 69 cases (1997-2005). J Am Vet
de Haan J, Shelton SB, and Ackerman N. 1993. Magnetic
Med Assoc 228(6):902-908.
resonance imaging in the diagnosis of degenerative lum-
Bodner DR, Delamarter RB, Bohlman HH, Witcher M, Biro C,
bosacral stenosis in four dogs. Vet Surg 22(1):1-4.
and Resnick MI. 1990. Urologic changes affer cauda equina
Denris R 2005. Assessment of locafion of the celiac and cra-
 compression in dogs. J Urol 143(1):186-190.
rial mesenteric arteries relative to the thoracolumbar spine
Bohn AA, Wills TB, West CL, Tucker RL, and Bagley RS. 2006.
using magnetic resonance imaging. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 Cerebrospinal fluid analysis and magnetic resonance imag-
46(5):388-390.
ing in the diagnosis of neurologic disease in dogs: a refro
De Risio L, Sharp NJ, Olby NJ, Munana KR, and Thomas
spective study. Vet Clin Pathol 35(3):315-320.
WB. 2001. Predictors of outcome affter dorsal decompres-
Cantile C, Baroni M, Tartarelli CL, Campari D, Salvadori C,
sive laminectomy for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in
and Arispici M. 2003. Inframedullary hemangioblastoma
dogs: 69 cases (1987-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 219(5):624-
in a dog. Vet Pathol 40(1):91-94.
628.
224 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
De Risio L, Thomas WB, and Sharp NJ. 2000. Degenerafive
Kim HJ, Chang HS, Choi CB, Song YS, Kim SM, Lee JS, et 
lumbosacral stenosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
al. 2005. Infiltrafive lipoma in cervical bones in a dog. J Vet
30(1):111-132
Med Sci 67(10):1043-1046.
Forterre F, Kaiser S, Garner M, Stadie B, Matiasek K, Schmahl
Kinzel S, Wolf M, Buecker A, Krombach GA, Stopinski T,
W, et al. 2006. Synovial cysts associated with cauda equina
Afify M, et al. 2005. Partial percutaneous discectomy for
syndrome in two dogs. Vet Surg 35(1):30-33.
treatment of thoracolumbar disc protrusion: retrospective
Fukuda S, Nakamura T, Kishigami Y, Endo K, Azuma T,
    I  1 1 
Fujikawa T, et al. 2005. New carine spinal cord injury
Kippenes H, Gavin PR, Bagley RS, Silver GM, Tucker RL, and
model free from laminectomy. Brain Res Brain Res Protoc
Sande RD. 1999. Magnetic resonance imaging feafures of
14(3):171-180.
fumors of the spine and spinal cord in dogs. Vet Radiol
Galloway AM, Curtis NC, Sommerlad SF, and Watt PR. 1999.
Ultrasound 40(6):627-633.
 Correlative imaging findingsin seven dogs and one cat with
Kippenes H, Gavin PR, Parsaei H, Phillips MH, Cho PS,
spinal arachnoid cysts. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(5):445-
Leathers CW, et al. 2003. Spatial accuracy of fractionated
452.
 IMRT delivery studies in canine paraspinal irradiation. Vet 
Ganey T, Libera J, Moos V, Alasevic O, Fritsch KG, Meisel HJ,
Radiol Ultrasound 44(3):360-366.
et al. 2003. Disc chondrocyte transplantation in a canine
Kirberger RM, Jacobson LS, Davies JV, and Engela J. 1997.
model: a treatment for degenerated or damaged interver-
Hydromyelia in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(1):30-
tebral disc. Spine 28(23):2609-2620.
38. Errafum in: 1997 Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(3):238.
 Gemmill TJ. 2004. What is your diagnosis? Spondylosis of the 
Kobayashi S, Meir A, Baba H, Uchida K, and Hayakawa K.
lumbosacral junction. J Small Arim Pract 45(4):177, 219-
2005. Imaging of infraneural edema by using gadolinium-
220.
enhanced MR imaging: experimental compression injury.
Glyde M, Doyle R, McAllister H, Campoy L, and Callanan
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 26(4):973-980.
 JJ. 2004. Magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis and
Kobayashi S, Uchida K, Takeno K, Baba H, Suzuki Y,
surgical management of sacral osteochondrosis in a mastiff
Hayakawa K, et al. 2006. Imaging of cauda equina edema
dog. Vet Rec 155(3):83-86.
 in lumbar canal stenosis by using gadolinium-enhanced
Grirs K, Ruel Y, Blot S, Begon D, Rault D, Delisle F, et al.
MR imaging: experimental constriction injury. AJNR Am J
2003. Spinal subarachnoid cysts in 13 dogs. Vet Radiol Ul-
Neuroradiol 27(2):346-353.
trasound 44(4):402-408.
Kobayashi S, Yoshizawa H, Hachiya Y, Ukai T, and Morita
Gonzalo-Orden JM, Altonaga JR, Orden MA, and Gonzalo
T. 1993. Vasogenic edema induced by compression injury
to the spinal nerve root. Distribufion of intravenously in-
radiologic findings in a dog with discospondylitis. Vet Ra-
jected protein tracers and gadolinium-enhanced magnetic
diol Ultrasound 41(2):142-144.
resonance imaging. Spine 18(11):1410-1424.
Grunenfelder FI, Weishaupt D, Green R, and Steffen F. 2005.
Kraft SL, Mussman JM, Smith T, Biller DS, and Hoskinson
 Magnetic resonance imaging findings in spinal cord in-
JJ. 1998. Magnetic resonance imaging of presumptive lum-
farction in three small breed dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
bosacral discospondylitis in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
46(2):91-96.
39(1):9-13.
Harkey HL, al-Meffy O, Marawi I, Peeler DF, Haines DE, and
Levitski RE, Chauvet AE, and Lipsitz D. 1999. Cervical
 Alexander LF. 1995. Experimental chronic compressive cer-
myelopathy associated with exfradural synovial cysts in
vical myelopathy: effects of decompression. J Neurosurg
4 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 13(3):181-186.
83(2):336-241.
Levitski RE, Lipsitz D, and Chauvet AE. 1999. Magnetic res-
Hopkins AL, Garner M, Ackerman N, Chrisman CL, and
onance imaging of the cervical spine in 27 dogs. Vet Radiol
Eskin T. 1995. Spinal meningeal sarcoma in a Rottweiler
Ultrasound 40(4):332-341.
puppy. J Small Arim Pract 36(4):183-186.
Lipscomb VJ and Muir P. 2000. Magnetic resonance imaging of 
Ito D, Matsunaga S, Jeffery ND, Sasaki N, Nishimura
a dog with sciatic nerve root signature. Vet Rec 147(14):393-
R, Mochizuki M, et al. 2005. Prognostic value of
394.
magnetic resonance imaging in dogs with paraplegia
Lipsitz D, Levitski RE, Chauvet AE, and Berry WL. 2001.
 caused by thoracolumbar intervertebral disk extrusion:
 Magnetic resonance imaging feafures of cervical stenotic
77 cases (2000-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc 227(9):1454
1460.
Mayhew PD, Kapatkin AS, Worfman JA, and Vite CH. 2002.
Itoh T, Nishimura R, Matsunaga S, Kadosawa T, Mochizuki
Associafion of cauda equina compression on magnetic reso
M, and Sasaki N. 1996. Syringomyelia and hydrocephalus
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209(5):934-936.
lumbosacral stenosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38(6):555-
Jones JC, Banfield CM, and Ward DL. 2000. Association be-
562.
tween postoperafive outcome and results of magnetic reso-
MeConnell JF, Garosi LS, Dennis R, and Smith KC. 2003. Imag-
 nance imaging and computed tomography in working dogs
ing of a spinal nephroblastoma in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultra-
with degenerafive lumbosacral stenosis. J Am Vet Med As-
sound 44(5):537-541.
soc 216(11):1769-1774.
McDornell J, Knowles KE, deLahunta A, Bell JS, Lowrie
Jurina K and Grevel V. 2004. Spinal arachnoid pseudocysts in
CT, and Todhunter RJ. 2003. Thoracolumbar spinal cord
10 Roftweilers. J Small Anim Pract 45(1):9-15.
225 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
disease in a family of Shiloh Shepherd dogs. J Vet Intern
Rappard G, Metzger GJ, Weatherall PT, and Purdy PD. 2004.
Med 17(4):530-537.
McDornell JJ, Tidwell AS, Faissler D, and Keating J. 2005.
coil: preliminary results with anatomic imaging of the ca-
 Magnetic resonance imaging feafures of cervical spinal cord
rine and cadaver spinal cord. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
 meringiomas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46(5):368-374.
25(5):835-839
Naughton JF, Tucker RL, and Bagley RS. 2005. Radiographic
Rossi F, Seiler G, Busato A, Wacker C, and Lang J. 2004. Mag-
diagnosis-paraspinal abscess in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultra-
 netic resonance imaging of articular process joint geometry
sound 46(1):23-26.
and intervertebral disk degeneration in the caudal lumbar
Nguyen CM, Ho KC, Yu SW, Haughton VM, and Strandt JA.
spine (L5-S1) of dogs with clinical signs of cauda equina
1989. An experimental model to study contrast enhance-
compression. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45(5):381-387.
 ment in MR imaging of the intervertebral disk. AJNR Am
J Neuroradiol 10(4):811-814.
current concepts in pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment.
Okada M, Koie H, Kitagawa M, Kanayama K, Sato T, Yama
JVet Intern Med 20(3):469-479.
mura H, et al. 2006. MRI findings of haematomyelia in a
Rusbridge C and Knowler SP. 2003. Hereditary aspects of oc-
dog with spontaneous systemic haemorrhage. Aust Vet J
cipital bone hypoplasia and syringomyelia (Chiari type I
84(9):332-335.
malformation) in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. Vet Rec
Olby N, Munana K, De Risio L, Sebestyen P, and Hansen B.
153(4):107-112.
2002. Cervical injury following a horse kick to the head in
Rusbridge C, MacSweeny JE, Davies JV, Chandler K, Fitz-
two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38(4):321-326.
 maurice SN, Dennis R, et al. 2000. Syringohydromyelia in
Olsewski JM, Schendel MJ, Wallace LJ, Ogilvie JW, and
Cavalier King Charles spaniels. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Gundry CR. 1996. Magnetic resonance imaging and biolog-
36(1):34-41.
ical changes in injured intervertebral discs under normal
Sale CS, Skerrift GC, and Smith KC. 2004. Spinal nephroblas-
and increased mechanical demands. Spine 21(17):1945-1951.
toma in a crossbreed dog. J Small Anim Pract 45(5):267-271.
Ono A, Harata S, Takagaki K, and Endo M. 1998. Proteo-
 Sande RD. 1992. Radiography, myelography, computed to
glycans in the nucleus pulposus of canine intervertebral
mography, and magnetic resonance imaging of the spine.
discs affer chondroifinase ABC treafment. J Spinal Disord
Vet Clin North Am Small Arim Pract 22(4):811-831.
11(3):253-260.
Sanders SG, Bagley RS, and Gavin PR. 2002. Intramedullary
Otari K, Arai I, Mao GP, Konno S, Olmarker K, and Kikuchi S.
1997. Experimental disc herniation: evaluafion of the nafu-
terial in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(11);:1594-1596,
ral course. Spine 22(24):2894-2899.
1574-1575
Penderis J and Dernis R. 2004. Use of traction during magnetic
Sanders SG, Bagley RS, Gavin PR, Konzik RL, and Cantor GH.
resonance imaging of caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy
 2002. Surgical treatment of an intramedullary spinal cord
hamartoma in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(5):659-661,
45(3):216-219
643-644.
 Penderis J, Schwarz T, MeConnell JF, Garosi LS, Thomson
 Schouman-Claeys E, Frija G, Cuenod CA, Begon D, Paraire
CE, and Dernis R. 2005. Dysplasia of the caudal vertebral
 F, and Martin V. 1990. MR imaging of acute spinal cord
articular facets in four dogs: results of radiographic, myel-
ographic and magnetic resonance imaging investigations.
J Neuroradiol 11(5):959-965.
Vet Rec 156(19):601-605.
Schulz KS, Walker M, Moon M, Waldron D, Slater M, and
Plaft SR, Dennis R, Murphy K, and de Stefari A. 2005.
 McDonald DE. 1998. Correlation of clinical, radiographic,
 Hematomyelia secondary to lumbar cerebrospinal fluid ac-
and surgical localizafion of intervertebral disc extrusion in
 quisition in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46(6):467-471.
Snsiaa sases os yo Apns aaoadsoid e ssop paarq-lus 
Plaft SR, McConnell JF, and Bestbier M. 2006. Magnetic res-
27(2): 105-111.
onance imaging characteristics of ascencding hemorrhagic
 Seiler G, Hani H, Scheidegger J, Busato A, and Lang J. 2003.
myelomalacia in a dog. Vet Radiol Ulfrasound 47(1):78-82.
Staging of lumbar intervertebral disc degeneration in non-
Purdy PD, Duong RT, White CL, IIl, Baer DL, Reichard RR,
chondrodystrophic dogs using low-field magnetic reso-
Pride GL, Jr, et al. 2003. Percutaneous franslumbar spinal
 nance imaging. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44(2):179-184.
cord compression injury in a dog model that uses angio
 Sessums KB and Ducote IM. 2006. What is your diagnosis?
plasty balloons: MR imaging and histopathologic findings.
Spinal arachnoid cysts. J Am Vet Med Assoc 228(7):1019-
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 24(2):177-184.
1020. No abstract available.
Purdy PD, White CL, Ⅲ, Baer DL, Frawley WH, Reichard
 Sether LA, Nguyen C, Yu SN, Haughton VM, Ho KC, Biller
RR, Pride GL, Jr,et al. 2004. Percutaneous franslumbar
DS, et al. 1990. Carine intervertebral disks: correlafion of
anatomy and MR imaging. Radiology 175(1):207-211.
plasty balloon: MR and histopathologic changes with bal-
Silver GM, Bagley RS, Gavin PR, and Kippenes H. 2001. Ra-
loon sizes and compression times. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
diographic diagnosis: cartilaginous exostoses in a dog. Vet
25(8):1435-1442.
Radiol Ultrasound 42(3):231-234.
 Ramirez O, I and Thrall DE. 1998. A review of imaging tech-
Skeen TM, Olby NJ, Munana KR, and Sharp NJ. 2003. Spinal
arachnoid cysts in 17 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
trasound 39(4):283-296.
39(3):271-282.
226 VETERINARY CLINICAL MRI: DIAGNOSIS OF SPINAL DISEASE
Smith PM and Jeffery ND. 2005. Spinal shock-comparafive
Yamada K, Nakagawa M, Kato T, Shigeno S, Hirose T, Miya-
aspects and clinical relevance. J Vet Intern Med 19(6):788
hara K, et al. 2001. Application of short-time magnetic reso
793.
 nance examination for intervertebral disc diseases in dogs.
Steffen F, Berger M, and Morgan JP. 2004. Asymmetrical,
 J Vet Med Sci 63(1):51-54.
transifional, lumbosacral vertebral segments in six dogs:
Yamada K, Tanabe S, Ueno H, Oinuma A, Takahashi T,
s      s s 
MiyauchiS, et al. 2001. Investigation of the short-term effect
40(4):338-344.
of chemonucleolysis with chondroitinase ABC. J Vet Med
Swensen SJ, Keller PL, Berquist TH, McLeod RA, and
Sci 63(5):521-525.
Stephens DH. 1985. Magnetic resonance imaging of hem-
Young B, Klopp L, Albrecht M, and Kraft S. 2004. Imaging di-
orrhage. AJR Am J Roentgenol 145(5):921-927.
 agnosis: magnetic resonance imaging of a cervical wooden
Taga A, Taura Y, Nakaichi M, Wada N, and Hasegawa T. 2000.
foreign body in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45(6):538-541.
 Magnetic resonance imaging of syringomyelia in five dogs.
J Small Anim Pract 41(8):362-365.
Cats
Taga A, Taura Y, Nishimoto T, Takiguchi M, and Higuchi M.
 1998. The advantage of magnetic resonance imaging in di-
Adams WH. 1999. The spine. Clin Tech Small Arim Pract
agnosis of cauda equine syndrome in dogs. J Vet Med Sci
14(3):148159.
60(12):1345-1348.
Asperio RM, Marzola P, Zibelliri E, Villa W, Sbarbati A,
Takagi S, Kadosawa T, Ohsaki T, Hoshino Y, Okumura M,
Osculati F, et al. 1999. Use of magnetic resonance imaging
and Fujinaga T. 2005. Hindbrain decompression in a dog
for diagnosis of a spinal tumor in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultra-
with scoliosis associated with syringomyelia. J Am Vet Med
sound 40(3):267-270.
Assoc 226(8):1359-1363, 1347.
Coates JR. 2000. Intervertebral disk disease. Vet Clin North
Tanaka H, Nakayama M, Ori J, and Takase K. 2005. Usefulness
Am Small Anim Pract 30(1):77-110.
 De Risio L, Thomas WB, and Sharp NJ. 2000. Degenerafive
disease. J Vet Med Sci 67(7):727-730.
 lumbosacral stenosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Arim Pract
Tanaka H, Nakayama M, and Takase K. 2006. Intraoperative
30(1);:111-132.
spinal ultrasonography in two dogs with spinal disease.
Galloway AM, Curtis NC, Sommerlad SF, and Waft PR 1999.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(1):99-102.
 Corelative imaging findings inseven dogs and one cat with
Tartarelli CL, Baroni M, and Borghi M. 2005. Thoracolumbar
 spinal arachnoid cysts. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(5):445-
 disc extrusion associated with extensive epidural haemor
452.
rhage: a retrospective sfudy of 23 dogs. J Small Anim Pract
Garosi L, de Lahunta A, Summers B, Dennis R, and Scase T.
46(10):485-490.
 2006. Bilateral, hypertrophic neuritis of the brachial plexus
Thomas WB. 2000. Diskospondylifis and other vertebral infec-
in a cat: magnefic resonance imaging and pathological find-
tions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30(1):169-182.
ings. J Feline Med Surg 8(1):63-68. Epub 2005 Oct 6.
Tidwell AS, Specht A, Blaeser L, and Kent M. 2002. Magnetic
Lu D, Lamb CR, Wesselingh K, and Targett MP. 2002. Acute
resonance imaging feafures of exfradural hematomas as-
intervertebral disc exfrusion in a cat: clirical and MRI find-
sociated with intervertebral disc herniation in a dog. Vet
ings. J Feline Med Surg 4(1):65-68.
Radiol Ultrasound 43(4):319-324.
MacKay AD, Rusbridge C, Sparkes AH, and Platt SR.
Ueno H, Morimoto M, Kobayashi Y, Hizume T, Murayama N,
p dds ae padsn y snse r o
infarction in fwo cats, and a review of the lifterafure. J Feline
a spinal cord ependymoma in a dog. Aust Vet J 84(1-2):36-
Med Surg 7(2):101-107.
39.
MeConnell JF and Garosi LS. 2004. Inframedullary inter-
Ueno H, Shimizu J, Uzuka Y, Kobayashi Y, Hirokawa H, Ueno
vertebral disk extrusion in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
E, et al. 2005. Fibrocartilaginous embolism in a chondrodys-
45(4):327-330.
trophoid breed dog. Aust Vet J 83(3):142-144.
Mikszewski JS, Van Winkle TJ, and Troxel MT. 2006. Fibro
van Klaveren NJ, Suwankong N, De Boer S, Van Den Brom
cartilaginous embolic myelopathy in five cats. J Am Anim
WE, Voorhout G, Hazewinkel HA, et al. 2005. Force plate
Hosp Assoc 42(3):226-233.
analysis before and after dorsal decompression for treat-
Paftany PM, Puckett WR, Klose KJ, Quencer RM, Bunge
 ment of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. Vet Surg
RP, Kasuboski L, et al. 1997. High-resolution diffusion-
34(5):450-456
weighted MR of fresh and fixed cat spinal cords: evalua-
Webb AA, Pharr JW, Lew LJ, and Tryon KA. 2001. MRimaging
tion of diffusion coefficients and anisofropy. AJNR Am J
findings in a dog with lumbar ganglion cysts. Vet Radiol
Neuroradiol 18(6):1049-1056.
Ultrasound 42(1):9-13.
Sanders S, Bagley RS, Tucker RL, and Nelson NR 1999. Ra
Westworth DR, Vernau KM, Cullen SP, Long CD, Van Hal-
 diographic diagnosis: focal spinal cord malacia in a cat. Vet
bach V, and LeCouteur RA. 2006. Vascular anomaly causing
Radiol Ultrasound 40(2):122-125.
subclavian steal and cervical myelopathy in a dog: diagno-
 Tani K, Taga A, Itamoto K, Iwanaga T, Une S, Nakaichi M, et
 al. 2001. Hydrocephalus and syringomyelia in a cat. J Vet
47(3):265-269.
Med Sci 63(12):1331-1334.
SECTION 3
Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Peripheral
Nerve Disease
Rodney S. Bagley, Patrick R. Gavin, and Shannon P. Holmes
 In comparison to MR imaging of the brain and spinal
1993). Schwarn cells begin myelinating peripheral
cord, the peripheral nervous system (PNS) has been less
 nerves to the limbs at the intervertebral foramen of
 s SNe al j   m pae nban
the vertebral column. Using this strict defirition, other
usually been relegated to imaging of neoplastic pro-
 components of the peripheral nerve, such as the cell
cesses or other infiltrative diseases, as these PNS dis-
 body of the motor neuron in the ventral gray mat-
eases are those that tend to affect peripheral nerve struc-
ter of the spinal cord, the synapse, or the effector or-
ture by erlarging the nerves. The sequences and quality
gan, would not be included in the PNS. Functionally.
of images historically collected have been less than ad-
however, a lesion of the peripheral nerve or cell body
equate to determine disease in normal sized nerves. As
would result in identical clirical signs as a lesion in
MR imaging advances, with improved spacial resolu-
the peripheral nerve. Therefore, the term "PNS" func-
tion and sequence acquisition, more information may
tionally includes all components from the cell body to
be gained regarding the anatomical abnormalities af-
 the effector organ. In addition, sensory components of
fecting the PNS.
these nerve structures would also be included in the
As the peripheral nerves are a component of the
PNS.
lower motor neuron, and peripheral nerves innervate
 In essence, the PNS forms the final link between the
 muscles, disease of the muscle may, in some setfings,
result in clinical signs that may overlap with those asso-
 the body structures necessary to ultimately perform a
ciated with the PNS. Therefore, in addition to anatom-
specific function. Without this cornection, regardless
ical alterations on peripheral nerve, abnormalities of
 Of what initiating events occur in the CNS, the function.
muscle may be associated with, or lend clues to, un-
will not be completed. These structures are sometimes
derlying peripheral nerve disease. MR abnormalities
 referred to as the final common pathway for expression
of muscle may also be associated with primary muscu-
 of nervous system function.
 loskeletal diseases. The MR appearance of these types
 This suggests that the ultimate effect of any nervous
of muscle abnormalities is discussed more thoroughly
system function is delivered to the body organs and
in those chapters of this book that describe muscu-
   ss y p e n yn s 
loskeletal imaging. In this chapter, the primary empha-
 the CNs. The PNS is responsible for projecting infor-
sis will be on imaging of peripheral nerve neoplastic
 mation to (afferent, sensory) and from (efferent, motor)
and other infiltrative processes, and on those muscle ab-
 the CNS.
normalities that may be associated with, or mimic, PNS
 With regards to a sensory nerve, the cell body is
diseases.
often found in a ganglion outside the CNS. Recep-
tors recognize stimuli and project this information in
dendritic processes toward the cell body. Once infor-
ANATOMICAL
mation is projected toward the cell body, axons from
the cell body enter the spinal cord through the dor-
CONSIDERATIONS
sal nerve root. Sensory axons may then be projected in
   p rds  n sd sn a
 The PNS includes any nerve myelinated by a Schwann
 nate on additional neuronal elements within the spinal
cell (deLahunta 1983; Jenkins 1978; King 1987; Kitchell
cord.
Practical Small Animal MRT Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
227
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
Neuronal cell bodies responsible for movement are
found primarily in the ventral gray matter of the spinal
 r a  on pi s  
with larger, myelinated axons such as alpha fibers.
These motor neuron cell elements may be stimulated
by local neurons in the spinal cord or from the termina-
tions of axons descending from more crarialin the CNS,
 such as the brain and brain stem. In this way, the compo-
nents of the CNS may signal movement in the muscles
of the limb, for example. Local axons from the dorsal
root ganglion cells may also terminate on these motor
neurons allowing for local spinal reflex functions.
Peripheral Nerve Pathophysiology
Figure 2.251.Gross view of a nerve sheath tumor (arrow)
Disease processes affecting the peripheral nerves and
following hemilaminectomy.
associated cell bodies can be many and varied (Sum-
mers 1995). Many of these diseases, however, result in
a firite number of alterations in the neuronal cell body.
commonly involve the peripheral nerves (Figure
 axon, or synapse. Pathophysiologic alterations may be
2.251). Any peripheral nerve, including the CNs,
physiologic or anatomical. The ultimate consequence,
may be involved. These types of peripheral nerve
however, is disruption of neural impulse generation or
neoplastic infiltrations, however, may be difficult to
destruction of neural elements. A neu ropraxia is an inter-
see on routine MR sequences (Tl and T2 sequences)
ruption in function and conduction in the nerve, usually
(Figures 2.252-2.254). The difficulty occurs due to
associated with a lesion of the myelin without severe
the signal from fat and blood vessels throughout the
axonal involvement. Neuropraxia is the least severe of
muscles that are usually surrounding the nerve of
the types of nerve damage or dysfunction, which also
interest (see Chapter 6, Figures 6.9-6.1l). Therefore,
usually equates to the greatest likelihood of reversal
fat-suppression sequences such as STIR may allow
 for a better delineation of these neoplastic processes
ration and damage of some axons. Again, this usually
(Figure 2.253).
occurs through mecharical disruption, but may also
Other factors that influence the ease at which these
result from diseases of the axon. Some regeneration of
processes can be identified and localized include the
-auos aq Aeu Ainju jo adki s! os 'msso Aeu suox
variable course of the peripheral nerves as they course
what reversible. Improvement in function will depend
through the muscle that they irnervate. Therefore,
upon the magritude of the axon loss (i.e., percentage of
the nerve may travel in various planes throughout its
axonal damage). Neurotmesis is complete severance of
course. Orientation of the MR scarring planes to follow
all structures of the nerve and is the most severe form of
the course of the peripheral nerves is often necessary to
injury. The likelihood of regeneration is less with neu-
 see discrete peripheral nerve enlargement.
rotmesis as compared to neuropraxia or axonotmesis.
When the exiting peripheral nerves are neoplastic at
either the spinal canal, foramen, or immediately dis-
Peripheral Nerve MR Imaging
tal to their exit of the foramen, these processes may be
Because of the quality and resolution of MR imaging
identified with spinal MR imaging. If the peripheral
 nerve tumor is present within the dura, an intradural,
in current clirical practice, MR imaging of peripheral
 nerve disease is primarily limited to imaging of periph-
 asuereadde ,aat-jos, o asueeadde Arelinpauexa
 eral nerve neoplastic diseases. As MR imaging is pro-
the subarachnoid space similar to the appearance of
 gressing, improved imaging of other peripheral nerve
-s, s uaas aq aeu aydeiaonaa uo sr as
tee" appearance is most evident in T2-weighted images
diseases is on the horizon.
as the CSF creating this appearance is white. A myel-
 ographic effect sequence (long T2-sequence) may also
SPECIFIC DISEASES
more easily show this type of "golf-tee" shaped appear-
ance (see Section 2, Figure 2.207).
Neoplastic Neuropathies
These tumors may not be as obvious in sagittal MR
Of the neoplastic diseases nerve sheath tumors
images as they may have little contrast difference with
(Schwarnoma, neurofibroma,  neurofibrosarcoma)
 respect to the adjacent spinal cord and may be primarily
229 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
 r   t n   s n  ( n    d s  
focal mass within the exifing peripheral nerve (arrow). View at surgery (C) (hemilaminectomy) of the mass (arrow). Histologic
diagnosis was a neturoma.
located lateral to the spinal cord (Figure 2.252). Intra-
 jection of a contrast agent generally results in some de-
venous gadolinium administration usually results in
 gree of either diffuse or focal enhancement in the area
enhancement of these tumors increasing their signal
affected by tumor. Contrast enhancement (intravenous
intensity in T1-weighted images (Figure 2.254). Dorsal
gadolinium-DTPA) does not precisely define the fumor
   s i a 
borders as neoplastic cells are generally found cutside
ages helpful to detect this category of tumors. In some
the enhanced portion of the mass. Gadolirium enhance-
instances, if the tumor infiltrates or originates in the
ment of tumors is inconsistent but, if present, may sup-
port a diagnosis of tumor. Other extradural disease pro-
lesion will be seen. Often either within the lesion or
 cesses, such as intervertebral disk herriation, may also
within the spinal cord surrounding (including proxi-
 show contrast enhancement on MR. Contrast enhance-
mal and distal to) the lesion there will be associated
ment characteristics alone, therefore, carnot be used as
hyperintense signal within the spinal cord parenchyma
 being pathognomonic for neoplasia.
 on T2-weighted sequences. This most likely represents 
 In the spinal canal external to the dura, peripheral
 edema, and may be restricted primarily to the gray mat-
nerve tumors, depending upon the slice plane may also
ter or more centralized regions of the spinal cord.
have more of an extradural appearance. In some in-
Tumors may have a variety of appearances with MR
stances, normal structures such as the vessels (venous
imaging, and need tobe differentiated from other spinal
5
 sinus) can be mistaken for a peripheral nerve neoplasm.
disease processes such as intervertebral disk herniation.
 Affected dogs often present for a lameness that, in
Tumors are typically vascular and invasive, disrupting
the normal integrity of the BBB. Thus, intravenous in-
time prior to presentation. Often dogs are initially
B
E/M
levels (L6-7) from a dog with a urilateral pelvic limb lameness. There is a fumor of the sciatic nerve present (arrow). Dorsal
  n s ()     n  ()   
diagnosed with arthritis or another orthopedic disease
neoplasia are more likely to do so. The MR character-
which they may, in fact, have serendipitious evidence
istics of these neoplastic processes are often similar to
of, as many affected animals are older. Clirical clues
their appearance in other body tissues, and may also not
include atrophy of selected thoracic limb muscles and
be able to be distinguished from nerve sheath tumor.
 pain upon local palpation of the nerve. In some in-
stances, a discrete mass can be palpated in the nerve.
Infectious Neuritis
anesthesia for adequate palpation.
If the tumor results in denervation of associated mus-
Diseases such as toxoplasmosis and Neospora canininm
cles, these muscles may atrophy and appear smaller in
 may result in infiltration and enlargement of peripheral
MR images. Often, as well, denervated muscle appears
 similar MR appearance to neoplastic peripheral nerve
quences.
disease. In some instance, neospora in particular, may
 e   ssd su 
result in multifocal bulbous enlargement of exiting pe-
ripheral nerves. Lymphoma and other hematological
ripheral nerves and nerve roots within the spinal canal.
231 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
C
Figure 2.254. Transverse (A) and dorsal (B) T1-weighted MR images from a dog wifh thoracic limb lameness following
nerve sheath tumor (arrows) following brachial plexus exploratory surgery.
Disease of Muscle
bral structures following the IVD extrusion. In some
 instances, similar changes may occur in other muscle
Paraspinal muscles may have abscessation, which is of-
groups and may be the result of muscle injury occur-
ten associated with migrating foreign material (such as
 ring during the process of the animal falling. possibly as
cle often result in multifocal hyperintense (on T2) or
the result of the acute paralysis or paresis. Some of this
 muscle change may also be the result of muscle damage
hypointense (on Tl) irregular regions suggesting focal
 during subsequent recumbency. A similar appearance
pockets of fluid accumulation. These muscles may be
 may also be present in paraspinal muscles in instances
subsequently erlarged, and often have varying degrees
 of exogenous spinal injury.
of erhancement following intravenous contrast admin-
istration.
It is also possible to see focal hyperintense signal on
Traumatic Neuropathies and Myopathies
T2-weighted sequences in the paraspinal muscle sur-
rounding some regions of intervertebral disk extrusion.
 Brachial plexus avulsion may result in alterations in the
 Biopsy of these muscles usually reveals no obvious  MR appearance of the spinal cord and associated limb
 pathology. The reason for this signal change therefore  muscles. As the nerve damage with brachial plexus
is not known, but most likely represents some degree  avulsion usually occurs at the level of the smaller nerve
of muscle injury associated with shifts of the verte-  rootlets adjacent to the spinal cord, images of this
region may show focal intraspinal hyperintensity in
Grosslinger K, Lorinson D, Hifftmair K, Konar M, and Weis-
T2-weighted images, which most likely reflects asso-
senbock H. 2004. Iiopsoas abscess with iliac and femoral
ciated spinal cord edema, hemorrhage, or inflamma-
vein thrombosis in an adult Siberian husky. J Small Arim
tion. Focal erlargement may be seen in the region of the 
Pract 45(2):113-116.
nerve rootlets, possibly the result of similar pathogeric
Kathmann I, Bottcher ICh, von Klopmann T, Gerdwilker A,
 mecharisms associated with the traumatic disruption
and Tipold A. 2006. Chronic inflammatory demyelinat-
of these nerve rootlets. In addition, hemorrhage may oc-
ing polyradiculoneuropathy with hyperfrophy of cervico
 cur in the subarachnoid space. This hemorrhage may re-
thoracal nerve roots in a dog. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd
148(6):297-302.
s snas  n ae  a  i
 Kornegay JN, Sharp NJ, Bartlett RJ, Van Camp SD, Burt CT,
to what has previously been discussed for the appear-
Hung WY,et al. 1990. Golden retriever muscular dystrophy:
monitoring for suuccess. Adv Exp Med Biol 280:267-272.
(see Section 2). Hemorrhage may be more easily dis-
 Lipscomb VJ and Muir P. 2000. Magnetic resonance imaging of
cernable on diffusion-weighted sequences.
a dog with sciatic nerve root signafure. Vet Rec 147(14):393
Depending upon when in relation to the traumatic
394.
-oe aq A sosn q 'pa si q a suaaa
Plaft SR, Graham J, Chrisman CL, Collins K, Chandra S,
phied and become hyperintense in T2-weighted images
Sirninger J, et al. 1999. Magnetic resonance imaging and
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of a malignant periph-
similar to other denervated muscles.
 Muscle thrombosis, embolism, and infarction may re-
eral nerve sheath fumor in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
sult from a variety of vascular insults. The MR appear-
40(4):367-371.
 Platt SR and MeConnell F. 2002. What is your diagnosis? Ma-
ance of muscle damaged in such a way can have either
lignant nerve sheath fumour. J Small Arim Pract 43(3):103,
139-140.
sequences. Focal or diffuse muscle hemorrhage may
Steprik MW, Olby N, Thompson RR, and Marcellin-Litfle DJ.
also be more easily discernable on diffusion-weighted
2006. Femoral neuropathy in a dog with iliopsoas muscle
sequences.
injury. Vet Surg 35(2):186-190.
Strong M, Hruska J, Czyrny J, Heffner R, Brody A, and Wong-
Chung J. 1994. Nerve palsy during femoral lengthening:
MR BIBLIOGRAPHY
MRI, electrical, and histologic findings in the cenfral and
peripheral nervous systems—a canine model. J Pediatr
Dogs
Orthop 14(3):347-351.
Tucker DW, Olsen D, Kraft SL, Andrews GA, and Gray AP.
Abraham LA, Mitten RW, Beck C, Charles JA, and Holloway
 2000. Primary hemangiosarcoma of the iliopsoas muscle
eliciting a peripheral neuropathy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 electromyography and magnetic resonance imaging. Aust
36(2):163-167.
Vet J 81(1-2):42-46.
 Brofman PJ and Thrall DE. 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging
findings in a dog with caudal aoric thromboembolism and
Cats
ischemic myopathy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(4):334-338.
Bush WW, Throop JL, McManus PM, Kapafkin AS, Vite CH,
Garosi L, de Lahunta A, Summers B, Dernis R, and Scase T.
and Van Winkle TJ. 2003. Intravascular lymphoma involv
2006. Bilateral, hypertrophic neuritis of the brachial plexus
 ing the central and peripheral nervous systems in a dog. J
in a cat: magnetic resonance imaging and pathological find
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39(1):90-96.
ings. J Feline Med Surg 8(1):63-68. Epub 2005 Oct 6.
Drost WT, Bahr RJ, Herry GA, and Campbell GA. 1999. Aor-
Mellanby RJ, Jeffery ND, Baines EA, Woodger N, and Her
toiliac thrombus secondary to a mineralized arteriosclerotic
rtage ME. 2003. Magnetic resonance imaging in the diag-
lesion. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(3):262-266.
nosis of lymphoma involving the brachial plexus in a cat.
 Endo H, Taru H, Nakamura K, Koie H, Yamaya Y, and Kimura
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44(5):522-525.
Vite CH, McGowan JC, Braund KG, Drobatz KJ, Glickson JD
J. 1999. MRI examination of the masticatory muscles in the
Wolfe JH, et al. 2001. Histopathology, electrodiagnostic test-
gray wolf (Canis lupus), with special reference to the M.
temporalis. J Vet Med Sci 61(6):581-586.
ing, and magnetic resonance imaging show significant pe-
Ferreira AJ, Peleteiro MC, Correia JH, Jesus SO, and Goulao A.
ripheral and cenfral nervous system myelin abnormalities
 in the cat model of alpha-mannosidosis. J Neuropathol Exp
2005. Small-cell carcinoma of the lung resembling a brachial
plexus fumour. J Small Arim Pract 46(6):286-290.
Neurol 60(8):817-828.
CHAPTER THREE
ORTHOPEDIC
Patrick R. Gavin and Shannon P. Holmes
Our physician colleagues utilize MR more for ortho-
IMAGING TECHNIQUE
pedic disease than for any other body system. The
superior soft tissue contrast, especially for defiring
An MR evaluation of the shoulder region must be
pathologic change, has greatly improved diagnoses,
appropriately broad in order to image the important
treatment options, and therapeutic outcomes for their
anatomy of upper thoracic limb lameness, without com-
patients. Similar advances are beginning to be recog-
promising spatial resolution. As a lameness could result
nized in veterinary medicine. For decades, we have
from disease of the spinal cord and associated periph-
been fixated on the skeletal system for the diagnosis
 eral nerves (including the brachial plexus), the scapula,
of orthopedic abnormalities. We forgot that it is the
humerus, shoulder joint capsule, joint surfaces, associ-
musculo-skeletal system, complete with tendons and
ated muscles, tendons, and ligaments, and adjacent soft
ligaments, nerves, blood vessels, fascia and synovial
tissue and vasculature. It is preferable, therefore, when
membranes, along with bones, that make up the entire
imaging the shoulder region to at least run screering
complex tissue affected by orthopedic injuries. Previ-
images of the caudal cervical and cranial thoracic spine
 un ood e aq on nulnou sem  aisno
and brachial plexus. We have found that optimum im-
for osseous structures. Itis now recognized that MR has
age quality of many of the musculo-skeletal structures
exquisite sensitivity and specificity for osseous abnor-
is obtained by placing the arimal in lateral recumbent
malities, most of which carnot be delineated by other
 position with the affected limb downward. This is espe-
imaging modalities. Nuclear scintigraphy has excellent
cially important when a surface coil is being utilized.
sensitivity, but lacks specificity.
-re e ru u pod si q 
 MR imaging is increasingly being used in the diag-
tion, which results in an approximate 90° angle at the
nosis of lamenesses suspected to involve the shoulder
shoulder, elbow, stifle, and tarsus. The body weight of
 region. The specific cause of shoulder lameness is of-
the animal usually eliminates motion of the limb re-
ten difficult to diagnose on the basis of the previously
gion from breathing. This necessitates rolling the ani-
standard diagnostic assessments (i.e., physical exami-
mal over for bilateral studies, but the extra effort has
nation including palpation and conventional radiogra-
 proven valuable. An attempt to image both limbs at
once should be avoided as the FOV is too large and
information as to intra-articular abnormalities, how-
 the slice orientation and volume averaging will not be
ever, is invasive. Additionally, many of the diseases that
identical for the two limbs. These factors can result in
affect the shoulder are not primarily intra-articular and,
erroneous interpretation.
 therefore, are more likely to be seen with MR imaging
Standard imaging sequences utilized to examine
providing for a more global assessment of the shoulder
the shoulder include high-resolution Tl-weighted se-
region.
quences to define anatomic abnormalities. However,
 The most often requested magnetic resonance study
our imaging protocols most heavily rely on STIR or
in veterinary orthopedics today is for the diagnosis of
-ap ar rn sanuanbas asup unrd passaddns-ie
shoulder lameness. Shoulder lameness is difficult to
tection of disease. T2-weighted sequences are neces-
diagnose based on conventional examination, includ-
sary to prevent misinterpretation from magic angle ar-
ing palpation and radiography Often, the profession
tifact (see Chapter 1, Section 4: Artifacts), urless the
has resorted to arthroscopy as a diagnostic procedure,
MR urit is capable of acquiring more T2-weighted (TE
which may be appropriate if it is an intra-articular ab-
≥ 35-40 ms) proton density fat-suppressed sequences.
normality. Many of the diseases that affect the shoulder
An ideal shoulder imaging protocol would include
are not intra-articular and, therefore, are best visualized
a sagittal T2-weighted sequence of the cervical and
with MR.
Practical Small Animal MRT Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
233
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
234 ORTHOPEDIC
T
A
d   a e        a r  e es
superimposed. The orientation of the sagiftal plane is aligned with the biceps tendon (white arrow) and cranially from the
midpoint of the interfubercular groove through the midpoint of the humeral head caudally. Accurately planning this scan plan
 can be more challenging when the biceps is displaced medially out of the intertubercular groove.
crarial thoracic spine, a STIR dorsal sequence of the
Familiarity with normal shoulder anatomy (Fig-
spinal cord through the ventral aspect of the brachial
ures 3.1-3.3) is critical for identification of pathologic
 plexus region (a STIR dorsal plane is plarned dorsal
changes. Virtually all structures of the shoulder joint
relative to the spine), and a combination of multipla-
can be visualized with MR. There is clear visualization
 nar sequences through the shoulder joint. Our current
 of the insertion of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus
protocol obtains images in all three planes of the shoul-
muscles on the medial and lateral aspect of the grater
der using fat-suppressed proton density sequences, a
 tubercle respectively. The origin and path of the biceps
T2 sagittal and dual echo axial of the shoulder joint.
tendon is readily apparent. The integrity of the tendon
snas s a  ad s n o
should be evaluated on long TE sequences as the tendon
with Tl-weighting, STIR or proton density fat satura-
angle often results in a magic angle artifact. The joint
tion, and T2-weighting. Transverse imaging (i.e., trans-
capsule and synovial fluid are easily seen. The thin ar-
verse to the biceps tendon within the bicipital groove)
ticular cartilage is seen between the synovial fluid and
 of STIR sequences or T2-weighting generally complete
the subchondral bone. The glenohumeral ligaments are
 the sequence. Field of view should be scaled according
difficult to see in isolation from the larger tendons
to the animal's body size to provide clear visualization
and ligaments forming the collateral support of the
of the shoulder. If contrast enhancement is deemed nec-
shoulder joint. Secondary changes at the site of in-
essary, the contrast is administered and post-contrast
sertion are used as sentinel indicators that patho-
studies are acquired in the sagittal and other planes as
-n  y uaa asnd aq a sa y
needed. In general, however, contrast studies are not
verse humeral ligament is small this ligament can
required.
be imaged in the axial plane, if images are acquired
235 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
B
Figure 3.2. Normal shoulder anatomy. T2-weighted transverse (A) and sagiftal (B) images of the shoulder. All osseous and
soff tissues are easily visualized, with a few exceptions. The transverse humeral ligament is extremely thin, and requires an
e un os are sui rera a sg s n go sie a a o reruadiad p aed as s
intimately associated with the joint capsule, they cannot be seen as distinct strucfures. (1) glenoid cavity, (2) humeral head, (3)
caudal pouch, (7) biceps tendon near origin, (8) glenoid labrum.
perpendicular to the long axis of the biceps tendon
 on the biceps tendon. This pathological change results
(Figure 3.1).
          
sequences and is best seen with fat-suppression se-
quences. There is medial displacement of the biceps ten-
Abnormalities of the Shoulder
don from its normal position within the intertubercu-
Joint Complex
lar groove and flattering the tendon. The Tl-weighted
images often have fatty replacement at the myotendi-
 Prior to the use of MR, bicipital tenosynovitis appeared
 n sss a gn n 
to be the most frequently diagnosed condition of the
 it is easy to see why many cliricians feel these animals
dog shoulder. The condition does occur, but incidence
2 have bicipital tenosynovitis on a physical examination
of this disease recognized on MR is less common and
 and arthroscopy /arthrotomy. The supraspinatus dam-
perhaps even uncommon relative to other pathologic
 age appears to result in secondary compression of the
changes sen on MR examinatiorns in our experience.
biceps tendon. With MR, this extracapsular defect is
 The most common abnormality present in the shoulder 
 clearly defined, as well as the degenerative secondary
joint to date in animals undergoing MR imaging has
changes on the greater tubercle. In this instance, the MR
been supraspinatus tendiritis.
defirition of supraspinatus tendinitis has altered the
The insertion of the supraspinatus tendon on the
clirical therapeutic course in management of shoulder
 medial aspect of the greater tubercle undergoes ap-
 lameness (Figures 3.4-3.6).
parent repetitive trauma resulting in a proliferative
Other abnormalities of the shoulder that have been
d as ssn sn  po ss
identified with MR include tumors of the scapula and
236 ORTHOPEDIC
11
10
3
C
Figure 3.3.  Normal shoulder musculafure. The extrinsic muscles are important in the assessment of the shoulder, since their
function is essential for shoulder stability. A large field of view scan in the sagiftal plane is often helpful in anatomically
localizing specific muscles. Normal tendons, muscles, and cortical bone have low (ie., black) signal intensity on T1, T2 and
PD sequences, whereas muscle becomes intermediate signal intensity on STIR or SPIR sequences. (A-B) T2-weighted sagiftal
images in series from lateral to medial. (C) PD-weighted transverse images at the level of the proximal interfubercular groove.
(1) Acromion, (2) deltoid muscle, (3) triceps muscle, long head, (4) triceps muscle, lateral head, (5) brachialis, (6) triceps
 muscle, accessory head, (7) triceps muscle, medial head, (8) supraspinatus muscle, (9) infraspinatus muscle, (10) biceps muscle,
(11) cleidobrachialis.
237 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
C
D
Figure 3.4. Supraspinafus tendinifis. (A)STIR sequence in the sagiftal plane. Arrows point to an area of fat at the myotendinous
 junction that is dlark on the STIR sequence. The dotted line shows the posiftion of transverse image 3C. (B) T2-weighted image
fhrough the same site as A. Note on this T2-weighted image the fat is bright where there has been tearing at the myotendinous
junction with fafty replacement. (C) STIR-weighted transverse sequence. The marked hyperintensity of the immature collagen
from the ruptured supraspinatus tendon is shown with the large arrows. Smallarrows show displacement of the biceps tendon
from this proliferative mass out of its normal bicipital groove. (D) T1-weighted, post-contrast, fat-suppressed image. There is
no enhancement of the proliferafive lesions seen on the STIR sequence at the inserfion of the supraspinafus. Displaced tendon
is seen. There is mild enhancement of the synovial lining.
238ORTHOPEDIC
the STIR sequence, B. (A) T1-weighted sagiftal image. Arrows incicate fat at the myotendinous junction. (B) The proliferative
lesion from immature collagen at the tearing of the insertion of the supraspinafus tendon on the greater tubercle is seen
with the small arrows on 9B. (C) Transverse image—the hyperintensity is shown with the large arrows for the tearing of the
supraspinafus, and the small arrows show the displacement of the biceps tendlon.
239 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
with some fluid around it. (B) STIR sagiftal sequence showing the hyperintensify at the tearing of the supraspinatus at the
 insertion. (C) Transverse imaging showing the hyperintensity of the torn supraspinatus and the normal appearance to the
biceps tendon (small arrows).
240 ORTHOPEDIC
proximal humerus (Figures 3.7 and 3.8), bicipital
Muscle Abnormalities
tenosynovitis (Figure 3.9), medial glenohumeral lig-
 In addition to the more chronic tendinous and ligamen-
ament abnormalities with instability, brachial plexus
 tous diseases, acute muscle tears have been identified
avulsion (Figure 3.10), infraspinatus contracture, and
 the less common infraspinatus tendinopathy (Figure
as the source of shoulder lameness (Figures 3.13 and
3.14). Muscle tears are generally seen with sufficient
3.11). Changes in signal intensities are similar for these
time interval from the traumatic event to have for-
diseases as the cellular pathologic changes in the ten-
mation of methemoglobin. As covered in Chapter 2,
dons are similar for these traumatic diseases. The use
of STIR or T2 fat-suppressed sequences provide an ex-
methemoglobin will have a high signal intensity of T1,
T2, and proton density sequences. Fat is also intense
cellent screening image as the background structures
 on these sequences, but fat in the muscle would null
out on the STIR or fat-suppressed sequences while
(whiter) signal intensities. The use of the higher resolu-
the methemoglobin would remain bright. These types
tion proton density and Tl-weighted sequences helps
 of lesions require rest and rehabilitation, rather than
define the anatomic structures that are affected. The use
 surgical intervention. Soft tissue lesion such as these
of contrast enhancement sequences generally adds lim-
ited additional diagnostic information in order to jus-
demonstrate the importance of obtaining the correct
diagnosis through advanced imaging and promotes
tify the increased anesthesia time associated with this
the consideration of proper treatment options with
procedure.
presumably better therapeutic outcomes.
BRACHIAL PLEXUS DISEASE
Shoulder Joint Abnormalities
Abnormalities of the shoulder joint surfaces such as os-
The recogrition of brachial plexus abnormaliies is
 teochondrosis can easily be missed on a radiographic
 much more common with the advent of MR than previ-
examination due to the curvature of the humeral head.
ously thought. The use of the large field-of-view STIR
Joint surface abnormalities, however, are usually read-
sequence allows for detection of small lesions that can
ily apparent on MR studies (Figure 3.15). The epiphysis
then be followed with T2-weighted sequences in the
   s    
transverse plane and T1 before and after contrast as
 suppressed images, and the defect is clearly seen as
necessary (Figure 3.12). The large FOV STIR sequence
- si a s is pe a r ar e
allows screering of the nerves of the thoracic limb from
 creased signal intensity on all sequences deep to the
the elbow to the spine. With this imaging techrique,
 lesion indicating a sclerotic subchondral bone. If any
- p e uo ,sq n, se rade se
   s  s s
ground. The challenge associated with these types of
 present in the bone, those will be seen on the STIR or
lesions is distinguishing the adjacent normal vascu-
T2 fat-saturated sequences as an area of high signal in-
 lar structures from abnormal, enlarged, hyperintense
tensity.
nerves.
While MR provides excellent delineation of the
 macroscopic extent of disease, histopathologic corre-
The ElboW Joint Region
 lation has shown that the microscopic extent of pe-
ripheral nerve disease is usually underestimated. Ex-
The elbow region has been evaluated less frequently to
tension of the macroscopic disease process through
date compared to the shoulder joint. Due to the rela-
the intervertebral foramen and into the spinal canal
tively small size of the joint, adequate imaging of this
should be determined as this information may affect
joint was initially less than ideal. With new MR technol-
therapeutic decisions (Figure 3.12). Unfortunately, ex-
ogy and better receiver coils, however, better images of
tension of peripheral nerve disease into the forami-
this joint are possible. The anatomic structures includ-
nal region is sometimes not apparent on MR imag-
ing the coronoid processes are clearly seen. The con-
ing studies even though it is present in the animal.
gruity of the joints can be evaluated as the sequences
 If there is any concern regarding the proximal ex-
can be acquired in all planes. The transverse and dor-
tent of a brachial plexus neoplastic disease, appro-
 sal plane images are set to the axis of the radius and
priate imaging of the associated spinal segments
ulna.
 and exiting peripheral nerve rootlets should be
Currently, many veterinarians and veterinary sur-
performed.
 geons rely heavily on computed tomography for the
241PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
L
plane. Hyperintersity of the mass in the caudal aspect car be seer, as well as fhe crarial aspect of the proximal humerus and
noted by the arrows, as well as within the medullary cavity and slighfly on the crarial aspect of the humerus. (D) Post-confrast
transverse image. The confrast enhancement of the mass can be seen outside of the humerus with the small arrows and within
the body of the humerus (large arrows). This mass is a sarcoma and was not visible radiographically.
242ORTHOPEDIC
D
Figure 3.8.  (A) T2-weighted sagittal image shows a mass in the region of the shoulder joint. Mass appears to involve the
  s n  e  n  n s m ( s d  s m s 
point to enlarged superficial cervical (prescapular) and axillary lymph nodes. (C) T1-weighted, post-contrast, fat-suppressed 
image through the shoulder joint showing the presence of the mass outside of the normal confines of the shoulder joint. The
mass was proven to be a synovial cell sarcoma.
243 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
Ms sme rs sas paee uo saend dees au u sianas s an pue () ssan rediia d'e ain
the presence of hyperintensity in the proximal biceps tendon on (A). The distal portion of the tendon is seen on (B). The
same plane as (A). The hyperintensity of the biceps tendon is seen. Therefore, this finding has been confirmed on a T2-weigthed
image that was not artifactual. There is mild joint effusion. (D) STIR transverse image. The marked synovifis can be seen, as
indicated by the small arrows, and the joint distention by the large arrows.
244 ORTHOPEDIC
B
Figure 3.10.  Brachial plexus avulsion. (A) STIR sequence in the parasagiftal plane to the left of midline. (B) STIR dorsal plane
image. The hyperintensity to the left of the spinal column is between the spinal column and scapula is readily seen. This is
confirmed to be an avulsion of the brachial plexus from a traumatic incident.
diagnosis of fragmented medial coronoid process, a
of the triceps tendon on the olecranon (Figure 3.18)
condition all too common in the active and sporting
is seen as a loss of integrity of the tendon in T1 im-
breeds. Orthopedic surgeons recognized that canine el-
bow dysplasia is a far more complex syndrome, which
the inflammatory response, and there can be methe-
is typically related to more abnormalities than those just
0 rd i uo puis pas se nsd uno
involving the medial coronoid process. Many of these
contrast.
are associated with other soft tissue abnormalities, and
Osteoarthritis (Figure 3.19) of the elbow is a common
therefore can go unrecognized on CT examinations of
condition, and the MR appearance of joint effusion as
the elbow.
seen on the T2-weighted sequences and osteophytes on
Images of the normal elbow depict all anatomical
the periarticular margins with contrast enhancement of
 structures clearly (Figure 3.16). Many clinicians will re-
the synovial liring is seen and helps rule out more seri-
 quest bilateral studies to utilize the non-affected limb
 ous conditions. Neoplastic conditiors of the elbow are
as a control for the affected limb. While this can be use-
not common, but are readily detected on a standard MR
 ful, familiarity with normal MR anatomy precludes the
examination. Damage to the origin of the deep digital
 necessity for this second study It is important to recog-
flexor tendor at the level of the medial epicondyle of the
rize, however, that elbow diseases can be bilateral and
humerus can be seen (Figure 3.20). There is a high T2
therefore, bilateral imaging studies are often appropri-
weighted signal intensity of the peritendionous struc-
ate. Confusion can occur, as many abnormal conditions
tures best seen on the STIR sequence tonull out the adja-
s  re  rs anq ar
 cent subcutaneous fat signal. The tendon is enlarged on
while the animal may be more, or exclusively affected
 the sequences due to the typical unorganized attempts
in a single limb. Bilateral studies should be performed
to repair the damaged collagen fibers.
if there is a clirical indication for diagnosis, prognosis,
or treatment.
Abnormalities of the elbow that have been diagnosed
PELVIC REGION
with MR include fragmented coronoid process (Figure
3.17). The fragment is best seen on the proton density
MR studies of the pelvic region are often indicated in
or T2 fat saturated or STIR sequences as the synovial
arimals due to the complexity of the soft tissue struc
fluid dissects along the fissure. Trauma to the insertion
tures in this region. It is best to place the animal in
245 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
             s    
showing the hyperintensity in the proximal humerus underneath the infraspinafus tendon. In this case, the lesion of the
 infraspinatus insertion is causing more bone edema from avulsion of the fibers at their insertion. The anatomical difference
between supraspinatus and infraspinatus diseases is readily seen.
246ORTHOPEDIC
Figure 3.12. Brachial plexus lesion. (A) Large FOV STIR dorsal image. Hyperintense area lateral to the spine is indicated
confrast, fat-suppressed dorsal plane image. The line indicates the plane of section of D. (D) Tl-weighted, post-contrast,
fat-suppressed image showing increased signal intensity in the region of the nerve root. Tentative diagnosis—enlarged nerve
247PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 3.13. Avulsion of the biceps tendon. (A) T2-weighted sagiftal sequence. The arrows point to the end of the biceps
tendon surrounded by fluid. (B) STIR sequence showing the lack of a biceps tendon in its normal location, which would be
between the arrows. (C) Transverse image through the end of the biceps tendon at the level seen in (A). (D) Just proximal to
the end showing only the fluid within the sheath of the tendon with no tendon being present.
248 ORTHOPEDIC
Figure 3.14. (A) Traumatic tear to the supraspinatus muscle is seen on the STIR sagiftal sequence. (B)STIR transverse sequence
showing this tear in the supraspinatus muscle. The dotted line shows the plane of section of (A).
dorsal recumbent position and use a field of view that
Osteoarthritis of the coxofemoraljoint can have marked
encompasses the entire pelvic region, typically defined
 enhancement of the synovial membrane and large areas
as the region from approximately L5 to the anus, and
 of cellulitis and synovitis (Figure 3.23). While the degree
laterally to include both gluteal musculature and cox-
of change is obvious, itis possible that septic arthritis or
ofemoral joints. The standard imaging protocol of the
 even synovial cellsarcoma could have a similar appear-
pelvis using MR includes acquisition of all planes using
ance. The degree of soft tissue inflammation is common
fat-suppressed sequences, like STIR or fat-suppressed
with osteoarthritis and should not be overinterpreted
proton density sequences. In addition, some informa-
as evidence of neoplasia.
tion, albeit limited, can be gained from the visualization
 Magnetic resonance is the best imaging modality
of the degree of contrast enhancement of the lesions.
for the accurate diagnosis of iliopsoas muscle tears.
In general, however, it is better to acquire multiple
This condition appears to be overdiagnosed clirically
sequences with different weighting, in various planes
based on physical examination and ultrasonographic
and without contrast rather than to rely heavily on the
findings, but when present the muscle abrormalities
contrast enhancement properties of the abnormal tis-
are clearly seen (Figure 3.24). The muscle tear is high
 sue. Contrast enhancement is beneficial, however, may
signal on STIR or T2 and may have methemoglobin
be helpful distinguish benign from infectious lesions of
hyperintensity on Tl prior to contrast, and the re-
the lumbosacral joint complex.
 sulting inflammation will be enhanced with contrast
A surprising rumber of tumors of the skeleton and
studies.
surrounding soft tissues in the pelvic region have been
found with MR imaging that were previously unde-
NERVE SHEATH TUMORS
tectable (Figures 3.21 and 3.22). All planes are readily
acquired utilizing fat-suppressed sequences including
STIR or fat-suppressed proton density sequences. The
While the brachial plexus is the most commorly af-
lesions are readily seen as hyperintense abnormalities
fected site with tumors of the nerve sheath, the second
on a dark (hypointense) background structures. Con-
 most common site is within the pelvic region. Tumors of
trast enhancement, however, should not be used as an
the femoral and sciatic nerves are more common than
absolute criterion for the presence of neoplastic tissue.
 previously thought with reapplication of MR and its
249PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
√
Figure 3.15.  Osteochondrosis. (A) T1-weighted image. The hyperintensity of the epiphysis is commonly seen. There is more
similar plane. Note how a small flap can be seen in (C). This was not visible in the other fwo sequences. There is no significant
subchondral edema, indicating this is not an active lesion, but quiescent. The area of erosion at the head of the humerus can be
Figure 3.16. Normal elbow. The hyperintensity of the proximal radius is seen in this young pafient. Note how the physeal
plate is readily seen. (A) T2-weighted image in sagiftal plane. (1) Olecranon process of ulna, (2) humerus, (3) radius, (4) triceps
muscles with arrow indicating tendinous insertion, (5) biceps muscle, (6) extensor muscles, (7) flexor muscles, (8) cephalic
vein. (B) STIR image in sagiftal plane. Note the normal amount of synovial fluid (9) within the elbow joint. The congruity of
the humeral ulnar articulation is well seen. (C) T1-weighted appearance of the normal medial coronoid process in the sagiffal
shown by the arrows. Note the flow of artifact from the cubital vein going in a top to bottom direction. (G) Dorsal plane through
the coronoid process as shown with the arrow.
251 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 3.16.  (Continued)
 superior soft tissue contrast. While any nerve can un-
ical examination and radiographic examination. Some
 dergo a malignant transformation, it has been our ex-
cases are normal or have something that was not seen
perience that the brachial plexus is the most common,
in the soft tissues (Figure 3.25). The presence or absence
followed by the sciatic nerve, and thirdly the femoral
 of joint effusion is readily apparent on MR. While many
nerve. It is, therefore, our protocol that all arimals
 of the diseases have similar changes on the various se-
with pelvic limb abnormalities, generally referred to
quences, the clear depiction of the anatomy allows for
the lumbosacral spine, be screened for nerve sheath tu-
 umerous diagnoses. Obviously, there are times when.
mors using a large field-of-view STIR sequence in a
 biopsy and histopathology or direct visualization is
plane plarned dorsal to the spine. Any abnormalities 
 needed for confirmation of the lesions. We have also
can be followed up with transverse imaging, including
 found a large number of instances where two or more
 is go se an re p an
different disease processes are occurring concurrently;
Examples of these lesions are given in Chapters 2 (Sec-
most commonly, this clinical scenario includes stifle os-
tion 3) and 7.
teoarthrosis with a neoplastic process that is not evident
on radiographic examination.
The most common disease within the canine stifle re.
STIFLEJOINT
mains damage to the crarial cruciate ligament. Most of
the patients submitted for MR do not have complete
The stifle joint is one of the most commorly imaged
tears with obvious drawer signs. The animals submit-
human joints utilizing magnetic resonance. By compar-
 ted for MR tend to have relatively stable stifles and pre-
ison, the veterinary commurity has been relatively slow
sumed joint effusion based on stifle radiographs; thus,
 to adopt with imaging modality for the assessment of
 the presumptive diagnosis is a partial tear of the cra-
lameness localized to this joint. The merisci, crarial and
caudal cruciate ligaments, collateral ligaments, tendon
based on loss of the normal linearity of the collagen
of the long digital extensor, the infrapatellar fat body.
fibers that span the entire length from origin to inser-
and the synovial fluid and membrane are all clearly
 tion. Damage to the collagen fibers results in inflam
seen. The oseous components are clearly seen and the
 mation spreading of these fibers, especially at their ori-
cartilage can be visualized in larger patients. We have
 gins and insertions. These lesions are then readily seen
 looked at stifle MR studies in a retrospective fashion
on MR studies as increased signal intensity in the nor
and found a large percentage of these arimals fail to
mally hypointense ligament origins and insertions, es
 have abnormalities that were suspected during phys-
pecially with STIR, T2, or proton density studies with
252ORTHOPEDIC
L7
sagiftal sequence. (B) STIR sagiftal sequence showing this fragmented medial coronoid process. (C) T1-weighted transverse
showing this fragmentation. (D) STIR-weighted transverse sequence showing this same fragmentation.
253 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
ties reflected of stifle disease, a large percentage of these
animals have abnormalities that are not generally at-
tributable to cranial cruciate ligament damage. Diseases
that are found in addition to this diagnosis are damage
to the medial and lateral meriscus. In these instances,
synovial fluid dissects in the meriscal tear and this ab-
normality is readily apparent. In general, however, it
is best to corfirm all lesions on more than one plane to
prevent errors due to volume averaging artifacts. Other
diseases that have been diagnosed in a retrospective re-
view of 60 stifle MR examinations include disruption of
the long digital extensor tendor, caudal cruciate liga-
ment damage, synovial cell sarcoma, traumatic muscle
tears, simple osteoarthritis, and patellar cartilaginous
damage.
TARSUS AND CARPUS REGIONS
Figure 3.18. Avulsion of the triceps tendon from the ole-
Many diseases of the tarsus have previously been di-
cranon. The high signal intensity identified with the arrows
agnosed with radiography or, more recently, CT. Some
is presumed hemorrhage and edematous fluid. The dark ten
 don can be seen proximal to that area.
improvements of the diagnosis of common conditions
such as osteochondrosis of the talus have occurred with
the use of CT. However, again there are soft tissue
abnormalities that are not seen with these low soft tis-
fat suppression. The origin of the crarial cruciate lig-
sue contrast techriques and are best seen with MR.
 ament is fan shaped and it often has a higher signal
With conditions such as osteochondrosis, the lesion
intensity due to volume averaging of the origin and
 is easily seen with MR, but a secondary effect on the
the synovial fluid; knowledge of this fact should help
 flexor tendons is alsoidentified. The secondary arthritic
prevent overinterpretation of damage to the cranial cru-
 reaction results in proliferation of soft tissues and
ciate ligament. The caudal cruciate ligament is more of
 deformity of the deep digital flexor tendon in the
a thick rope-like structure and is uniformly dark on all
region of the sustentaculum tali. This reaction is con-
sequences. Examples or partial tears to crarial cruciate 
sidered a contributing component of the lameness as-
ligaments are given (Figures 3.26 and 3.27). However,
 sociated with this abnormality (Figure 3.33). Tumor and
one should again be reminded that other conditions 
 foreign bodies are also well visualized with MR (Fig-
occur, including traumatic muscle tears (Figure 3.28),
ures 3.34 and 3.35). The precise localization of a for-
synovial cell sarcomas (Figure 3.29), and other condi-
eign body in the distal limb greatly facilitates surgi-
tions (Figures 3.30-3.32). Again, the signal intensities
cal removal. Foreign bodies are dark on all sequences
are similar (high on T2 and STIR) but the clear anatomic
and are surrounded by fluid. These lesions are often
depiction allows the conditions to be cataloged
seen as well or better on the STIR sequence than on
differently.
 the T1 post-contrast studies even if fat suppression is
 The radiographic abnormality that most have trusted
used. The overdependence of veterinary radiologists
 prior to this time to diagnose stifle disease has been
on post-contrast studies is probably based on experi-
apparent joint effusion with displacement of the infra-
ence with other modalities and CT in particular. The
patellar fat body. While this can be overinterpreted, it
 strength of MR is the visualization of the chemistry of
 can also be transient and not necessarily associated with
the tissue allows for diagnoses without contrast. Post-
severe clirical disease. In addition, some animals are
contrast studies have value, but they should be judged
found to be normal on MR imaging evaluations that
against the cost. The cost includes the agent, tech-
were suspected based on physical examination of hav-
rician and equipment time, and increased anesthetic
ing stifle disease. Even in dogs with clirical abnormali-
time.
254ORTHOPEDIC
in the same plane as (A). Large arrows indicate joint effusion. Small arrows point to osteophytes on the radius and anconeal
255 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
L7
(C) Transverse STIR image showing enlarged, abnormal deep digital flexor tendon at its origin from the medial epicondyle. (D)
enhancement of the joint cap suule of the elbow.
256ORTHOPEDIC
Figure 3.21. Tumor of the sacrum invading the spinal canal. (A) STIR sequence in the dorsal plane. Mass can be seen in the
 o ss  is   (   s  a  s a n a s 
seen invading the leff porfion of the sacrum. (D) Sagiftal STIR sequence showing the mass in the leff sacrum.
257 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 3.22. Sacral mass. (A) STIR dorsal plane sequence showing the mass affecting the right sacrum. (B) STIR sagiffal
in the sacral region.
258ORTHOPEDIC
Hyperintensity can be seen of the synovial fluid. Some hyperintensity can be seen within the skeleton. On biopsy this was proven
to be an inflammatory condifion. The amount of soff tissue change has never been well appreciated from our radiographic
259PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 3.24. Rupture of the iliopsoas muscle. (A) STIR sequence in the dorsal plane. The hyperintensity of the iliopsoas is
well seen, including down to its inserfion at the lesser trochanter of the proximal femur. (B) T2-weighted transverse sequence
showing the enlargement of the iliopsoas muscle at the level of the sacrum. (C) T1-weighted, fat-suppressed, post-contrast study
showing mild enhancement of the iliopsoas muscle in places, and lack of enhancement in others. (D) T1-weighted, post-confrast
260ORTHOPEDIC
B
Figure 3.25.  Normal stifle. (A) PD-weighted fat-suppressed coronalimage with the sagiftal slice planes superimposed (parallel 
white dashed lines). The sagiftal plane is oriented parallel to the medial collateral ligament. We found that no additional
information regarding the integrity of the cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) is gained by aligning the sagiftal plane with the CCL
as it travels from lateral to medial. (B) T2-weighted sagiftal image with the coronal slice planes superimposed (parallel white 
dashed lines), which is aligned parallel to the patellar tendon. (C) T2-weighted sagiftal image with the transverse slice planes
superimposed (parallel white dashed lines), which is aligned perpendicular to the patellar tendon. (D), (E) T2-weighted sagiftal
images near the midline of the stifle joint. The cranial cruciate ligament is typically not as well seen as the caudal cruciate
ligament due to its strucfure where if starts off as a fan-shaped strucfure prior to becoming a more round ligamentous strucfure.
adjacent to cruciate ligaments, (2) patellar tenon, (3) caudal cruciate ligament, (4) patella, (5) femur, (6) tibia, (7) gastrocnemius
muscles, (8) crarial cruciate ligament, (9) meniscofemoral ligament, (10) transverse ligament. Note the fold-over artifact over
n is m  s   s a i ss   () )    n g nq a
on all imaging sequences and alterations in the shape and/or signal intensity should be regarded as pathologic change. When
viewed at the level of the midbody of the femoral condyles, ift will have a typical "bowtie" appearance. The synovial fluid (12) i
seen on fat-suppressed imaging sequences. Cartilage imaging is generally considered extremely challenging, even in human
patients who have thicker cartilage. Changes in the subchondral bone in fat-suppressed images have proven reliable indicators
(1) reuoios pue (H) asiaasuen au u saeu passaiddns-e paoiam-d (-(H) pazensa you n uaa 'seuep aereo go
Figure 3.25.
(Continued)
262ORTHOPEDIC
Bone
edema
Figure 3.26. Torn meniscus. (A) STIR sequence. The fluid is bright and can easily be seen within the torn meniscus. (B) Dorsal
signal intensity within the meniscus. (C) T1-weighted image. While the torn meniscus can be seen, it is much more difficult
thanthat of (A).
Figure 3.27. Partial tear of the cranial cruciate ligament. (A) The large arrows show joint effusion and displacement of the
cranial cruciate ligament. (B) T2-weighted sequence in the same plane. Large arrows show the caudal cruciate ligament and
cruciate ligament. (E) Dorsal plane, proton dlensity, fat suppressed showing the hyperintensity at both the origin and insertion
of the cranial cruciate ligament. This was confirmed as a partial tear in the cranial cruciate ligament.
264ORTHOPEDIC
Figure 3.28.  (A) T2 sagiftal, large arrow indicate joint effusion and synovitis, small arrows point to lack of CrCL visualization
and stretching of CaCL. Note crarial displacement of the tibia relative to normal posifion. (B) Proton density fat suppressed 
sagiftal image depicifting same structures seen in A. (C) PD fat sat dorsal plane image with edema at origin of the CrCL.
265 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
(A) T2-weighted image showing a hyperintensity within the gastrocnemius muscle. (B) T2-weighted image showing a perfectly
     s             
femur. This study correctly shows the presence of a torn gastrocnemius muscle with no involvement of the stifle joint. This
rupfure as its primary differential diagnosis.
266ORTHOPEDIC
C
D
Figure 3.30. Young Labrador with acute hind limb lameness, thought to be a cranial cruciate ligament rupture. (A) T2-
weighted sagiftal image showing a mass at the caudal aspect of the proximal tibia. (B) STIR sequence showing the same
mass. Note how the crarial and caudal cruciate ligaments and the infrapatellar fat body are all normal. (C) T1-weighted, fat-
this mass. Mass was histologically proven to be a synovial cell sarcoma. Again, in this young Labrador, there was active and
euurexa esud pue urexa oderoeru paseqamdnaue aen e aqounou sem pue uadus e pi
MR provided the differenfial diagnosis of a mass. The imaging study allowed the dog to have a proper surgical removal, which
 in this case involved amputation of this hind limb after an extensive metastatic survey proved negative.
267PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 3.31. Medial patellar luxafion. (A)-(C) STIR images in sagiftal, transverse, and dorsal plane respecfively. Arrows on
A and C point to the synovial fluid distention. Arrows on B point to the bone edema in the patella and media ridge of the
frochlea. (D) T2 sagiftal image, the cranial arrow points to the normal cranial cruciate ligament and the caudal arrow points to
the normal caudal cruciate ligament.
268ORTHOPEDIC
Figure 3.32. Infiltrative lipoma. (A) T2-weighted transverse image of the thigh in the region of the stifle. The arrows point to
  n     n d s n e s  a d   an    
thelipoma.
B
C
and the hyperintensity around the joint is from the synovitis. (B) T2-weighted dorsal plane image showing the hyperintensity
of the medial trochlea of the talus, associated with the OCD lesion. (C) Marked synovitis and joint distension is seen as shown
shape out of its normal oblong shape as it rides over the sustenfaculum tali. This imaging has allowed befter understanding of
the secondary effects of osteochondrosis on the deep digital flexor tendon.
Dime
Stick
Figure 3.34. Foreign body within the carpus. This animal had two previous surgeries and only small pieces of wood were
found. MR exam allowed for the clear visualizafion of a foreign material deep to the flexor tendons in the metacarpal region.
T1-weighted post-confrast studlies in the same planes. Note how the confrast images really do not show the lesion as well as the
STIR sequences. Contrast often provides minimal information on magneftic resonance studies. Strength of magnetic resonance
 is visualized in the varying stages of chemistry through sequence selection. (E) Photograph of the stick that was removed at 
surgery.
270 ORTHOPEDIC
B
C
D
Figure 3.35. Foreign body in the metatarsal region. (A), (B) STIR sequences in the sagiftal and transverse planes, respectively.
than that seen in (D). Again, note how the confrast does not improve visualizafion and is necessary in these types of studies.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baird DK, Hathcock JT, Kincaid SA, Rumph PF, Kammer
 mann J, Widmer WR, et al. 1998. Low-field magnetic res-
onance imaging of early subchondral cyst-like lesions in
Alhadlaq HA, Xia Y, Moody JB, and Matyas JR. 2004. Detect-
induced cranial cruciate ligament deficient dogs. Vet Ra-
ing structural changes in early experimental osteoarthri-
diol Ultrasound 39(3):167-173.
tis of tibial cartilage by microscopic magnetic resonance
Baird DK, Hathcock JT, Rumph PF, Kincaid SA, and Visco
imaging and polarised light microscopy. Ann Rheum Dis
 DM. 1998. Low-field magnetic resonance imaging of the
63(6):709-717.
canine stifle joint: normal anatomy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 Arnoczky SP, Cooper TG, Stadelmaier DM, and Hannafin JA.
39(2):87-97.
1994. Magnetic resonance signals in healing menisci: arn ex-
Baird DK, Kincaid SA, Hathcock JT, Rumph PF, Kammerman
perimental study in dogs. Arthroscopy 10(5):552-557.
 J, and Visco DM. 1999. Effect of hydration on signal intensity
Azer NM, Winalski CS, and Minas T. 2004. MR imaging for
of gelatin phantoms using low-field magnetic resonance
 imaging: possible application in osteoarthritis. Vet Radiol
osteoarthritis. Radiol Clin North Am 42(1):43-60.
Ultrasound 40(1):27-35.
271 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
 Barfield CM and Morrison WB. 2000. Magnetic resonance
Kaiser S, Cornely D, Golder W, Garner MT, Wolf KJ, Waibl
arthrography of the canine stifle joint: technique and ap-
H, et al. 2001. The correlation of canine patellar luxation
 plications in eleven military dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
and the anteversion angle as measuired using magnetic res-
41(3):200-213.
onance images. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(2):113-118.
 Bischofberger AS, Konar M, Ohlerth S, Geyer H, Lang J,
Keller MD, Galloway GJ, and Pollift CC. 2006. Magnetic res-
 Ueltschi G, et al. 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging, ul-
onance microscopy of the equine hoof wall: a sfuidy of res-
trasonography and histology of the suspensory ligament
olution and potenfial. Equine Vet J 38(5):461-466.
origin: a comparafive study of normal anatomy of warm-
 Kippenes H and Johnston G. 1998. Diagnostic imaging of
blood horses. Equine Vet J 38(6):508-516.
osteochondrosis. Vet Clin North Am Smal Anim Pract
Carrig CB. 1997. Diagnostic imaging of osteoarthritis. Vet Clin
28(1):137-160.
North Am Small Anim Pract 27(4):777-814.
 Kirberger RM and Fourie SL. 1998. Elbow dysplasia in the
Davis GJ, Kapatkin AS, Craig LE, Heins GS, and Wortman
dog: pathophysiology, diagnosis and control. J S Afr Vet 
 JA. 2002. Comparison of radiography, computed tomog-
Assoc 69(2):43-54.
raphy, and magnetic resonance imaging for evaluation of
I umg 'as due ueA TY Haureg 'IN dreus 'NI Aeauoy 
appendicular osteosarcoma in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Hung WY,et al. 1990. Golden retriever muscular dystrophy:
220(8):1171-1176.
monitoring for success. Adv Exp Med Biol 280:267-272.
 De Smet AA, Dueland RT, and Dubielzig RR 1993. Case report
Lahm A, Uhl M, Erggelet C, Haberstroh J, and Mrosek E.
775. Canine osteosarcoma with associated avascular necro
sis and sequestrum formafion. Skeletal Radiol 22(2):146
dral bone damage: an experimental study in dogs with
149.
histopathological grading. Acta Orthop Scand 75(6):762-
 Evans PM, GasselA, and Huber M. 2004. What is your diagno
767.
sis? Synovial cell sarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224(4):511-
Lee JM, ChoiSH, Park HS, Lee MW, Han CJ, Choi I, et al. 2005.
512.
Radiofrequency thermal ablation in canine femur: eval-
Fitch RB, Wilson ER, Hathcock JT, and Montgomery RD. 1997.
uafion of coagulation necrosis reproducibility and MRI-
Radiographic, computed tomographic and magnetic reso
histopathologic correlation. Am J Roentgenol 185(3):661-
nance imaging evaluation of a chronic long digital extensor
667.
tendon avulsion in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(3):177-
Lipsitz D, Levitski RE, Chauvet AE, and Berry WL. 2001.
181.
Magnetic resonance imaging feafures of cervical stenotic
Franci P, Leece EA, and Brearley JC. 2006. Post anaesthetic
myelopathy in 21 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(1):20-
27.
 onance imaging compared to horses undergoing surgery.
 Martig S, Konar M, Schmokel HG, Rytz U, Spreng D, Schei-
Equine Vet J 38(6):497-501.
degger J, et al. 2006. Low-field MRI and arthroscopy of
Fransson BA, Gavin PR, and Lahmers KK. 2005. Supraspina-
fus tendinosis associated with biceps brachii tendon dis
cranial cruciate ligament insufficiency. Vet Radiol Ulfra-
placement in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227(9):1429-1433,
sound 47(6):515-522.
1416.
Mazur WJ and Lazar T. 2005. What is your diagnosis? Chon-
Ganey T, Libera J, Moos V, Alasevic O, Fritsch KG, Meisel HJ,
crosarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 226(8):1301-1302.
et al. 2003. Disc chondrocyte transplantaftion in a canine
Mrosek EH, Lahm A, Erggelet C, Uhl M, Kurz H, Eissner
 B, et al. 2006. Subchondral bone trauma causes cartilage
tebral disc. Spine 28(23):2609-2620.
matrix degenerafion: an immunohistochemical analysis in
Goodfellow M and Platt S. 2003. What is your diagno
a carine model. Osteoarthr Cartil 14(2):171-178.
sis? Chrondroblastic osteosarcoma. J Small Anim Pract
Nadel SN, Debatin JF, Richardson WJ, Hedlund LW, Senft C,
44(11):479, 515-516.
Rizk WS, et al.1992. Detectiorn of acute avascular necrosis of
Grosslinger K, Lorinson D, Hiftmair K, Konar M, and Weis-
the femoral head in dogs: dynamic contrast-enhanced MR
senbock H. 2004. liopsoas abscess with liac and femoral
imaging vs spin-echo and STIR sequences. Am J Roentgenol
vein thrombosis in an adult Siberian husky. J Small Anim
159(6):1255-1261.
Pract 45(2):113-116.
Nakamura T, Matsumoto T, Nishino M, Tomita K, and Kadoya
Hayes AM, Dennis R, Smith KC, and Brearley MJ. 1999. Syn-
 M. 1997. Early magnetic resonance imaging and histologic
findings in a model of femoral head necrosis. Clin Orthop
ment of arn unusual canine sof tissue fumour. J Small Anim
Relat Res (334):68-72.
Pract 40(10):489-494.
Nolte-Ernsting CC, Adam G, Buhne M, Prescher A, and Gun-
Hoskinson J and Tucker RL. 2001. Diagnostic imaging of
fher RW. 1996. MRI of degenerafive bone marrow lesions
lameness in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
in experimental osteoarthritis of canine knee joints. Skeletal
Pract 31(1):165-180, vii.
Radiol 25(5):413-420.
Janach KJ, Breit SM, and Kunzel WW. 2006. Assessment of
Nordberg CC and Johnson KA. 1999. Magnetic resonance
the geomefry of the cubital (elbow) joint of dogs by use of
imaging of normal canine carpal ligaments. Vet Radiol Ul-
magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Vet Res 67(2):211-218.
trasound 40(2):128-136.
272
ORTHOPEDIC
Platt SR, MeConnell JF, Garosi LS, Ladlow J, de Stefari A, and
Tidwell SA, Graham JP, Peck IN, and Berry CR 2007. Inci-
Shelton GO. 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging in the di-
dence of pulmonary embolism after non-cemented total
agnosis of canine inflammatory myopathies in three dogs.
hip arthroplasty in eleven dogs: computed tomographic
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(6):532-537.
pulmonary angiography and pulmonary perfusion scintig-
 Schaefer SL and Forrest LJ. 2006. Magnetic resonance imag-
raphy. Vet Surg 36(1):37-42.
ing of the canine shoulder: an anatomic study. Vet Surg
Turan E, Bolukbasi O, and Omeroglu A. 2007. The effect of
35(8):721-728
fhe tarsal joint posifions on the tibial nerve motor action
 Shubitz LF and Dial SM. 2005. Coccidioidomycosis: a diag-
potential latency in dog: electrophysiological and anatom-
nostic challenge. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 20(4):220
ical studies. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr 114(1):20-24.
226.
van Bree H, Degryse H, Van Ryssen B, Ramon F, and Desmidt
Smith M, Murray R, Dyson S, Mair T, and Boswell J. 2006.
 M. 1993. Pathologic correlations with magnetic resonance
 Magnetic resonance imaging study in horses. Vet Rec
images of osteochondrosis lesions in canine shoulders. J
159(19):643.
Am Vet Med Assoc 202(7):1099-1105.
Smith MR, Wright IM, and Smith RK. 2007. Endoscopic as-
van Bree H, Van Ryssen B, Degryse H, and Ramon F. 1995.
sessment and treatment of lesions of the deep digital flexor
 Magnetic resonance arthrography of the scapulohumeral
tendon in the navicular bursae of 20 lame horses. Equine
 joint in dogs, using gadopentetate dimeglumine. Am J Vet 
Vet J 39(1):18-24.
Res 56(3):286-288.
 Snaps FR, Balligand MH, Saunders JH, Park RD, and Don-
Wallack ST, Wisner ER, Werner JA, Walsh PJ, Kent MS, Fairley
 delinger RF. 1997. Comparison of radiography, magnetic
RA, et al. 2002. Accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging
 resonance imaging, and surgical findings in dogs with el-
for estimafing inframedullary osteosarcoma extent in pre-
bow dysplasia. Am J Vet Res 58(12):1367-1370.
operative planning of canine limb-salvage procedures. Vet
Snaps FR, Park RD, Saunders JH, Balligand MH, and Don-
Radiol Ultrasound 43(5):432-441.
 delinger RF. 1999. Magnetic resonance arthrography of the
Widmer WR, Buckwalter KA, Braunstein EM, Visco DM, and 
cubitaljoint in dogs affected with fragmented medial coro-
 O'Connor BL. 1991. Principles of magnetic resonance imag-
noid processes. Am J Vet Res 60(2):190-193.
Snaps FR, Saunders JH, Park RD, Daenen B, Balligand MH,
Assoc 198(11):1914-1922.
and Dondelinger RF. 1998. Comparison of spin echo, gra-
Yabe K, Yoshida K, Yamamoto N, Nishida S, Ohshima C,
 dient echo and fat safuration magnetic resonance imaging
Sekiguchi M, et al. 1997. Diagnosis of quinolone-induced
sequences for imaging the canine elbow. Vet Radiol Ultra-
arthropathy in juvenile dogs by use of magnetic resonance
sound 39(6):518-523.
(MR) imaging. J Vet Med Sci 59(7):597-599.
Steprik MW, Olby N, Thompson RR, and Marcellin-Little DJ.
Young B, Klopp L, Albrecht M, and Kraft S. 2004. Imaging di-
2006. Femoral neuropathy in a dog with iliopsoas muscle
agnosis: magnefic resonance imaging of a cervical wooden
injury. Vet Surg 35(2):186-190.
foreign body in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45(6):538-541.
Suga K, Yuan Y, Ogasawara N, Okada M, and Matsunaga N.
Zarucco L, Wisner ER, Swanstrom MD, and Stover SM. 2006.
 2003. Visualization of normal and interrupted lymphaftic
 Image fusion of computed tomographic and magnetic res-
Auderdun  ea m sia p u aren
onance images for the development of a three-dimensional
using an extracellular MR contrast agent, gadopentetate
musculo-skeletal model of the equine forelimb. Vet Radial
dimeglumine. Invest Radiol 38(6):349-357.
Ultrasound 47(6):553-562.
CHAPTER FOUR
MAGNETIC RESONANCE
IMAGING OF ABDOMINAL
DISEASE
Patrick R. Gavin and Shannon P. Holmes
 Magnetic resonance studies of the abdomen can pro-
ables, and the TR and TE have major effects as well as
vide exquisite anatomical detail of organ systems.
spin echo versus gradient echo sequences. The follow-
 In animals, these studies are aided by general anes-
 ing is a general guideline. The normal liver is relatively
thesia, which reduces motion from the gastrointesti-
hyperintense on T1 sequences and isointense on T2-
nal tract. Sequences found to be of most use include
weighted sequences. The differing lobes are usually of
T2-weighted images (especially with fat-suppression),
the same signal intensity. Within the liver, the gall blad-
STIR sequences, and Tl-weighted images before and
der is present as a discrete, semicircular hyperintense
after contrast administration. If possible, T1-weighted
structure (relative to the signal of the liver parenchyma)
images also benefit from fat-suppression due to the
on T2-weighted sequences. Utilizing various imaging
 large amount of intra-abdominal fat in most veteri-
planes, the location of the biliary system including the
 nary patients. In general, respiratory gaiting is not
common and cystic bile ducts can also be determined.
required and if flow or respiratory motion artifact
Vascular structures associated with the liver are eas-
becomes a problem with interpretation, simply swap-
ily seen and appear as hypointense or hyperintense on
ping the phase and frequency encoding directions will
T1 and T2, respectively. The normal pancreas is slightly
allow for complete visualization of the abdominal vis-
hyperintense to liver on Tl sequences and isointense to
cera (Figure 4.1).
liver on T2-weighted sequences. The normal spleen is
For imaging of the abdominal structures, the ani-
hypointense to liver on T1 sequences and hyperintense
 mal is most commonly placed in a dorsally recumbent
to liver on T2-weighted sequences.
position.
The kidneys have a more complex appearance with
MR imaging. The normal kidney cortex is markedly
hyperintense to liver on T1 sequences and very hyper-
NORMAL ABDOMINAL
intense to liver and isointense to spleen on T2-weighted
sequences. The medullary region is moderately hyper-
ANATOMY
intense to liver on T1 sequences and more similar in
appearance to renal cortex only more hyperintense on
Abdominal structures can be distinguished based
T2-weighted sequences.
on location and imaging characteristics. Fat satura-
The urinary bladder has low signal intensity on T1
tion techniques are generally used due to the large
sequences and is very hyperintense on T2-weighted se.
amount of fat in the abdomen. Various imaging planes
 r sr a d s ade s s
may be necessary to image the complex geometry
signal from the urine.
 Of some of the abdominal structures. In dogs larger
The adrenal glands are isointense to renal cortex on
than 20 kg body weight, slice thicknesses of 1 cm are
T1 sequences and isointense to renal cortex on T2-
appropriate.
weighted sequences. These structures are present im-
 The organs will be similar in appearance to the gross
 mediately adjacent to the relatively hypointense vena
anatomical features, and those features are as important
 cava, which is tubular in appearance and relatively cir-
 as signal characteristics. The appearance has many vari-
cular in transverse plane imaging sequences.
Practical Small Animal MRT Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
273
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
Figure 4.1.
275 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
G
H
Figure 4.1. Normal Anatomy. (A),(B) Coronal T2-weighted fat-suppressed images. (C) Sagittal T2-weighted fat-suppressed
ds () os () api ( aa (i) st pssads-ey piam-1 asa ( ) s piam-
(5) duodenum, (6) portal vein, (7) kidney, (8) adrenal gland, (9) small intestines, (10) colon, (11) descending aorta, (12) caudal
vena cava, (13) urinary bladder, (14) pancreas.
 The normal intestinal structures are isointense to
ABNORMALITIES OF THE LIVER
spleen on T1 sequences and on T2-weighted sequences.
 In the caudal abdomen, the reproductive structures
AND ASSOCIATED STRUCTURES
may be imaged. Normal ovaries are mildly hyperin-
tense on T1 sequences and moderately hyperintense
 e e a ne  are srs
on T2-weighted sequences. The uterus is isointense
intensity on T2-weighting in the liver and spleen. Con-
on T1 sequences and hyperintense on T2-weighted se-
trast enhancement is of limited benefit unless arterial,
quences.
as well as venous, studies are performed. If arterial and
The normal prostate is isointense on Tl sequences
venous studies are performed on hepatic and splenic
and hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences.
lesions, the correct diagnosis of benign from malignant
The major abdominal vascular structures of the aorta
disease is reported to be over 90%.
and caudal vena cava are variable on Tl sequences
The liver studies are performed to determine whether
and on T2-weighted sequences due to flow and phase
lesions involve the vena cava or portal vein (Figure 4.2).
encoding direction. Knowledge of normal anatomy al-
Liver studies are also used to detect relatively smaller
lows for clear visualization of these vessels and other
primary tumors or metastases (Figure 4.3). Lesions that
large vessels including the portal vein.
should not be confused with neoplastic processes are
 In some instances, the lymphatic system is appar-
the hypointensities seen within the spleen on virtually
ent. The chylous ducts are hypointense on Tl sequences
 all sequences. These hypointensities are not macro-
and hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences. Normal
scopic or microscopic structural lesions. We have
lymph nodes are isointense on T1 sequences and hy-
performed histopathology of these "lesions" and no
perintense on T2-weighted sequences.
abnormalities have been detected (Figure 4.4). To date
 The omentum is usually not readily apparent as a
we have been unable to prove their chemical composi-
discrete structure, however, contributes to the relative
tion, but all indications are they represent iron storage
fat signal in various regions of the abdomen.
sites.
C
D
Figure 4.2. (A) Sagittal T2-weighted fat-suppressed gradient echo image with a large hepatic mass indicated by the large
fat-suppressed gradient echo of the liver mass ventral to the vena cava. Note the mass has a similar appearance to the remaining
  n      n    a    (  s  
 Note the difference in appearance between the mass and the remaining liver on this sequence. (D) Transverse post-contrast
i nu sap isn a mu an ( se usd aes a u sse a go a oa sua passddnse paiam-
 i si s al g i ia a p    aa 
277 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
凸
B
D
this large mass is in the left lateral and medial lobes. A smaller mass is seen in the right lateral lobe. Small arrows indicate the
displaced caudal vena cava. (B) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in the dorsal plane. Arrows show the same masses as seen
show the mass in the left lateral liver encroaching well beyond midline. Small arrows indicate the gall bladder. Arrows in the
arrows point to two lesions within the thorax. The more lateral cranial lesion is seen on (C); the medial lesion is not detected
in the previous images. Both lesions are compatible with metastatic lesions. Biopsy would be needed for confirmation. (E)
 T2-weighted, gradient echo, transverse plane rostral to (A). The small arrows show the gall bladder. Large arrows next to the
gall bladder show the presence of a very small mass, presumed to be a probable metastasis to the liver. Arrows in the thorax
point to a spherical lesion compatible with metastasis.
C
 Figure 4.4. (A) T2-weighted sagittal image. All images were post-contrast, as the brain had been studied prior to the abdomen.
Large arrows point to the hypointense lesions within the spleen. These lesions are not visible ultrasonographically, on gross
pathology, or on histopathology. Therefore, they must represent some form of chemical change, probably related to iron storage.
Small arrows point to the artifact seen with high concentrations of gadolinium within the urinary bladder following contrast. It
are in the dorsal portions of the urinary bladder. (B) T2-weighted transverse imaging showing the hypointense lesions within the
spleen, compatible with iron storage. (C) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in the dorsal plane showing the same hypointense
lesions within the spleen. These lesions are hypointense in all image sequences.
279 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
ABNORMALITIES OF THE
ability of magnetic resonance imaging to clearly im-
age the structure in all three major planes allows for
KIDNEYS AND ADRENAL
clear definition of invasion (Figure 4.6). These stud-
GLANDS
ies can aid in deciding whether lesions are infiltra-
tive which may influence surgical excisability. Stud-
ies in the humans have found that with techniques
Renal and adrenal studies are readily performed with
 magnetic resonance imaging. Cases where ultrasonog-
to ascertain lipid content, the fat containing adrenal
raphy has been unable to give a clear diagnosis are good
 masses are generally benign with a high degree of speci-
candidates for MRI due to the superior resolution and
ficity. Adrenal tumors that are clinically inapparent
 have also been found when imaging the thoracolum
contrast (Figure 4.5). Adrenal tumors can invade the
vena cava. Definite invasion of the vena cava can be dif-
bar spine. Tumors may be single or bilateral (Figures 4.7
ficult to ascertain from other imaging modalities. The
and 4.8).
Figure 4.5. Case was followed with ultrasonography. A "lesion" was seen in the right kidney that appeared to be getting
larger. Patient was referred for MRI. (A)-(C) T2-weighted gradient echo sequences in the dorsal, sagittal, and transverse
planes, respectively. A large hyperintense lesion in the right renal pelvis compatible with hydronephrosis is highlighted with
hypointensity on T1-weighting, compatible with a fluid of low cellularity or hydrogen content.
B
Figure 4.6.  (A) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in the sagittal plane. Large arrows show an adrenal mass. Small arrows
sequences over gradient echo sequences. All the material present within the caudal vena cava may not be tumor. Some of it
may represent thrombus formation. (C) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in the dorsal plane. Mass invading the vena cava
is highlighted with arrows. (D) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in the dorsal plane, dorsal to (C). Enlarged right adrenal
isreadily seen.
Figure 4.7. (A) T2-weighted STIR sequence in the dorsal plane. Large arrows highlight an enlarged left adrenal
gland. Small arrows show flow artifact going outside the patient. It must be remembered that this flow artifact
would also be superimposed on the patient. All of these sequences are obtained post-contrast and, therefore, some
of the image intensities will be altered. Note the right kidney has a low signal intensity and it should be higher on
a STIR sequence. The low signal intensity is probably due to high concentrations of gadolinium within the kidney
(C) T2-weighted, gradient echo, fat-suppressed image in the dorsal plane. Note how there is less motion artifact in a
 gradient echo sequence than in the STTR sequence due to a much shortened acquisition time. (D) T2-weighted gradient
echo, fat-suppressed sequence in the transverse plane. Large adrenal is seen. The aorta and vena cava are indicated
with large arrows. Note there is no vascular involvement present.
Figure 4.6. (Continued) (E) T1-weighted gradient echo
sequence, transverse plane image. Large arrows show the
large right adrenal gland. Small arrows show the invasion 
into the vena cava. A small portion of the lumen of the vena
cava is still patent with a lack of signal intensity indicating
blood flow.
C
Figure 4.8. Bilateral adrenal masses. All of these lesions are post-contrast. (A) T2-weighted, gradient echo, fat-suppressed
image in the dorsal plane. Left and right adrenal masses are seen. (B) T1-weighted, gradient echo, post-contrast, fat-suppressed
is seen. (D) STTR sequence in the transverse plane. The large arrows show the low signal intensity in the kidney. This is probably
artifactual due to high gadolinium concentrations. The small arrows show the enlarged right adrenal gland. The low signal
q oi anp sinee juasandan pinoo io saseu passaddns-iey asau ul iey suasadau pno spue leuape al u sasuaiu
administered.
Figure 4.9. Patient with high insulin levels and hypoglycemia. (A) T2-weighted, gradient echo sequence, fat-
suppressed, dorsal plane image. Arrows indicate a spherical mass that appears to be in the liver. However, due
to volume average artifact, this mass could also be within the ad jacent pancreas. (B) STIR sequence, transverse plane.
m aq oi eadde ss sn ae pno pee aaae aa y and asiaasu a u uaas si ss s
showing the same mass. (D) Another section of the STTR sequence. Another mass was detected closer to midline.
 u a passaddns-ey 'uanbas opa-uaera paiam-i () apou ydu pareua ue qusadau Aeuu s
sagittal plane. The mass seen in Figure 4.9 (D) is depicted here.
283 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
OTHER ASSOCIATED ORGANS
The MR often helps determine resectability of lesions
within the pelvis due to the inability of ultrasound to
provide a complete examination in this area.
Other organs have been imaged on occasion. These
include the pancreas in the search for small, non-
 MR can be used to study lesions of the genitourinary
ultrasonographically detectable insulinomas. To date,
tract, but to date, most lesions have been found in a
serendipitous fashion. Magnetic resonance can be used
the majority of these insulinomas have been detected;
however, there have been cases of presumed insuli-
for superior visualization of tumors such as transitional
cell carcinomas in the bladder. The use of a FLAIR se-
noma based on serum insulin levels that have evaded
quence will allow a T2 image of the tumor while nulling
MR detection (Figure 4.9). MR can be utilized to visu-
out the signal from the urine (Figure 4.10).
alize gastrointestinal abnormalities, including masses.
E
Figure 4.10.  Transitional cell carcinoma. (A) FLAIR inversion recovery sequence. This allows for nulling of the urine and 
Mass is less intense than the urine. Small arrows show the presence of the colon. (C) T1-weighted, post-contrast fat-suppressed
image. Contrast enhancement of the mass is readily seen. (D) T1-weighted, gradient echo sequence, fat-suppressed, transverse
Volume of lesions to ascertain therapeutic efficacy.
285 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
PORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNTS
pletely, negates the suppression of signal from vessels
that are flowing parallel to the slice acquisition. There-
 Both CT and MR have proven to have superior accuracy
fore, the entire vessel even when tortuous is delineated.
Like routine abdominal MR imaging, respiratory gating
for the diagnosis of portosystemic vascular anomalies
 is unnecessary, with the exception of some intrahepatic
(PSVA) than more commonly used modalities such as
PSS.
sonography and radiographic portography. The use of
 The images produced by TOF sequences are trans-
MR to diagnose portosystemic shunts (PSVA) has un-
verse abdominal images that display the major abdom-
dergone significant revision and improvement since be-
 inal veins as markedly hyperintense structures on the
ing first described by Sequin et al. (1999). Currently, MR
 background of signal suppressed abdominal anatomy
(Figure 4.12A-D). The interpretation of these images
the detection of portosystemic shunts. This level of suc-
cess of course necessitates appropriate knowledge of 
 requires tracing the portal vein along its length and ex-
 amining its tributaries for anomalous communication
the portal vascular system and its variations, as well as
familiarity with the appearance of an MR portogram.
with the systemic circulatory system. It is also possi-
 ble to reconstruct the TOF transverse images into two-
The acquisition of a MR portogram utilizes a two-
dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) maxi-
dimensional time-of-flight (2D TOF) sequence. This is
a type of gradient recalled echo (GRE). This sequence
 mum intensity projections, which are also called MIPs
applies a saturation pulse to a slice volume, which
(Figure 4.12E, F, respectively).
 With the use of MR portography both intra- and ex-
nulls all signals within the volume part acquisition.
The blood flowing into the volume can thus be mag-
 trahepatic PSVAs are easily delineated from their origin
 to their terminus. When matched to T1- or T2-weighted
netized by an RF pulse and, therefore, the blood is the
anatomical images of the abdomen, the precise loca-
only detectable signal admitted and detected (Figure
 tion of the anomalous vessel can be determined sur-
4.11). We have found this sequence to be the most ro-
 bust, rather than phase contrast venography, for the
gically. This information purportedly reduces surgical
examination of slower blood velocity associated with
time, which is critical in these metabolically disturbed
 PSVA. The improvement in sensitivity and specificity
patients. With intrahepatic PSVAs (Figure 4.13), the lo-
MR portography is related to concurrent application of
cation of the shunt within the hepatic parenchyma is
appropriately sized receiver coils and the administra-
well defined, and the caliber of the anomalous commu-
 s pp e a n 
tion of gadolinium-based contrast prior to acquisition
information is also important in distinguishing cases
of the MR portogram to increase the conspicuity of the
 blood pool. The use of gadolinium, partially or com-
 which are surgically amenable from those that are not.
CVC
PSVA
Figure 4.11.  Diagram of the mechanisms of signal suppression used in the prod uction of time-of-fight MR venography to
produce MR portograms. (Let) The aorta (dark gray) is represented as the top vessel, with the caudal vena cava (light gray)
below with a portosystemic vascular anomaly (PSVA—light gray) communicating with it. (Middle) The saturation band (SAT
BAND) is applied sequentially from cranial to caudal for an abdominal venogram, thus is called the marching SAT BAND. It
suppresses the signal of the flowing blood (black) downstream. (Right) When vessels lie within the plane of suppression, they
Celiac
Artery
Renal
Branches of
Vein
MesentericVeins
B
Left
Portal
Branch
L
上
Figure 4.12.  Normal MR portograms. (A)-(D) Transverse time-of-flight images showing the normal disposition of portal vein
and caudal vena cava from formation of the portal vein by the cranial and caudal mesenteric veins (A) to normal arborization
 of the portal vein in the liver parenchyma. (E) Two-dimensional maximum intensity projection (MIP). (F) Three-dimensional
MIP.
C
Figure 4.13. Single, extrahepatic portosystemic vascular anomalies (PSVA). (A) Dorsal plane 2D MIP of a portocaval PSVA.
(B) Sagittal plane 2D MIP of a right gastric PSVA. Note the markedly dilated pancreaticoduodenal vein (caudally directed
arrow). (C) Sagittal plane 2D MIP of a portoazygos PSVA, which measures 3 mm in diameter. This anomalous vessel was not
identified on abdominal ultrasound. Because the portal vein is normally sized, the ultrasound diagnosis was negative from a
PSVA.
287 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
The same benefits are realized with extrahepatic PSVAs
(Figure 4.16). The change is suspected to represent
(Figure 4.14), with very precise localization available
 metabolic cerebral disruption associated with hepatic
from the MR portogram. Since its inception, MR portog-
 encephalopathy. The MRI abnormality is seen in both
raphy has defined some very abnormal PSVAs (Figure 
 animals with clinical signs of hepatic encephalopathy
 4.15) that are difficult to delineate well with ultrasound.
 and those which are assessed to be neurologically nor
The ability to distinguish surgically amenable PSVAs is
 mal indicating the presence of subclinical disease. In
important not only from an emotional but a financial
addition, the severity of this change has been seen to
point of view.
change with medical management alone. In one dog
 In the process of developing MR portography, con-
imaged 1 year following placement of an ameroid con-
current studies of the brain of these animals have
strictor on the PSVA, persistence of this hyperintensity
shown a relatively consistent structural change. A bilat-
 on T2 and flair sequences was seen. The histologic corre-
 lation of this structural change has not yet been defined
in the coronal radiation on T2 and FLAIR sequences 
 and therefore its importance in the clinical management
of these patients is unknown.
CVC
PV
              
 divisional PsvA. Arrows in lef image demark the caudal vena cava dorsal to the portal vein at the level of the porta hepatic. The
left portal branch is shown in the second image, which communicates with the left hepatic vein at the level of the diaphragm. (B)
Transverse grad ient recalled echo (GRE) images of a right divisional PSVA. The arrows denoted the anomalous communication
between the portal vein and the caudal vena cava, in which the communication is located within the liver parenchyma. This is
important pre-operative information.
Figure 4.15. Abnormal portosystemic vascular anomalies (PSVA), some which the MR program shows cannot be corrected
around the left kidney. On the initial abdominal exploration, none of the PSVA could be visualized, but was found with
dissection into the retroperitoneal area around the kidney. (B) Sagittal plane 2D MIP of a portal-caval-azygous PSVA. The large
arrows denote the intrahepatic communication between the portal vein and the caudal vena cava, which was identified on
abdominal ultrasound. However, the blood flow in the caudal vena cava is retrograde and you can see signal detected from
this area on the 2D TOF because it is opposite normal. There is also no cranial continuation of the caudal vena cava from the
liver to the heart. The communication with the markedly dilated azygos vein is caudal to the pelvic diaphragm, and therefore
collateral circulation for the abdomen. (C) Transverse time-of-flight (TOF) images, displayed caudal to cranial, of a caudal vena
cava (CVC)—azygos vein (AV) communication and left gastric portosystemic vascular anomaly (PSVA). The left image is at
d mou si   pe p s ( a hed a  axau a u  a a a u a o  a
dorsal to the aorta. The fusion of the CVC and the AV is seen in the third image; as well, the PV is crossing midline demarking
  s i      s  a   a      n
   s     l n  n n s s i   i a  a    aa
right image, the left gastric PSVA joins the left hepatic branch just caudal to the diaphragm.
289 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 4.16. Presumed hepatic encephalopathy (HE).
(A)-(C) T2-weighted, FLAIR, and post-gadolinium-enhanced 
T1-weighted images showing bila terally symmetric hyperin-
tense lesions in the coronal radiation and adjacent gray mat-
ter, which do not undergo contrast enhancement. (D)-(E) HE
lesions in patients with single extra- and intra hepatic por-
tosystemic vascular anomalies.
Figure 4.16. (Continued) (F-H) HE lesions in a patient im-
aged at presentation (F), 10 weeks following medical man-
agement (G) and 1 year following the placement of an
ameroid constrictor (H).
OTHER VASCULAR
ABNORMALITIES
Aortic and vena cava thromboses can be detected on
MR examination of the abdomen or most often when
imaging the thoracolumbar spine. Patients with poor
vascular flow to the hind limbs may be interpreted as
a neurologic disease. The turbulent flow in the aorta
 often gives a heterogenous appearance on T2-weighted
studies (Figure 4.17). Transverse images and 2D TOF
studies provide proof of thrombosis (Figure 4.18).
Figure 4.17. Normal abdominal aorta. Turbulent flow cre-
ates some artifact. (A) T2-weighted sagittal image. Large ar
rows point to normal lack of signal in fast flowing aortic
blood. Smallarrows point to increased signalin normalaortal
due to turbulent flow and phase shifts. Arrow-heads point to
a small area of the vena cava in the slice. (B) Two-dimensional
TOF angiogram of the abdominal aorta. Large arrows indi-
cate uniform flow in the aorta. Small arrows point to a small
area of vena cava in the slice.
291 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
个
image. Arrows point to the thrombus in the aorta. (C) MIP or the 2D TOF angiogram of the abdominal aorta. The arrows point
to the start of the thrombus. (D) Source image from 2D TOF angiogram upstream of the thrombus. Small arrows point to the
vena cava that is nulled as flow is going the wrong way for this angiogram. Large arrows point to the flow in the aorta. (E)
Source image from 2D TOF angiogram just below the start of the thrombus. Small arrows point to vena cava, large arrows to
thelackof flow in the aorta.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hahn KA, McGavin MD, and Adams WH. 1997. Bilateral re-
nal metastases of nasal chondrosarcoma in a dog. Vet Pathol
34(4):352-355
 Behrend EN and Kemppainen RJ. 2001. Diagnosis of canine 
Harder MA, Fowler D, Pharr JW, Tryon KA, and Shmon C.
hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
 2002. Segmental aplasia of the caudal vena cava in a dog.
Pract 31(5):985-1003, viii.
Can Vet J 43(5):365-368.
Bottcher P, Maierl J, Schiemann T, Glaser C, Weller R,
Johnson VS and Seiler G. 2006. Magnetic resonance imag-
Hoehne KH, et al. 1999. The visible animal project:
 ing appearance of the cisterna chyli Vet Rad iol Ultrasound
a three-dimensional, digital database for high quality
47(5):461-464.
three-dimensional reconstructions. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Khangure MS and Hua J. 1996. Comparative assessment
40(6):611-616.
 of gadoxetate disodium, manganese dipyridoxal diphos-
Bourrinet P, Bengele HH, Bonnemain B, Dencausse A, Idee
phate, and superparamagnetic iron oxide for enhance-
JM, Jacobs PM, et al. 2006. Preclinical safety and phar
 d l 1 so u  al so s
macokinetic profile of ferumoxtran-10, an ultrasmall su-
S460.
perparamagnetic iron oxide magnetic resonance contrast
Llabres-Diaz FJ and Dennis R. 2003. Magnetic resonance
agent. Invest Radiol 41(3):313-324.
imaging of the presumed normal canine adrenal glands
 Brofman PJ and Thrall DE. 2006. Magnetic resonance imag-
[PMID]. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44(1):5-19.
ing findings in a dog with caudal aortic thromboembolism
Muleya JS, Taura Y, Nakaichi M, Nakama S, and Takeuchi
and ischemic myopathy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47(4):334
A." 1997. Appearance of canine abdominal tumors
338.
with magnetic resonance imaging using a low field
Chang D, Kim B, Yun Y, Hur Y, Lee Y, Choi M, et al. 2002. Su-
 permanent magnet. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(6):444
 perparamagnetic iron oxide-enhanced magnetic resonance 
447.
imaging of the liver in beagle dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 Munday HS. 1994. Assessment of body composition in cats
43(1):37-42.
 and dogs. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 18(Suppl. 1):S14
Chang SC, Liao JW, Lin YC, Liu Cl, and Wong ML. 2007. Pan-
S21.
creatic acinar cell carcinoma with intracranial metastasis in
Myers NC, IIl. 1997. Adrenal incidentalomas. Diagnostic
a dog. J Vet Med Sci 69(1):91-93.
workup of the incidentally discovered adrenal mass. Vet
 Chowning SL, Susil RC, Krieger A, Fichtinger G, Whitcomb
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27(2):381-399.
 LL, and Atalar E. 2006. A preliminary analysis and model
 Partington BP and Biller DS. 1995. Hepatic imaging with ra-
of prostate injection distributions. Prostate 66(4):344
diology and ultrasound. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
357.
Pract 25(2):305-335.
Clifford CA, Pretorius ES, Weisse C, Sorenmo KU, Drobatz
Rivera B, Ahrar K, Kangasniemi MM, Hazle JD, and Price
KJ, Siegelman ES, et al. 2004. Magnetic resonance imaging
 RE. 2005. Canine transmissible venereal tumor: a large-
of focal splenic and hepatic lesions in the dog. J Vet Intern
 animal transplantable tumor model. Comp Med 55(4):335-
Med 18(3):330-338.
343.
Dennis R. 2005. Assessment of location of the celiac and cra-
Sari A, Ozyavuz R, Demirci A, Ercin C, Arslan A, Yuzuncu
 nial mesenteric arteries relative to the thoracolumbar spine
 AK, et al. 1999. MR imaging of renal vein occlusion in dogs.
using magnetic resonance imaging. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Invest Radiol 34(8):523-529.
46(5):388-390.
Sato T, Aoki K, Shibuya H, Machida T, and Watari T. 2003.
Diez-Prieto I, Garcia-Rodriguez MB, Rios-Granja MA, Cano
Leiomyosarcoma of the kid ney in a dog. J Vet Med A Physiol 
Rabano MJ, Gonzalo-Orden JM, and Perez-Garcia CC. 2001.
Pathol Clin Med 50(7):366-369.
Diagnosis of renal agenesis in a beagle. J Small Anim Pract
Stolzenburg JU, Neuhaus J, Liatsikos EN, Schwalenberg
42(12):599-602
T, Ludewig E, and Ganzer R. 2006. Histomorphology
Drost WT, Bahr RJ, Henry GA, and Campbell GA. 1999.
of canine urethral sphincter systems, including three-
Aortoiliac thrombus secondary to a mineralized ar-
dimensional reconstruction and magnetic resonance imag-
teriosclerotic lesion. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(3):262-
ing. Urology 67(3):624-630.
266.
Suga K, Ogasawara N, Okazaki H, Sasai K, and Matsunaga
Garamvolgyi R, Petrasi Z, Hevesi A, Jakab C, Vajda Z, Bogner
N. 2001. Functional assessment of canine kidneys af-
P, et al. 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging technique for the
ter acute vascular occlusion on Gd-DTPA-enhanced dy-
examination of canine mammary tumours. Acta Vet Hung
namic echo-planar MR imaging. Invest Radiol 36(11):659-
54(2):143159
676.
Garosi LS, Penderis J, McConnell JF, and Jakobs C. 2005. L-2-
Tidwell AS, Penninck DG, and Besso JG. 1997. Imaging of
hyd roxyglutaric acid uria in a West Highland white terrier.
adrenal gland disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Vet Rec 156(5):145-147.
Pract 27(2):237-254.
Gavin PR. 1997. Future of veterinary radiation oncology. Vet
Vitellas KM, Kangarlu A, Bova JG, Bennett WF, Vaswani K,
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27(1):157-165.
Chakeres DW, et al. 2001. Canine abdominal MRI at 8 Tesla:
293 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
initial  experience  with  conventional  gradient-recalled
 rate of gastric emptying in the dog and cat: 1898-2002. J Vet 
echo and rapid acquisition with relaxation enhance-
Intern Med 17(5):609-621.
ment (RARE) techniques. J Comput Assist Tomogr 25(6):
Yasuda D, Fujita M, Yasuda S, Taniguchi A, Miura H,
856-863.
Hasegawa D, et al. 2004. Usefulness of MRI compared with
Wyse CA, McLellan J, Dickie AM, Sutton DG, Preston T, and
CT for diagnosis of mesenteric lymphoma in a dog. J Vet
Yam Ps. 2003. A review of methods for assessment of the
Med Sci 66(11):1447-1451.
CHAPTER FIVE
THORAX
Patrick R. Gavin and Shannon P. Holmes
ANATOMY
addition, it is possible to produce "black-blood" and
"white-blood" images of the circulatory system using
 Initial studies of the thorax were not useful due to the
various imaging sequences. The mediastinal structures
motion that occurs with respiratory and the cardiac
will have appearance in accordance with its tissue struc-
cycles. Subsequent studies utilizing breathhold tech-
 ture. For example, the esophagus being a muscular tube
niques and respiratory and cardiac gating have allowed
 has intermediate to low signal intensity. Because of gen-
for clear visualization of the thoracic structures.
eral anesthesia, the esophagus can have variable de
grees of gas distention. The tracheobronchial and ster-
nal lymph nodes are not routinely identified in normal
Normal Anatomy
 patients, as they will be nearly isointense to mediastinal
fat on T2-weighted sequences.
The appearance of normal anatomy is best seen on T1-
and T2-weighted sequences (Figures 5.1-5.4). As noted
in the previous chapters, STIR or fat-suppressed se-
quences are the most robust for detecting pathologic
IMAGING PROCEDURE
changes and lymph nodes. The heart is best visualized
in dorsal and sagittal planes. The dorsal plane is also
Pathologic conditions such as hydrothorax can severely
superior for examining the lungs and mediastinal struc-
compromise the ability of an imaging modality, such
tures. However, the use of all three planes is preferable
as radiography and computed tomography, to distin-
for complete evaluation of the thorax, including the
 guish the fluid within the thoracic cavity from pathol-
thymus, lymph nodes, esophagus, trachea, lungs, heart
 ogy of similar density. While ultrasonography can help.
(and the internal structure of myocardium, valves and
it is difficult to visualize all areas of the thoracic cav-
chambers), and thoracic wall.
 ity with total confidence. Magnetic resonance imag-
The lungs, due to the presence of air-filled alveoli, are
 ing allows clear visualization of the difference between
void of signal and appear black. Therefore, it is easy to
fluid within the thoracic cavity and pathologic change
see soft tissue abnormalities in lung parenchyma using
(Figure 5.5). Often, sequences to detect pathology
 sequences that optimize soft tissue contrast. Atelectasis
utilize T2-weighted sequences and T2-weighted se-
from general anesthesia is commonly identified in pa-
quences with some type of fat suppression such as the
tients imaged in dorsal recumbency. This should not be
 STIR sequence or T2-weighted sequence with fat satu-
mistaken for pleural effusion or parenchymal disease;
ration. The STIR sequence will provide uniform nulling
circular and linear signal voids are seen in atelectatic
 of the fat signal, but is a noisy image. T2 fat-saturation
 lungs representative of air-filled tertiary bronchi and
images are more detailed, but the fat-saturation may
bronchioles. Similar to the lungs the respiratory tree
 not be uniform, especially distant to the receiving coil
(trachea and bronchi) is void of signal, but the walls of
or the isocenter of the magnet.
the airways are hyperintense. The muscle of the heart 
 When the lung is being examined, Tl-weighting pro-
has low signal intensity on T2-weighted sequences
vides excellent visualization of intrapulmonary abnor-
 malities, as the lack of signal from the lung provides
quences. It is best seen on Tl- and T2-sequences where 
 the needed contrast to any abnormality present within
the hyperintense mediastinal and pericardial fat delin-
eates its margins. The appearance of the blood within 
1  rapidly obtained and cardiac motion can be negated
the heart chambers and blood vessels can be hyper- 
- via cardiac gating or more easily with the acquisition
 ans     ' 
 of two sequences in the same plane with the only pa-
and the velocity and direction of the blood flow. In 
1 rameter change being the phase encoding direction to
Practicat Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
295
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-8 13-80607-5
296THORAX
C
D
Figure 5.1. (A)-(D) T2-weighted dorsal images. (1) Right ventricle, (2) left ventricle, (3) mediastinum with hyperintense fat,
(4) aortic valve, (5) main pulmonary artery, (6) accessory lung lobe, (7) aorta, (8) trachea, (9) left caudal lung with hyperintense
blood vessels, (10) ribs and intercostal muscles, (11) esophagus, (12) mainstem bronchi, (13) right diaphragmatic crus, (14)
stomach wall and left diaphragmatic crus.
297PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
C
bronchi, (5) aorta, (6) main pulmonary artery, (7) brachiocephalic trunk and right subclavian artery, (8) right atrium, (9) caudal
vena cava,(10) cranial vena cava.
298THORAX
C
D
(2) trachea left atrium, (3) cranial vena cava with ghosting artifact below in Figure 5.3(A) (4) brachiocephalic trunk and right
 () e () e rn () s  s    s  i  ()  
pulmonary artery, (9) right ventricle, (10) left ventricle, (11) right atrium, (12) mainstem bronchi with paired pulmonary arteries
and veins that are white and black respectively, (13) caudal vena cava, (14) liver and gall bladder, (15) caudal mediastium
around the accessory lung lobe.
299 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
C
Figure 5.4. Single T2* sagittal image of the cardiac cycle, acquired as CINE loop. A small volume of pericardial fluid (*) star
   (     (          
craniocaudal diameter of the left ventricle is reduced and the ventricular wall has increased thickness. The blood in the aorta
is of intermediate signal intensity. White blood can be seen in the pulmonary artery (5). (C) Systolic phase—the aortic valve is
open and white blood is flowing out.
300THORAX
C
D
 parenchyma. Small arrows point to the bilateral hydrothorax. The fluid appears homogenous and is dependent, as this patient
was scanned in sternal recumbency. Notice the motion artifact from the heart in the background, both above and below the
 patient. (B) T1-weighted post-contrast image. Some enhancement of the mass can be seen (arrows). Note the enhancement in 
(A) and (B) the phase direction was ventrodorsal.
301PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
B
Figure 5.6. Depiction of changing of phase direction to allow visualization of various parts of the lungs and other tissues
of the thorax. (A) Phase is left to right. The flow artifact from the heart is shown with the arrows. Note how this can be seen
 e is  si  o a i in p q s  ad a ( d al o isi
 ap aa   e  s pe edsa  pados m aa as Au a  
 can greatly add to the imaging time.
place the cardiac motion artifact in different regions of
MEDIASTINAL
the thorax (Figure 5.6).
Thymomas can often be surgically excised if they do not
CARDIAC
envelope the vasculature of the cranial mediastinum
Many times, the vasculature is merely displaced in a
lateral direction from the thymic mass (Figure 5.9). In
 There are exciting clinical applications and research
 other types, the mass engulfs the vasculature preclud-
studies utilizing magnetic resonance for detection of
ing surgical excision (Figure 5.10).
human cardiac abnormalities. While cardiovascular
disease, such as arteriosclerosis, is not common in vet-
PULMONARY
erinary patients, we have numerous cardiac anomalies
and other conditions of the heart including neoplastic
conditions which can be examined with MR. The use of
MR provides sufficient resolution of pulmonary masses
 gradient echo techniques to allow for rapid visualiza-
to assess the potential for surgical or other treatments
tion can help limit motion artifact. Clear visualization
(Figure 5.11). Metastatic lesions can be readily detected
can be obtained of the abnormalities, even without car-
 when larger than a few millimeters in diameter. Lesions
diac gaiting (Figures 5.7 and 5.8). The clear visualization
 should always be confirmed in more than one plane and
of the abnormality, in reference to the anatomical struc-
 more than one type of sequence to avoid overinterpre-
tures, can provide the information needed to properly
 tation of various artifacts. Computed tomography re-
stage diseases. In our experience, the presence of peri-
 mains the fastest and easiest way to visualize thoracic
cardial effusion can severely hamper the detection of
f  metastasis. MR can be utilized for this purpose, espe-
small lesions. The heart moves erratically in the fluid
s    n d   a
 negating any benefit that may be achieved with cardiac
s   n ps n p 
gating.
have shown good ability to detect lesions in the 5 mm
C
D
with arrows. (B) Dorsal plane, T1-weighted gradient echo image. The mass can be seen to the left of the aortic arch. (C), (D)
enhance in a heterogenous manner. Displacement of the aorta (small arrows) by the mass. Mass is readily seen in (D) with large
arrows. Gradient echo imaging has less contrast than spin echo sequences, but can be very beneficial due to the high speed
imaging for cardiac studies to red uce motion artifact.
303 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
C
D
readily seen. A mass can be seen, as indicated by the arrows, in the cranial aspect of the pericardial sac. The dotted line shows
the slice orientation of (D). (B) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in the dorsal plane. Again, the fluid in the pericard ial sac is
easily seen, as well as the mass in the cranial aspect of the sac. Dotted plane shows the slice orientation of (D). (C) T1-weighted
post-contrast gradient echo sequence similar in location to (B). The pericardial fluid is now dark in this T1-weighted image, but
the enhancement can be seen in the chambers of the heart, as well as enhancement of the mass in the cranial pericardial sac. On
transverse imaging, this multilobulated mass in the cranial pericardial sac is seen on the transverse T2-weighted gradient echo
sequence. This mass appeared to arise from the right auricle and was diagnosed as a hemangiosarcoma. While the pericardial
definition of the mass. The magnetic susceptibility artifact seen in the dorsal portion of the patient, parts (A) and (D), is from an
identification chip. (D) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in the transverse plane, located by the dotted line in (B). Arrows
indicate the mass from the right auricle.
304 THORAX
A
B
C
Figure 5.9. Benign thymoma. (A) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence. Arrows show the smooth margination and spherical
of the thoracic cavity. The mass is readily seen, as is the fluid. Note the increased motion artifact in the STIR sequence.
(C) T2-weighted transverse gradient echo sequence showing the smooth margination of the mass. The vascular structures are
displaced dorsally by the mass, but they are not surrounded by the mass. This mass was surgically removed in a curative
fashion.
diameter range. If the thorax is being visualized, cer-
other imaging options. The superior soft tissue visu-
tainly attempts to visualize metastatic nodules, if clini-
cally indicated, will prove worthwhile (Figure 5.12).
tems. Advanced gating techniques allow for quanti-
tative determination of flow velocities, volumes, and
pressure gradients. Cine loops can be obtained in mul-
Future Thoracic Imaging
tiple planes. The larger field of view can allow for easier
 interpretation. With additional experience, this exciting
 Modern high field magnets can provide excellent im-
area of investigation will expand to more veterinary
ages of thoracic diseases and should be considered with
imaging centers.
305 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
T1
C
D
Figure 5.10. (A) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence of a large mass in the cranial mediastinum. The small arrows show the
presence of the cranial vena cava within the mass. (B) T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in the dorsal plane. The large arrows
fluid cannot be seen on T1-weighted. (D) Following the administration of contrast, it shows the heterogenous enhancement of
the mass. The mass was proven a thymic carcinoma. The visualization of the vena cava being surrounded by the mass precluded
suurgical resection.
306THORAX
A
+
Figure 5.11. Study of a patient with a known large pulmonary mass on radiographs. MR was done to obtain clearvisualization
of margins for surgical resection. (A) A large heterogenous mass can be seen on the T2-weighted gradient echo sequence in
the dorsal plane. Small arrows show the presence of an additional separate lesion within the pulmonary parenchyma. (B) T2-
s pad e n a a  i sd a  s aa  ss a  a o se s
 mass precludes surgery for a curative procedure.
307 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
Figure 5.12. Known mass of the right thoracic wall. Study was done to assess for surgical margins. (A) A large mass can be
seen in this T2-weighted fat-suppressed spin-echo sequence. Small arrowheads show the presence of a suspected mass within
cranial thoracic spinal column. Presence of pulmonary metastasis, as well as a spinal metastasis, again precluded unnecessary
surgery in a curative fashion.
308 THORAX
BIBLIOGRAPHY
with dobutamine cardiovascular magnetic resonance tag-
ging. Eur J Card iothorac Surg 30(1):103-107.
Aletras AH, Tilak GS, Natanzon A, Hsu LY, Gonzalez FM,
Morino S, Toba T, Araki M, Azuma T, Tsutsumi S, Tao H,
Hoyt RF, Jr, et al. 2006. Retrospective determination of
et al. 2006. Noninvasive assessment of pulmonary em-
the area at risk for reperfused acute myocardial infarction
physema using dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic res-
with T2-weighted cardiac magnetic resonance imaging:
onance imaging. Exp Lung Res 32(1-2):55-67.
histopathological and displacement encoding with stim-
Shea SM, Fieno DS, Schirf BE, Bi X, Huang J, Omary RA, et al.
ulated echoes (DENSE) functional validations. Circulation
2005. T2-prepared steady-state free precession blood oxy
113(15):1865-1870.
 gen level-dependent MR imaging of myocardial perfusion 
Amundsen BH, Helle-Valle T, Edvardsen T, Torp H, Crosby
in a dog stenosis model. Radiology 236(2):503-509.
 J, Lyseggen E, et al. 2006. Noninvasive myocardial strain
Simor T, Gaszner B, Oshinski JN, Waldrop SM, Pettigrew
measurement by speckle tracking echocardiography: vali-
RI, Horvath IG, et al. 2005. Gd(ABE-DTTA)-enhanced car-
 dation against sonomicrometry and tagged magnetic reso
diac MRI for the diagnosis of ischemic events in the heart.
nance imaging. J Am Coll Cardiol 47(4):789-793.
J Magn Reson Imaging 21(5):536-545.
Chetboul V, Tessier D, Borenstein N, Delisle F, Zilberstein L,
Storey P, Chen Q, Li W, Seoane PR, Harnish PP, Fogelson
 Payen G, et al. 2003. Familial aortic aneurysm in Leonberg 
 L, et al. 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging of myocardial
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223(8):1159-1162, 1129.
 infarction using a manganese-based contrast agent (EVP
Choi BW. 2006. Differentiation of acute myocardial infarction
1001-1): preliminary results in a dog model. J Magn Reson
from chronic myocardial scar with MRI. Korean J Radiol
Imaging 23(2):228-234.
7(1): 1-3.
Su MY, Head E, Brooks WM, WangZ, Muggenburg BA, Adam
Dickfeld T, Kato R, Zviman M, LaiS, Meininger G, Lardo AC,
GE, et al. 1998. Magnetic resonance imaging of anatomic
et al. 2006. Characterization of radiofrequency ablation le-
and vascular characteristics in a canine model of human
sions with gadolinium-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic
aging. Neurobiol Aging 19(5):479-485.
resonance imaging. J Am Coll Cardiol 47(2):370-378.
Tsekos NV, Woodard PK, Foster GJ, Moustakidis P, Sharp TL,
Ferreira AJ, Peleteiro MC, Correia JH, Jesus SO, and Goulao A.
Herrero P, et al. 2002. Dynamic coronary MR angiography
2005. Small-cell carcinoma of the lung resembling a brachial
and first-pass perfusion with intracoronary ad ministration
plexus tumour. J Small Anim Pract 46(6):286-290.
of contrast agent. J Magn Reson Imaging 16(3):311-319.
Flacke S, Fischer S, Scott MJ, Fuhrhop RJ, Allen JS, MeLean M,
Vignaud A, Rodriguez I, Ennis DB, DeSilva R, Kellman P,
 et al. 2001. Novel MRI contrast agent for molecular imag-
Taylor J, et al. 2006. Detection of myoca rdial capillary orien-
ing of fibrin: implications for detecting vulnerable plaques.
tation with intravascular iron-oxide nanoparticles in spin-
Circulation 104(11):1280-1285.
echo MRI. Magn Reson Med 55(4):725-730.
Hsu LY, Natanzon A, Kellman P, Hirsch GA, Aletras AH, and
Vilar JM, Arencibia A, Ramirez JA, Gil F, Latorre R, Morales
Arai AE. 2006. Quantitative myocardial infarction on de-
 I, et al. 2003. Magnetic resonance imaging of the thorax of
layed enhancement MRI. Part I: animal validation of an
three dogs. Vet Rec 153(18):566-568.
alltomated feature analysis and combined thresholding in-
Vite CH, Insko EK, Schotland HM, Panckeri K, and Hendricks
farct sizing algorithm. J Magn Reson Imaging 23(3):298
 JC. 1997. Quantification of cerebral ventricular volume in
308.
English bulldogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38(6):437-443.
Huynh TV, Bergin CJ, Hauschildt J, Konopka RG, Bloor C,
Wagner A, Mahrholdt H, Thomson L, Hager S, Meinhardt G,
and Buxton R. 1996. Magnetic resonance detection of acute
Rehwald W, et al. 2006. Effects of time, dose, and inversion
pulmonary emboli in a canine model with pathologic cor-
time for acute myocardial infarct size measurements based
relation. Acad Radiol 3(12):1019-1024.
on magnetic resonance imaging-delayed contrast enhance-
Koie H, Kurotobi EN, and Sakai T. 2000. Double-chambered
ment. J Am Coll Cardiol 47(10):2027-2033.
right ventricle in a dog. JI Vet Med Sci 62(6):651-653.
Wray JD and Blunden AS. 2006. Progressive dysphagia in a
 Lee DC and Klocke FJ. 2006. Magnetic resonance approaches 
dog caused by a scirrhous, poorly differentiated perioe-
and recent advances in myoca rdial perfusion imaging. Curr
 sophageal carcinoma. J Small Anim Pract 47(1):27-30.
Cardiol Rep 8(1):59-64.
 Yang J, Wan MX, and Guo YM. 2004. Pulmonary functional
Liu Y, Sun L, Huan Y, Zhao H, and Deng J. 2006. Effects of
MRI: an animal model study of oxygen-enhanced ventila-
basic fibroblast growth factor microspheres on angiogene-
tion combined with Gd-DTPA-enhanced perfusion. Chin
sis in ischemic myocardium and cardiac function: analysis
Med J (Engl) 117(10):1489-1496.
CHAPTER SIX
HEAD-NoN-CNS
Patrick R. Gavin and Shannon P. Holmes
ANATOMY
the case of the middle and inner ear examinations, it is
often preferable to perform a very highly T2-weighted
The entire head can be visualized with magnetic reso-
sequence to better visualize the cochlear apparatus and
nance. The common modality to study diseases, such
the semicircular canals.
as the nasal cavity, oral cavity, and the middle ear, has
been computed tomography. The authors of this text
are obviously MR zealots; however, we have found that
NASAL CAVITY
the use of magnetic resonance generally provided su-
perior imaging of all of these locations. Certainly, when
it comes to diseases of the retrobulbar region, magnetic
In the nasal cavity, cliricians are often looking for the
etiology for a nasal discharge, including epistaxis. The
resonance far excels due to superior soft tissue visual-
basic rule outs for epistaxis are idiopathic hemorrhage
ization.
(including that from high blood pressure), nasal infec-
tions, nasal fungal infections, and nasal neoplasia. The
sequences offered allow clear visualization between ob-
IMAGING PROCEDURE
structive fluid within the sinuses and any obstruct-
ing mass. Fungal disease is characterized by loss of
The examination should utilize the strengths of mag-
turbinates and thickened mucosa, often with the pres-
netic resonance, that is, the ability to scan in all planes.
 ence of a fungal granuloma within the sinuses. Other
Therefore, all diseases involving structures such as the 
diseases can cause loss of turbinates, including chronic
nasal cavity should scan from the tip of the nose back
bacterial rhiritis; however, it is not accomparied by the
through at least the mid portion of the brain (caudal
thickened mucosa seen with fungal rhinitis (Figure 6.2).
aspect of the skull), at least on the dorsal and sagittal
 Non fungal rhiritis is often characterized by ventral de-
planes. The transverse planes can be localized to the
pendence within the nasal cavity that is often bilateral
disease process as seen on the previous two planes.
(Figure 6.3).
Sequences utilized generally entail STIR sequences 
 On rare occasion, a foreign body can be seen associ-
for their high sensitivity to the detection of pathologic
ated with the rhiritis. Most foreign bodies are too small
abnormalities and T1-weighted images before and af-
to be readily detected. Foreign bodies larger than the
ter contrast. Other than STIR sequences, T2-weighted
size of a grain of rice would be readily detected. Most
fat-suppressed images can offer much of the same infor-
foreign bodies do not have mobile protons and, there-
 mation. Fat suppression is more difficult to uniformly
 fore, have a low signal intensity on all sequences. Most
obtain and that is why most studies utilize the STIR
 foreign bodies would be surrounded by an inflamma-
sequence in the nasal cavity. Generally, only one plane
tory fluid and therefore, in T2-weighted images (in-
  ss s  si s n 
cluding STIR), there is a dark mass surrounded by a
low clear visualization of the nasal cavity, retroocular
bright fluid. If contrast is used, then the dark foreign
spaces, and the middle ear In addition, the draining
 body would be surrounded by a dark fluid and a ring
lymph nodes of these regions are also well seen. All
 of contrast-enhancing inflammatory tissues.
structures are clearly visualized (Figure 6.1).
Nasal neoplasia  is  generally  characterized by
At times, special sequences are utilized. In the case
turbinate destruction, osseous lysis, and extension into
of the ocular studies, it is generally best to perform the
 surrounding tissues. The extension can be seen into the
 T1 post-contrast with fat saturation. One post-contrast
frontal sinus, maxillary sinus, and/or sphenoid sinus
without fat saturation should always be acquired. In
In addition, the extension can be seen into the nasal
Practical Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
309
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
310HEAD-NON-CNS
13
12
D
Figure 6.1. Normal anatomy. (A-F) T1-weighted transverse images of the skull of a dog. (G), (H) T2-weighted sagiftal images
 ()   s ( s  ()   e no   n    (-  e y  n 
of eye, (4) ethmoid turbinates, (5) vomer at venfral aspect of nasal sepfum, (6) zygomatic salivary gland, (7) medial pterygoid
muscle, (8) hard palate, (9) tongue—being deformed by endotracheal tube, (10) optic nerve and its associated venous plexus
within extraocular musculafure, (11) zygomatic arch, (12) soft palate, (13) sphenopalatine sinus, (14) mancdible, (15) masseter
muscle, (16) temporal muscle, (17) temporomandibular joint, (18) basisphenoid bone, (19) tonsilar lymph tissue, (20) tympanic
bulla, (21) external aucditory meafus, (22) parotid salivary gland, (23) mandibular salivary gland, (24) mandibular lymph nodes,
  n  () sn n () o   ()  p g  ()
22
23
10
25
Figure 6.1.  (Continued)
312HEAD-NON-CNS
一
of a fungal granuloma in the right frontal sinus and mucosal thickening in a T1-weighted pre-confrast image. (C) Contralateral
showing the frontal granuloma and the confrast enhancement of the mucosa in the right frontal sinus.
313PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
D
  n se   r s  s        
infectiouls.
314HEAD-NON-CNS
and intensities in the right frontal sinus. (B) Slice caudal—showing the increased signal intensity in the right frontal sinus. This
lobulated appearance is one of tissue, since there is no air /fluid level. (C) T1-weighted post-confrast enhancement of the area
a js po ad a ms (  e an m s a go aa pe s au (a  s
involving the meringeal surface of the rostral right brain. This contrast enhancement shows the presence of breaching of the
cribriform plate and calvarium.
315 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 6.4.  (Continued) (E), (F) T1-weighted post-contrast dorsal plane images. The mass in the right nasal cavity is readily
seen in both images, and the breaching of the cribriform plate and calvarium with the enhancement encroaching onto the
meningeal surface of the rostral right brain is readily seen.
cavity and / or the brain. The cribriform plate is not a lin-
would be virtually identical. Therefore, when there is
ear flat structure as the name would imply. The cribri-
 no reason to expect significant contrast enhancement,
form plate is a complex curved structure. Therefore, the
 computed tomography is limited to merely viewing the
only clear visualization of the cribriform plate comes
osseous involvement. With MR, contrast is utilized to
with MR examination in the sagittal and dorsal planes.
visualize the extent of vascularity and the degree of
The use of contrast erhancement is often of benefit in
viable tissue compared to nonviable or necrotic tissue
detecting cribriform plate extension, as an inflamma-
(Figures 6.6 and 6.7).
tory meringitis is the first stage seen with cribriform
The knowledge of anatomy is often challenged with
plate penetration (Figure 6.4).
 MR due to the visualization of all tissues and the un-
There can be a homogenous mass in nasal cavity and
 common loss of symmetry can be a challenge. There
nasal pharynx extending via the auditory tube into the
 can be considerable variation with the appearance of
 middie ear. These are termed nasal-pharyngeal polyps
the salivary glands (Figure 6.8).
(Figure 6.5).
Not all masses are neoplastic, and with MR the
appearance of the tissues and their association with
the surrounding soft tissue can help determine if le-
sions are non-neoplastic and inflammatory (Figure 6.9).
ORAL CAVITY
Sialocoele can occur in many locations and when the
zygomatic salivary gland is involved the appearance
When studying diseases of the oral cavity, the soft tis-
on MR helps secure the diagnosis (Figure 6.10). It
sue extent of disease is much better delineated with
 should be stressed that MR does not replace biopsy
the use of magnetic resonance. When comparing stud-
and histopathology; if there is any doubt from imag-
ies with paired CT and magnetic resonance, the lesion
 ing, those procedures are often necessary.
is virtually always larger based on the changes in the
Dental structures are hypointense on all sequences
soft tissues, as visualized with MR. Computed tomog-
 due to the lack of multiple protons. However, the tooth,
raphy has a difficult time detecting contrast enhance-
including the roots, can be clearly seen due to the in-
ment compared to the normally very vascular oral mu-
tensity differences between the teeth and the surround-
cosal tissues, while MR visualizes the chemical struc-
 ing alveolar bone. Therefore, dental disease can be
ture of the tissues. The electroric density of a soft tissue
detected. Dental tumors can be readily detected, and
mass, compared to the surrounding local soft tissues,
the gross extent of the lesion clearly identified. The
316HEAD-NON-CNS
C
 Figure 6.5. Nasal pharyngeal polyp. There is a hyperintensity in T2-weighted sagiftal image. (A) There is some heterogeneity
to the signal. (B) Showing the increased hyperintensity in the right nasal cavity, the right frontal sinus, and also wifthin the
317PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
Figure 6.6. (A) CT Examination of a cat with "mass" involving the leff zygomatic arch region. Lysis and destruction of the
Zygomatic arch is highlighted with the arrows. This was presumed neoplastic on CT examinafion. This area did not enhance
differently than the surrounding normal tissue. (B) MRSTIR transverse sequenced through this similar area. The fluid sediment
 Of a hematoma or abscess. An abscess with osteomyelitis was confirmed in this case.
study of the head and oral cavity should always in-
EXTERNAL, MIDDLE,
clude the regional lymph nodes, which would include
the mandibular, parotid, and retropharyngeal lymph
AND INNER EAR
 node structures. Any involvement of the lymph nodes
helps lead one to a narrower differential diagnosis
Magnetic resonance is equally adaptive to viewing all
(Figure 6.11).
structures of the auditory system, including the exter-
 Small, difficult to detect lesions such as tonsillar car-
nal, middle, and inner ear. Sequences utilized are sim-
cinomas, can often be appreciated both from direct vi-
ilar to those listed; however, additional sequences that
sualization as well as from the metastatic involvement
 of the regional lymph nodes. In addition to the tonsil, 
the cochlear and semicircular canal structures of the in-
 all oral structures including the various structures of
ner ear. There are numerous cases of fluid within the
the tongue, gingiva, and mucosal surfaces are readily
 middle ear, unilaterally or bilaterally, that are probably
evaluated.
not associated with an active infectious condition. In
Soft tissue extension beyond midline, in the absence
these cases, the fluid is seen on STIR or T2-weighted
of osseous changes, is better seen with magnetic reso-
 sequences without any evidence of contrast enhance-
 nance. At times, the use of contrast enhancement is of
 ment to suggest an inflammatory component. This is
little benefit, as the normal mucosa of the nasal and oral
 often called otitis media effusion by our physician col-
cavities is richly vascular and at times, the neoplastic
 leagues. Such a condition is commonly seen in animals
 with trigeminal nerve fumors with marked muscle at-
ing normal tissue. However, contrast is still utilized to
 rophy due to denervation. These arimals presumably
determine if the lesion is viable and vascularized.
 lose normal function of the auditory tube (eustachian
318HEAD-NON-CNS
 n a  m ss   st ()      n a () ()  g a
is a T1-weighted dorsal plane image. The mass is highlighted with the arrows. The lysis of the maxilla is readily seen as the
 difference between the two sides is readily seen. (D) Following the administration of contrast, a T1-weighted transverse image
shows no enhancement of the mass and a fluid/sediment level. This was another case of osteomyelitis wifh abscess formafion
that was accurately diagnosed on MR MR has the ability to see osseous lysis as well as CT, but the increased information
 obtained from signal intensities of the various sequences can be highly useful in a differential diagnosis.
319 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
Figure 6.8. (A) CT examination through the aflantooccipital region. A mass was seen on the left side. This mass could also be
palpated. Presumptive diagnosis was an enlarged lymph node or a neoplastic condition. (B)-(E) T1-weighted post-contrast MR
examinations of this area. (B)-(D) Transverse images at different levels. (B) shows the presence of a normal mandibular salivary
gland on the left-hand side. There is no corresponding mandibular salivary gland on the patient's right side. Rostral to (B) and
(C) shows the presence of salivary gland. The normal mandibular salivary gland is almost out of view (small arrows). (D) This
view is even more rostral through the region of the sella of the mid region of the brain. The sella can be seen in the venfral
calvarial region. The arrows show the presence of the elongated mandibular salivary gland that is going into the sublingual
region on the patient's right side. The dorsal plane view shows the presence of this aberrant right salivary gland, which is
presumed to be a combination of a mandibular salivary gland and a sublingual salivary gland. This type of asymmefry of
s  o   s   s   s  e    s
320 HEAD—NON-CNS
are displaced and modified by pathologic change. The
 tube), which most likely leads to fluid buildup within
use of magnetic resonance allows clear visualization
the middle ear.
of all structures, including the palpebral region of the
Areas of otitis media often have higher protein con-
tent to the fluid, thickened contrast-enhancing mem-
lacrimal gland (normal lacrimal gland not visualized),
the zygomatic salivary gland, the interior chamber
branes, and often an expansile appearance to the bullae
(posterior chamber), and all structures of the retrob-
(Figure 6.12). Otitis media that has ruptured through
ulbar region (Figure 6.1).
the bullae into the surrounding soft tissues is char-
Orular muscles, vessels, and optic nerves are all well
acterized by a diffuse, poorly marginated cellulitis
visualized. The optic nerve can be difficult to visualize
myositis with regional lymphadenopathy (Figure 6.13).
in the normal state. Abnormalities to the optic nerve
In contrast, neoplastic conditions of these structures
from either optic nerve neuritis or lesions, including
 are generally well marginated with more central en-
meringioma of the optic nerve, are readily identified
hancement and a lesser degree of lymphadenopathy
(Figure 6.15). Studies of the orbits generally rely heav-
(Figure 6.14). Obviously, biopsies with cytopathologic
ily on STIR or T2 fat-suppressed images in all three
condition. However, the magnetic resonance appear-
basic planes. Tl-weighted images before and after con
trast should be performed with fat suppression, if at all
ance can allow the differential diagnosis to be heavily
possible, due to the large amount of fat present in the
weighted toward a neoplastic or inflammatory condi-
retrobulbar region (Figure 6.15). The zygomatic salivary
tion. The clear visualization of the abnormalities can
 gland is one that is often not considered in our differ-
d r  r  s an  d
ential diagnoses of orbital disease.
 or for surgery for either a curative or cytoreductive
 We have taken the liberty of using the zygomatic sali-
nature.
vary gland to show the range of diseases that can occur
from such an organ. Studies depicted include salivary
gland tumors and sialocele (Figures 6.9 and 6.10, re-
ORBIT CONDITIONS
spectively). In addition, there can be normal but aber-
rant or anatomical variations in the placement of the
Areas of the orbit can be visualized with ultrasound.
salivary gland (Figure 6.8). These same basic disease
However, the ultrasound appearance of retrobulbar
processes can occur in any of the anatomical structures
structures can be difficult to sort through when they
of the head. Therefore, with the optic nerve we can
321 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
T1Post
D
 n pd e a aas  () u es z a o ee pu Ae ri an
large mass. The contralateral side shows the normal zygomatic salivary gland. (B) The image is flipped such that the patient's
to the normal salivary gland, 2. (C) T1 post-contrast image with the normal position of the patient's right to the viewer's
 left. (D) Adjacent slice from (C), again showing the heterogeneity of the salivary gland mass. This was proven to be salivary
carcinoma.
322HEAD-NON-CNS
T1Post
T1 Pre
T1 Post
STIR
D
 Figure 6.10.  (A) T1-weighted pre-contrast image through the level of the zygomatic salivary glands. The arrows show the
normal salivary glands. (B) Post-contrast fat-suppressed image showing the normal erhancement paftern of the salivary glands.
There is no confrast enhancement of this mass. (D) On the dorsal plane, STIR sequence the fluid signal of the mass is readily
the brain (3). This fluid mass contained saliva and a diagnosis of a zygomaftic sialocele was made.
323PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Figure 6. 11. Lymphadenopathy. (A)STIR dorsal sequence. The large arrows point to the smaller mandibular lymph node, and
the larger retropharyngeal lymph node. Small arrows point to the interposed mandibular salivary gland. (B) T1-weighted post-
confrast dorsal plane image. The large arrows point to the same lymph nodes. Note that following contrast enhancement, all the
lesions have a similar signal characteristic and one cannot differenfiate lymph nodes from the salivary gland. Offen, sequences
enhancement. Note that there is an erlarged superficial cervical lymph node (prescapular) lymph node on the ipsilateral side.
retropharyngeal lymph node dorsal to this. Small arrows show the normal mandibular salivary gland. Note the same salivary
gland can be seen on the confralateral side. Aspirates indicated orly an inflammatory lymphadernifis in this case. There was
considerable dental disease in this patient that was presumably the source of the inflammation.
324HEAD-NON-CNS
C
Figure 6.12. Cat with otitis media on the left side. (A) T2-weighted transverse image. Arrows show the presence of fluid
with an air /fluid level in the left middle ear. (B) T1-weighted post-confrast showing only minimal erhancement of the lining
Visualization of fluid within the tissue. This "tympanic bullae series" shows the presence of the fluid and no involvement of the
in the head can have multiple drainage patterns.
325 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
right side. There is a fluid signal within the right tymparic bulla. (B) Large arrows show the presence of mild lymphadenopathy
  () s     rs s     n  
confrast image. (D) Post-confrast T1-weighted image. Note how much of the fluid signal in the middle ear did not enhance as
well as some of the tissue immediately external to the middle ear, while there was avid enhancement of the pharyngeal tissue.
The enhancement is poorly marginated and tends to follow fascial planes. This was proven to be cellulitis, presumed from
326HEAD-NON-CNS
    e            ()  
  ( s s  (   r       
fat-suppressed image. Note how much of the fissue wifhin the external ear and middle ear does enhance. This is indicated with
the large arrows. The small arrows point to the enhancement of the normal parotid and mandibular salivary glands. Biopsy
indicated this was a ceruminous gland carcinoma.
327 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
B
Figure 6.15. Normal eye: (A) T1 transverse; (B) T1 coronal. (1) Frontal sinus, (2) vitreous of eye, (3) lens of eye, (4) ethmoid
furbinates, (5) vomer at ventral aspect of nasal sepfum, (6) zygomafic salivary gland, (7) medial pterygoid muscle, (8) hard
palate, (9) tongue—being deformed by endotracheal tube, (10) optic nerve and its associated venous plexus within extraocular
musculafure.
have inflammatory or neoplastic conditions. Generally.
main methods for differential diagnosis is through re-
these can be differentiated due to margination, vascular
 peat examination within a few months to determine the
supply, and degree of homogeneity of their chemical
 progress of the disease.
structure.
There have been many cases where the animal
 Retrobulbar lesions are clearly seen, and the imag-
presents with vague signs such as inability to open its
 ing characteristics help diagnose berign abscesses from
mouth or difficulty eating, and the MR examination re-
more serious lesions (Figures 6.16 and 6.17).
veals large tumors of the skull. Many of these tumors
are multilocular osteosarcomas (Figure 6.18). Many of
these arimals have had a radiographic examination.
 Standard orthogonal radiographs of the skull can miss
OTHER
rumerous lesions. Even with the many special views
of the skull, diseases can be missed, as it must be re-
In some cases, the animalis presented with an abnormal
membered that it takes a large increase or decrease in
physical appearance, such as atrophy of the temporal
the bone marrow content to be radiographically visible.
musculature. Uriversal atrophy of the temporal mus-
The example shown of a large tumor within the skull
cle generally involves an abnormal trigeminal nerve.
 was a clinical case that had received prior high quality
Trigeminal nerve problems can be from an inflamma-
 radiographic examination that was deemed normal.
tory process, a diffuse neoplastic process includinglym-
Currently, it is this author's recommendation that if
phoma, or a nerve sheath tumor. While MR is not highly
 cross-sectional imaging is available, it should be used
specific at differentiating these diseases, with urilateral
for examination of the skull in virtually all cases. While
lesions the degree of nerve enlargement often helps dif-
 magnetic resonance imaging is preferable in many
ferentiate between neuritis and a nerve sheath tumor.
cases, computed tomography offers a great advantage
Since the region is very difficult to biopsy, one of the
 over standard radiographic examination.
Figure 6.16. Meningioma of the optic nerve. (A), (B) Heterogeneity of the mass in the retrobulbar region on the right-hand
side is seen on (A) and (B) STIR sequences in fhe dorsal plane. (B) This shows the large mass in the refrobulbar area with the
large arrows while the intracranial extension of the mass through the optic foramen is highlighted with the small arrows. (C)
T1-weighted pre-confrast fransverse image. The avid enhancement of the extension of this fumor into the calvarium is seen. (D)
an optic nerve meningioma. The infracranial extension proved that surgical excision was not a viable curative opfion.
329PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
weighted image. (C), (D) T1-weighted fat-suppressed images post-confrast. Note how the vast majority of the mass does not
was a retrobulbar abscess. Plant material was found within the abscess.
330HEAD-NON-CNS
一
pa s e q o sreadde ara raas aq n une al ro as o ssoi asadu s se uas si su ase  'spiss
with a midline shift of the brain to the patient's left. (B) T1-weighted pre-confrast image. While the mass is poorly seen in
T1-weighted images, the lysis of the calvarium is readily seen. The normal dark signal of the calvarium has been lost in the
area, as indicated with the arrows. (C) Coronal image—post-contrast, fat suppressed. The avid enhancement of this mass can
 be seen both inside and outside of the normal calvarium. Midline shift is readily seen. (D) T1-weighted post-contrast transverse
fat-suppressed image. The enhancement of fhe mass is readily seen as well as the lysis of the calvarium. Mass was proven to
be a multilocular osteochondrosarcoma. This mass was not seen with standard orthogonal views on skull radiographs.
331 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
CONCLUSION
Dvir E, Kirberger RM, and Terblanche AG. 2000. Magnetic
 resonance imaging of otitis media in a dog. Vet Radiol Ul-
trasound 41(1):46-49.
Abnormalities can be visualized in any of the tissues
Ellison GW, Dornell RL, and Daniel GB. 1995. Nasopha
within the head. These include all the structures of
ryngeal epidermal cyst in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
the eye, retrobulbar space, all the various tissues of
207(12):1590-1592.
the nasal cavity and oral cavity, middle ear, and ac-
Endo H, Taru H, Nakamura K, Koie H, Yamaya Y, and
cessory structures including the salivary glands and
Kimura J. 1999. MRI examinafion of the masticatory mus-
 lymph nodes. Cases shown in this chapter represent
cles in the gray wolf (Canis lupus), with special ref-
 many of the most common conditions seen to date.
erence to the M. temporalis. J Vet Med Sci 61(6):581-
However, it should be stressed that magnetic resonance
586.
Garosi LS, Dennis R, and Schwarz T. 2003. Review of diag-
has the ability to see the skeletal structures as well as
 nostic imaging of ear diseases in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol
any of the soft tissues of the head.
Ultrasound 44(2):137-146.
This chapter has shown the broad use of magnetic
 Garosi LS, Lamb CR, and Targett MP. 2000. MRI findings in a
resonance to image numerous organ systems. We have
dog with otitis media and suspected otitis interna. Vet Rec
long known of the insensitive, nonspecific nature of
146(17):501-502.
 ahrel e sem Aqdeoui painduo qderorpen mnis
Guilliard MJ, Banks AR, Baxter CJ, and Mayo AK. 1999. What
advancement. Magnetic resonance offers an even fur-
is your diagnosis? Mouth neoplasms. J Small Anim Pract
ther advance in the imaging and clear delineation of ab-
40(1):1, 35.
 normalities of the skull and tissues of the head. In many
 Jeffery N. 2005. Ethmoidal encephalocoele associated with
aspects, magnetic resonance imaging helps provide a
seizures in a puppy. J Small Anim Pract 46(2):89-92.
narrower differential diagnosis and certainly clearer de-
 Johnson VA and Seiler G. 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging
termination of disease borders.
appearance of the Cisterna chyli. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
47(5):461464.
Kafka UC, Carstens A, Steenkamp G, and Symington H. 2004.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Diagnostic value of magnetic resonance imaging and com-
puted tomography for oralmasses in dogs. JS Afr Vet Assoc
75(4):163-168.
Barthez PY, Schaafsma IA, and Pollak YW. 2006. Multi-
Kato K, Nishimura R, Sasaki N, Matsunaga S, Mochizuki M,
modality image fusion to facilitate anatomic localization of
Nakayama H, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of a canine
99mTC-pertechnetate uptake in the feline head. Vet Radiol
eye with melanoma. J Vet Med Sci 67(2):179-182.
Ultrasound 47(5):503-506.
Kneissl S and Probst A. 2006. Magnetic resonance imaging
 Bischoff MG and Kneller SK. 2004. Diagnostic imaging of the
feafures of presumed normal head and neck lymph nodes
canine and feline ear. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 
in dogs. Vet Radial Ultrasound 47(6):538-541.
34(2):437-458
Kneissl S, Probst A, and Konar M. 2004. Low-field magnefic
 Caruso K, Marrion R, and Silver G. 2002. What is your diag-
 resonance imaging of the canine middle and inner ear. Vet 
nosis? Retrobulbar mass indenting the inferior aspect of the
Radiol Ultrasound 45(6):520-522.
right globe. J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(11):1553-1554.
Larocca RD. 2000. Unilateral external and internal ophthal-
Chang Y, Thompson H, Reed N, and Penderis J. 2006. Clirical
moplegia caused by intracrarial meningioma in a dog. Vet
and magnetic resonance imaging feafures of nasopharyn-
Ophthalmol 3(1):3-9.
geal lymphoma in two cats with concurrent intracranial
Lipsitz D, Levitski RE, and Berry WL. 2001. Magnetic reso
mass. J Small Arim Pract 47(11):678-681.
nance imaging feafures of multilobular osteochondrosar-
Clifford C, Jennings D, Maslin WR, and Weigand C. 2000.
coma in 3 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42(1);:14-19.
 What is your neurologic diagnosis? Unilateral oftitis externa
MeConnell JF, Hayes A, Plaft SR, and Smith KC. 2006. Calvar-
 Or media, cerebellar meningioma, and a solitary mammary
 ial hyperostosis syndrome in two bullmastiffs. Vet Radiol 
adenoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(8):1217-1219.
Utrasound 47(1):72-77.
Cullen CL, Grahn BH, and Wolfer J. 2000. Diagnostic ophthal-
Miwa Y, Matsunaga S, Kato K, Ogawa H, Nakayama H, Tsu-
mology. Mesenchymal orbital tumor with adjacent bony
jimoto S, et al. 2005. Choroidal melanoma in a dog. J Vet
invasion. Can Vet J 41(9):723-724.
Med Sci 67(8):821-823.
Derris R 2000. Use of magnetic resonance imaging for the
Owen MC, Lamb CR, Lu D, and Targeft MP. 2004. Material in
 i s   s  n s
 the middle ear of dogs having magnetic resonance imaging
Anim Pract 41(4):145-155.
for investigation of neurologic signs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
De Rycke LM, Saunders JH, Gielen IM, van Bree HJ, and
45(2):149-155.
 Petite AF and Dennis R 2006. Comparison of radiography
tomography, and cross-sectional views of the anatomy of
and magnetic resonance imaging for evaluating the extent
normal nasal cavifies and paranasal sinuses in mesafi-
of nasal neoplasia in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 47(9):529-
cephalic dogs. Am J Vet Res 64(9):1093-1098.
536.
332 HEAD—NON-CNS
Pownder S, Fidel JL, Saveraid TC, Gailbreath KL, and Gavin
repair of cleft palate in a four-week-old carine (Canis fa-
PR. 2006. What is your diagnosis? Incidental melanosis of
 miliaris): an animal model for cleft palate repair. Contemp
a salivary gland lesion. J Am Vet Med Assoc 229(2):209-
Top Lab Anim Sci 43(6):17-21; quiz 58.
210.
Varejao AS, Munoz A, and Lorenzo V. 2006. Magnetic res-
Saunders JH, Clercx C, Snaps FR, Sullivan M, Duchateaul
onance imaging of the intratemporal facial nerve in idio
L, van Bree HJ, et al. 2004. Radiographic, magnetic reso
pathic facial paralysis in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
nance imaging, computed tomographic, and rhinoscopic
47(4):328-333
feafures of nasal aspergillosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Vazquez JM, Arencibia A, Gil F, Ramirez JA, Gonzalez N, Sosa
225(11):1703-1712.
 CD, et al. 1998. Magnetic resonance imaging of the normal
Sturges BK, Dickinson PJ, Kortz GD, Berry WL, Vernau KM,
canine larynx. Anat Histol Embryol 27(4):263-270.
Wisner ER, et al. 2006. Clinical signs, magnetic resonance
Willis CK, Quinn RP, McDonell WM, Gati J, Parent J, and
imaging features, and outcome after surgical and medical
Nicolle D. 2001. Functional MRI as a tool to assess vision in
treatment of otogenic infracranial infection in 11 cats and 4
dogs: the optimal anesthetic. Vet Ophthalmol 4(4):243-253.
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 20(3):648-656.
Xia Y, Moody JB, and Alhadlaq H. 2002. Orientational depen-
Tolwani R, Hagan C, Runstadler J, Lyons H, Green S, Bouley
dence of T2 relaxafion in arficular cartilage: a microscopic
D, et al. 2004. Magnetic resonance imaging and surgical
MRI (microMRI) study. Magn Reson Med 48(3):460-469.
CHAPTER SEVEN
CANCER IMAGING
Susan L. Kraft
INTRODUCTION
TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
FOR CANCER MR
 MR has been used for cancer imaging for many years to
diagnose brain and spinal cord tumors, in the context of
For proper detection, mapping, and staging of a can-
its long-standing and well-developed neuroradiology
cer, an MR examination of the affected area should in-
application. Its utility for non-neurological cancers has
clude multiple imaging planes in conjunction with at
evolved more slowly, especially in veterinary medicine
least two types of pulse sequences, using an appropri-
in which economics and availability mandate the rec-
 ate coil. Either a STIR or T2-weighted pulse sequence
ommended imaging strategy. The potential advantages
are suggested due to their sensitivity to pathology, com-
of MR for cancer diagnosis and staging are irrefutable,
bined with pre- and postcontrast T1-weighted scans for
Wm Suone Suseaou st asodand sl oy asn sh pue
anatomic detail (Figure 7.2). This type of examination
 greater access and affordability.
can entail imaging times of 0.5-1.5 h with the animal un-
The basic concepts regarding MR physics have been
der general anesthesia. Besides a working knowledge
reviewed in Chapter 1. MR's greatest strength is soft tis-
 of MR interpretation, the evaluator should know the
e u shnsau ronoued jo jeaenod sh pue 'uleu ans
typical routes of cancer extension and metastasis, and
-seu reuedrnu rg apnnde s,n ,Asdone pena,
have a detailed knowledge of anatomy.
ing is especially useful to identify tumor margins rel-
The STIR pulse sequence is excellent for cancer imag-
ative to involved or susceptible surrounding anatomy
 ing. The details of performing a STIR sequence have
(Figure 7.1). Furthermore, the ability to characterize a
been described in the chapter on MR physics (Chap-
lesion with MR can improve specificity and diagnos-
jey uoy reuais aq sassaddns sunaeun ais (1 1al
tic accuracy by evaluating the combined pattern of a
and renders it dark gray or hypointense. As a re-
tumor's altered signal intensity from a series of pulse
sult, the hyperintense signal from cancer pathology
sequences. This provides a wealth of informatior about
stands out noticeably against the darkened tissue back-
tumor morphology, composition, margins, and pres-
 ground (Figure 7.2) It is important that STIR imaging
ence of secondary complications. MR depicts tumor
be done prior to, and not after, contrast enhance-
heterogeneity and disorganization since the grayscale
 ment with paramagnetic contrast media. The tumor's
images reflect rot just a tumor's water and fat content,
contrast enhancement could potentially be masked
but also evolving hemorrhage, necrosis, edema, pro-
due to suppression by the STIR's inversion recovery
 teinaceous fluid, even melanin. Even so, many tumor
pulse.
types and some noncancerous pathology can have sim-
 Fat-saturated T2-weighted imaging is an alternative
ilar abnormal signal intensity patterns, so biopsy or cy-
to the STIR pulse sequence, and with smaller FOV can
tology may still be necessary to verify diagnosis.
 have excellent image quality (Figure 7.2). Fat saturation
Corticalbone structures are depicted as areas of black
is an MR techrique that uses a selective pulse tuned
signal void and bone landmarks are not as obvious as on
to the frequency of fat to suppress its signal during
CT images. Tissue mineralization and periosteal bone
imaging. Like the STIR sequence, fat saturation will
production can be more difficult to detect with MR until
render fatty tissues dark, thereby highlighting pathol-
fairly well developed. However, tumor osteolysis and
ogy which has a hyperintense signal. The disadvan-
invasion through cortical bone is readily visible on MR
tage is that with some MR instruments, fat saturation
(Figure 7.1).
over a large FOV can be incomplete and uneven, plus
Practical Small Animal MRT Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
333
0 2009 Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN: 978-0-813-80607-5
334CANCER IMAGING
C
Figure 7.1.  Multiplanar postcontrast T1-weighted MRimages of a dog witha multilobular osteosarcoma (T) showing extensive
invasion within the frontal sinuses. The fumor extent is best illustrated by assessing the combinafion of sagiftal (A), dorsal
siso o ) ed  () pe (a) sd  ) saedde oe sn isa qoa sn () sian pe )
cortex marked by the white arrowheadl).
335PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
Figure 7.2. Multiplanar, mulfti-pulse sequence MR images of a dog with a soft tissue sarcoma dorsal to the hip, including
sagiftal and dorsal STIR (A) and (B), transverse pre- and fat-safurated postconfrast T1-weighted (C) and (D), and fat-safurated
perifumor reactive inflammation.
336 CANCER IMAGING
C
 e m  e  s     (a) m  )    
each image. The venfral fumor region has signal characteristics consistent with fluid and /or necrosis (N).
the techrique increases scan time. In comparison, fat
MR is much greater than iodine contrast agents with CT.
suppression using a STIR sequence is uriform over
Contrast enhancement also aids in delineating tumor
even large FOV giving it more consistent quality. Use
 margins from surrounding secondary pathology such
 -souep pasn aq ose ues sunseun uonsaiddns-ey jo 
 as edema and hemorrhage. Use of fat safuration during
tically to confirm the presence of adipose content in a
postcontrast Tl-weighted scans helps further to dis-
tumor (Figure 7.3).
tinguish contrast-enhanced tumor margins from sub-
Despite MR's excellent contrast resolution, injection
cutaneous, epidural, or bone marrow fat when imag-
of paramagnetic contrast media is useful for detect-
ing spinal, skeletal tumors, and subcutaneous tumors
ing some berign and lower grade malignant tumors,
(Figure 7.2). Another techrique used is to subtract the
which can be relatively isointense to surrounding tis-
sues. The visibility of gadolirium contrast agents with
images leaving orly the enhancement.
337 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
C
Figure 7.4. Dorsal plane whole body STIR ((A), leff) and T2-weighted ((A), right) MR images of a normal dog. Parts (B) and
(C) are sagiftal STIR MR images showing multiple erlarged lymph nodes in a dog with lymphoma, including the mandibular
(white arrowhead in (B), superficial cervical (white arrow (B)), axillary (black arrowheads in (B)), medial iliac (white arrow in
(C)), and inguinal lymph nodes (white arrowhead in (C)
WHOLE BODY MR FOR
developed for veterinary patients (Figure 7.4). In
comparison to PET (which is also a highly sensi-
CANCER STAGING
tive cancer staging modality), MR is more available,
less expensive, and does not lead to patient radi-
Whole body MR is potentially a single imaging method
 ation exposure. Whole body MR is more sensifive
that could replace traditional imaging to stage can-
than CT or 99m-Te-MDP bone scintigraphy to skele-
cer In the past, whole body MR had the disadvan-
tal metastases from various malignancies and also to
wgepeaap ahe pue saug ueos pasuonord jo sabel
 bone marrow infiltration from lymphoma. Occult ca-
due to motion artifact.  Technical improvements 
 rine and human bone marrow lymphoma has been
 and new imaging strategies are evolving to achieve detected with whole body MR since it provides a global
 practical_ scan times along with acceptable image  view of the marrow, even when biopsy results are neg-
quality. Techriques for whole body MR are being
ative.
338 CANCER IMAGING
MR IMAGING TECHNIQUES
IMAGING RESIDUAL TUMOR
FOR RADIATION THERAPY
AND TUMOR RECURRENCE
PLANNING
An increasing number of veterinary cancer patients
are undergoing surgery, radiation and /or chemother-
Radiation therapy plarning systems have tradition-
ally used CT scan data, but some systems can also
apy, and enjoying longer life spans. Imaging is being
requested with increasing frequency to detect resid-
utilize MR images. Despite its poorer contrast resolu-
tion, CT images are the source of tissue electron den-
 n   s ps m  m
sity values that are used for dosimetric heterogeneity
inadequate, or later to detect tumor recurrence and
distinguish that from radiation fibrosis or necrosis.
 corrections. Those density data carnot be obtained di-
The distinction between residual tumor and postradi-
rectly during MR imaging. A recent veterinary study by
 ation or postsurgical reactive tissue or inflammation
Lyons et al. (2007), however, compared treatment plans
is difficult to make in the early post-treatment phase
created with and without consideration of electron
(Figure 7.5). Postsurgical studies should be done in
density data. The study showed orly a 1.0 ± 0.86%
      1   s  i 
difference in mean dose delivered to 95% of the tu-
affter surgery in order to allow postsurgical inflam-
mor volume. MR images can suffer from geometric in-
mation to subside so that images can be interpreted
accuracy and artifact due to local magnetic field dis-
accurately regarding the presence of residual tumor.
tortiors, particularly at the periphery of images away
 Immediate postsurgical scanning can be done as it
from the central axis, which could be important if
takes about 3 days to get surgical inflammation. A
delivering spatially focused therapy such as radio-
delay of at least several months post-treatment is
 surgery Finally, it is easier to simulate a radiation
recommended for a baseline scan to moritor for sub-
treatment setup (patient positioning and landmarks
sequent tumor recurrence. Granulation tissue and
to an anatomic isocenter) during CT scanning than
developing fibrosis after an aggressive surgery or af-
with MR due to the use of receiver coils and lack of
ter radiation therapy can have similar characteristics
triangulating laser light systems in most MR suites.
to neoplasia. After 3-6 months, mature scar tissue is
 Recent publications, however, have shown excellent
repositioring accuracy using MR and positioning
hypocellular and low in signal in T2 images, thereby
allowing it to be distinguished from active tumor re-
aids.
currence.
Still, due to the known advantages of MR for
depicting tumors and their margins, it is impor-
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND
tant to incorporate MR into target defirition when-
ever possible. A multimodality approach for radi-
MOLECULAR IMAGING
ation treatment planning is the trend in human
medicine, through use of fused CT-MR, CT-MR-single
WITH MR
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), or
 PET results so that treatment incorporates the com-
MR techriques that asses tumor physiology are be-
plementary information from each modality Also,
coming an inherent part of clinical cancer imaging.
open MR scanners specially designed for radia-
Diffusion MR imaging shows an improvement in tu-
tion therapy plarring are being built that have
mor water mobility if there is a positive response to
geometric distortion corrections and  landmarking
therapy (Figure 7.6). BOLD imaging is now attract-
systems.
ing interest as a method of mapping tumor hypoxia.
 In select situations, MR has already proven to be
Dynamic contrast-enhanced MR provides information
superior to CT for radiation and surgical treatment
about tumor perfusion and angiogenesis, and can indi-
plarning. An example is human vestibular schwan-
cate response to treatment. MR angiography can iden-
noma, in which CT has limitations due to arti-
tify the major vessels supplying a tumor and its degree
facts at the skull base. Three-dimensional postcon-
of vascularity (Figure 7.7). Cancer can also be assessed
trast MR is the choice method for radiosurgery
plarning of these tumors with measurably lower
 agnostic specificity and evaluate response to therapy
 post-treatment morbidity The same principles would
(Figure 7.8).
 apply for small caudal fossa brain tumors in animal
The newest frontier in MR is molecular imaging in-
patients.
volving the use of targeted contrast agents lirked to
Figure 7.5. Dorsal plane postconfrast fat-safurated T1-weighted (A) and STIR (B) MR images made a week after incomplete
surgical resection of a liposarcoma. It is not possible to distinguish residual tumor from the confrast-enhancing margins (T1)
and diffuse signal hyperintensity (STIR) of this postsurgical seroma (S).
C
Figure 7.6. Transverse postconfrast T1-weighted MR image (A) of a canine melanoma (T) that is invading the retrobulbar
space. Parts (B) and (C) are MR diffusion images made before and after treatment with a pegylated form of tumor necrosis factor.
Treatment partially improved the tumor's restricted water motion, based on an increase in the apparent dliffusion coefficient 
(ADC) which is displayed as a color map. (See Color Plate 7.6B.)
340 CANCER IMAGING
A
B
Figure 7.7. Transverse postcontrast T1-weighted MR image (A) of a vertebral osteosarcoma (T), and an MR angiogram (B)
showing the tumor vasculature (arrow) branching off the carotid artery.
cellular biomarkers, receptor, gene, or substrate probes.
(Figures 7.9 and 7.10). Numerous publications are now
These methods have the promise of combining the func-
available on brain, spinal cord, crarial, and periph-
tional sensitivity of PET scarring with high-resolution
eral nerve tumor diagnosis in the dog and cat. An
anatomic images from MR.
entire chapter (Chapter 2, Section 1) has been ded-
The assessment of tumor physiology with MR gen-
icated to this subject in this reference. Neoplasia of
erally requires contemporary state-of-the-art MR scan-
the nervous system usually results in hyperintense sig-
ners with advanced software, higher field strength,
nal in T2 and FLAIR images and hypointensity in T1-
stronger and faster gradient systems. Veterinary oncol-
weighted images. The occasional nervous system tu-
mor that remains isointense in T2 and T1 images is
imaging as high-caliber MR equipment becomes more 
usually detectable on MR after contrast enhancement
 available to veterinarians. Ultimately, these methods
with gadolinium DTPA (Figure 7.9). Rarely, a low-grade
 glioma will have relatively normal vasculature (and in-
ficity, accuracy of tumor staging, allow us to identify
tact blood brain barrier) and therefore be poor or non-
positive responders to therapy and eventually to tailor a
contrast enhancing and /or too small to cause noticeable
patient's treatment based on the response documented
mass effect or edema. MR provides the best chance of
with MRI/MRS.
detecting these lesions via abnormal signal intensity
caused by the infiltrate. Central nervous system (CNS)
lesions that are small, poorly enhancing, or located in
SPECIFIC AREAS
the brainstem region, are best seen with MR and can be
missed on CT scans.
Nervous System Tumors
Accurate tumor margins are especially important in
MR is unquestionably the method of choice for de-
treatment plarning for CNS lesions to spare normal sur-
tection and diagnosis of nervous system tumors, and
rounding tissue while treating the entire tumor volume.
this is its best-understood use in veterinary medicine
MR with gadolirium-based contrast enhancement of
341 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Choline
Lactate
abnormal lactate (signifying necrosis) and elevated choline (associated with increased cell membrane turnover).
human brain tumors has been reported to equal or ex
MR is excellent for tumor characterization and can
ceed the area of enhancement of the same lesions with
show the location and size of ocular lesions better than
iodine-based contrast media from CT images, and may
ophthalmoscopy or ultrasonography (Figure 7.13). Its
enhanced tumor margins still underestimate the edge
d anno ue un a on aiqe an st aoeds ra
of more infiltrative fumor types such as human ma-
parallel to the optic cone (Figure 7.13). In a study by
lignant gliomas. This has been demonstrated through
Dernis (2o00), MR provided more accurate diagnoses
human studies using comparative stereotactic biopsies
 of orbital disease in 25 dogs and cats compared to ra-
and also by evidence from multivoxel MR spectroscopy
diography and ultrasound.
in which cancer-like metabolic spectra have been found
 MR provides excellent images of the nasal passages,
 outside the contrast-enhancing tumor margins.
turbinates, and sinuses. Besides its sensitivity to crib-
Despite MR having the best sensitivity to nervous
riform plate destruction, MR allows tumor tissue to be
system lesions and excellent lesion characterization, its
 distinguuished from exudate based on differing signal
specificity is not absolute. Non-neoplastic lesions such
intensity and exudate's lack of contrast enhancement
as abscesses and infarcts can have features similar to
(Figure 7.14). The combined T1 and T2 signal intensity
cancer (Figure 7.1l). Biopsy of CNS lesions in veteri-
 pattern varies depending upon an exudate's degree of
nary patients is frequently impractical or undesirable.
inspissation and protein content. Tl-weighted signal
intensity increases with protein content until it exceeds
 human brain tumors and initial investigations are un-
28%, at which point exudate decreases in intensity. Tu-
derway in veterinary medicine.
mors of the sinonasal region tend to be intermediate
in signal in T2-weighted images with a more diffuse or
Tumors of the Head
solid form of erhancement, whereas sinusitis and rhiri-
tis have higher T2 signal intensity and rim enhancement
MR's multiplanar imaging is particularly advanta-
of inflamed mucosa.
 geous when imaging the complex anatomy of the head.
 MR of neoplasia involving the ear has been described
MR should be considered when imaging head tumors
S in veterinary patients. Thin slice volume scans with MR
that have an extensive soft tissue component, and
I are best to see the full extent of invasion of malignant
especially  when there is concern regarding possi-  cancer into the middle and inner ear, intralabyrinthine
ble CNS invasion (Figure 7.12). Dural, pial, or brain
structures, crarial nerves VIl and VIll, cerebellopontine
parenchymal invasion can be detected using fat-
angle, and brainstem ruclei due to lack of artifact in the
suppressed postcortrast T1-weighted imaging.
brainstem region (Figure 7.15).
342CANCER IMAGING
C
Figure 7.9. Sagiftal pre- and postcontrast (parts (A) and (B), respectively) and transverse (C) postcontrast T1-weighted MR
images of a dog with cervical spinal meningioma. The fumor is slighfly hypointense relative to the spinal cord before contrast
enhancement (black arrows in (A)) but is quite visible after confrast enhancement.
343PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
2003
CgTm:
25
PA
C
Figure 7.10. Sagiftal fat-safurated postconfrast T1-weighted (A), transverse T2-weighted (B), and dorsal STIR (C) MR im-
ages of a neurofibroma (T) extending parasagiftally and ventrally from a cranial thoracic spinal nerve root. The multiplanar 
capabilifies of MRI make it excellent for assessing full anatomic extent of peripheral nerve sheath fumors.
344CANCER IMAGING
Figure 7.11.  Transverse postconfrast T1 (A) and T2 (B) MR images of a dog's ring-enhancing cerebrallesion with a mild mass
effect and perilesional edema. These feaftures are common with intra-axial brain fumors such as oligodendroglioma, however
Xoooa umoum jo snsea Arojeuureu ue o Arepuoas po pooq e pue eeeu ot anp sem s
A
B
Figure 7.12. Transverse (A) and dorsal plane (B) postcontrast T1-weighted MR images from a dog with a chondroblastic
theinvasive area.
345PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
C
D
allows its detection.
346CANCER IMAGING
B
320x2
TR:516
EXTREM
C
Figure 7.14. Transverse T2-weighted (A), fat-safurated transverse (B), dorsal (C), and sagiftal (D) postcontrast T1-weighted
MR images of a nasal adenocarcinoma (T). Note in the T2-weighted image the hyperintense exudate interspersed around the
* marks the olfactory lobe of the brain in (B). Early calvarial erosion is seen on these views.
347PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
A
B
carcinoma of the ear canal that had also formed a necrotic abscess (A). Also note the confrast enhancement of the inner margin
of the skull base and meninges from local invasion and inflammation. In the T2-weighted image, the middle ear contains
hyperintense fluid (F).
in mottled to uniformly hypointense regiors in T1 im-
MR of Musculoskeletal and Bone
ages and hyperintensity in STIR images (Figure 7.17).
Marrow Cancers
Although the STIR pulse sequence is quite sensitive to
bone marrow cancer, false positives can occur due to
MR is the modality of choice in human medicine for
 musculoskeletal cancer, because it excels at delineating
other pathology such as edema, inflammation, and con-
version of yellow to red bone marrow during certain
tumor margins from neurovascular and skeletal struc-
diseases.
fures. MR is more sensitive than CT to soft tissue tumor
infiltrate within fat, muscle, tendon, bone, and allows
 better identification of blood vessels (Figure 7.16). For
Tumors of the Thorax
primary bone tumors, MR has been found to be better
than CT and radiography for determiring extraosseous
 There is great untapped potential for MR of thoracic
 neoplasia in veterinary medicine. Historically, the res-
cular involvement, and skip lesions, all of which are
 piratory and cardiac motion artifact and slower scan
 times associated with earlier MR equipment resulted
radiation therapy (Figure 7.17). Recurring tumors can
 in an inability to match the lung image quality that
 be visualized in the presence of nonferrous metal or-
can be obtained using CT. Advances have beent made
thopedic implants. Dynamic-contrast-enhanced MR of
in MR to reduce motion artifact and it is now con-
both human and carine osteosarcomas has shown
 sidered suitable for thoracic imaging. Those advances
promise in predicting percent tumor necrosis, an im-
 include faster breath-hold gradient echo imaging, respi-
portant prognostic indicator that can also be used to
ratory compensation, and respiratory and cardiac gat-
 evaluate response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
 ing. Suitable spatial and contrast resolutions can now
As previously stated, MR's sensitivity to skeletal
be achieved with MR to detect lung metastases. MR has
metastases and bone marrow infiltrate exceeds that of
 been shown to detect lung nodules as small as 5 mm
CT and 99m-Te-MDP bone scintigraphy. The MR ap-
 with similar sensitivity as CT, and lung nodules and
pearance of canine bone marrow changes with age and
d ra u p q mu are sss
varies geographically due to the relative distribution
(Figures 7.18 and 7.19)
of yellow (fatty) versus red (cellular) bone marrow. Anl
The multiplanar feature of MR allows lesiors involv-
adult dog's yellow fatty bone marrow is hyperintense
 ing curved structures such as the rib cage or diaphragm
relative to musculature in Tl- and T2-weighted im-
 to be accurately depicted, and MR is being used with
ages, and hypointense in STIR or fat-suppressed T1-
increasing frequency for human tumors of the medi-
and T2-weighted images. Primary or metastatic lesions
 astinum, thoracic wall, cardiovascular structures, and
lead to a reversal of those signal intensities, resulting
diaphragm (Figures 7.20 and 7.21).
348CANCER IMAGING
C
images from a dog with rapid recurrence of a hemangiosarcoma metastasis (T) in the muscle along the flank. The muscular
tumor was incompletely excised 1 week ago, along with a splenectomy for the primary hemangiosarcoma. The metastasis has
 a nonenhancing necrotic center, and there is a seroma (S) along the flank whose margins blend with the contrast-enhancing
ftLimor.
349 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
   s  (       )    
humeral osteosarcoma (T) in a dog. The intramedullary margin is well defined, but there is an extensive extramedullary
component with tissue reaction extending to the vasculafure medial to the distal humerus.
1a
Figure 7.18.  Transverse T2-weighted (A) and sagiftal STIR (B) MR images of a dog with a primary lung fumor (presumably,
based on signalment, history, and radiographic appearance) in the cranial lung lobe (T). The normal contralateral lung lobe is
hypointense (N). Normal liver (L) is seen caudal to the heart and diaphragm on sagiftal view.
350CANCER IMAGING
02
320x2
ET:15
TR:4000.0
TE:97.7
A
B
Figure 7.19.  Transverse T2-weighted MR image of a metastatic hemangiosarcoma (white arrow) in a dog that presented for
su a u jaredde are saseseau pazis Aqeea asuaadu sran () squ pu au oi suis unau nou iaddn
on the sagittal STIR MR image of this dog's thorax surrounding the heart (H) (B).
652
15.0
ORSOPA
！
B
C
of a large mediastinal liposarcoma (T) in a dog's thorax. Note the marked cardiac displacement.
351 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
B
the chest wall(T). The hypointense lungs are separated by the cranioventral mediastinal reflection (white arrowhead in (B).
Tumors of the Abdomen and Pelvis
more challenging due to similarities in signal intensity
Very few reports are available on abdominal MR in
between normal spleen and tumors.
 MR's gastrointestinal applications have been slower
veterinary patients, largely due to the widespread
availability and relative low cost of radiographs and
to develop due to lack of an effective intraluminal con-
 diagnostic ultrasound but there are many promising
 trast media and efficacy of existing techniques. Its use
applications (Figures 7.22-7.25). Faster MR scan tech-
 for human GI cancers is increasing, however, in con-
 junction with gadolinium IV contrast and faster scan
riques mirimize artifacts from bowel motion, and mul-
techriques. MR is now a recognized methodology for
tiple applications are being evaluated for human ab-
 human preoperative distant staging of gastrointestinal
dominal cancer imaging. Those will guide future de-
velopments in veterinary medicine; one advantage is
cancers and detecting intestinal wall infiltrate. In a vet-
that the needed general anesthesia in animals reduces
erinary case report by Yasuda et al. (2004), MRI's use-
bowel motion.
fulness in distinguishing mesenteric lymphoma from
 MR is considered the best and first choice for human
adjacent adhesions and bowel has been demonstr-
ated.
hepatic imaging, but more commorly a screening CT
precedes a more focused MR exam of the abdomen.
Multiphase contrast-erhanced MR is highly sensitive
CONCLUSION
noma (and also for abdominal metastatic disease) com-
pared to contrast-enhanced CT. Human liver nodules
MR's advantages are well accepted in veterinary
seen on ultrasound imaging that carnot be found on
 medicine for examining neoplasia of the brain, spinal
MR are classified as pseudolesions and not even biop-
cord and spine, crarial and peripheral nerves, and for
sied. Similarly, a prospective MR study by Clifford et al.
 other structures of the head. The veterinary use of MR
(2004) of 23 dogs resulted in a 90% specificity in differ-
for cancer of the musculoskeletal system, thorax, and
   s   
 abdomen is undergoing active evolution. Exciting new
 nant nodules of the liver or spleen, indicating a poten-
 promising applications of MR for cancer are in transi-
tial for noninvasive diagnostic specificity compared to
 tion from a research to a clinical veterinary setting, in-
ultrasound imaging (Figures 7.23 and 7.24). Detection
cluding whole body MR, physiological, and metabolic
of early or small malignant nodules of the spleen can be
imaging.
352CANCER IMAGING
C
Figure 7.22. MRI is well suited for imaging invasive abdominal masses and the adjacent vasculature. Dorsal plane (A) and 
pe ((v) u moure am pue ,, au Aq paepu) pre mu ea euaa epneo au sueldsp pue sussaiduos sem sse au
the aorta leftward ("Ao" and black arrow in (A)). An MR angiogram shows the tumor vasculature branching from the aorta
cranial to the right renal artery (white arrowhead in (D)).
A
B
Figure 7.23. Transverse T2-weighted MR images of hemangiosarcoma metastases in both kidney cortices (* in (A) and in the
liver (hyperintense nodules in (B)) in the same dog shown in Figure 7.19.
3CO
Figure 7.24.
 Sagiftal T2-weighted (A), transverse pre- (B), and postcontrast T1-weighted MR images (C) of the liver from a
dog that presented for an MRI of the lumbar spine. Although the cause of the neurological deficits were not identified on the
MRI, numerous liver nodules were found and liver enzymes and cloffing fimes were elevated. Neoplasia was the presumed
diagnosis but histological verification could not be obtained.
354 CANCER IMAGING
2×512
Figure 7.25.  Transverse (A) and sagiffal (B) fat-safurated postcontrast T1-weighted MR images from a dog with a transiftional
cell carcinoma (T) of the urethra. The urethra is marked with a * in (A) and the colon with a white "C" on both views.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Choyke PL, Dwyer AJ, and Knopp MV. 2003. Functional tu-
mor imaging with dynamic confrast-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging 17:509-520.
Special thanks to Ms. Betsy Sestina, Billie Arceneaux,
Clifford CA, Pretorius ES, Weisse C, Sorenmo KU, Drobatz
and Melinda Wilhelm for their excellent techrical as-
KJ, Siegelman ES, et al. 2004. Magnetic resonance imaging
 p      '
of focal splenic and hepatic lesions in the dog. J Vet Intern
ogy colleagues of Colorado State Uriversity's Veteri-
Med 18:330-338.
 nary Medical Center for their many contributions.
Daniel GB and Mitchell S. 1999. The eye and orbit. Clin Tech
Small Anim Pract 14:160-169.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Davis GJ, Kapatkin AS, Craig LE, Heins GS, and Wortman
 JA. 2002. Comparison of racdiography, computed tomog-
raphy, and magnetic resonance imaging for evaluation of
Armbrust LJ, Hoskinson JJ, Biller DS, and Wilkerson M. 2004.
 appendicular osteosarcoma in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Low-field magnetic resonance imaging of bone marrow in
220:1171-1176.
the lumbar spine, pelvis, and femur in the adult dog. Vet
 Dennis R 2000. Use of magnetic resonance imaging for the
Radiol Ultrasound 45:393-401.
investigation of orbital disease in small animals. J Small
Bagley RS, Wheeler SJ, Klopp L, Sorjonen DC, Thomas WB,
Anim Pract 41:145-155.
Wilkens BE,et al. 1998. Clinical feafures of trigeminal nerve
Duesberg CA, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Bertoy EH, Dublin
sheath tumor in 10 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:19-25.
AB, and Reid MH. 1995. Magnetic resonance imaging for
Balaban RS and Hampshire VA. 2001. Challenges in small
diagnosis of pifuitary macrofumors in dogs. J Am Vet Med
animal noninvasive imaging. Iar J 42:248-262.
Assoc 206:657-662.
Barentsz J, Takahashi S, Oyen W, Mus R, De Mulder P, Reznek
Dyke J, Paricek D, Healey J, Meyers P, Huvos A, Schwartz L,
R, et al. 2006. Commonly used imaging techniques for di-
et al. 2003. Osteogeric and ewing sarcomas: estimation of
agnosis and staging. J Clin Oncol 24:3234-3244.
necrotic fraction during induction chemotherapy with dy-
Calvo BF and Semelka RC. 1999. Beyond anatomy: MR imag-
namic contrast-enhanced MR imaging. Radiology 228:271-
ing as a molecular diagnostic tool. Surg Oncoi Clin N Am
278.
8:171-183.
Eustace SJ, Walker R, Blake M, and Yucel EK. 1999. Whole-
Chenevert TL, Meyer CR, Moffat BA, Rehemtulla A, Mukherji
body MR imaging. Practical issues, clinical applications,
SK, Gebarski SS, et al. 2002. Diffusion MR: a new strategy
and future directions. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am
 for assessment of cancer therapeutic efficacy. Mol Imaging
7:209-236.
1:336-343.
Follen M, Levenback CF, Iyer RB, Grigsby PW, Boss EA, Del-
Chin T, Chang S, and Dillion W. 2002. Brain and spinal cord
passand ES, et al. 2003. Imaging in cervical cancer. Cancer
tumors. In: David PR, Bragg G, and Hricak H (eds), Onco
98:2028-2038.
logic Imaging, WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 133-159.
Forrest L. 1999. The head: excluding the brain and orbit. Clin
Chong V, Fan Y, Mukerji SK. 2002. Malignancies of the na-
Tech Small Anim Pract 14:170-176.
sopharynx and skull base. In: David PR, Bragg G, and
Friedman WA and Foote KD. 2003. Linear accelerator-based
Hricak H (eds), Oncologic Imaging, WBSaunders,Philadel-
radiosurgery for vestibular schwannoma. Neurosurg Focus
phia, pp. 182-201.
14 (5):1-8.
355 PRACTICAL SMALL ANIMAL MRI
Garosi LS, Denris R, Penderis J, Lamb CR, Targett MP, Cap-
Kraff SL, Trncic N, and LaRue S. 2006. MR and CT of dy-
 pello R, et al. 2001. Results of magnetic resonance imaging 
namic contrast enhancement decreased affer single dose
in dogs with vestibular disorders: 85 cases (1996-1999). J
irradiation of canine fumors. In Proceedings of the Ameri
Am Vet Med Assoc 218:385-391.
can College of Veterinary Radiology. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Garosi LS, Dennis R, and Schwarz T. 2003. Review of diag-
47:118.
nostic imaging of ear diseases in fhe dog and cat. Vet Radiol
Lappas J and Maglinte D. 2002. Gastrointestinal malignan-
Utrasound 44:137-146.
cies. In: David PR, Bragg G, and Hricak H (eds), On-
Ghanem N, Uhl M, Brink I, Schafer O, Kelly T, Moser E, et al.
cologic Imaging, WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 419-
 2005. Diagnostic value of MR in comparison to scintigra-
433.
 phy, PET, MS-CT and PET/CT for the detection of metas-
Lipsitz D, Higgins RJ, Kortz GD, Dickinson PJ, Bollen AW,
tases of bone. Eur J Radiol 55:41-55.
Naydan DK, et al. 2003. Glioblastoma multiforme: clinical
Gore R and Yaghmai V. 2002. Esophageal cancer. In: David
 findings, magnetic resonance imaging, and pathology in 
 PR, Bragg G, and Hricak H (eds), Oncologic Imaging, WB
five dogs. Vet Pathol 40:659-669.
 Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 359-390.
Loevner LA. 2002. Paranasal sinus neoplasms. In: David PR,
Hathcock JT. 1995. Low field magnetic resonance imaging
 Bragg G, and Hricak H (eds), Oncologic Imaging, WBSaun-
characteristics of cranial vault meningiomas in 13 dogs. Vet
ders, Philadelphia, pp. 160-181.
Radiol Ultrasound 37:257-263.
Lyons J, Thrall DE, and Pruitt AF. 2007. Comparison of isodose
Hosten N, Wust P, Beier J, Lemke AJ, and Felix R 1998.
distributions in canine brain in the heterogeneity corrected
MR-assisted specification/localizafion of target volumes.
versus uncorrected treafment plans usig 6 Mv photons. Vet
Aspects of quality control. Strahlenther Onkol 174(Suppl
Radiol Ultrasound 48:292-296.
2):13-18.
Mah D, Steckner M, Palacio E, Mifra R, Richardson T, and
Kafka UC, Carstens A, Steenkamp G, and Symington H. 2004.
 Hanks GE. 2002. Characteristics and quality assurance of a
Diagnostic value of magnetic resonance imaging and com-
 dedicated open 0.23 T MR for radiation therapy simulation.
puted tomography for oral masses in dogs. JS Afr Vet Assoc
Med Phys 29:2541-2547.
75:163168.
McCornell JF, Plaft SR, Penderis J, Abramson C, and Denris
Kalmar JA, Eick JJ, Merrift CR, Shuler SE, Miller KD, McFar
R 2006. Use of MR spectroscopy in the investigation of ca-
land GB, et al. 1988. A review of applications of MR in soff 
nine brain disease. In Proceedings of European Association
tissue and bone tumors. Orthopedics 11:417-425.
of Veterinary Diagnostic Imaging. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Kato K, Nishimura R, Sasaki N, Matsunaga S, Mochizuki M,
47:421.
 Nakayama H, et al. 2005. Magnetic resonance imaging of a
Mellanby RJ, Jeffery ND, Baines EA, Woodger N, and
canine eye with melanoma. J Vet Med Sci 67:179-182.
Herrtage ME. 2003. Magnetic resonance imaging in the di-
Kippenes H, Gavin PR, Bagley RS,Silver GM, Tucker RL, and 
agnosis of lymphoma involving the brachial plexus in a cat.
 Sande RD. 1999. Magnetic resonance imaging features of
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:522-525.
 iia so  pro ds e ads a r sr
 Mentzel HJ, Kentouche K, Sauner D, Fleischmann C, Vogt S,
Ultrasound 40:627-633.
Goftschild D, et al. 2004. Comparison of whole-body STIR-
Kippenes H, Gavin PR, Sande RD, Rogers D, and Sweet V.
 MR and 99mTe-methylene-diphosphonate scintigraphy in
 2003. Accuracy of positioning the cervical spine for radi
children with suspected multifocalbone lesions. Eur Radiol
ation therapy and the relationship to GTV, CTV and PTV.
14:2297-2302.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:714-719.
Miwa Y, Matsunaga S, Kato K, Ogawa H, Nakayama H,
Kneissl S, Probst A, and Konar M. 2004. Low-field magnetic
 Tsujimoto S, et al. 2005. Choroidal melanoma in a dog. J
resonance imaging of the canine middle and inner ear. Vet 
Vet Med Sci 67:821-823.
Radiol Ultrasound 45:520-522.
Muleya JS, Taura Y, Nakaichi M, Nakama S, and Takeuchi A.
Kraft SL. 2007. Magnetic resonance imaging characteristics
1997. Appearance of canine abdominal tumors with mag-
of peripheral nerve sheath tumors of the canine brachial
netic resonance imaging using a low field permanent mag-
 plexus in 18 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48:1-7.
net. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:444 447.
Kraff S, Ashton E, Ehrhart E, Sestina L, Arceneaux B, Thamm
 Munden R and Bragg D. 2002. Primary malignancies of
D, et al. 2007. Estimafion of % fumor necrosis by 3D com-
the thorax. In: David PR, Bragg G, and Hricak H (eds),
 partmental analysis of dynamic contrast-erhanced MR in
 Oncologic Imaging, WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 313-
spontaneous canine osteosarcomas, in Proceedings of the
341.
International Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine,
Plaft SR, Graham J, Chrisman CL, Collirs K, Chandra S,
Berlin Germany, p. 564
 Sirninger J, et al. 1999. Magnetic resonance imaging and
KraftSL and Gavin PR 1999. Intracranial neoplasia. Clin Tech
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of a malignant periph-
Small Anim Pract 14:112-123.
eral nerve sheath ftumor in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Krafft SL, Gavin PR, DeHaan C, Moore M, Wendling LR, and
40:367-371.
Leathers CW. 1997. Retrospective review of 50 canine in-
Randall EK, Lana S, Avery A, Olver C, and Kraff S. 2005.
 tracranial tumors evaluated by magnetic resonance imag-
Whole-body MR: a prospective comparison to routine
ing. J Vet Intern Med 11:218-225.
diagnostic evaluation in staging lymphoma in dogs. In
356 CANCER IMAGING
Proceedings of the American College of Veterinary Radi-
Thomas WB. 1996. Magnetic resonance imaging feafures of
ology. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:115.
primary brain fumors in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:20
Ross BD, Moffat BA, Lawrence TS, Mukherji SK, Gebarski SS,
27.
 Quint DJ, et al. 2003. Evaluation of cancer therapy using
Troxel MT, Vite CH, Massicofte C, McLear RC, Van Winkle TJ,
diffusion magnetic resonance imaging. Mol Cancer Ther
Glass EN, et al. 2004. Magneftic resonance imaging feafures
2:581-587.
of feline intracrarial neoplasia: retrospective analysis of 46
Rubin P, Brasacchio R, and Katz A. 2006. Solitary metas-
cats. J Vet Intern Med 18:176-189.
tases: illusion versus reality. Semin Radiat Oncol 16:120
Tsunoda S, Takagi S, Tanaka O, and Miura Y. 1997. Clinical
130.
and prognostic sigrificance of femoral marrow magnetic
Schmidt T, Reinshagen M, Brambs HJ, Adler G, Rieber A,
resonance imaging in patients with malignant lymphoma.
Tirplitz CV, et al. 2003. Comparison of conventional ente-
Blood 89:286-290.
roclysis, intestinal ulfrasound and MR-enteroclysis for de-
Tucker DW, Olsen D, Kraft SL, Andrews GA, and Gray AP.
termining changes in the small intestine and complicafions
2000. Primary hemangiosarcoma of the iliopsoas muscle
in patients with Crohn's disease. Z Gastroenterol 41:641-
eliciting a peripheral neuropathy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
648.
36:163-167.
 Sherar M. 2005. Imaging in oncology. In: Tarnnock IF, Hill RP,
Turrel JM, Fike J, and LeCouteur RA. 1986. Computed tomo-
Bristow RG, and Harrington L (eds), The Basic Science of
 graphic characteristics of primary brain tumors in 50 dogs.
Oncology, MeGraw Hill, New York, pp. 249-260.
J Am Vet Assoc 188:851-856.
 Sheu M, Chang C, Wang J, and Yen M. 2001. MR staging of
Wallack ST, Wisner ER, Werner JA, Walsh PJ, Kent MS, Fairley
 clinical stage I and Ia cervical carcinoma: a reappraisal of 
RA, et al. 2002. Accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging
efficacy and pitfalls. Eur J Radiol 38:225-231.
for estimating inframedullary osteosarcoma extent in pre-
Sostman HD, Prescoft DM, Dewhirst MW, Dodge RK, Thrall
operative planning of canine limb-salvage procedures. Vet 
DE, Page RL, et al. 1994. MR imaging and spectroscopy for
Radiol Ultrasound 43:432-441.
prognostic evaluafion in sof-tissue sarcomas. Radiology
Wisner E and Pollard R. 2004. Trends in veterinary cancer
190:260-275.
imaging. Vet Comp Oncol 2:49-74.
Stockberger S and Maglinte D. 2002. Colorectal cancer. In:
Yamaguchi H, Minami A, Kaneda K, Isu K, and Yamawaki
 David PR, BraggG, and Hricak H (eds), Oncologic Imaging,
S. 1992. Comparison of magnetic resonance imaging and
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 434-477.
computed tomography in the local assessment of osteosar-
Takagi S, Tsunoda S, and Tanaka O. 1998. Bone marrow
coma. Int Orthop 16:285-290.
involvement in lymphoma: the importance of marrow
Yasuda D, Fujita M, Yasuda S, Tariguchi A, Miura H,
 magnetic resonance imaging. Leuk Lymphoma 29:515-
Hasegawa D, et al. 2004. Usefulness of MR compared with
522.
CT for diagnosis of mesenteric lymphoma in a dog. J Vet
Tarimoto A, Yuasa Y, Imai Y, Izutsu M, Hiramatsu K,
Med Sci 66:1447-1451.
Tachibana M, et al. 1992. Bladder tumor staging: compar-
Yin FF, Das S, Kirkpatrick J, Oldham M, Wang Z, and Zhou
ison of convenfional and gadolinium-enhanced dynamic
SM. 2006. Physics and imaging for targeting of oligometas-
MR imaging and CT. Radiology 185:741-747.
tases. Semin Radiat Oncol 16:85-101.
INDEX
A
Berign thymoma, 304f
Cerebral edema, 50-52
Abdomen, MR sfudies of, 351
Biceps tendon avulson, 247f
cytotoxic edema, 50
adrenal gland abnormality, 279
Bicipital tenosynovitis, 235, 243f
interstifial edema, 50
aortic thrombus, 290, 291f
Bilateral adrenal masses, 282f
vasogenic edema, 50
genitourinary tract, 283
Bilateral hydrothorax, 300f
Cerebral hemispheres, 24
kidney abnormality, 279
 Black-blood images, 295
Cerebral white matter, 26
liver structure abnormality, 275
Blood brain barrier (BBB), 45
Cerebrovascular disease, 95
normal abdominal anatomy, 273-275
Body coil, 21
Ceruminous gland carcinoma, 326f
pancreas, 283
Bone marrow cancers, 347
Cervical necrotic lipoma, 336f
portosystemic shunts, 285-289
Bone scintigraphy, 337
Cervical spinal meningioma, 342f 
vena cava thrombus, 290, 291f
Brachial plexus disease, 244f, 246f.
Chemical shift artifact, 11, 14f, 212
Abducent nucleus (Cranial nerve VI),
 See also under Orthopedic
Chiari malformations, 177
31-33
 Brain herriation
Chondroblastic osteosarcoma, 344f
Aberrant salivary gland, 320
craniotomy defect, 60
Choroid plexus fumors, 81
Acute intervertebral disk nucleus
foramen magnum, 60
CINE loop, 299f
 pulposus extrusion, 207f, 208f,
rostral (caudal transtentorial), 60
Cingulate gyrus, 60
209f
subfascial (cingulate gyrus), 60
Circular coils, 21
ADC (apparent diffusion coefficient),
CN. See Cranial nerve
339f
CNS (Central nervous system), 340
Adrenal glands, 273
C
Cochlear division of CN VII, 40
Air-filled sinus strucfures, 41
Calcified meningioma, 195f
Comparative imaging
 Aliasing artifact. See Fold-over artifact
Calvarial erosion, 346f
diagnostic radiology, 1
Anatomy of head (non-CNS), 310f, 311f
Cancer imaging
magnetic resonance imaging, 2-3
Arimal head posifions, 48f
 abdominal MR, 351
nuclear medicine, 1-2
Anomalous disease, 68, 173
bone marrow cancers, 347
ultrasonography, 2
Aortic body tumor, 302f
head fumors, 341
computed tomography, 2
Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC),
molecular imaging with MR,
Comparafive stereotactic biop sies, 341
339f
338-340
Compartmentalized ICP. See Brain
Arachnoid cysts, 178-179, 188f, 189f
musculoskeletal cancer, MR of, 347
herniafion
Artifacts, 212
nervous system fumors, 340-341
Computed tomography (CT), 2, 319f 
 chemical shiff artifact, 11
 pelvis, tumors of, 351
Congenital hydrocephalus, 64f
cross-talk arfifact, 16
physiological imaging with MR,
 Coronal T2-weighted fat-suppressed 
fold-over (aliasing), 11, 15
338-340
images, 275f
 hardware artifacts, 10
radiation therapy plarning, 338
Cortical bone strucfures, 333
magic angle artifact, 16, 19f, 243f
residual fumor, 338
Cortical osteolysis, 334f
magnetic susceptibility artifact, 15-16
technical aspects, 333-336
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL), 263f,
 phase and frequency arfifacts, 10-11
thorax, fumors of, 347
266f, 267f
truncation artifact, 15
fumor recurrence, 338
Cranial mediastinum, 305f 
volume averaging artifact, 16
whole body MR, 337
Cranial nerve I (Olfactory nerves), 29
Aflantoaxial subluxafion, 174
Canine melanoma, 339f
Cranial nerve ⅡI (Optic nerve), 29-31
Auditory stimulus recognition, 40
Canine retrobulbar melanoma, 345f 
Cranial nerve I (Oculomotor nerve),
Axonotmesis, 228
Carpus regions, 253
31
Cartilage imaging, 260f
Cranial nerve IV (Trochlear nerve), 31
Caudal transtentorial, 60
 Cranial nerve IX (Glossopharyngeal
B
Caudal vena cava (CVC), 280f, 288f,
nerve), 40
B0 field, 21
297f, 298f
Cranial nerve V (Trigeminal nerve), 33
Bacteremias, 52
CCL (Cranial cruciate ligament), 260f
Cranial nerve VI (Abducent), 31-33
BBB (Blood brain barrier), 45
Central nervous system (CNS), 41, 340
Cranial nerve VII (Facial nerve), 33
Practical Small Animal MRI Patrick R. Gavin and Rodney S. Bagley
357
@ 2009 Wiley-Blackwell ISBN: 978-0-8 13 -80607-5
358 INDEX
Crarial nerve VII (Vestibulocochlear
Extracellular fluid (ECF), 45
inner, 317-320
nerve)
Extradural hematomas, 205
middle, 317-320
cochlear division, 40
 Extramedullary fumors, 199
imaging procedure, 309
vestibular division, 33, 40
nasal cavity, 309, 313f, 316f
Crarial nerve X (Vagus nerve), 40
normal anatomy, 310f, 311f
Cranial nerve XI (Spinal accessory
F
normal eye, 327f
nerve), 40-41
Facial nerve (Cranial nerve VII), 33
oral cavity, 315-317
Cranial nerve XII (Hypoglossal nerve),
Falx cerebri, 41, 45f
orbit,320-327
41
 Fast spin-echo imaging (FSE), 5
Hemangiosarcoma metastasis, 348f,
Cranial nerves diseases, 102-107
Fibrocartilagenous Emboli (FCE), 203)
353f
Cranial nerves, individual. See under
207f
Hemangiosarcoma, 303f
Intracranial disease diagnosis
FLAIR See Fluid aftenuafion inversion
Hematoma, 52,53f, 54f, 205, 210f
Cranial vena cava, 297f
recovery
Hemilaminectomy, 228f, 229f
Cranioventral mediastinal reflection,
 Fluid aftenuafion inversion recovery, 6,
Hepatic encephalopathy (HE), 70, 289f
351f
9, 69f, 72f, 190f
Herniation
CrCL visualization, 264f
bilateral caudal transtentorial
 brain. See Brain herriafion
Cross-talk artifact, 16
herniation, 66f
intervertebral disk, 190, 199, 203, 229
Cryo-coolers, 21
epidermoid cysts, 72f
Hydrocephalus, 54, 58, 68
CSF, 41, 44 45,55, 68, 177, 199
glioma, 51f
Hydromyelia, 176-178
CT (Computed tomography), 2
 hyperintense regions, 61f 
Hyperadrenocorticism, 68
Cystic meningiomas, 79
infracranial infarction, 55f, 57f, 58f
Hyperintense signal, 41, 42
Cytotoxic edema, 50
meringitis and ence phalitis, 96f
Hypoglossal nerve (Crarial nerve XII),
Fold-over artifact, 11, 15f
41
Foramen magnum, 123, 177, 178
D
Foramen magnum herriation, 60, 67
DAMMNNITTV scheme. See under
Formaldehyde-fixed brain, 24f
I
Spinal disease diagnosis
Fragmented medial coronoid process,
 liopsoas muscle rupture, 259f
Dandy-Walker syndrome, 177
252
Imaging sequence. See Sequence
Deep digital flexor tendinitis, 255f
FSE (Fast spin-echo imaging), 5
selection
Degenerafive intracranial diseases,
 Fungal rhinitis, 312f
Infectious/Irflammatory Diseases, 200
65-68
Infiltrafive lipoma, 268f
 Degenerative myelopathy, 137
Inflammatory rhiritis, 313f
Dermoid cysts, 68
G
Infrapatellar fat pad, 260f
Diagnostic imaging
Gamma scintigraphy, 1-2
 Infraspinatus diseases, 245f
computed tomography (CT), 2
GE imaging. See Gradient echo imaging
 Intervertebral disk cranial, 209f 
diagnostic radiology, 1
Gliomas, 80-81
Intervertebral disk herniation, 190, 199,
gamma scintigraphy, 1-2
Glossopharyngeal nerve (Cranial nerve
203, 229
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
IX), 40
Intracranial blood flow, 46
2-3
GME (granulomatous
 Intracranial disease diagnosis
nuclear medicine, 1
 meningoencephalitis), 91, 91f
anomalous disease, 68
ultrasonography, 2
Gradient coils, 21
cerebral edema, 50-52
 Diagnostic radiology, 1
Gradient echo imaging, 7,9, 302f, 303f,
cerebrovascular diseases, 95-102
 Diastolic phase, 299f
304f,305f,306f
 compartmentalized ICP. See Brain
Disc herniafion, 16, 190, 199, 203,
Gradient recalled echo (GRE), 250f, 285,
herniation
229
287f
 degenerative diseases, 65-68
Diskospondylitis, 200-201, 202f
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
cranial nerves diseases, 102-107
Dorsal MR images, 76f, 78f
(GME), 91f
hydrocephalus, 68
 Dorsal nerve, 126
Gross brain image, 30f 
idiopathic disease, 92
Dural ossification, 164
Gun shot injury, 206f
inflammatory diseases, 83-92
individual crarial nerves
cranial nerve I (Olfactory nerve), 29
E
H
cranial nerve IⅡI (Optic nerve),
Echo time (TE), 5
Hardware artifacts, 10
29-31
Elbow joint region, 240
Head fumors, 341
cranial nerve Ⅲl (Oculomotor 
Epidermoid cysts, 68
Head, MRI of (non-CNS)
nerve), 31
Epiphysis, 249f
ear
 crarial nerve IV (Trochlear nerve),
Equipment selection, 21-22
external, 317-320
31
359 INDEX
crarial nerve IX
 Intramedullary tumors, 199, 205f
radiofrequency (RF) pulse, 5
(Glossopharyngeal nerve),
Inversion recovery (IR), 6
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 6
 cranial nerve V (Trigeminal nerve),
Isovolumetric systolic phase, 299f
spin echo (SE) sequences, 6
33
IVDD (Intervertebral disk disease), 137,
spin-laftice relaxation, 5, 6
crarial nerve VI (Abducent), 31
139
spin-spin relaxation, 5, 6
cranial nerve VII (Facial nerve), 33
supraparamagnetic elements, 4
cranial nerve VII
Multi-element spine coil, 21
(Vestibulocochlear nerve)
I
Multilobular osteosarcoma, 334f
cranial nerve X (Vagus nerve), 40
Joint effusion, 254f, 263f, 264f
Multiphase confrast-enhanced MR, 351f
 cranial nerve XI (Spinal accessory
Multiple cartilaginous exostoses,
nerve), 40-41
199-200
cranial nerve XlI (Hypoglossal 
L
Muscle abnormalifies, 240
nerve), 41
Larmor frequency, 5
Muscle disease, 231
 infratentorial nervous system, 26-29
Leigh's syndrome, 68
Musculoskeletal cancer, MR of, 347
 intracranial imaging artifacts, 107
Linear coils, 21
Myelogram effect, 188f, 195f
infracranial nervous system, 48-50
Liposarcoma, 339f
Myelography, 190, 212
intracranial pressure (ICP), 58-60
Lumbosacral (LS) disease, 163-164
Myopathies. See Traumatic
intracranial vascular disease, 52
Lymph nodes in dog, 337f
neuropathies
landmarks, 47
Lymphadenitis, 324
Myxosarcoma, 351f
metabolic encephalopathies, 70-73
Lymphadenopathy, 323f
neoplasia
Lymphoma, 230
 choroid plexus fumors, 81
N
gliomas, 80-81
Nasal cavity, 309, 313f, 316f
meningioma, 75-79
M
Nasal neoplasia, 309, 314f
metastasis, 83
Magic angle artifact, 16, 19f, 243f
 Nasal pharyngeal polyp, 316f 
pifuitary fumors, 81-82
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 1-3
Neoplasia, 73-75, 179
fumors extending from local
 of abdomen. See Abdomen, MR
 Neoplastic diseases
strucfures, 83
sfudies of
choroid plexus fumors, 81
non-neural infracranial elements 
 of fumors. See Cancer imaging
gliomas, 80
intracranial blood flow, 46
Magnetic susceptibility artifact, 15, 17f,
meningioma, 75
meninges, 41
18f, 303f
metastasis, 83
skull, 41
 Mancdibular salivary gland, 323f
piftuitary fumors, 81-82
ventricular system and CSF, 41,
Marked synovifis, 267f
fumors extending from local
4445
Maximum intensity projection (MIP),
structures, 83
neuroanatomical, 23
288f
Neoplastic neuropathies, 228-230
nutritional abnormality, 83
Medial patellar luxation, 267f
Nerve sheath fumors, 190, 195f, 228f,
pathophysiological diagnosis, 48, 50
Mediastinal liposarcoma, 350f
246f, 248-251
seizures, 52-54
Meninges, 41, 135f
Nervous system fumors, 340-341
supratentorial nervous system, 24-26
Meningioma, 75, 198f, 328f
Neuritis, 230
trauuma, 95
Meningocele, 173
Neuroanatomy, 23, 123-127
ventricular obstruction, 55-58
Meningomyelocele, 173
Neurofibroma, 343f
ICP (Intracrarial pressure), 58, 60
Metabolic Encephalopathies, 70-73
Neuroma, 229f
Idiopathic disease, 92
Metastatic neoplasia, 83
Neuropraxia, 228
Individual crarial nerves. See under
MIP (Maximum intensity projection),
Neurotmesis, 228
Intracranial disease diagnosis
286f, 288f
NEX (number of excitations), 6
Inflammatory diseases, 83, 91-92
Molecular imaging, 338
Non-neural intracrarial elements. See
 Infratentorial nervous system, 26-29
Motion artifact, 12f, 221f
under Infracranial disease
Interstifial edema, 50
MR safety, 21-22
diagnosis
Intervertebral disk disease (IVDD), 137,
 MRI. See Magnatic resonance imaging
 Normal shoulder anatomy, 235f
139
MRI, physics of
Normal shoulder musculafure, 236f
Intracranial arachnoid cysts, 68
 clinical application, 4
Nuclear medicine, 1
 Intracrarial blood flow, 46
 gradient echo (GE or GRE) sequence,
Nutritional abnormality, 83
 Intracranial imaging artifacts, 107
7
 Intracranial nervous system, 48
hydrogen use, 4
Intracranial pressure (ICP), 58, 60
 Larmor frequency, 5
Intracranial vascular disease, 52
magnetic field strengths, 4
Oculomotor nerve (Crarial nerve ⅢI),
 Intramedullary hematomas, 205
 paramagnetic materials, 4
31
360 INDEX
Olfactory bulb, 27f
 Proton density fat suppressed sagiftal
foramen magnum region, 185
Olfactory nerves (Cranial nerve I), 29
image, 264f
06 
Oligodendroglioma, 344f
 Proximal humeral osteosarcoma, 349f
hemilaminectomy, 149f
Ophthalmologic imaging, 345f
PSVA. See Portosystemic vascular
hemivertebrae and kyphosis, 174f
Optic nerve (Cranial nerve II), 29-31,
anomalies
intervertebral disk extrusions, 140f
327f, 328f
Pulmonary metastasis, 307f
intervertebral disk extrusions, 141f
Oral cavity, 315-317
 Pulmonary parenchyma, 306f
kyphosis and syringomyelia, 175f
Orthopedic
LS articulations, 163f
brachial plexus disease
Meringoencephalocele, 185
elbow joint region, 240-244
R
mulfiple cartilaginous exostoses, 194f
muscle abnormalifies, 240
 Radiation therapy planning, 338
myelogram effect, 188f
shoulder joint abnormalifies, 240
 Repetition time (TR), 5
spondylosis deformans, 172f, 173f
carpus regions, 253
Residual fumor, 338
synovial cysts, 159f
imaging technique, 233-235
Retrobulbar invasion, 334f
syringomyelia, 179f, 182f, 183f, 184f
nerve sheath fumors, 248-251
RF coils,21
thalamus (dog), 49f
pelvic region, 244-248
Rhodesian ridgeback dogs, 173
thoracic intervertebral disk
shoulder joint complex
Ribs and intercostal muscle, 296f
protrusion, 147f
abnormalifies, 235-240
truncation artifact, 186f
stifle joint, 251-253
ventral slot, 161f
tarsus, 253
S
Wobbler's syndrome, 153f, 155f, 156f
Osteoarthritis, 244, 258f
Sacral mass, 257f
Salivary carcinoma, 321f
Osteochondrosis, 249f, 253f
Sacrum, fumor of, 256f
 Salivary gland adenocarcinoma, 321f
Osteolysis, 344f
Sagiftal STIR sequence, 11f
SAT BAND (saturation band), 285f
Osteomyelitis, 201, 318f
 Sagittal T1-weighted MR image, 37, 79f,
Scoliosis, 173-174
Otitis media (cat), 324f
93f, 183, 203, 210f, 218f, 221f
SE (spin echo) sequences, 5, 7
cerebral cortex, 98f
 Sequence selection
cerebral white mafter, 72f
FLAIR sequence, 9
P
choroid plexus fumor, 92f
 gradient echo sequence, 9
Parasagittal T2-weighted MR image,
foramen magnum, 37f
STIR sequence, 9
38f, 39f, 158f, 170f, 171f, 213f,
pituitary,31f
T1 sequence, 8
216f
syringomyelia, 184f
T2 sequence, 8
Parenchymal hematoma1, 60t
vertebral body, 136f
Seizure activity, 52-54
Pelvic region, MR studies of, 244-248
Sagiftal T2-weighted fat-suppressed
 Short tau inversion recovery. See STIR
 Pelvis, tumors of, 351
 gradient echo image, 276f
Shoulder joint abnormalities, 240
Perilesional edema, 344f
Sagiftal T2-weighted MR images, 19f,
Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 6, 6f
Peripheral nerve MR imaging, 228
24f, 99f, 101f, 196f, 197f, 199f,
 Single photon emission computed
Peripheral nerve pathophysiology, 228
202f, 203f, 204f, 207f-216f, 220f,
tomography (SPECT), 338
Peripheral nerve sheath fumors, 343f
229f
Single T2 sagittal image of cardiac
 Peripheral nervous system (PNS)
AA instability /subluxafion, 177f,
cycle, 299f
imaging
178f
Skull, 41, 83, 83f
anatomical considerations, 227-228
acute IVD extrusion, 154
Skull radiographs, 330f
diseases
acute lumbar intervertebral disk
Slice caudal, 314f
infectious neuritis, 230
extrusion, 142f, 143f
SNR (signal-to-noise ratio), 6, 6f
muscle, 231
arachnoid cyst, 187f, 189f
 SPECT (single photon emission
neoplastic neuropathies, 228-230
bilateral caudal transtentorial
computed tomography), 338
traumatic neuropathies, 231-232
herniation, 66-67f
Spin echo (SE) sequences, 5, 7
peripheral nerve MR imaging, 228
cervical intervertebral disk
Spina bifida, 173
 peripheral nerve pathophysiology.
extrusions, 144f, 145
Spinal abscessafion, 201
228
choroid plexus fumor, 91f, 92f
Spinal accessory nerve (Crarial nerve
Phase and frequency artifacts, 10
 chronic intervertebral disk
XI), 40-41
Pifuitary Tumors, 81-82
protrusion, 189f
Spinal cord blood flow, 127
PNS. See Peripheral nervous system
 cystic abnormality of spinal cord,
 Spinal cord hemorrhage (hematoma),
Portal vein (PV), 288f
175f
205-212
Portosystemic shunts, 285
cystic intracranial structures, 71f
Spinal cord trauma, 201, 204f, 205f
 Portosystemic vascular anomalies
dermoid sinus, 176f
 Spinal disease diagnosis
(PSVA), 285, 286f, 287, 287f, 288f
 dorsal cranial thoracic region, 220f
 anatomy
Postsurgical seroma, 339f
extradural tumor, 191f
meninges, 127
361 INDEX
normal neuroanatomy, 123127
Syringomyelia, 176-178
crarial nerve V tumor, 104f
spinal cord blood flow, 127-135
Systolic phase, 299f
cudal colliculus, 32f
vertebral structures, 127
fintracranial infraction, 55f
MR feafures (DAMNNIITTV scheme)
foramen magnum, 27f
anomalous diseases, 173
infracranial hematoma, 53
arachnoid cysts, 178-179
T1 fat-safurated postconfrast sagiftal
ipsilateral bulla, 104f
arfifacts, 212
image, 18f
mesencephalic aqueduct, 32f
aflantoaxial subluxafion, 174-176
T1 relaxafion (spin-laftice relaxation), 5
oculomotor nerve (CN II) (arrows),
degenerative disease, 135
T1- weighted sequence, 8, 13f
38f
diskospondylitis, 200-201
 T1-weighted gradient echo image, 302f
olfactory bulb, 27f
dural ossification, 164
 T1-weighted pre-contrast image
roster mesencephalic aqueduct, 32f
external trauma to spinal cord, 201
(head-non-CNS), 330f
 subdural abscess, hyperintense,
fibrocartilaginous emboli, 203
T1-weighted sagiftal images of thorax,
ventricles, 101f
hematoma, 205,212
297f
temporalis muscle, 104f
hydromyelia, 176-178
T2 relaxation (spin-spin relaxation), 5
Transverse STIR image, 249, 255f, 276f
 imaging following spinal surgery,
T2-weighted gradient echo sequence,
 Transverse T1-weighted MR images,
140
280f, 303f, 304f, 305f, 306
25f, 50f, 78f, 84f, 88f, 109f
 infectious /inflammatory diseases,
T2-weighted sagiftal image, 11f, 13f,
anatomical defect and porencephaly,
200
18f, 241f, 242f, 247f, 310f
J04
intervertebral disk disease, 137-140
T2-weighted sequences, 8
artifact, 108f
lumbosacral disease, 163-164
T2-weighted spin-echo sequence, 307f
bulla, 103f
 multiple cartilaginous exostoses,
T2-weighted STIR sequence, 280f
 caudal thalamus geniculate bodies,
199-200
Tarsal OCD, 267f
30f
neoplasia, 179, 190, 199
Tarsus, diseases of, 253
cavernous sinus region, 107f
scoliosis, 183-184
Tela choroidea, 79
cerebellar infarction, 58f
spinal cord hemorrhage, 205, 212
Thalamus, 26
cerebral hemisphere, 100f
spondylosis deformans, 164
Thiamine deficiency, 83
cervical meringioma, 196f
syringomyelia, 176-178
Thoracic cavity, 304f
cervical necrotic lipoma, 336f
Wobbler's syndrome, 15
Thoracic imaging, future, 304
choroid plexus fumors, 62f
spinal cord pathophysiology, 135
Thoracic spinal cord, 126
congenital hydrocephalus, 64f
Spinal fracfures, 206f
Thoracic vertebrae, 127, 130f
cystic meningioma, 85f
Spinal surgery imaging, 140
Thorax
dog skull, 310f 
Spine coils, 21
anatomy, 295
frontal sinus, 43f
Spin-echo sagiftal image, 280f
cardiac, 301
gliomas, 86f
Spin-lattice relaxation, 5
fufure thoracic imaging, 304
 granulomatous meningoencephalitis
Spin-spin relaxation, 5
imaging procedure, 295
(GME), 91f
SPIO (super paramagnetic iron oxide), 4
mediastinal, 301
hemangiosarcoma metastasis, 348f
Stifle joint, 251, 260f
pulmonary, 301
 hydrocephalus and syringomyelia,
STIR MR image, 9, 230f, 234, 266f, 333
tumors, 347
65f
STIR sagiftal sequence, 13f, 236f, 237f,
 Thymic carcinoma, 305f
idiopathic epilepsy, 61f
239f, 248f, 250f, 252f, 257f
Thymomas, 301f
interthalamic adhesion, 69f
biceps tendon, 239f
Time-of-flight MR, 285f
interventricular foramen, 46f
sacral mass, 257f
Tonsillar carcinomas, 317f
intervertebral disk extrusion, 148f
supraspinafus muscle, 248f.
Torn meniscus, 262f
intfracranial cavity, 103f
supraspinafus tendinitis, 237f
Transitional cell carcinoma, 284
intfracranial hematoma, 53f, 54f
 STIR transverse image, 243f
 Transverse computed tomographic
infracranial infarction, 56f, 57f
 STIR-weighted sequence, 282f
images (maxilla), 318f
intramedullary spinal tumor, 196f
Subfascial herniation, 60
 Transverse plane T2-weighted image
 infravenous contrast administrafion,
 Super paramagnetic iron oxide (SPIO),
(nasal carcinoma), 341f
63f
4
 Transverse proton density MR image,
intraventricular meningioma, 83f
 Supraspinatus disease, 245f
28f, 29f, 30f, 109f
ipsilateral bulla, 104f
Supraspinafus tendinitis, 237f, 238f,
 bilateral middle/inner ear
lumbar spine, 354f
239f
infection,intfracranial cavity, 103f
meningioma, 76f, 77f
Supratentorial nervous system, 24-26
cadual cerebellum, 36f
 metastatic neoplasia, 93f
Synovial cell sarcoma, 242f
caudal geniculate, 30f
middle/inner ear infections, 102f
 Synovial fluid, 260f
cavernous sinus, 107f
multifocal parenchymal contrast 
Synovitis, 264f
cerebellar infarction, 59f
enhancement, 95f
362 INDEX
 Transverse T1-weighted MR images
hemangiosarcoma metastases, 353f
stomach wall, 296
(Cont.)
hemilaminectomy, 150f 
ventricle, 296f
multipleca rtilaginous exostoses, 194f
hydrocephalus and syringomyelia,
Tumor physiology, 338
nerve sheath fumor, 231f
65f
Tumor recurrence, 338
oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III),
idiopathic epilepsy, 61f
Tumor vasculafure, 340f
105f
intervertebral disk elements, 167f
Turbo spin-echo imaging (TSE), 5
peripheral nerve fumor, 231f
intervertebral disk extrusions, 141f,
Tympanic bulla, 326f
pituitary, 31f
145f, 146f, 148f
previous fumor, 198f
 intervertebral disk protrusions, 143f
sciatic nerve, 230f
infracranial hematomas, 54f
U
spinal canal, 191f 
infracranial infarction, 57f, 58f
Ultrasonography, 1, 2
temporalis muscle, 104f
infracranial infraction, 55f
Urinary bladder, 273
urethra, 354f
ipsilateral temporalis muscle, 106f
Urethra, 354f
vertebrae, 191f
kyphosis and syringomyelia, 175f
 Transverse T2-weighted fat-suppressed
 1.S intervertebral disk levels, 170f
images, 234f, 275f
lung fumor, 349f
Transverse T2-weighted gradient echo
meningioma, 80f
Vagus nerve (Cranial nerve X),
image, 277f
multiple arachnoid cysts, 188f, 189f
40
 Transverse T2-weighted MR images,
nasal adenocarcinoma, 346f
Vasogenic edema, 50, 51
26f, 43f, 47f, 49f, 53f, 56f, 67f, 69f,
oftis media, 324f
Vena cava thrombus, 290, 291f
81f, 86f, 97f, 98f, 99f, 105f, 165f,
spinal fracfures, 206f
Ventricular obstruction, 54. See also
181f, 220f
synovial cyst, 159f, 160f
Hydrocephalus
annulus fibrosis, 139f
syringomyelia, 180f
Ventricular system, 41, 44-45
bilateral caudal transtentorial
thalamus, 51f
Vertebral abnormalifies, 173
herniation, 66f
of thorax, 298f, 300f
Vertebral body osteomyelifis, 200
brachial plexus lesion, 246f
toxoplasmosis, 98f
Vertebral diskospondylitis, 201
brain stem, 99f
transverse slice plane, 215f
Vertebral structures, 127-135
 calcified meningioma, 195f 
trigeminal nerve(cranial nerve V), 39f
Vertebral tumors, 190, 192f, 193f
caudal franstentorial herniafion,
 truncation artifact, 186f
Vestibular division of cranial nerve VII,
67f
venous sinuses, 137f
33
cerebellar infarction, 58f
ventral cervical spinal cord, 154f
Vestibular system, 27
 cerebral cortex of the brain
ventral slot, 161f
Vestibulocochlear nerve (Crarial nerve
cerebral edema, 87f
ventral slot procedure, 151f
VⅢI), 33, 40
 cerebral white matter, 25f
ventricular obstruction, 62f
Veterinary radiology, 1
cerebrocortical gray mafter, 25f
vertebral venous sinuses and veins,
Volume averaging artifact, 16, 19f
cervical arachnoid cyst, 188f
136f
cholesteatoma, 92f
vestibularcochlear nerve (crarial
choroid plexus fumor, 92f
nerve VII), 39f
W
choroid plexus fumors, 62f
Transverse fime-of-flight (TOF) images,
Wobbler's syndrome, 152, 157f, 158f
congerital hydrocephalus, 64f
288f
White-blood images, 295, 299f
dermoid sinus, 176f
 Traumatic injury, 95
diskospondylifis, 202f
Traumatic neuropathies, 231-232
dorsal cranial thoracic region, 220f
 Triceps tendon avulson, 253f
X
external spinal trauma, 205f
 Trigeminal nerve, 33
Xanthochromia, 199
extramedullary spinal tfumor, 195f
Trochlear nerve (Cranial nerve IV), 31
FLAIR, 51f
Truncation artifact, 15, 16f
glioma, 88f, 89f, 90f
TSE (furbo spin-echo imaging), 5
Z
glioma, 51f
 T2-weighted dorsal images
Zipper artifact, 10, 11f
GME, 91f
 main pulmonary artery, 296f
Zygomatic salivary gland, 321f, 322f,
head-non-CNS,325f, 326f, 330f
mainstem bronchi, 296f
327f