The Practical Veterinarian
Small Animal Theriogenology
Margaret V.Root Kustritz
BH
Obras
loineag
尾巴宠物健球中http:/tahc.taobao.com
The Practical Veterinarian
Small Animal Cardiology
O. Ly1ine Nels0n, ISBN 0-7506-7298-6
SmallAnimalDentistry
Paul Q. Mitchell, ISBN 0-7506-7321-4
Veterinary Anesthesia
JanyceCornick-Seahorn,ISBN 0-7506-7227-7
Veterinary Epidemiology
Margaret R. Slater, ISBN 0-7506-7311-7
VeterinaryNeurotogy
ShawnP.Messonnier,ISBN 0-7506-7203-X
Veterinary Oncology
Kevin A. Hahn,ISBN 0-7506-7296-X
VeterinaryParasitology
Lora Rickard Ballweber, 1SBN 0-7506-7261-7
Veterinary Toxicology
Joseph Roder, ISBN 0-7506-7240-4
Coming Soon
Small Animal Emergency Medicine
JenniferDeveyandDennisCrowe,ISBN0-7506-7370-2
SmallAnimalEndocrinology
Dave Bruyette, ISBN 0-7506-7420-2
BUTTERWORTH
HEINEMANN
11830WestlineIndustrialDrive
St.Ixouis,Missouri 63146
SMAL.I.ANIMALTHERIOGENOLOGY
ISBN 0-7506-7408-3
Copyright @ 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
recording,or otherwise,without prior permission of the publishet.
NOTTCE
Veterinary medicine is an ever-changing field.Standard safety precautions
rmust. lx: followed, but as new research and clinical experience broaden our
Or appropriate.Readers are advised to check the most current product
toverifytherecommendeddose,themethodanddurationofadmiuistra
tion, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the licensed prescriber,
relying on experience and knowledge of the patient, to determine dosages
and the best treatment for each individual patient. Neither the publisher
(T property arising from this publication.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Srmall anirnal theriogenology / edited by] Margaret V. Root Kustritz.
p. cm. — (The practical velerinarian)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN0-7506-7408-8
1. DogsGenerative organsDiseases. 2. CatsGenerative organsDiseases.
3.Theriogenology.I.Root Kustritz,margaret V. I1.Series.
SF992.U175 S642003
636.7'08926—dc21
2002038577
AcquisitionsEditor:LizFathman
Developmental Editor;Kristen Mandava
Publishing Services Manager:Peggy Fagen
Designerfulia Dummitt
KI/QWK
Printed in the United States of America
Lastdigitistheprintnumber:987654321
Contributors
Jane A.Barber,DVM,MS,DACT
Veterinary Specialties at thc Lake
Troutman, North Carolina
Deborah Cartisano, DVM, MS
Department ofVeterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
OklahomaStateUniversity
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Wynne A.Digrassie,DVM, MS,DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College ofVeterinary Medicine
Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Mylissa S.D.Edens, DVM, MS, DACT
College ofVeterinary Medicine
Large Animal Surgery and Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn,Alabama
BruceE.Eilts,DVM,MS,DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
School ofVeterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
T
vi
Contributors
RichardFayrer-Hosken,BSVc,PhD,MRCVS,DACT
Department of Large Animal Medicine
College ofVeterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia
Allen M.Heath,DVM, MS, DACT
Large Animal Surgery and Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn,Alabama
G.Reed Holyoak, DVM, PhD, DAGT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Margaret V.Root Kustritz,DVM,PhD,DACT
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
St. Paul, Minnesota
MichelleAnne Kutzler,DVM,PhD
Diplomate American College of Theriogenologists
Department of Clinical Sciences
Oregon State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Corvallis, Oregon
Contributors
vii
William B. Ley, DVM, MS, DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, Oklahoma
SaraKLyle,DVM,MS,DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Mushtag Memon,BVSc,PhD,DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Washington State University
Pullman, Washington
Harry Momont,DVM,PhD,DACT
Department of Medical Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, Wisconsin
Peter R.Morresey,BVSc,MACVSc,DACT,DACVIM
New Bolton Genter
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Kennett Square,Pennsylvania
vii
Contributors
Patricia N. Olson, DVM, PhD, DACT
Guide Dogs for the Blind
San Rafael, California
DaleL.Paccamonti,DVM,MS,DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, I ouisiana
Augustine T. Peter, BVSc, MVSc, MSc, PhD, MBA, DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
School ofVeterinary Medicine
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana
Carlos Pinto, MedVet, PhD,DACT
Department ofVeterinary Clinical Sciences
School ofVeterinaryMedicine
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Beverty. I. Purswell, DVM, PhD, DACT
College ofVeterinary Medicine
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, Virginia
Contributors
ix
MatthewReeves,BVSc
Stafford Heights
Queensland,Australia
Craig A. Smith, DVM, PhD, DACT
American Veterinary Medical Association
Schaumburg, Illinois
PhilipThomas,BVSc,PhD,FACVSc,DACT
Stafford Heights
Queensland, Australia
Walter R. Threlfall, DVM, PhD, DACT
Veterinary Hospital
The OhioStateUniversity
Columbus, Ohio
Ahmed Tibary,DVM,PhD,DACT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Washington State University
Pullman,Washington
William R. Widmer, DVM, MS, DACVR
Department ofVeterinary Clinical Sciences
School ofVeterinary Medicine
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana
Contents
SeriesPreface
xii
Preface
xili
Acknowledgments
XV
1
DisordersofSexualDevelopment
1
SaraK.Lyle
2
BreedingManagementintheBitch
andQueen
33
MylissaS.D.EdensandAllenM.Heath
3
Artificial InseminationintheDog
61
BruceE.Eilts,DaleL.Paccamonti,
andCarlosPinto
4
SemenCollection andEvaluation
97
WalterR.Threlfall
5
ContraceptionandPregnancyTermination
125
MichelleAnneKutzler
6
Prepuberal Gonadectomy
(Early-AgeNeutering)ofDogsand Cats
165
PatriciaN.Olson
7
InfectiousDiseasesoftheReproductive
TractoftheBitch
183
PeterR.Morresey
8
Pregnancy
207
AhmedTibaryandMushtaqMemon
9
ParturitionandDystocia
241
JaneA.Barber
Contents
xi
10
Neonatology
283
MargaretV.RootKustritz
11
OvarianDisordersoftheBitch andQueen
331
CraigA.Smith
12
UterineDisorders
367
MargaretV.RootKustritzand
JaneA.Barber.
13
VaginalDisorders
395
BeverlyJ.Purswell
14
MammaryDisorders
421
HarryMomontandJaneA.Barber
15
ContraceptiveTechniquesfor
MaleDogsand Cats
447
RichardFayrer-Hosken
16
Testicularand EpididymalDisorders
457
WilliamB.Ley,G.ReedHolyoak
WynneA.Digrassie,and
DeborahCartisano
17
ProstaticDisorders
493
AugustineT.PeterandWilliamR.Widmer
18
DisordersofthePenisandPrepuce
535
MatthewReevesandPhilipThomas
19
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
561
MargaretV.RootKustritz
20
Emerging Technologiesin
SmallAnimalTheriogenology
599
RichardFayrer-Hosken
Series Preface
The Practical Veterinarian series was devel-
oped to help veterinary students, veterinari-
ans, and veterinary technicians find answers to
common questions quickly. Unlike large text-
books, which are filled with detailed informa-
tion and meant to serve as reference books, all
the books in The Practical Veterinarian series
are designed to cut to the heart of the subject
matter. Not meant to replace the reference
texts, the guides in our series complement the
larger books by serving as an introduction to
each topic for those learning the subject mat
ter for the first time or as a quick review for
those who already have mastered the basics of
each subject.
The titles for the books in our series are
selected to provide information for the most
common subjects one would encounter in
veterinary school and veterinary practice.
The authors are experienced and established
clinicians who can present the subject matter
in an easy-to-understand format. This helps
both the first-time student of the subject and
the seasoned practitioner to assess informa
tion often difficult to comprehend.
xii
Preface
xili
It is our hope that the books in The
Practical Veterinarian series will meet the
needsofreaders andserve asa constantsource
of practical and important information. We
welcome comments and suggestions that will
help us improve future editions of the books in
theseries.
Shawn P Messionnier, D.V.M.
Preface
The authors of this text are theriogenologists,
that is, specialists who deal with the physiology
and pathology of the male and female repro-
ductive systems and the clinical practice ofvet
and andrology. Some are still
I in training, and
others have been in practice for many years.
Some are academicians, some are in industry,
andsome are
private practitioners. A few
do exclusively
small animal
1work,whereas
most do
reproductive work
K inall species.
Theriogenology is well rooted in practice and
was the first specialty for which diplomates
could be drawn either from practice or from an
internship and residency. Theriogenology as a
      
organization for nonboarded practitioners, the
xiv
Preface
Society for Theriogenology (www.therio.org).
The diplomates of the American College
of Theriogenologists who have contributed
to this text did so to promote our mission
of support for veterinary students and
practitioners.
: As theriogenologists, we strongly recom-
mend that all animals being considered for
breeding undergo a thorough prebreeding
examination to include testing for brucellosis
withhipradiograpl
ationoftheeyes
and other tests s
1cto
breed; a com
plete physical exan
lation; and semen evalua
tion of males. Man
animals should not be
bred. If an animal's health will suffer from
remaining sexually intact or if that animal is
unlikely to
produce superior
offspring
it
should'be neutered. Theriogenology is not
aboutbreeding animals at any c
cost;instead,it
is about educating
 clients
uthowbest tc
manage breeding and reproductive conditions
forefront of efforts to curb pet overpopulation
and continue to research how best to treat
reproductive tract disease in all animals, intact
or neutered.
Acknowledgments
AX
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank all those therioge-
nologists who have gone before, all the
researchers who provided us with the infor-
mation we have collated here for you, all the
mentors who assisted us in our training,
all the students and clients who have further
assisted us in our training, and our families
and friends. The editor especially wishes to
thank her extremely patient husband and
children. If this book leaves a question un-
answered, please contact the diplomates of
the American College of Theriogenologists
(www.theriogenology.org). Our greatest wish is
to help you find the answer.
Margaret V. Root Kustritz, DVM, PhD, DACT
1
Disorders of Sexual Development
SaraK.Lyle
ATAGLANCE
● The normal canine karyotype is 78,XX for bitches and
78,XY for dogs. The normal feline karyotype is 38,XX
for queens and 38,XYfor toms.
•Embryologic developnent as a female occurs unless
genes from the Ychromosome are expressed, which
causes differentiation of theindifferentgonadiinto a
functional testis.
2
Disorders of Sexual Development
· Disorders of sexual development are associated with
infertility and include the following:
·Abnormalitiesofchromosomalsex=defectsinnum-
ber orstructure ofsexchromosomes:
- Klinefelter's syndrome (XXY)
-Turner's syndrome (XO)
- Chimera or mosaic (XX/XY, XY/XY)
 Male calico or tortoiseshell cats: have all abnor-
mal karyotype, containing at least one Ychromo-
some and more than one X chromosome
·Abnormalities of gonadal sex = sex reversal;the
gonads do not agree with the sex chromosome com-
plement.
·Abnormalities of phenotypic sex = internal or exter-
nal genitalia do not agree with gonads and sex chro-
mosome complement.
- True hermaphrodites (ovarian and testicular tis-
sue present)
Pseudohermaphrodites
Male pseudohermaphrodites (testes and femalc
genitalia)
Female pseudohermaphrodites (ovaries and
male genitalia)
Normal sexual differentiation canbe described as
occurring in three sequential steps: establishment of
chromosomal sex, development of gonadal sex, and
development of phenotypic sex. Chromosomal sex is
DisordersofSexua!Development
3
established at fertilization (either XX or XY), and this
chromosomal composition is maintained throughout
life in all cell lines during mitosis. The early cmbryo is
sexually indifferent; all XX and XYembryos havc genital
ridges, wolffian (mesonephric) and millerian (para-
mesonephric) ducts, a urogenital sinus, a genital tuber
cle, and genital swellings. Gonadal differentiation is
determined by the sex chromosome constitution.
The presence of a Ychromosome results in differen-
tiation ofa testis from the genital ridge. In the absence of
a Y chromosome, the genital ridge differentiates into an
ovary. The gene Sry, named for the sex-determining
region on the Ychromosome,encodes a protein that ini
tiates testis differentiation (sometimes referred to as the
testis-determin?ng factor). Recently, autosomal genes that
are involved in gonadal differentiation have been identi-
fied.Sox9isinvolvedin testisdiffercntiation(specifically
Sertoli cell differentiationl); two normal alleles are nec-
essary for normal testis dcvelopment in XY males that
carry Sry. Normal XX individuals, which lack Sry, possess
two X-linked Dax I alleles, which are involved with ovar-
ian differentiation.Onehypothesis is that theDax/ gene
is involved with turning off male-specific genes during
gonadal differentiation; it may also play a role in adre-
nal, pituitary, and hypothalamic development.
Determination of phenotypic sex (differentiation of
the tubular reproductive tract and external genitalia)
4
Disorders of Sexual Development
depends on gonadal sex. The basic embryonic plan is
female. If the genital ridges are removed from XX or XY
embryos before gonadal differentiation, the female phe-
notype results. In normal XY individuals, Sertoli cells in
the testis secrete mullerian-inhibiting substance (MIS),
which causes regression of the mullerian ducts. Leydig
cells within the testis secrete testosterone (T), which pro
moteswolffian duct differentiation into the epididymis
and vas deferens.Secretion ofthese two hormoneslikely
must occur within a critical time window during embry
onic development for normal masculinization to result.
In the urogenital sinus, genital tubercle, and genital
swellings, testosterone is converted to dihydrotestos-
terone (DHT) by the enzyme 5a-reductase. DHT causes
the urethra to close and initiates development of the
prostate, penis, and scrotum. Descent of the testes into
the scrotum completes phenotypic developmentin the
male. The hormonal and genetic control of testicular
descent is not completely understood.
In normal XX individuals, the absence of MIs, T,
and DHT allows the mullerian ducts, urogenital sinus,
genital tubercle, and genital swellings to develop into
female internal and external genitalia. The mullerian
ducts develop into the oviducts, uterus, cervix, and cra-
nial vagina; the urogenital sinus develops into the caudal
vagina and vestibule; the genital tubercle develops into
the clitoris; and the genital swellings develop into the
vulva (Figure l-1).
DisordersofSexuaiDevelopment
CHROMOSOMAL
SEX:
XX
XX
INDIFFERENTEMBRYO
Sry
GONADAL
SEX:
OVAAY
GONAD
TESTIS
MIS
PHENOTYPIC Oviduct
MULLERIAN
SEX:
Uterus
Regress
DUCTS
Cranial vagina
TESTOSTERONE
Regress
WOLFFIAN
Vas deferens
DUCTS
Epididymis
Remains open:
UROGENITAL
Closes:
Caudal vagina
DHT
Urethra
Vestibule
SINUS
Prostate
Clitoris
GENITAL
DH
Penis
TUBERCLE
Remains open:
GENITAL
Closes:
Vulva
SWELLINGS
Scrotum
MIS-mullerian-inhibiting substance
DHT-dihydrotestosterone
Figure 1-1.
Normal sexual development in the mammalian
embryo.(Modifiedfrom MorrowDA:Current therapy in theri-
ogenology.Philadeiphia,1989,WBSaunders.)
6
DisordersofSexual Development
Disorders of Chromosomal Sex
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Individualswith abnormalchromosomalsexhave
defects in either the number or the structure of the sex
chromosomes. These defects usually are caused by ran-
dom events during gamete formation or early embry
onic development and are not necessarily related to
abnormal genes inherited from the dam or sire.
Reported abnormalities of chromosomal sex include
XXY syndrome,XO syndrome,XXX syndrome,true
hermaphrodite chimeras,XX/XYchimeras with testes,
and XY/XY chimeras with testes.
XXYSYNDROMEXXYsyndromeiscalledKlinefelter's syn
drome in humans and is one of the most common sex
chromosome abnormalities observed in human beings.
The true incidence of this disorder in dogs and cats is
unknown; it is the most commonly reported sex chromo
some abnormality. Affected dogs have a 79,XXY kar-
yotype,hypoplastictestes,epididymides,vasa deferentia,
and male external genitalia that vary from normal to
hypoplastic and are sterile. The testes produce MIS and
T, which explains the completely male phenotype. The
presence of two X chromosomes prevents normal sper-
matogenesis, resulting in sterility.
Affected cats have a 39,XXY karyotype, with internal
andexternalgenitalia andtestes similartothose
DisordersofSexua!Development
7
described for the dog. Ofinterest is the association of
coat color with this chromosomal anomaly in cats. The
gene for white coat color is on an autosomc, and the
genes for orange and nonorange (black or brown) are
on the X chromosome, at the same locus. During early
embryonic development in normal XX feinales,one X
chromosome is randomly inactivated in each somatic
cell to form the Barr body. The result is that each cell can
express only an orange or nonorange coat color.
Females that are heterozygous for these alleles develop
the random patches of the tortoiseshell or calico pattern
because only one allele is expressed in a given patch of
hair. Normal males with only one X chromosome should
be able to express only one coat color--orange or non-
orange.Male catsthatexhibitthe tortoiseshell or calico
coat pattern must have two X chromosomes. They either
have the karyotype of 39,XXY or their coloring can be
the result of chimerism or mosaicism (see following dis
cussion).
XO SYNDROME Affected dogs have a 77,XO karyotype,
dysgeneticovaries(streak gonads),female internal
genitalia, and infantile external genitalia, and they are
sterile.In humans(Turner's syndrome) and horses
this syndrome is associated with somatic abnormali-
ties, the most notable of which is small stature. On the
basis of only two reports in the literature (of cases
occurring in a Doberman pinscher and an American
8
Disordersof Sexual Development
Eskimo bitch), this is likely the case in the dog as well.
This syndrome was also reported in a 2.5-year-old
Burmese cat that had primary anestrus (37,XO) but
that did not have somatic abnormalities. Two kittens
with an XO karyotype have also been described; the
gonadal histology of these kittens was not included in
the report. These kittens also had vascular and central
nervous system anomalies and did not live past 3 days
ofage
XXX SYNDROME A single report of an Airedale terrier
bitch with primary anestrus at 4 years of age noted an
association with a 79,XXX karyotype. The ovaries lacked
follicles, the uterus was small, and the remainder of the
genitalia were female. Resting serum concentrations of
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hor-
mone (LH) were elevated, and progesterone was at the
baseline level (consistent with anestrus). In other
species, XXX individuals have been reported to be fer-
tile. However, most are infertile with abnormal estrous
cycles.
TRUE HERMAPHRODITE CHIMERA Chimerism results
when two or more cell populations, each arising from
different individuals, are present in a single individual.
An example is the fusion of two zygotes with different
sex chromosome constitutions, giving rise to a single
zygote with an XX/XY chromosome constitution.
DisordersofSexualDevelopment
9
Mosaicism results when two or more cell populations
withdifferentchromosomeconstitutionsarepresent
but when both of these cell populations arise from
within the individual. This usually is attributable to
mitotic nondisjunction. True hermaphrodites have
both ovarian and testicular tissue present. Any combina-
tion can be seen (unilateral ovotestis with a contralat-
eral ovary or testis, bilateral ovotestes, or unilateral
ovary and unilateral testis). Three canine cases of true
hermaphrodite chimeras have been reported. The
karyotype of these individuals was either XX/XY or
XX/XXY; all were phenotypic females with enlarged
clitorides. There is one report of a feline that was exter-
nally male in phenotype, with one scrotal testis and one
abdominal ovary. Ipsilateral to the ovary, mullerian
ductderivativeswerepresent.
XXXYCHIMERAWITHTESTESAnOldEnglishsheepdog
with ambiguous genitalia (cranially displaced vulva con-
taining a hypoplastic penis) possessed a karyotype of
XX/XY. Internally, the gonads were aspermatogenic
testes, and the tubular tract was a hypoplastic uterus.
Several cats withXX/XY chimerism with an external
male phenotype have been reported, with variable fer-
tility. It appears that the higher the proportion of XY
cells to XX cells is, the greater is the likelihood of fertil-
ity. Some tortoiseshell males have this chromosomal
anomaly.
10
Disorders ofSexual Development
XY/XY CHIMERAWITH TESTES Tortoiseshell appearance
in males with normal testicular histology and normal fer-
tility is most likely caused by XY/XY chimerism.
Signaiment
Disorders of sex chromosomes are random events.
Therefore, they can be observed in dogs and cats of
any breed. All of these disorders are congenital (pres-
ent at birth). However, individuals with abnormal gen-
italia may not be identified until they reach breeding
age or may be identified at the time of elective
gonadectomy.
History and Chinicaf Signs
Most animals with abnormalities of chromosomal sex
have few clinical symptoms. Detection is most likely if
the animal's intended use is in a breeding program.
The most common historical complaints are primary
anestrus for phenotypic females and inability to sire
litters for phenotypic males. The exception to this is an
individual that is a chimera with ambiguous external
genitalia and the puppy or kitten is presented because
of an abnormal vulva or prepuce. Some her maphro
dite chimeras also may have chronic vulvar irritation.
It is also possible to see hermaphrodite chimeras
or chimeras with testes present with signs of hyper
DisordersofSexualDevelopment
11
estrogenism secondary to Sertoli cell tumor in abdom-
inal testiculartissue.
PhysicalExaminationFindings
In general, the external genitalia of most patients with
abnormal sex chromosome constitution is normal or
hypoplastic but unambiguous. The penis and prepuce
of phenotypic males can vary from normal to
hypoplastic, and most will have hypoplastic scrotal
testes. Phenotypic females typically have normal or
hypoplastic vulvas. Hermaphrodites and chimeras may
have ambiguous or unambiguous genitalia. They usu-
ally appear to be phenotypic females in the dog, with a
normal to enlarged clitoris. In the cat, reports of her-
maphrodites or chimeras have been phenotypic males,
with or without scrotal testes. Whether this difference
in phenotype expression of chimeras between dogs
and cats is coincidental or has a genetic basis is
unknown.
Diagnostic Tests and Resuits
A karyotype is necessary to define the error in sex
chromosome constitution. This is typically performed
on peripheral blood lymphocytes. In all patients with a
suspected disorder of sexual development, a careful
gross description of the external and internal genitalia
12
Disorders of Sexual Development
and histopathology of the gonads and tubular tract are
necessary to accurately categorize the disorder.
Treatment
Gonadectomy and hysterectomy are recommended. If
the clitoris is enlarged, as is seen with some chimeras,
amputation is recommended to eliminate continual
mucosal irritation.
Prognosis
Because disorders of chromosomal sex are random
events occurring during meiosis or mitosis, there is no
heritable component to these syndromes. Therefore it is
unnecessary to remove siblings or parents of affected
individuals from the breeding population. Phenotypic
females that are undiagnosed hermaphrodite chimeras
or chimeras with testes are potentially at risk for Sertoli
cell tumors of abdominal testicular tissue.
Disorders of Gonadal Sex
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Individuals with disorders of gonadal sex have either an
XX or XYsex chromosomal constitution,but the gonads
do not agree with the chromosomal sex. This is referred
DisordersofSexualDevelopment
13
to as sex reversal. XX sex reversal has been reported to
occur only in the dog: affected dogs have a 78,XX chro-
mosomeconstitution.Nocases ofXXsexreversalinthe
cat have been reported, and no cases of XY reversal in
either the dog or the cat have been reported. XX sex
reversal includcs XX truc hermaphrodite and XX
males. It is possible to see both of thcsc phcnotypes
within the same fainily. Eighty pcrcent of human XX
males are Sry positive as a result of translocation from
the Ychromosome to an autosome.Howcvcr, all cases of
canine XX sex reversal to date thiat havc bcen tcsted arc
Sry negative. Sry-negative XX sex reversal has been
described in goats and pigs as an inherited autosomal
recessive syndrome.It has been reported to occur in the
llama and the horse in isolatcd cases; the inhcritance
pattern in thiese species is unknown. The spccific autoso-
mal genes that are responsible for testis induction in the
absence of Sry are presently unknown. Functionally
active MIS is preseilt, but failure of complcte mullerian
to MIS.
Signaiment
XX sex reversal has been reported to occur only in the
dog. No cases of this syndrome have been identified in
the cat. In the American cocker spaniel, XX sex reversal
is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Inheritance
14
Disorders of Sexual Development
malrecessive.It hasbeen described as a familial disorder
occurring in the English cocker spaniel, beagle,
weimaraner, Kerry blue terrier, and Chinese pug. The
mode of inheritance in these breeds is unknown but is
likely autosomal recessive. Cases of XX sex reversal also
have been described in the basset hound, vizsla, soft-
coated wheaten terrier, Pomeranian, Doberman pin
scher, American pit bull terrier, Border collie, Walker
hound, and Afghan hound.
History and ClinicalSigns
Affected individuals usually are presented as pheno-
typic females with primary anestrus, phenotypic
females with an abnormal vulva, or males with bilat
eral cryptorchidism and an abnormal prepuce and
penis.
Physical Examination Findings
XX true hermaphrodite individuals haveboth ovaries
and testes. Bilateral ovotestes constitute the most com-
mon combination of gonads. The next most common
combination is one ovotestis and one ovary. One
ovotestis andone testis comprise theleast common
combination. The amount of testicular tissue present
correlates with the degree of masculinization of the
DisordersofSexua!Development
15
internal and external genitalia. Most individuals are
phenotypic females or have a partially masculinized
female phenotype that varies from a normal to abnor-
malvulva,normal-sizedorenlargedclitoris(commonly
with an os clitoris),uterus, oviducts, epididymides, and
vasa deferentia.
XX males have testes, the entire wolffian duct sys-
tem (epididymides and vasa deferentia), and a prostale.
A bicornuate uterus is present, but both oviducts usually
are absent. The prepuce usually is abnormal in shape
and caudally displaced. Most XX males have a hypoplas
tic penis, and hypospadias or abnormal curvature of the
penis is common.
Diagnostic Tests and Resuits
A karyotype of 78,XX in conjunction with the presence
of testicular tissue (at least one ovotestis or one testis) is
needed to verify XX sex reversal. Elevation of testos-
terone in response to a gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone (GnRH) or human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG) stimulation test suggests that testicular tissue is
present, but negative results of a stimulation test do not
completely rule out the presence of testicular tissue. A
polymerase chain reaction test for the presence of Sry is
recommended to accurately describe this disorder.
Unfortunately, no laboratory test is available to identify
carriers for XXsex reversal.
16
Disorders of Sexual Development
Treatment
Gonadectomy and hysterectomy are recommended for
affected individuals.
Prognosis
On rare occasions, XX true hermaphrodites have repro
duced, but it is not recommended to maintain these
individuals in a breeding program. Most XX true her-
maphrodites and all XX males are sterile. Because this is
a heritable trait in breeds that have been closely studied
and is most likely a heritable trait in breeds for which
breeding trials have not yet been conducted, owners
should be counseled that both parents of affected indi-
viduals should be removed from the breeding program.
At least half of the siblings of affected individuals are
expected to be carriers. Because there is no laboratory
test that can identify carriers, the best recommendation
is to not use any siblings of affected individuals as breed-
ing animals.
Disorders of Phenotypic Sex
Definition and Pathogenesis
In individuals with disorders of phenotypic sex, there is
agreement with chromosomal and gonadal sex but
disagreement with phenotypic sex (internal or external
DisordersofSexual Development
17
genitalia) . A female pseudohermaphrodite has an XX
chromosome constitution, ovaries, and masculinized
internal or external genitalia. A male pseudohermaphro
dite has an XY chromosome constitution, testes, and
internal or external genitalia feminized to some degree.
Descent of the testes into the scrotum coinpletes the
development of phenotypic sex. The genetic and hor-
monal control of testicular descent is not completely
understood, and the classification of cryptorchidism as a
disorder of phenotypic sex is debatable (see Chapter 16).
FEMALE PSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISM Female pSeudo-
hermaphroditism resulting from endogenous androgen
exposure(e.g., adrenogenital syndrome in humans) has
not been reported as occurring in the dog or cat. Rare
reports of female pseudohermaphrodites in the dog sug-
gest that iatrogenic exposure of the fetus to exogenous
androgens or progestogens during gestation is responsi-
ble for this syndrome. There have been no reports of this
syndrome in thie cat.
MALEPSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISMMalepseudoher-
maphrodites include XY males in whom the millerian
ducts fail to regress and individuals with defects in
androgen-dependentmasculinization,
Persistent maflerian duct syndrome Persistent millerian
duct syndrome (PMDS) is recognized as a form of
18
Disorders of Sexual Development
male pseudohermaphroditism in the miniature schnau-
zer in the United Statcs, the basset hound in The
Netherlands, and possibly the Persian cat. In the
miniature schnauzer, affected individuals are XY
males, with bilateral testes, external male genitalia,
and all muillerian and wolffian duct derivatives pres-
ent. PMDS has been shown to be inherited with an
autosomal recessive pattern in the miniature schnau-
zer; only homozygous individuals display the abnor-
mal phenotype. Affected individuals secrete bioactive
MIS at the critical time period during embryonic
development. This suggests that the defect in animals
affected with PMDS is insensitivity of the muillerian
ducts to MIS, possibly related to a defect in the MIS
receptor.
Defects in androgen-dependent mascufinization Animals
that possess defects in androgen-dependent.masculin-
ization have an XY sex chromosome constitution, bilat-
eral testes, and no millerian duct derivatives. However,
internal andexternalgenitalia thatrequire androgens
for masculinization during embryonic development do
not develop normally. The resulting abnormal pheno
type can vary from complete (severe) to incomplete
(mild). These are grouped according to primary defect
asfollows:
+Defects in androgen production
·Androgen resistance or androgen insensitivity
DisordersofSexua!Development
19
Failure in conversion ofT to DHT (defect in the 5α-
reductaseenzyme)
Defects in the androgen rcceptor (testicular femi-
nization)
Defects in androgen production or in the 5o-reduc-
tase cnzyme have not been reported to occur in
thedogorcat.
Hypospadias is the abnormal location of the urinary
orifice. The orifice can be located anywhere along
thie ventrum of the glans penis to the perineum.
Fhis defect occurs when there is incomplete mas
culinization of the urogenital sinus (closure of the
urethira).The remainder of the external genitalia
of these animals is not ambiguous, but concur-
rent cryptorchidism, penile hypoplasia, ventral
deviation of the penis, and abnormalities of the
ventral prepuce have been described.
Testicular feminization syndromes (Tfm) are those in
which there arc mutations, qualitalive or quanti-
tative, in the X-linked androgen receptor gene.
Affectedanimals are XY maleswithbilateral
testes. Becalise testes are present that secrete nor-
mal amounts of T and MiS, no millerian duct
derivatives are present. However, because there is
a defect in the androgen receptor gene, andro-
gen-dependent masculinization is either absent
or incomplete, despite normal production of T
andDHT.
20
Disorders of Sexual Development
Signaiment
FEMALE PSEUDOHERMAPHRODiTISM Female pSeudo
hermaphroditism has been described only in dogs
Phenotypic females with enlarged clitorides are most
likely to be presented as juveniles because of abnormal
genitalia. Phenotypic males can be seen at any age
depending on the clinical signs.Because this disorder is
caused by iatrogenic sex steroid administration during
pregnancy,thereis nobreedpredilection.
PERSISTENT MULLERIAN DUCT SYNDROME PeISiSteI1t
mullerian duct syndrome occurs in dogs and cats.
Although this disorder is congenital, the age at presenta-
tionlikely depends on whether the individual has bilat
eral scrotal testes. Those with unilateral or bilateral
cryptorchidism may be seen as juveniles, whercas those
with scrotal testes are more likely to be seen at a later
date in life because of symptoms related to uterine dis-
ease, urinary tractinfections, or prostatitis.PMDS is her-
itable in the miniature schnauzer in the United States
and thebasset hound in TheNetherlands.
HYPosPADlAS Although congenital, mild forms, in
which the orifice is located along the glans penis, may
not be recognized until after puberty, more severe forms
are more likely to be identified in puppies because of the
abnormal location of the urine stream. This syndrome
may have a familial basis in the Boston terrier.
DisordersofSexua!Development
21
TESTICUtAR FEMINIZATION SYNDROME CoImplctc Tfm
has been reported only in the cat (domcstic short-
hair). Incomplete Tfn has occurred in the cat and
dog. Although the defect is congenital, most affected
animals are not presented until they reach breeding
age.
History and ClinicalSigns
FEMALEPSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISMDogSwithfemale
pseudohermaphroditism are phenotypic males with
hematuria, are attractive to male dogs, have swelling of
the prepuce (periodic estrus), havc signs of cystic
endometrial hypcrplasia/pyometra, or havc urinary
incontinence secondary to pooling of urine within the
vagina. Mildly affected individuals with external female
genitalia either are clinically inapparent or are seen
because of an enlarged clitoris or an abnormal vulvar
conformation,
PERSISTENT MULLERIAN DUCT SYNDROME IDogS with
PMDS may be brought for treatment because of unilat-
eral or bilateral cryptorchidism; these cases may also be
seen because of signs of hyperestrogenism caused by
Sertoli cell tumors. Those with bilateral scrotal testes are
more likely tohave clinical signs consistent with systemic
illness resulting from pyometra, urinary tract infections,
orprostatitis.
22
Disorders of Sexual Development
HYPOSPADIAS Dogs with hypospadias may be asympto
matic or may have a history of inguinal dermatitis sec-
ondarytourinaryimcontinence.
TESTICULARFEMINIZATIONSYNDROMEAnimalswith
complete Tfm are seen as phenotypic females with com-
plaints of primary anestrus and sterility. Animals with
incomplete Tfm are more often presented because of
genital ambiguity.
Physical Examination Findings
FEMALE PSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISM Dogs that are
female pseudohermaphrodites have bilateral ovaries
and oviducts, a uterus, a cervix, and a cranial vagina. The
degreeofmasculinizationofandrogen-sensitivetissues
ranges from a normal vulva with mild clitoral enlarge-
internalprostate.
PERSISTENT MULLERIAN DUCT SYNDROME DogS with
PMDS have oviducts, a bicornuate uterus, a cervix, and a
cranial vagina. They also have testes, epididymides, vasa
deferentia, and a prostate. Half of affected males are
either unilaterally or bilaterally cryptorchid, and the
remainderhave bilateral scrotal testes.Development of
Sertoli cell tumor may be seen in those with abdominal
Disordersof SexualDevelopment
23
testes. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia/pyometra may be
present in uterine tissue.
HYPOSPADlAS In mildly affected dogs the urethral
orifice is located on the ventral aspect of thc glans
penis (glandular form).In more scverely affectcd
dogs, the urethral orifice can be located along the
proximal penis, prepuce, scrotum, or perineum
(penile, preputial, scrotal, or perineal forms). These
latter types reflect a more significant defect in
androgenization.Some individuals may be crypt
orchid or may have a hypoplastic penis, ventral devia-
tion of the penis, or an abnormally developed
prepuce.
TESTICULARFEMINIZATIONSYNDROMEIndlividuals
with complete Tfm have bilatcral tcstes (usually
abdominal) and no epididymidides, vasa deferentia,
oviducts, uterus, cervix, or cranial vagina. A vulva is
present externally. Animals with incomplete Tfm have
bilateral testes, which can be abdominal, but are more
frequently described as having a perineal bifid
scrotum. The exlernal genitalia in affected cats have
been those of a fairly normal female with a vulvalike
opening, perineal hypospadias, a blind-ending vagina,
and a penis that resembles a clitoris and develops
spines.
24
Disorders of Sexual Development
Diagnostic Tests and Resuits
FEMALE PSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISM Individuals suS-
pected of being female pseudohermaphrodites should
have their chromosome constitution defined by kar
yotype; affected dogs have a 78,XX karyotype. Although
endogenous androgen exposure has not been reported
as occurring in any of the canine cases of female pseudo
hermaphroditism, it is recommended to rule out an
endogenous source of androgens before surgery is per
formed. Elevation of T to a concentration of 3 ng/ml or
more in response to administration of GnRH (2 μg/kg
administered intramuscularly; draw blood sample
1 hour later) or hCG (40 IU/kg administered intramus-
cularly; draw blood sample 4 hours later) suggests the
presence of testicular tissue and, therefore, a diagnosis
of XX sex reversal. Elevation of serum T in response to
adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation suggests
adrenal production oftestosterone (similar to adrenogen
ital symdrome in humans). Histopathologic examination
of the gonads and tubular tract confirms the presence of
ovaries, oviducts, a uterus, and a cervix. Dogs that have
symptomsofurinarytractabnormalitiesshould
ing surgical inter vention.
PERSISTENT MULLERIAN DUCT SYNDROME DogS with
PMDS have a karyotype of 78,XYand gonadal and tubular
tract histopathology confirming the presence of testes,
DisordersofSexualDevelopment
25
epididymides, vasa deferentia, a uterus, a cervix, and a
cranial vagina. Contrast cystourethrography is indicated
for dogs with symptoms of urinary tract abnormalities.
HYPOsPADIAS Hypospadias has been reported to Occur
in association with other types of abnormalities of sexual
differentiation (e.g., XX sex reversal). To provide
informed genetic counscling to the owner, it is
recommended to perform a karyotype and gonadal
histopathologic exarnination on the affected dog.
TESTICULAR FEMINIZATIONSYNDROME AdiagnosiS of
Tfm dcpends on the finding of an XYchromosome con-
stitution,bilateral testes,andfemaleexternalgenitalia
Binding studies of cultured genital fibroblasts from
androgen-responsive tissues show reduced or absent
binding for T and DHT.
Treatment
FEMALEPSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISM OvariohystereC
tomy (OHE) is recommended.Any urinary tract abnor
mality identified by contrast cystourethrography should
be surgically corrected.
PERSISTENT MULLERIAN DUCT SYNDROME Castration and
hysterectomy are recommended. Occasionally, a small
communication from the cranial vagina to the prostate is
26 Disorders of Sexual Development
present. Removal of as much of the vagina as possible is
recommended to avoid urinary tract complications.
HYPOSPADlAS Castration is recommended for all ani-
mals with hypospadias. Asymptomatic dogs may not
require surgical intervention, whereas animals that are
ment. Such management can range anywhere from clo-
sure of the defect inglandular forms topenile
amputation in those cases in which the location is more
proximal (penile, preputial, scrotal, or perineal forms).
TESTICULAR FEMINIZATION SYNDROME Castration of
affected animals is recommended. Prevention can be
accomplished throughi genetic counseling to reduce or
remove carrier animals from a breeding program, Tfm is
an X-linked disorder,and carrier females are fertile. The
expected outcome is that 50% of female offspring from
carrier females will be carriers, 50% of male offspring
will be affected, and 50% of male offspring will be nor-
mal. Male offspring with normal gcnitalia can be pre
sumcd not to carry the mutation for Tfm and may
Temain in the breeding program.
Prognosis
FEMALE PSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISM After surgical
intervention, the prognosis is good. The importance of
Disorders of Sexual Development
27
distinguishing this syndrome from XX sex reversal
relates to genetic counseling. With female pseudoher-
maphroditism resulting from exogenous androgen
exposure, there is no heritable component and no need
to remove the parents or siblings from the brecding pro-
gram. With XX sex reversal, it is strongly advised to
remove the parents and siblings of affected individuals
from a breeding program. In the dog the internal and
external genitaliaundergo differentiation from days34
46 from the LH peak that occurs during estrus in thc
dam. Avoiding in utero exposure of the fetus to andro-
gens or progestogens during this critical period should
prevent this syndrome.
PERSISTENT MULLERIAN DUCT SYNDROME PrOgnOsis is
good after castration and hysterectomy. Complications
resulting from pyometra, urinary tract abnormalities, or
prostatic disease carry a fair to poor prognosis dcpend-
ing on the duration of disease before diagnosis.
HYPOsPADlASAfter castration and surgicalcorrcction(if
necessary), the prognosis is good. Although dogs that are
mildly affected can breed normally, removing all affected
individuals from a breeding program is recommended.
TESTICULAR FEMINIZATION SYNDROME The prognosis is
good after castration. Genetic counseling should be aimed
at eliminating female carriers from the gene pool.
28
Disorders of Sexual Development
AgenesisandDysgenesisof the
Reproductive Tract
Definition and Pathogenesis
Agenesis is the failure of a structure or orgarn system to
develop because of nonappearance ofits primordium
during embryonic development. Dysgenesis is a defect
in development of a structure or organ. In the reproduc
tive tract of dogs and cats, agenesis or dysgenesis of the
gonads, millerian or wolffian ducts, urogenital sinus,
genital tubercle, or genital swellings can be seen.
Examples include monorchidism and testicular hypo-
plasia, ovarian agenesis and ovarian hypoplasia, segmen
tal aplasia of the epididymides, vasa deferentia, oviducts,
uterus, and vagina, and penile hypoplasia. In females,
failure of fusion of the caudal mullerian ducts or
urogenital sinus can give rise to a variety of vaginal
anatomic anomalies (see Chapter 13). In affected ani-
mals in which chromosomal sex, gonadal sex, and phe-
notypic sex agree, it is unknown whether there is some
genetic, hormonal, or heritable component to these
anomalies,
Signaiment
All of these defects are present at birth; however, most
are not recognized until the animal is used for breeding
or are found incidentally at OHE or castration. Some
DisordersofSexua! Development
29
dogs with vaginal anomalies are treated as juveniles for
persistent vaginitis. Agenesis or dysgenesis of any por
tion of the reproductive tract can be seen in all breeds of
dogs and cats.
History and Clinicaf Signs
Most animals with agenesis or dysgenesis of a portion of
the reproductive tract have no clinical symptoms, but if
present, the signs will depend on what part of the tract is
affected. In females, signs may vary from primary
anestrus to small litter size, infertility, or sterility. Clinical
signs in males vary from absence of a testis to infertility
or sterility.
Physicaf Examination Findings
The external genitalia of affected animals usually are
normal, except in a male with a hypoplastic penis o1
prepuce. Some females with vaginal anomalics may
have perivulvar dermatitis secondary to chronic
vaginitis.Internally,a variety of anomalies may be
identified, such as complete lack of one or both
gonads, unilateral or bilateral gonadal hypoplasia,
unilateral aplasia ofa uterine horn (uterus unicornis),
and segmental aplasia of oe or both uterine horns.
Several types of vaginal malformations are possible
(see Chapter 13).
OE
Disorders of Sexual Development
DiagnosticTestsandResuits
It is recommended to determine the karyotype and the
type of gonad present in affected individuals. Many cases
of agenesis or dysgencsis are secondary to abnormalities
of chromosomal orgonadal sex.This information is nec-
essary toprovideinformedgeneticcounseling toowners
of affected animals. Contrast vaginography can delin
the animal is in proestrus or estrus extends cranially to
produce a hysterogram, which can evaluate patency of
the cervix, uterine body, and uterine horns.
Treatment
Surgical treatment varies withi thie nature of the disorder.
Females with segmental aplasia may have accumulation
of intraluminal serous to purulent fluid proximal and
ipsilateral to the affected region of the uterus; complete
OHE is recommended if breeding potential is not
desired. If the animal's intended use is breeding.
removal of the affected side only can be attempted.
Somesurgical facilitieshave attemptedmicroreconl-
struction on a few male dogs with epididymal blockages.
The results have been extremely variable, and more
work is needed in this area. Theoretically, this procedure
could be applied to dogs with segmental aplasia of the
epididymides or vasa deferentia, provided that the aplas
tic segment is relatively short.
Disorders of Sexual Development
31
Prognosis
The prognosis for life is good, whereas the prognosis
for fertility varies from fair to poor depending on
whether the anomaly of the tract is unilateral or
bilateral. Those with unilateral agenesis or dysgenesis
may be able to reproduce, although fertility will be
reduced when compared with an unaffectcd individ-
ual. Those with bilateral abnormalities are likcly to be
sterile.
Bibliography
Johnston SD,Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine
and feline theriogenology, Philadelphia, 2001, WB
Saunders.
McElreavey K, Vilain E, Nacer A et al: A regulatory cas-
cade hypothesis for mammalian sex determination:
Sry represses a negative regulator of male develop-
ment,ProcNatlAcad SciUSA90:3368,1993.
Meyers-Wallen VN: Disorders of sexual development
in the dog. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds):
Current veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB
Saunders.
Meyers-Wallen VN: Inherited disorders in sexual devel-
opment,JHered90:93,1999.
32
DisordersofSexual Development
Meyers-Wallen VN: CVT update: inherited disorders of
the reproductive tract in dogs and cats. In Kirk Rw,
Bonagura JD (eds): Current veterinary therapy XIII,
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
Meyers-Wallen VN, Schlafer D, Barr I et al: Sry-negative
XX sex reversal in purebred dogs, Mol Reprod Dev
53:266,1999.
2
Breeding Management in the Bitch
and Queen
Mylissa S.D.Edens and Allen M.Heath
ATAGLANCE
● Estrous cycle of the bitch
● Proestrus: 9-day average duration; vulvar swelling and
serosanguineous vulvar discharge present; female
does not allow copulation; vaginal epithelium increas-
ingly cornified
33
34
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
·Estrus: 9-day average duration; feinale does
allow copulation; vaginal epithclium completely
cornified
·Diestrus: 60-day average duration; occurs regardless
of breeding status; abrupt return to noncornified
vaginal epithelium
·Anestrus
· Breeding management of the bitch
· The averagc bitch ovulates on the second day of
estrus (standing heat),but this varies in normal
bitches.
· The fertile window is from 3 days before to 4 days after
ovulation.
· If only one breeding is possible or if artificial insemi-
nation is to be performed, optimal breeding day is
2 days after ovulationl.
· Ovulation day is best determined by measure-
ment of scrum progesterone concentration;
serum progesterone concentration 2 days before
ovulation is 2-3 ng/ml and on ovulation day is
5-8 ng/ml.
· Estrous cycle of the queen
● Estrus: 7-day average duration; lordosis posture; vocal-
ization; female allows copulation; cats are induced
ovulators
-If not induced to ovulate, go into interestrus;
8-day average duration
BreedingManagementintheBitchandQueen
35
-lf induced to ovulate but not pregnant,
duration
-Ifinducedtoovulateandpregnant,go
into diestrus; 63- to 66-day average gestation
length
· Anestrus: seasonal (long-day breeders)
The Bitch
The most common cause of infertility in the bitch is
inappropriately timed breeding. By knowing the stages
of the estrous cycle and the corresponding clinical signs
and physiology, one can optimize brceding efficiency
and improve fertility.
Onset of puberty in the bitch occurs at 6-23 months
of age, with an average of 10-14 months. The bitch
is nonseasonally monoestrous. The interestrous interval
is 4-13 months, with an average of 7 months. A few
breeds, such as the basenji and Mexican Hairless, cycle
every 12 months, whereas the German shepherd and
rottweiler cycle every 4-5 months.
Stages of the Canine Estrous Cycle
The stages of the canine estrous cycle are proestrus,
estrus, diestrus, and anestrus (Figure 2-1).
36
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
Cornified
LH
P4
Interrmediate
Parabasal
2-3
u/bu
E2
Breed
lOvul
0
24-7
Anestrus
Proestrus
Estrus
Diestrus
Figure 2-1. lllustration of the hormonal events during the
estrous cycle of the bitch. The vaginal epithelial cells seen during
proestrus are also shown.E2,Estradiol;LH,luteinizing hormone;
P4,progesterone; Ovuf, ovulation.
PROESTRUS
Duration
· Proestrus lasts for 3-17 days, with an average of 9
days.
Behavior
· This stage is characterized by attraction of male
dogs to the bitch. She does not allow the male to
mount.
BreedingManagementin theBitchandQueen
37
Physical changes
· The vulva is swollen, and a serosanguineous vulvar
discharge, originating from the uterus, typically is
present.
· Vaginoscopic examination reveals a moist, pink, and
edematous vagina. The vaginal lumen often is diffi-
cult to visualize (Figure 2-2 and Color Plate 1).
Endocrinologyandvaginalcytology
● Follicular development causes a gradual increase in
serum estrogen concentration,which peaks 2-3 days
before estrus and then rapidly declines during
estrus. The rise in estrogen leads to hyperplasia of
the vaginal epithelial cells.
· Evaluation
of vaginal cytology during early
proestrus, when estrogen concentrations are low,
reveals parabasal and intermediate epithelial cells
(Figure 2-3 and Color Plate 2). Parabasal cells are
the healthiest of the vaginal epithelial cells. Red
blood cells are commonly present. Neutrophils and
bacteria also may be seen.
· As proestrus progresses, estrogen conccntrations
continue to rise and hyperplasia of the vaginal
epithelial cells occurs. The increased thickness
of the vaginal epithelium results in the most
superficial cells being located farther away from the
blood supply. These cells are not viable and are
38
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
Figure 2-2.Endoscopic view of vaginal mucosal folds during
proestrus. The folds are edematous, moist, and pink. The proges-
teroneconcentration of thisbitch was less than1 ng/ml.
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
39
Figure 2-3. Vaginal cytologic result showing parabasal cells.
They are round cells with a large nucleus and a small amount of
cytoplasm.
called superficial cells (Figure 2-4 and Color Plate 3).
At the end of proestrus, more than 80% of the
epithelial cells are cornified superficial cells. Red
blood cells may still be present; however, fcwcr neu-
trophils are present compared with early proestrus.
Bacteria may be present throughout procstrus.
· Progesterone concentrations in serurn during most
of proestrus are less than 2 ng/ml.
40
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
Figure 2-4.  Intermediate cells (thin black arrows) and superfi-
cial cells (thick black arrows) seen on vaginal cytologic examina-
tion. Intermediate cells have more irregular borders than do
parabasal cells, and they have a smaller nucleus and larger cyto-
plasm. Cornified superficial cells are dead vaginal epithelial cells.
They have sharp, angular borders and contain a small, pyknotic
nucleusornovisiblenucleus.
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
41
ESTRUS
Duration
· The duration of estrus is 3-21 days, with an average
of 9 days.
Behavior
· This stage is characterized by the bitch allowing the
male to mount and standing to be bred.
Physical changes
· The vulva is flaccid, and thc vulvar discharge often is
straw-colored.However, some normal bitches may
continue to have a blood-tinged discharge through-
ot estrus.
·Vaginoscopic examination shows a crenulated vagina
with a more prominent lumen (Figure 2-5 and Color
Plate 4). The mucosa may be hyperemic but often is
blanched.
Endocrinologyandvaginalcytology
● Estrus usually begins at approximately the time of
the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge, which has a
duration of 24-48hours.This is coincident with a
decline in estrogen concentrations and a rise in
progesteroneconcentrations.
· Luteinization begins before ovulation. Therefore
progesterone concentrations at the LH surge are
generally 2-3 ng/Inl.
42
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
Figure 2-5. Endoscopic view of the vagina of a bitch in estrus.
The vaginal vault is crenulated. The serum progesterone of this
bitchwas3.8ng/ml.
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
¥43
· Ovulation of a primary oocyte occurs 2 days after the
LH surge (day 0)
· An additional 2-3 days are required for the oocyte to
maturc to a fertilizable secondary oocyte. The
oocytes remain fertile for 2-3 days.Best conception
rate and litter size are achieved by breeding 47 days
after the LH surge.
· During estrus, vaginal cytology specimens contain
greater than 90% cornified superficial epithelial
cells. Red blood cells are fewer in number, and neu-
trophils arenotpresent.
· Progesterone concentrations continuc to rise,
reaching 5.0-8.0 ng/ml at ovulation and 4.0-20.0
ng/ml duringthefertilepcriod.
DIESTRUS
Duration Diestrus lasts 56-58 days from ovulation.
Behavior During this period, the bitch will no longcr
stand to be mounted.
Physical changes
· The vulva is no longer swollen.
· Vaginoscopic examination reveals the mucosa to be
pale, with no crenulation seen.
44
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
Endocrinologyandvaginalcytology
* Serum progesterone concentrations remain ele-
vated throughout diestrus.
· Vaginal cytology changes during a 24- to 36-hour
period from full cornification of epithelial cells to
40%-60% parabasal and intermediate cells. Many
neutrophils may be seen. In addition, metestrum
cells (a parabasal cell with a neutrophil in the cyto-
plasm) and foam cells (a parabasal cell with vacuoles
in the cytoplasm) may be seen.
ANESTRUS
Duration
● Anestrus lasts for 2-9 months.
Physicaf changes
 · It is the period of uterine involution. Involution
  nau a u s o s
90 days in the postpartum bitch.
Endocrinoiogyandvaginaicytology
· Progesterone concentrations decrease just before
parturition or gradually after corpus luteum regres
sion in the nonpregnant bitch.
· Vaginal cytologic examination reveals parabasal and
intermediate epithelial cells. Red blood cells are not
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
45
present. Neutrophils may or may not be present but
never should be great in number in a normal
anestrousbitch.
Technique for Obtaining Vaginal Cytology
Specimens
The vulvar lips are parted with one hand while the other
hand is used to pass a 7-inch-long cotton-tipped applica-
tor that has been moistened with saline or tap water. It is
important to avoid the ventral clitoral fossa because it
generally contains keratinized cells, which can be con-
fused with superficial epithelial cells. The swab is passed
in a craniodorsal direction, avoiding the urethral papilla
on the floor of the vestibule, until the ischial arch is
reached, at which point the swab is directed craniad.
The swab is rotated within the vagina a few times and
then withdrawn. The swab is gently rolled across a micro
scope slide in two to three rows. It is important. not to
smiear the swab across the slidebecause this will distort
the epithelial cells. The slide is dried and then stained
with a modified Wright-Giemsa stain (Diff-Quik;
American Scientific Products, McGraw, Ill.). The time
required to stain vaginal epithelial cells is longcr than
that for blood smears; the slide is placed in cach of the
solutions of stain for l0-l5 scconds each. Oncc dried
the slide is observed under 40x magnification.
46
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
Breeding Management of the Normal Bitch
    o si as o s
long as 7-9 days after ejaculation,breeding several days
before ovulation may result in aged gametes aund smaller
litters. With good breeding management, the bitch can
be inseminated at the optimal time to ensure fertiliza-
tion of the maximal number of viable oocytes.Breeding
management is important when sending the bitch to the
stud dog,whenusingshipped cooled semen,andcspe
ciallywhen using frozen semen.
It is important to make sure that both the bitch and
the dog are free of Brucella canis before breeding (see
Chapter 7) and that they are vaccinated, free of internal
and external parasites, and in good general health.
Testing for hereditary defects may be recommended,
depending on predispositions present in that breed.
When deciding when to breed the bitch, behavior,
character of the vulvar discharge, vulvar swelling,vaginal
cytologic examination, vaginoscopy, and serum proges-
terone concentrations are all used together to deter-
mine the time of the LH surge.
· Vaginoscopy may be used to determine the decline
in serum estradiol and estimate the day of the LH
surge.
As estradiol is decreasing,the vaginal folds become
crenulated as a result of a decrease in edema.
Maximum crenulation occurs 47 days after the
LH surge, which is the most fertile period. The
BreedingManagementintheBitchandQueen
47
degreeof crenulationvaries among bitches.
Vaginoscopy is performed using a rigid endo
scope (10-inch Welch Allyn juvenile proctoscope
or3.5-mm30-degree cystourethroscope),passing
it into the vagina as described for collection of
vaginal cytology specimens. Alternativcly, a clear
speculumcanbeused.
Vaginoscopic changes are much less accurate than is
measurement of progesterone in serum for assess-
mentofoptimal breeding day
· Vaginal cytologic examination is performed every
2-4 days. Once the vaginal epithelial cells are greater
than 50% cornified,measurement ofprogesterone
in serum is begun.
every 48 hours until serum progesterone concentra-
tion is 2-3 ng/ml. This concentration is coincidental
with the LH surge. If the progesterone concentra-
tion was less than 2 ng/ml on the first day of testing
and greatcr than 3 ng/ml2days later, one can
assume that the LH surge occurred between those
2 days. Once the serum progesterone has reached 2
3 ng/ml, retesting the progesterone the next day to
confirm that it is continuing to rise is recom-
mended.
In-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) kits are available for measurement of
serum progesterone concentration. ELISA is easy
48
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
to perform and is inexpensive, but it is not as accu-
rate as radioimmunoassay(RIA)or chemilumi-
nescence assay. Progesterone concentrations
measured by ELISA are reported as a range. They
are adequate to use for fresh or fresh chilled
semen breeding procedures but generally are not
accurate enough for timing of insemination with
frozen semen. When ELISA is used, a false
decrease in serun progesterone concentration
may be measured if the sample is hemolyzed. A
false increase in serum progesterone concentra-
tion may occur if the ELISA kits are not warmed to
roon temperature before use.
Progesterone is the same in all species. Therefore
serum progesterone may be determined by RIA Or
chemiluminescence assay at any endocrinology laby
oratory or at a human hospital. The RlA aud chemi-
luiminescenceassays
sare more expenisiveto
perform but provide an absolute progesterone con-
centration. These more accurate assays should be
used whenknowledge of the exact dayof ovulation
is required, such as when inseminating a bitch with
frozen semen or breeding to a subfertile dog
· LH is the hormone that causes ovulation to occur.
Serum LH must be measured every 24 hours to
ensure that the day of the LH peak is identified.A
value of greater than 1 ng/ ml is considered positive.
An in-house kit for measurement of LH in serum is
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
49
commercially available(Status-LH; Synbiotics, San
Diego, Calif.). The manufacturer recommends that
positive results be verified by measurement of serum
progesterone.
·Once theLHsurgeoccurs,evidencedby measurement of
greater thanIng/mlof LHin serum or,ideally,by meas-
urementof2-3ng/mlofprogesteroneinserum,thebitch is
bred4-7dayslater.
Measurementofserumprogesteroneconcentra-
tions beyond that identifying the LH surge is rec-
ommended to ensure that the bitch ovulates and
that she forms and maintains normal luteal tissue.
Serum progesterone concentration on ovulation
dayis5-8 ng/ml.
If one insemination is performed, it is best done on
day 5 or 6 after the LH surge. For two breeding
procedures, insemination should be done on days
5 and 7 after the LH surge.
AfterationsoftheCanineEstrousCycle
SHORTENING THE INTERESTROUS INTERVAL There are
two ways to shorten the interestrous interval in the bitch.
One is to shorten diestrus, and the other is to shorten
anestrus.
+ Diestrus can be shortened by inducing luteolysis
with the use of prostaglandin F2a. Prostaglandin F2
(Lutalyse; Pharmacia & Upjohn, Peapack, NJ) is
50
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
administered subcutaneously or intramuscularly
(50-200μg/kg twice a day) for49days beginning at
day 5 of diestrus or later. The bitch will proceed into
anestrus afterluteolysis.Possible sideeffects associ-
ated with the use of prostaglandin include emesis,
salivation, diarrhea, and respiratory difficulty. The
side effects generally are self-limiting. Timc until
onset of the subsequent proestrus is widely variable.
· Anestrus may be shortened with the use of
dopamine agonists, such as bromocriptine or caber
goline. Therapy for shortening of anestrus should
not be instituted before day 90 of anestrus to allow
normal uterine involution to occur. Bromocriptine
(Parlodel; Novartis, East Hanover, NJ; 50 μg/kg
given orally twice a day) is given until proestrus
begins. Emesis may occur as a side cffect. Cabergoline
(Dostinex;Pharmacia& Upjohn; 5 μg/kg admin
isteredorally oncedaily)alsoisgivenuntilproestrus
begins and reportedly causcs fewer side effects than
does bromocriptine. Proestrus generally occurs
after17-50days oftreatment with either drug
IRREGULARINTERESTROUSINTERVALS
· Split heats may appear as shortened interestrous
proestrus signs with no ovulation occurring, then a
brief (3-4 week) anestrus period, and then a normal
Breeding Managementin the BitchandQueen
51
ovulatory cycle. Split heat generally occurs in young
bitches during puberal heat. The bitch is fertile only
during ovulatory heat. Repeated vaginal cytologic
examination and serum progesterone concentra-
tions can be used to diagnose split heats.
intervals. Silent heat is defined as the bitch's having
little to no vulvar swelling or discharge despite nor-
mal follicular development and ovulation. Bitches
ndergoing silent heat generally attract male dogs.
To diagnose silent heat in bitches and to manage
them for breeding, vaginal cytology specimens
should be collected and evaluated every 1-2 weeks
monthly to determine when the bitch is cycling and
fertile.
· Ovulation failure can shorten the interestrous
interval. Ovulation failure is diagnosed by monitor
latory bitches, serum progesterone concentration
doesnotrise tonormaldiestrousconcentrations
(>5-8 ng/ml). The bitch may be treated with human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG; 500 IU/kg) during
subsequent estrus to induce ovulation at that
cycle.
·Hypothyroidism maybe associatedwithprolonged
interestrous intervals or acyclicity. Hypothyroidism
is best diagnosed by concurrent measurement of
52
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
thyroid-stimulatinghormone,which is elevated in
serum of hypothyroid dogs, and free thyroxine by
dialysis, which is decreased in serum of hypothyroid
dogs.
The Queen
Onset of puberty in the queen occurs when she achieves
80% of her adult body weight, if that occurs during the
appropriate season of the year. Puberty onset generally
occurs when queens are 6-9 months old. Most queens
are seasonally polyestrous, with cycling occurring during
long day periods. Cycling usually begins in January or
February and ends in September in temperate latitudes,
The cyclic activity of a queen can be altered artificially.
Cats that are maintained in 1o hours of artificial light
may cycle year round.
Stages of the Feline Estrous Cycle
The stages of the feline estrous cycle are proestrus,
estrus,diestrus,interestrous,and ancstrus(Figure 2-6),
PROESTRUS
Duration This stage lasts for 12 hours to 2 days and is diffi-
cult to distinguish from estrus.
BreedingManagementin theBitchandQueen
53
Estrus
Induction
No induction
of ovulation
of ovulation
Interestrous
Pregnancy
Pseudopregnancy
(8 days)
(63-66 days)
(40-50 days)
Estrus
Estrus
Figure 2-6. Potential outcome of each estrous cycle of the
queen.
Behavior During proestrus the tom is attracted to the
queen but she does not allow him to breed.
Endocrinology and vaginaf cytology Proestrus is the
period of follicular  growth
andriseinserum
estrogen concentrations. Vaginal cytologic examina
tion may be performed as in the bitch. The number of
superficial epithelial cells increases to greater than
10%, and the number of parabasal and intermediate
cells decreases. Red blood cells and neutrophils are
not commonly seen. The vaginal mucous becomes
54
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
less viscous, and there are less noncellular debris
and eosinophilic and basophilic strands of mucus
present.
ESTRUS
Duration
·The duration ofestrusis variable.Controversy exists
regarding whether coitus and induction of ovula-
tionshortenbehavioral estrus in queens.Ingcneral,
estrus lasts an average of 6.5-8 days.
Behavior
· Estrus is the pcriod of sexual receptivity. During
estrus the queen vocalizes, rubs her head and neck
on objects, becomes more restless, rolls, and
assumes the posture called lordosis, in which she
holds her forequarters to the floor, elevates her
hindquarters, and holds her tail to one side.
Endocrinologyandvaginalcytology
· At the beginning of estrus, anuclear superficial cells
number approximately 10%, with an increase to
40% by the fourth day. Percentage of superficial
cells remains at 40%-60%.Percentage of intermedi-
atecellsdecreasesfrom 40%-10%duringestrus.
Parabasalcells are fewer than10%of the epithelial
cells.
Breeding Managementin theBitchand Queen
55
·Ovulation may occur duringestrus.Queens are
induced ovulators. The means of induction may be
vaginal stimulation or a form of external stimulation,
such as petting or visual stimulation. This external
stimuluscausesreleaseofgonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) from the hiypothalamus and suh
scquent release of pituitary LH. Maximum LH con
centration occurs 4 hours after multiplc (8-12)
copulations.Return tobaseline conccntrations
0ccurs in 24 hours. Ovulation1 occurs 24 hours after
thiercleaseofLH.Atleastfour copulationsare
required to reliably cause release of endogenous
GnRHand LH,andovulation,inestrousqueens.
INTERESTROUS
Duration
●If the queen does not undergo ovulation during
estrus, interestrus occurs next. This stagc lasts for an
averagc of 8 days, with a range of 2-19 days.
Behavior
· The queen is no longer attractive to the male, and
estrous behavior ceases.
Endocrinologyandvaginaicytology
·During this period, thcrc is a sharp decline in estro-
gen concentralions.
56
Breeding Management In the Bitch and Queen
· On vaginal cytologic examination the predominant
cell types seen are nucleated superficial cells and
intermediatecells.Background debrisispresent.
DIESTRUS
Duration
· The length of diestrus depends on whether the
queen is pregnant or pseudopregnant. The dura-
tion of pregnancy is 63-66 days. The duration of
pseudopregnancy is 40-50 days. This consists of a
luteal phase of 36-37 days and then an interestrous
period of 7-10 days.
Behavior
·This is a period of reproductive quiescence.
Endocrinologyandvaginalcytology
· During diestrus the queen is under the influence of
progesterone.
ANESTRUS
Duration
·Seasonal anestrus occurs during the shortening
photoperiod, generally from October through
December. Lactational anestrus may persist for 2-3
weeks afterweaning.
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
57
Behavior
·This is a period of reproductive quiescence.
Endocrinoiogyandvaginalcytology
· Vaginal cytology specimens contain fewer than 10%
parabasal cells. Intermediate cells constitute 40%-
70% of the epithelial cells.Nucleated superficial
cells comprise 30%-40% of the cells. Background
debrisisevident.
ManipulationoftheFelineEstrousCycle
INDUcTION OF ESTRUS Artificial induction ofestrus may
be needed for synchronizing donors and rccipients
in an embryo transfer program. Equine chorionic
gonadotropin (eCG; I50 IU intramuscularly) is adminis-
tered, and then hCG (l0o IU intramuscularly) is admin-
istered 80-88 hourslater.A less successfulprotocol is to
given follicle-stimulatinghormone(2 mg intramuscu-
larly once daily) for 5-6 days. The queen is mated during
the estrus cycle or is induced to ovulate with hCG and is
then inseminated. Neither eCG nor FSH is commer-
cially available in the United States at this time.
INDUCTION OF OVULATION Ovulation may bc induced
pharmacologically with hCG(250IU given intramuscu-
larly on days 1 and 2 of estrus) or GnRH (25 μg given
intramuscularly on any day of estrus). Induction also
58
Breeding Management in theBltch and Queen
may be induced by vaginal stimulation using a cotton
swab.Manual stimulation needs to occur 48 times at 5-
to 20-minute intervals,with each stimulation lasting 2-5
seconds.
Breeding Management of the Norma! Queen
The optimal age to breed a cat is between 1.5 and 7 years.
The queen is taken to the tom for breeding. The premat-
ing period lasts for 10 seconds to 5 minutes and consists
of the cats calling to and smelling one another. The mat-
ing period includes 1l-3 minutes of the male mounting.
neck biting, and treading with his hind legs. This is fol-
lowed by intromission and ejacuulation, which take place
within 5-10 seconds. During this period the queen emits
a characteristic yowl. Coitus is followed by an after-reac-
tion by the gueen that lasts 30 seconds to 10 minutes and
consists of the queen rubbing herself on the ground,
rolling from side to side, and licking her vulva.
Subsequent breeding may resume following the after
reaction. Cats may breed as often as 30 times in 24 hours.
Bibliography
Concannon P: A review for breeding management and
artificial insemination with chilled or frozen semen.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology
Breeding Managementin theBitch and Queen
59
Canine Male Reproduction Symposium, Montreal,
Quehec,Canada,1997.
Concannon P, Verstegen J: Estrus induction in dogs: use of
gonadotropins, therapies and dopanine agonists.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 1997.
Feldman E, Nelson R: Ovarian cycle and vaginal
cytology. In Feldman E (ed). Canine and feline
endocrinology and reproduction,Philadelphia,1996,
WBSaunders.
Freshman J: Clinical approach to infertility in the cycling
bitch, Vet Clin North Am 21:427, 1991.
Freshman J: Solve the mystery: infertility in the bitch.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology
Canine Reproduction Symposium, Baltimore, 1998.
Goodman M: Canine ovulation timing.Proceedings of the
Society for Theriogenology Canine Reproduction
Syinposium,Baltimore,1998.
Goodman M: Ovulation timing concepts and controver-
sies,VetClinNorthAm31:219,2001.
Hutchison R: Maximizing conception rates using fresh
cooled or frozen canine semen, Proceedings of
the Society for Theriogenology Canine Male
Reproduction Symposium, Montreal, Quebec.
Canada,1997.
Johnston S: Clinical approach to infertility in bitches with
primary anestrus,VetClinNorthAm21:421,1991.
60
Breeding Management in the Bitch and Queen
Johinston S: Using hormone assays in small animal repro-
duction. Proceedings of the Society for Therio-
genology, Kansas City, Mo, 1996.
Johnston S, Olson P, Root M: Clinical approach to infer-
tility in the bitch, Semin Vet Med Surg 9:2, 1994.
Olson P, Thrall M, Wykes P et al: Vaginal cytology: part I.
A useful tool for staging the canine estrous cycle,
Comp Cont Ld 6:288,1984.
Purswell B: Pharmaceuticals used in canine theriogenol
ogy. Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology
Baltimore, 1998.
Root Kustritz M: Unique aspects of feline reproduction.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology,
Kansas City, Mo, 1996.
3
Artificial Insemination in the Dog
Bruce E.Eilts,Dale L.Paccamonti,and Carlos Pinto
ATA GLANCE
· Artificial insemination with fresh semen
· Semen collection: routine (see Chapter 4)
·Semen handling/storage/shipment: none
·Insemination:vaginal
· Artificialinsemination with chilled semen
·Semen collection:routine
61
62
Artificial Insemination in the Dog
· Semen handling/storage/shipment: addition of
sperm-rich fraction of ejaculate to extender; mainte-
nance at refrigerator temperature; commercial sys-
tems available
● Insemination: vaginal or intrauterine
Ideally, inseminate within 24 hours of semen col-
lectionandextension.
Optimal breeding day is 2 days after ovulation (scc
with larger number of breeding procedures.
+Artificial insemination with frozen semen
+ Semen collection:routine
· Semen handling/storage/shipmient: sperm-rich
fraction of thc cjaculate extended with one or
more solutions, at least one of which contains a
cryoprotectant such as glycerol; semen is frozen in
straws or as pellets in liquid nitrogen; must be
maintained and shipped in liquid nitrogen and
thawed just before insemination; optimal breed-
ing day for a single insemination is 3 days after
ovulation
·Insemination:intrauterine
 Surgical: general anesthesia, laparotomy, inject
semen through uterine wall with sterile needle
and syringe
Transcervical
"Scandinavian"or"Norwegian"rigid catheter:
blind technique
Artificial Inseminationin theDog
63
Endoscopy: visualization of cervix with endo-
scope,passageofpolypropyleneurinarycatheter
through cervix for semen deposition
Artificial insemination (Al) is required whcn using
fresh cooled or frozen semen and also is bcneficial in
some situations with fresh semen.Reasons for lsing Al
when breeding with fresh semen include presence of
vaginal abnormalities that prevent natural maling, such
as strictures, or a bitch that will not allow mating for
behavioral reasons, such as being either overly submis-
sive or dominant to the male. Problems of the male dog
requiring Al include the male being either overly aggres
sive or too timid to breed the bitch, and disease condi-
tions that prevent the normal mating actions of
mounting and intromission. Finally, Al provides the
opportunity to obtain information regarding the quality
of semen inseminated into the bitchi. Even if a breeding
soundness examination shows a male to have acceptable
semen quality, only Al ensures that the acceptable
semen is actually deposited into the female's vagina
FreshSemen
Collection of semen and semen analysis are presented in
Chapter 4. When semen is collected for immediate
insemination, fractioning of the semen into presperm,
sperm-rich, and prostatic portions is not needed. Fresh
semen most often is inseminated immediately after
64
Artificial Insemination intheDog
collection with no further dilutions or semen extenders
added. However, it is imperative that the ejaculate be
examined at least for the presence of motile spermato-
zoa before insemination.It is not uncommon to collect a
milky white sample from a male that appears to be a
"good" ejaculate and then have the initial microscopit
evaluation reveal that there are no spermatozoa present.
A complete evaluation of the ejaculate, including assess-
ment of percentage of progressively motile spermato-
zoa, total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate,and
percentage of morphologically normal spermatozoa, is
preferable to just a cursory examination of spermato-
zoal motility. If motility is acceptable, it may be advisable
to perform the insemination before completing the
evaluation because prolonged exposure of sperm to
autologousprostaticfluidcan decreasespermmotility.
Vaginaffnsemination
To perform vaginal insemination, the only equipment
needed is an AI pipette and a syringe to infuse the
semen. There are reports that the lubricants in syringes
with rubber plungers can have detrimental effects on
the motility of sperm; however, this occurs only after
long incubation periods, and using a syringe with a rub-
ber plunger to inseminate shortly after semen collection
should have no detrimental effect on fertility. Pipettes
specifically made for AI in the dog are commercially
ArtificiafInseminationin theDog
65
available (Synbiotics, San Diego, Calif.; Maple Hill
Embryos Inc., Woodstock, Ontario, Canada; Inter-
national Canine Semen Bank, Sandy, Or.). We prefer
bovine or equine uterine infusion pipettes or Cassou AI
sheaths (available from most veterinary suppliers) that
have been cut to appropriate lengths based on the size of
the bitch to be inseminated (Figure 3-1). An insemina-
tion pipette named the Osiris pipette also is commercially
available. The Osiris pipette simulates the erect penis in
the vagina and is intended to prevent semen leakage
after AI (IMV International, Minneapolis, Minn.). No
controlled studies have been conducted to determine
Figure 3-1. From top to bottom, the Osiris, Norwegian, and
large animal infusion pipettes and the transcervical endoscope.
Insets show close-up viewsofthe delivery ends.
66
Artificial InseminationintheDog
whether conception rates are better with the Osiris
pipette than with regular AI pipettes.
Various tcchniques to perform vaginal AI have been
described. Some clinicians recommend washing the
vulva before insemination,inserting a finger into the
vagina to guide the AI pipette into the vagina, “feather-
ing” the vagina by digital stimulation, and elevating of
the hindquarters of the bitch after insemination. We do
not use any of these techniques and attain 90% preg-
nancy rates when inseminating with fresh semen. Thc
method weuse is toinsert a nonlubricated AIpipette
into the vagina at the dorsal commissure of the vulva,
being careful not to allow the pipette to enter the ure-
thra. We then pass the pipette over the brim of the pelvis
and into the cranial vagina near the external os of the
cervix. The insertion of the pipette is sometimes made
difficult by the end of the pipette being obstructed by
folds of the vagina.If this occurs, we withdraw the
pipette slightly, redirect, and move it forward with slight
increased pressure. If the vaginal epithelium is very
hyperplastic, a finger can be used to guide the pipette
into the vagina. The pipette should be inserted such that
the end is passed far enough to be at the level of the cau-
dal abdomen. One of us routinely palpates the tip of the
pipette in the cranial vagina through the abdominal
wall. Next, the bitch is elevated to a 45-degree angle by
grasping above the stifles and elevating the hindquar
ters. The syringe is placed on the pipette and the semen
Artificial inseminationin the Dog
67
injected through the pipette.After the semen is injected
through the pipette, the syringe is removed. If the semen
remains in the pipette, the pipette should be withdrawn
1-2 mm until the sermen is observed to freely flow
down the pipette. After the semen is allowed to drain
throughthe
pipette, a small amount of air is
injected through the pipette to flush any remaining
semen into the vagina. Care must be taken to ensure the
pipette is completely empty of semen; large animal uter-
'aas jo qut g o dn po u sadid ois a
which may be the entire ejaculate.
After AI, we elevate the hindquarters of the bitches fo1
no more than I minute.After that time the bitchics are
allowed to do what they want. This is in dircct cornitrast to
many authors who state that bitches'hindquarters should
be elevated for at least 10 (if not 20) minutes, that the
bitches should be put into crates immediately after
the hindquarter elevation time, that the bitches should
not be allowed to urinate, and that the bitches should not
be allowed to jump or squat. The only thing we avoid is the
placement of pressure on the caudoventral abdomen.
The only controlled study to assess the effects of clcvating
the hindquarters showed that elevating the hindquarters
fecundity as elevating the hindquarters for l0 minutes. In
a subsequent study that we conducted (unpublished), not
elevating the hindquarters at all after inscmination gave
the same excellent pregnancyrates.
68
Artificial lnseminationin theDog
If the ejaculate has a very small volume, it is some-
times advisable to dilute the ejaculate with semen exten-
der to make the volume easier to handle (see Chilled
Semen, Equipment and Techniques). No difference in
fertility was obtained when fresh semen was extended
1:1 and vaginal inseminations were performed multiple
times compared with natural mating or Al of unex-
tended semen on the same schedule. We recommend
breeding every other day during cytologic estrus when
the male is present. It has been shown that if AI is per-
formed twice, rather than once, around the time of best
fertility (see Chapter 2), the conception rate is signifi-
cantly improved. There also seemed to be a trend toward
increasing pregnancy rates when the number of insemi-
nationsincreasedbeyondtwo.
Conception Rate with Fresh Semen
The number of spermatozoa inseminated depends on
the ejaculate obtained; however, it has been estimaled
that at least 220 x 106 normal spermatozoa per ejaculate
need to beinseminated(Table 3-1).Vaginal AI on 3 con
secutive days after acceptance of the male by the female
using 50 × 106 spermatozoa in fresh semen extended 1:4
for each breeding resulted in lower fertility (20%) than
Al on 3 consecutive days using 200 x 106 spermatozoa in
fresh semen extended 1:1 (80%) or natural mating
(80%).
Artificial Insemination in the Dog
69
Fecundity
panuuo
E'L
7.2
5.6
Conception
breeding
one lime
nq 'saf
different
Breeding
saf——
Vaginal A1
from-
Natural
IeUfIRA
DU—
AI CR =
200×
%5
N
Procedure Using Fresh, Chilled, or Frozen Semen
Concep-
(21/25)
tion
8%
(4/5)
20%
($/)
90%
66.3
84%
107
5
Spermatozoa/
breeding
procedure
200 × 106
50 ×106
Not stated
Not stated
Volume
stated
(m)
3.6
5'0
N
Not
2
Every other
day during
cytologic
3 tirmes after
acceptance
3 tirmes after
acceptance
Timlng of
Chapter 2)
2 tirnes at
a
1-2 times
Guunp
(see
early
estrus
Table 3-1.
extender
extender
transcer-
Method
Fresh
Fresh
Fresh,
70
Artificial Inseminationin theDog
Fecundity
4.2
如
Conception
finfertility
(pasoubep
cont'd
Fresh semen
dlfferent
breeding
from-
eubeA
vaginal
=yI
35%
司
Procedure Using Fresh, Chilled, or Frozen Semen -
-
(0L/6)
100 at
48hr
(10/10}
tion
100%
(6/6)
06
%0B
(S/D)
C
s
total normal
breeding
procedure
motile at
258× 10h
Not stater
24 hr of
motile at
351 × 106
48 hr of
storage
×002
(ml)
E
1
Every other day
4 breeding
procedures)
(average,
3 times after
acceptance
o
breeding
Chapter 2)
Once on
day 4, 5,
or6 after
LH peak
Euunp
cytalogic
estrus
aas)
Table 3-1.
extended
Method
surgical,
uterine
Fresh,
Chilled
Chilled,
Artificialinseminationin theDog
71
Not stated
Not stated
panuuo
4.0
4.6
6'E
4.7
One vaginat
UPIDMUON
breeding
Surgical Af
IU-no
saf—
sa-
U—no
Vaginal A]
Natural
DU
ou
NA
auc
N
NA
N
20% (1/5)
(35/40)
(920/38)
(01/9)
%5'28
(35/40)
87.5%
(40/60）
(01/9)
100 (7/7)
28%-
%09
60%
%09
52.6
60%
100%
palers
Not
L
10
10
广
Not stated
901 ×00E-6
9-300× 106
901×05
1×002
183× 106
901×21
200×106
21× 105
105 ×105
stated
stated
5
Not
JU S
3-12
3-12
WL
Not
1ON
1ON
 after LH peak
2-5 days after
acceptarice
Days 3 and 5
Daily in estrus
Daily in estrus
Based on P4
S pue E sAea
after LH peak
Every other day
during estrus
Every other day
sa bs
3 times after
Not stated
ovulation
(2 times)
Based on P4
(1-12)
{1-12)
assays
(1-12)
(1-)
extended
extended
Chilled,
Chilled,
Frozen,
jeubeA
Frozen,
Frozen,
Frozen,
Frozen,
eurbeA
Frozen,
uterine
Frozen,
Frozen,
eub
72
Artificial Insemination in the Dog
Fecundity
5.6
7.6
7.6
9'1
Conception
Fresh sermen
|
<saf
Norwegian
-cont'd
different
ou-nt
Transcer-
IU——no
Norwegian
I—no
Procedure Using Fresh, Chilled, orFrozen Semen-
dauo
(20/30)
83% (5/6)
[43/51}
%9
%坞
100%
(5/5)
rate
3
5
5
Spermatozoa/
breeding
procedure
Not stated
200 × 106
186 ×106
200 ×106
Voluma
stated
(mal)
Not
1 ml
Z
48hrafter LH?
2 times 24 and
2-5 days after
Based on P4
2 tirmes 24 and
Chapter 2)
1-2 tirmes
ovulation
48 hr after
Late estrus
(1 tirme)
LH peak?
see
Table 3-1.
Frozen, uterine,
Norwegian
Frozen,uterine,
eN
Frozen, uterinhe,
Norwegian
Frozen, uterine,
transcervical
ArtificialinseminationintheDog
73
Not stated
6.0
9'E
One-vaginal
IU—yes,
Norwegian
IUhigher
200 ×106
Vaginal A1
2 times-
NA
85% (6/7)
(11/19)
(9/10}
60 (6/10)
%85
%05
19
2
1
100-300x106
(calculated
from data)
50×106
188×106
901×00
stated
1 rml
Not
E2
2-5 days after
(2.4 breeding
Once at “optimal
2 times 24 and
procedures)
after LH peak
LH peak?
Based on P4
ovulation
3 and 5 days
Frozen, uterine,
transcervical
Frozen, uterine,
transcervical
laparotomy
Adoososedel
surgical,
surgical.
Frazen,
Frozen,
74
Artlficial lnseminatlionin theDog
The effect of volume of fresh semen placed in the
anterior vagina has not been critically evaluated.
Volumes as low as 2.2 ml and up to 3.6-3.9 ml have bee1l
reported to yield good pregnancy ratcs. It seems that as
long as an adequate number of normal spermatozoa are
placed into the vagina, the volume of the inseminate
does not affect fertility. Excessively large semen volumes
inseminated into the vagina could result in the drainage
of some of the ejaculate from the vagina; this has not
bcen critically tested.
Lower pregnancy rates have been reported to be
associated with artificially inseminated fresh semen com-
pared with natural breeding. These all were retrospec-
tive studies of pregnancy rates of different females brcd
to diffcrent males by various veterinarians under a vari-
ety of breeding conditions. In the one controlled study
that directly compared pregnancy rates of bitches bred
by AI using fresh semen versus natural mating, there was
or natural mating when the same males were used under
sinilar breeding conditions. In the canine colony at our
institution,AI with fresh semen is used almost exclu
sively and the pregnancy rate in normal bitches is 90%.
Transcervical intrauterine insemination and sur-
gical insemination with fresh semen have been
reported (see Frozen Semen, Intrauterine Insemination
Techniques). Although intrauterine insemination with
fresh semen seems to have no benefit under normal
ArtificialInseminationin theDog
75
situations, one report did indicate that intrauterine
insemination with fresh semen siginificantly improved
the pregnancy rate in bitches that were previously infer-
tile when bred to the same proven males.
ChilledSemen
Chilled shipped semen also is called chilled extended semen
or fresh cooled semen. Breeding with chilled shippcd semen
requires a well-coordinated effort among thc stud and
bitch owmers, the veterinarian collecting the semen,
and the veterinarian inseminating thc bitch. The
veterinarian managing the bitch must ensure the proper
timingof theinsemination(see Chapter 2).The veteri-
narian collecting the semen must prepare it for shipment
in such a way to maintain quality during transport.
If the male has llever had semen collected,it may
not be possible to collecl a suitable ejaculate on the
exact day the first semen sample is desired. It may take 1-
2 weeks to train a male to ejaculate in a vetcrinary office
without an estrual bitch present. Thereforc it is ideai for
the dogtohavehad semen collected and to be familiar
with the collection procedure long bcfore any semen
actually is needed. It also is advisable to prepare a "test
shipment" in advance. A scmen sample should be
cxtended, stored a minimum of 24 hours in the con-
tainer that will be used for transport, and evalated after
24 hours to ensure that extcnsion and storage do not
76
Artificia!Inseminationin theDog
hiave detrimental effects on the semen quality. Not all
semen will respond to extending,cooling,and storage in
a similar fashion, and this test shipment will determine
the viability of the sperm affer extension and cooling.
Shipping company schedules and venues to which
they ship need to be assessed carefully well before the
need arises. Some destinations are serviced by ship
ping companies, and some are best served by counter
to-counter airline shipments. In some cases, shipments
cannot be sent out on the appropriate day, and in others,
shipments cannot be delivered on the appropriate day.
Equipment and Techniques
When shipping chilled semen, it is imperative that an
appropriate semen extender be added to the ejaculate.
Semen extenders provide an energy source and buffers
that enhance the survival of chilled sperm cells. We have
received several chilled ejaculates that were not
extended, and the motility was nil at the time of arrival
24-48 hours after the shipment was sent. Extendcrs
can be obtained from commercial sources that are
manufactured exclusively for extending canine semen
(Synbiotics; CLONE, Chester Springs, Pa.; Camelof
Farms, College Station, Tx.; International Canine
Semen Bank) or for extending equine semen (Lane
Manufacturing, Denver, Colo.; IMV International).
Homemade semen extenders also can be prepared, but
Artificialinseminationin theDog
77
proper laboratory techniques are essential for good
results. Commercial extenders marketed for canine
sementendtobcexpensive,andpreparationofhome
made extenders tends not to be cost effective, rcquiring
exacting quality control that is beyond the capability of
most private veterinary clinics. We have found that com-
mercially available equine semen extenders work well
for chilling canine semen up to 48 hours and are
extremely cost effective. The prepared extender can be
portioned into smaller (10-15 ml) aliquots and frozen in
a non-frost-free freezer for use within 4 monthis.
Chilled semen is prepared by diluting freshly col-
lected semen with the desired semen extender. The
extender must beprewarmed to37°C before adding it
to the semen or the spermatozoa will suffer cold-shiock.
The prostatic portion of the ejaculate may have detri-
mental effects on the storage of canine spcrm cells, so
some workers advise not collecting any of the prostatic
portion of the ejaculate. We found no dctrimental
ulates were extended1:1 and inseminated after 24 or
48hours of storage.Ifthe entire prostaticportion of the
ejaculate iscollected and the semen isextended,the vol.
ume of the resulting extended semen may be such that it
cannot be completely inseminated without some vaginal
reflux. If the volume of the ejaculate is large, the semen
can be extended l:l in an extender and then cen-
trifuged at 900 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant can
78
ArtificialInsemination in theDog
then be removed and the remaining semen pellet
extended to a more desirable volume withfresh exten-
der. When a commercial canine semen extenderis used,
it is always best to follow the manufacturer's recommen-
dations regarding semen preparation, extension ratios,
tion for extending and shipping dog semen has not been
determined.
Containersdesignedto ship semen canbeobtained
from many of the same sources that provide canine
semen extenders. Several companies manufacture or
provide canine semen shipping containers (Synbiotics;
CLONE: Camelot Farms; Bio-Flite, Anaheim Hills,
Calif.;International CanineSemenBank).The contain-
ers usually consist of a Styrofoam box, an ice pack, and a
receptacle for the semen. These commercially available
semen containers maintain semen well cnough thal
acceptable pregnancy rates result. Commercially avail-
ablc shipping containers offer a predictable, attractive,
and easy way to ship semen. However, many of these con-
tainers are relatively expensive when compared with the
disposable equine shipping containers. We found that a
commercially available (although no longer marketed)
disposable equine shipping container allowed storage of
extended canine semen for up to 48 hours, with result-
ing pregnancy rates equivalent to AI with fresh semen.
We have used other brands of disposable equine semen
shippers and have had good success in maintaining
ArtificialinseminationintheDog
6
semen viability. The advantage of the equine semen
shippers is their lower cost than the canine semen ship.
pers. Homemade shipping containers can be used; how
ever, they do not usually have a predictable cooling rate
and semen quality may not be maimtained as well as with
use of commercially available contaimers.
Withfresh coolcd semen,littleorno scmcnprcpa
ration is required aftcr its arrival beforc insemination is
performed. It is advisable to chcck thc motility of thc
s  e o dorp e lid q ozds
and, if motile sperm are present, procccding with insem-
ination in the same manner as with fresh seimen. The
entire semen sample need not be warimedl before AI. It is
recommended to save a small aliquot of the semen for
evaluation. With knowledge of the concentration of
spermatozoa in the scmcn (millions of spermatozoa per
milliliter) and the volume inseminatcd (milliliter per
inseminate), thc total number of spcrmatozoa in the
inseminate can be calculated (sce Chapter 4). Evcn withi
pregnancy. Knowledge of semen quality (total number
of spermatozoa, percentage of progressively motile sper
matozoa, percentage of morphologically normal sper
matozoa) may help in determining the calse,or at least
nant. Furthermore, if semen quality is not acceptable,
the persons who prepared and shipped the semen can
be notified and an additional shipment provided if time
80
Artificial Insemination In theDog
permits. Modifications in semen preparation can be
made to improve quality after shipping.
ConceptionRatewithChilledSemen
Results after using chilled extended semen can be the
same as those with natural breeding if sufficient sperma-
tozoa are inseminated at the proper time. Vaginal AI on
3 consecutive days with 200 x 1o° spermatozoa/breed-
ing with semen extended l:l and stored for 24 hours
produced the same pregnancy rates as natural mating
using the same breeding schedule (80%).However,
using 50 x 106 spermatozoa extended 1:4 and stored for
24 hours resulted in lower fertility (20%). Other reports
that summarized data from chilled semen insemimations
showed pregnancy rates to vary from 28%-60% depend-
ing on the type of extender used. These pregnancy rates
are lower when ovulation is timed and the number of
breeding procedures is limited to one or two, compared
with the 90%-100% conception rates we observed when
spermatozoa/breeding were performed.
Frozen Semen
An exhaustive review of the preparation of frozen semen
is beyond the scope of this chapter. Simply stated, to pre-
pare frozen semen after a good-quality semen sample is
Artificial inseminatlon in the Dog
81
obtainedrequires a method to standardize the concen
tration of the sample, a freezing extender with a cryo
protectant, a packaging system, a freezing method, and a
storage facility.
EquipmentandTechniques
There are many different semen extenders, cryoprotec-
tants and cryoprotectant concentrations, freezing mech-
anisms, and freezing rates reported. One of the main
differences between chilled semen extenders and
frozen semen extenders is the addition of a cryoprotec
tant such as glycerol to the medium. The cryoprotectant
helps maintain cell integrity during the freezing and
thawing process.
A simple method to freeze canine semen that is cur-
rently used by our laboratory is as follows:
· Collect semen and conduct a complete analysis
● During the evaluation process, dilute the semen l:1
using a commercially available semenrefrigeration
extender (Refrigeration Media,TEST Yolk Buffer
[TYB] 9972; Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, Calif.) and
centrifuge it for 10 minutes at 900 × gravity.
+After centrifugation, remove the supernatant and
resuspend the pellet to a concentration of 400x 106
spermatozoa/mlusing thesame refrigeration
extender. Place this standardized semen sample in a
refrigerator set at 5° C for 1 hour.
82
Artificial Insemination in the Dog
· During the hour of cooling, label an appropriate
number of 0.5-ml French straws with all the data
required by the dog's registry (e.g., name, registra
tion number, breed, date, collection facility).
· After l hour, add a commercial freezing cxtcilder
conitaining 12% glycerol (Freezing Medium, TEST
Yolk Buffer [TYB] with Glycerol 997l; Irvine
Scientific), which also has been kcpt at 5° C, to the
cooled semen solution at a l:l ratio by volume, to
make a final concentration of 200 × 10° spermato-
zoa/ml in Fluid containing 6% glycerol.
· In a 5" C cold box, fill the 0.5-ml straws anid seal the
ends.
· Place the straws on a screen that is attached to a
3-cm-thickStyrofoam frame,whichis floating in liq
uid nitrogen.After 10 minutes, plungc the straws
into the liquid nitrogen before storage.
· Semen is stored at -196* C in commercially available
liquid nitrogen tanks. Storage and inventory are
critical aspects of frozen semen use. Meticulous
records must be kept regarding the location and
number of strawsfrozenfrom eachmale.Theliquid
nitrogen must be routinely monitored to ensure
that there is sufficient liquid nitrogen to maintain
the temperature at -196° C. If frost staris to accumu-
late on the tank, the semen should be transferred
immediately to a new tank and the damaged tank
discarded.
Artificial inseminationin theDog
83
Most dog breed associations are not as concerned
about the quality of the frozen semen as they are about
identification of the semen. The quality control of the
final product depends on the integrity of the freezing
facility.
Frozen semen is usually shipped in “dry dewars."
These are small tanks that do not contain any liquid
nitrogen but keep the sample at -l96° C for a short
period (e.g., for 1-2 weeks). Because there is no liquid in
the tanks, the airlines and shipping companies will allow
their shipment, unlike liquid nitrogen tanks. If a liquid
nitrogen tank is available at the shipping destination,
the semen may be shipped well in advanice alld trans-
ferred to the liquid nitrogen tank at the time of arrival.
If, however, a liquid nitrogen tank is not availahle at the
insemination site, shipment should be timed in accor-
dance with the intended date of insemination.
Because most veterinarians will deal with scmen that
was frozen by someone else, it is important to follow the
instructions provided by the freezing facility rcgarding
the thawing procedure, as well as timing the insemina-
tion and optimizing the insemination technique.
Thawing procedures for frozen semen vary as much as
for 10 seconds. Some facilities recommend thawing at
lower temperatures for a longer time, and some
recommend adding thawing media during the thaw.
Regardless of the experience of the veterinarian that is
84
Artificial Insemination in theDog
to perform the insemination, it is best to use the freezing
facilities'recommendation because they have deter
mined the optimal thaw technique for their frozen
semen.
Normally, frozen semen is inseminated directly into
the uterus to increase chances of conception. At present,
there are three methods to place semen directly into the
uterus. These methods are surgical implantation by
laparotomy or laparoscopy, use of the Scandinavian or
Norwegian catheter, and transcervical vaginal endoscopy.
Intrauterine insemination Techniques
SURGICALINTRAUTERINE
EINSEMINATIONSurgical
implantation is performed with the animal under gen
cral anesthesia. The laparotomy procedure is less
erinarians are capable of performing the surgery. A
small ventral midline incision is made and the uterus
carefully exposed through the incision using a minimal
amount of handling. As the uterus is being exposed, an
assistant thaws and prepares the semen according to the
instructions provided by the freezing facility. The semen
can be placed in a sterile syringe to which is attached a
22-gauge needle. The needle is inserted into the uterine
lumen, and once the placement of the needle is assured
in the uterine lumen, the semen is injected into the
uterus. The uterus is placed back in the abdomen and
Artificialinsemination intheDog
85
the incision closed.It is advised that the hindquarters of
the bitch be kept slighitly elevated during the procedurc
because semen can reflux out the cervix if they are not.
Laparoscopic insemination affords few advantages over
laparotomy other than having a smaller skin incision.
However, the cost of equipment needed and the time
required to perfect the laparoscopic technique are sig
nificantdisadvantages
Controlled studies examining the appropriate vol-
ume of surgical inseminates have not been performed.
The volume of semen that the uterus can hold is not
known, but volumes up to l ml have been inseminated
into each uterine horn with success. One worker recom
mends that no more than 4 ml be placed in the uterus. If
the semen tobe used is stored inlow concentrations or if
the postthaw motility is poor and several 0.5-ml straws
are needed to inseminate 100-200 × 106 normal sperma-
tozoa, then the volume of the uterus may be exceeded
and the semen may overflow into thc vaginia and be
wasted. If this occurs, it is suggested to centrifuge the
sample to increase the concentration by decreasing the
volume.
Surgical insemination usually is performed on a sin
gle day, 3 or 4 days after ovulation (see Chapter 2), but
some veterinarians perform surgery on consecutive
days. It is unknown whether multiple surgeries consis
tently yield higher pregnancy rates. In coun tries where
elective surgeries are not allowed or if the client does not
86
Artificial Inseminationin theDog
want to risk anesthesia and surgery, nonsurgical meth-
ods of uterine insemination must be used.
TRANSCERVICALINSEMINATIONWITHARIGIDCATHETER
Uterine insemination using the Scandinavian or
Norwegian catheter requires a special catheter and con-
siderable skill by the veterinarian.The catheter consists
of a large plastic sheath aild a smaller stainless steel
catheter that fits inside the sheath (see Figure 3-l).
Thereareatleastthreesizesofcathetersmadefordiffer
ent size dogs. To perform the insemination, the veteri-
narian passes the sheath, with the internal catheler
retracted, as far into the vagina as possible. The tip of the
stainless steelcatheter is advanced craniallyinto the
fornixunderthe cervix.Because the cervical osopensin
a dorsoventral direction, the catheter cannot be direcily
advanced through the cervix. The cervix must be pal-
pated through the abdomen and grasped by the veteri-
narian. Once the cervix is grasped and the catheter is in
the cervical fornix, the veterinarian manipulates the
cervixby turning it ventrally so that the cervical os
assumesamorehorizontalposition.As the cervixassumes
ahorizontal orientation,the catheterisbackcd out of
the fornix and threaded through the cervix.Whcn the
s
felt by the veterinarian. Once the catheter is placed
through the cervix,the semen is introduced. The
purchase of the catheters is a relatively small expenise;
Artificialinsemination in the Dog
87
however, attaining the skill to consistently pass the
catheter through the cervix requires considerable
training, practice, and patience. The possibility of a
vaginal or uterine rupture is always present when inex-
perienced clinicians are attempting this intrauterine
insemination procedure.
ENDOSCOPICTRANSCERVICALINSEMINATIONAnother
method to inseminate directly into the uterus that does
not require surgery is the “New Zealand" method of
transcervical uterine insemination. The equipment
neededfortheNewZealandintrauterineinsermination
technique is much more expensive than that necded for
the other techniques, but the insemination process is
much easier to learn than the “Scandinavian"method.
The New Zealand method uses a cystoscope to directly
view and catheterize the cervix. The equipment needed
consists of a36-cm-long x5-mm-diameter cystoscope
that has a 30-degree viewing angle, a sheath that con-
tains a channel for the catheter, a light source, and an
optional camera and television monitor (see Figure 3-I).
(Companies that manufacture or sell this cquipment
include Karl Storz, Goleta, Galif.; MDS, Brandoll, Fla.;
and Endoscopy Support Services, Brewster, NY.) To set
up the equipment, the veterinarian inserts the cysto-
scope into the sheath and connects the light source to
the cystoscope. An 8-French polypropylenle urinary
cathieter, which will be used to initroduce the semen into
88
Artlficial lnseminatlonintheDog
the uterus, is inserted into the channel on the sheath.
The procedure can be viewed directly through the cysto
scope or yia a television monitor if so equipped. To per
form the transvaginal insemination, the estrual bitch
ideally isplaced on a specially designed hydraulic table
that contains a large flat restraining strap placed gently
around the bitch's abdomen. The adjustable, hydraulic
table allows the bitch's height to be adjusted easily and
gives the operator much more comfort when perform-
ing the procedure than if the operator has to bend over.
Sedation is not required because estrual bitches gener-
ally tend to tolerate the procedure very well. The cysto-
scope, sheath, and catheter combination (hereafter
referred to as the cystoscope) is inserted through the vulva
and into the anterior vagina, as described for perform
ing vaginal artificial insemination. The cystoscope must
be directed dorsally to avoid the urethra and then over
the pelvis into the vagina. Once the vaginal folds are visu-
alized, the cystoscope is directed cranially while the end
of the cystoscope is kept centered in the vagina through
manipulation of theviewingend of the cystoscope out-
side the bitch. Air insufflation, as needed in many endo-
scopic procedures, is not necessary. The clinician should
continue to direct the cystoscope craniad until the dor-
sal median postcervical fold is visualized on the dorsal
aspect of the field of view. The dorsal median postcervi-
cal fold is recognizable as a semicylindrical, regular fold
oriented longitudinally in the dorsal anterior vagina.
Artificial lnseminationin theDog
89
The dorsal median postcervical fold is followed anteri-
orly until the cervix is visualized as a small reddish
rosette on the vaginal wall. The cervix can be visualized
because the cystoscope has a viewing angle of 30 degrees
directed dorsally.When the cystoscope is inserted past
the dorsal median postcervical fold, the operator is actul-
ally looking dorsally, so the cervix can then be seen. To
attain the correct angle to visualize the cervix, it is best
for the operator to lift the external operating end of the
cystoscope as far dorsally as possible. This places the dis-
tal, viewing end in a better position to view the cervix.
When the cervix is visualized, the 8-French catheter is
passed into the cervical os and gently rotated to pass
it through the cervix. The catheter should pass easily
through the cervical os. If not, the angle of the catheter
can be adjusted slightly by turning the catheter or adjust
ing the angle of the cystoscope. If the catheter still does
not pass readily into the cervical os, a small fold may
have been incorrectly identified as the cervix and thc
search for the cervix should be continued. Once the
catheter is inserted through the cervical os, the semen is
injected throughthe catheter.Itis advisable thatfrozeii
semen not be thawed until the catheter has beenl placed
through the cervixbecause in some bitchies the cervix
cannot be found and surgical insemination may be
rcquired. When the semen is injected through the
catheter that has been passed through the cervix, there
should be no semen reflux out the cervical os. It has
06
Artificial Inseminationin theDog
been reported that almost all breeds and sizes of dogs
have been inseminated successfully using this tech-
nique. If the cervix is not catheterizcd and dcep vaginal
insemination is going to be performed regardless of cer-
vical passage, it is best to withdraw the cystoscope and
perform routine Al. This is because semen will run out
through the sheath of the cystoscope and will not stay in
thevagina.
ConceptionRatewithFrozenSemen
Most AI with frozen semen is performed surgically
because early work using vaginal insemination did not
yield high pregnancy rates. However, for breeding that is
attempted by vaginal Al on repeated days during the
estrous cyclewith adequate numbers ofsperm cells,con
ception rates of 50% and 60% have been reported.
Conception rates associated with frozen semen using
vaginal AIhavebeenless than orequaltothose
lsing intrauterine insemination, Frequency of insemina
tion and sperm numbers used in these studies with vagi
nal AI varied, but include 1-12 breeding procedures with
9-300 x 106 spermatozoa/insemination, 2 breeding pro
cedures with 132 × 106 spermatozoa/brecding, 2 breed-
ingprocedureswith200x106
spermatozoa/brecding
and 1-6 breeding procedures with 183 x 106 spermato-
zoa/breeding. Coiception rates of 1o0% have been
attained when as few as 2l x 10° spermatozoa or up to
ArtificialInseminationintheDog
91
105 x 106 spermatozoa were vaginally inseminated daily
during cytologic estrus. Increasing the number of breed-
ing procedures from one to two increased coniception
rate and fecundityin another study from 34%-60%,but a
third insemination had no additive effect.
Theintrauterinedepositionoffrozensemenusing
the Norwegian insemination technique has yielded
pregnancy ratcs of 67% breeding once or twice with an
unstated number of sperm, 74% breeding twice with
132 × 106 spermatozoa/procedure, 83% breeding twice
with 200 x 106 spermatozoa/procedure, and 84% breed-
ing one to three times using 186 x 106 spermatozoa/pro
cedure. The transcervical endoscopic technique has
yielded pregnancy rates of 100% breeding twice with
200x 106 spermatozoa/procedure, 85% using as few as
totalof452x106spermatozoain2.4breedingproce
dures/cycle.Increasing
thenumberofbreeding
procedures from one to three did not increase the con-
ception rate or fecundity using the Norwegian transcer
vicaltechnique.
Surgical insemination has been the most widely
used technique in the United States, although con-
In one study a 90% conception rate was reported when
100-300 × 106 spermatozoa were inseminated once dur
ing the fertile period. However, another study using
laparoscopic surgical Al attained only a 60% conception
Z6
Artificial Insemination in the Dog
rate using one insemination of 200 x 106 spermatozoa.
The 60% conception rate was not different from the
100% conception rate attained by vaginal AI twice with
310 x 106 spermatozoa. Many private facilities in the
United States currently use surgical insemination and
report success rates averaging 83%using a single timed
AI. These success rates cannot be confirmed. Because
the continued operation of these private facilities relies
on success, it can be assumed that these results are being
attained.
As with chilled semen breeding, the American
Kennel Club (AKC) requires the proper paperwork to
be completed, as well as DNA identification of the stuid
and the bitch before a litter can be registered.
In summary, attention must be paid to the quality
of the ejaculate, proper handling of the ejaculate, and
theinsemination technique used to attain acceptable
fertility using artificial insemination. If care is taken,
conception rates for AI with fresh, chilled, or frozen
semencanapproachthoseassociatedwithnatural
breeding. The optimum technique to breed with
frozen semen that combines the best conception rate
and fecundity, lowest sperm dose, ease for the opera-
tor, lowest expense for the client and veterinarian, and
least trauma to the bitch is not yet known; however,
during the next few years, a standard semen dose and
insemination  technique probably  will be  widely
actoptedt.
Artificialinsemination in theDog
6
Bibliography
Brittain D, Concannon Pw, Flanders JA.et al: Use of sur-
gical intrauterine insemination to manage infertility
in a colony of research German shepherd dogs, Lab
Anim Sci45:404,1995.
England GC, Allen WE: Factors affecting the viability of
canine spermatozoa II: effects of seminal plasma
and blood, Theriogenology 37:373, 1992.
Farstad W: Bitch fertility after natural mating and after
artificial insemination with fresh or frozen semen,
ISmallAnimPrac25:561,1984.
Fontbonne A, Badinand F: Canine artificial insemina-
tion with frozen semen: comparison of intravaginal
and intrauterine deposition of senen, J Reprod Fertil
Suppl47:325,1993.
Gill HP, Kaufman GF, Foote RH et al: Artificial insemina-
tion of beagle bitches with freshly collected, liquid-
stored, and frozen-stored semen, Am J Vet Res
31:1807,1970.
Hutchison RV: Maximizing conception rates using fresh
cooled or frozen canine semen. Proceedings of the
Society for Theriogenology, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada, 1997.
Linde-Forsberg C: Artificial insemination with fresh,
chilled extendcd, ad frozen-thawed semen in the
dog,SeminVet MedSurg10:48,1995.
Linde-Forsberg C, Forsberg M: Fertility in dogs in
rclation to semen quality and the time and site of
94
Artificial Insemination in the Dog
insemination with fresh and frozen semen, J Reprod
FertilSuppl39:299,1989.
Linde-Forsberg C, Forsberg M: Results of 527 controlled
artificial inseminations in dogs, J Reprod Fertil Suppl
47:313, 1993.
Linde-Forsberg C, Holst BS, Govette G: Comparison of
fertility data from vaginal vs intrauterine inseminla
tion of frozen-thawed dog semen: a retrospcctive
study, Theriogenology 52:11,1999.
Mickelson WD, Memon MA, Anderson PB et al: The
relationship of semen quality to pregnancy rate a11d
litter size following artificial insemination in the
bitch,Theriogenology39:553,1993,
NothlingJO,Gerber D, Shuttleworth T: Intravaginal
insemination of bitches with semen frozen in
Triladyl with Equex STM paste to which prostatic
fluid or modified TALP was added prior to insemi-
nation (abstract). 4th International Symposium
on Dog and Cat Reproduction, Oslo, Norway,
2000.
Nothling JO, Gerstenberg C, Volkmann DH: Success
with intravaginal insemination of frozen-thawed
dog semen: a retrospective study, J So Afr Vet Assoc
66:49, 1995.
Pinto CR, Eilts BE, Paccamonti DL: The effect of reduc
ing hindquarter elevation time after artificial insem-
ination in bitches, Theriogenology 50:301, 1998.
Artificial Inseminationin the Dog
95
Pinto CR, Paccamonti DL, Eilts BE: Fertility in bitches
arlificially inseminated with extended, chillcd
semen,Theriogenology52:609,1999.
Silva LD, Onclin K, Lejeune B et al: Comparisons of
intravaginal  and  intrauterine  insemination  of
bitches with fresh or frozen semen, Vet Rec 138:154,
1996.
Tsutsui T, Hase M, Tanaka A et al: Intrauterine and
intravaginal insemination with frozen canine se men
using an extender consisting of orvus paste-supple
mented egg yolk tris-fructose citrate, J Vet Med Sci
62:603,2000.
Wilson M: Non surgical intrauterine artificial insemina-
tion in bitches using frozen semen, J Reprod Fertil
Suppl47:307,1993
Wilson MS: Transcervical insemination techniques in
the bitch, VetChn North Am31:291,2001.
Semen Collection and Evaluation
WalterR.Threlfall
ATAGLANCE
· A breeding soundness examination
· Complete physical examination, including rectal
palpation of the prostate, palpation of thic scro-
tal contents, and examination of thie extruded
penis
· Semen collection and evaluation
97
98
Semen Collection and Evaluation
· Serologic testing for canine brucellosis and
possibly measurement of serum thyroid hormone
concentrations
+ Semen collection
▪ A latex cone with attached plastic tube is introduced
over the dog's penis, and erection is stimulated
manually.
· Semen is ejaculated in three fractions; the second,
or sperm-rich,fraction is the most valuable to the
veterinarian.
· Semen evaluation
·Parameters evaluated include the following:
Volume: The volume collected varies with the col-
lector and the dog. There is no minimum accept-
able value.
- Color: Normal semen is milky white.
- Progressive motility: The normal percentage of
spermatozoamoving forward quicklyin a straight
line is70%or greater.
- Morphology: The normal percentage of mor-
phologically normal spermatozoa is 70% or
greater. Primary defects are those that occur
during spermatogenesis. These may be associ-
defects, which develop during matirationl 0r
transit of spermatozoa outside the testes or are
an artifact of collection or preparation of thc
stained slide.
SemenCollectionandEvafuation
66
- Concentration/total number: The concentra-
tion varies with amount of prostatic fluid added
to the sperm-rich fraction during ejaculation.
Total number of sperrmatozoa in the ejaculate in
millions is calculated by multiplying concentra-
tion (millions of spermatozoa per milliliter) by
volume (milliliter per ejaculate). The normal
total number of spermatozoa in the canine ejacu
late varies from 300 million to 2 billion.
Breeding Soundness Examination
The purpose of a breeding soundness examination
(BSE) is topredict thefertilityofa stud dog to thebest of
one's ability using laboratory and clinical evaluations
without breeding trials. This is not as accurate as the mat-
ing of the stud to numerous females and determination
of conception rates, but it is accurate and conserves
much time and expense. Any male of value being mated
with the purpose of producing offspring of value should
have a BSE performed periodically. This prevents loss of
reproductivelife in bitches bred to subfertile or infertile
males and allows' diagnosis of subfertility before it
becomes infertility. Male dogs most likely to be pre-
sented for BSE are older males, males mated to bitches
that failed to whelp after breeding, and young untested
males for which the breeder wants proof of fertility
before mating. Other dogs that should undergo BSE but
100
Semen Collection and Evaluation
seldom do are males being purchased for breeding pur-
poses and dogs being sold for breeding purposes, espe
cially if those animals are to be shipped abroad. Male
dogs that will have semen shipped or frozen also should
undergo BSE; this is performed to determine the repro-
ductive health of the male and the quality of the semen
before arrangements are made to perform artificial
insemination with chilled semen or to freeze semen.
The components of a BSE vary according to the
individual performing the procedure; there is no stan-
dardized procedure. For that reason, the components
included in the examination are listed and then
described with the readers'understanding that this is
only a guideline. Other elective tests sometimes are
indicated.
History
The examination should begin with a complete history
of the animal's previous health, uses (e.g., showing, obe-
dience, hunting), and breeding experiences with out-
comeinformation.The general history should include
anyinformation related to injuries orillnesses that could
affect reproduction. It should be remembered that
these conditions could have occurred at any time in the
animal's life. The length of owmership and the accuracy
of any history provided based on information before
ownership also are important to know. The results of
SemenCollectionandEvaluation
101
diagnostic tests that have been performed previously, if
any, and the status of vaccination, deworming, heart-
worm prevention, and medications administered should
berecorded.
PhysicafExamination
The physical examination begins with visual inspection
of the entire animal and examination with auscultation
and palpation. Special attention should be paid to those
characteristics that are known to be heritable. The clini
cian should observe the animal's gait as he enters the
examinationroom tonotewhether front orrearlimb
abnormalities are present that may decrease his desir-
ability as a breeder. This is the best opportunity that we
as veterinarians have to provide genetic counseling to
owners regarding the importance of not using males
that have genetic abnormalities. It is known that not all
owners will heed our advice, and it is our prerogative
whether to assist in mating of an animal with genetic
flaws.
The next portion of the physical examination is the
determination of normalcy of the reproductive system.
This examination should include palpation of the scro-
tum and all scrotal contents, palpation of the penis and
prepuce and visual inspection of the extruded penis,
and palpation of the prostate. This portion of the exami-
nation may be deferred until after the semen has been
102
SemenCollection and Evaluation
collected, depending on the disposition of the male. In
some cases it is more difficult to collect semen from very
timid males after palpation of the internal and external
genitalia.
The veterinarian begins palpation of the scrotum
and scrotal contents by locating two fully descended
testcs.Animals with only one testis in the scrotum should
have a very good reason, such as a history of surgical
reinoval of one testis; if no such history exists, the animal
is cryptorchid and should not be used for breeding (see
Chapter 16). The testes should be palpated for consis-
tency and the size measured. The best way tolearn nor-
malconsistency oftestes istopalpate maniytestes;
excessively firm or excessivelysoft testes are abnormal in
any case. Testicular size can best be measured using
calipers obtained from a hardware store, such as those
used to measure diameters of metal rods or pipe. The
length, width, and height of each testis is recorded. This
allows comparison at future examinations to determine
objectively any change in testicular size. This informa-
tion is especially beneficial when attempting to deter-
mine the reason for a decrease in fertility asan animal
ages.
Afterpalpation of the testes,the veterinarian identi
fies the tail of the epididymis. The tail of the epididymis
is the most prominent portion of the epididymis, and it
should be directed posteriorly.If this orientation is not
present, torsion of the spermatic cord may be present
Semen Collection and Evafuation
103
(see Chapter 16). The body and head of the epididymis
should blend in smoothly to the testis. The size of the
epididymis should correspond with the size of thc nor-
mal testis. The consistency can best be determincd again
by palpating as many epididymides as possible. The clini-
cian examines the vas deferens,which is thie firmest
structure within the spermatic cord, proximal to the epi-
didymis. The scrotal skin is examined for abnormal
thickness or dermatitis, which could elevate the
intrascrotal temperature and impair testicular function.
Palpation of the prostate should be part of the physi
calexamination of every male dog.Prostatomegaly in a
castrated male dog invariably was caused by prostatic
adenocarcinoma. Prostatomegaly in an intact. dog more
phiy or prostatitis (see Chapter 17). The veterinarian
should elevate the tail while an assistant restrains the
dog. The veterinarian gently inserts a gloved, well-
lubricated finger into the anal sphincter, with care to
keep the palmar portion of the finger most ventral in the
rectum. The pelvic portion of the penis is palpated while
thefingeris advanced forward.The prostate is the struc-
ture surrounding the penis at approximately the depth
of the length of the index finger. The prostate may
fall forward into the abdomen and not be palpable
per rectum in larger dogs or dogs with significant
prostatomegaly. In this case an assistant should elevate
the anterior portion of the dog or the veterinarian may
104
Semen Callection and Evaluation
use the nonpalpating hand to put pressure on the caudal
abdomen, moving the prostate back into the pelvic inlet
toward the gloved finger. The prostate should be
bilobed, symmetric, and uniform in consistency. Any dis-
parity or enlargement and any changes in consistency
from one area to another should be noted.
The penis and prepuce usually are best palpated
before semen collection, but this examination can be
performed later if the dog is timid and resists this proce-
dure. The clinician palpates the penile shaft through the
prepuce, noting any abnormal enlargements, pain, or
crepitus in the area of the os penis. The extruded penis
should be visually examined both before and immedi-
ately after collection, if possible.
Libido
Libido can be determined with or without the presence
of a bitch in estrus. If the male has had semen collected
previously and is used to the procedure, no female may
be necessary. However, assessment of quality of libido
shouldnotbereducedin thosemaledogsrequiringa
female to be present. Many males that have not had
semen collected and have beenused for natural service
only may not show interest unless a female is present. For
some males the bitch needs to be near optimal breeding
time (see Chapter 2).If the male continues to demon
strate no interest in the presence of a female in estrus, it
SemenCollectionandEvaluation
105
still may be unwise to think there is a libido problem.
Many males are intimidated by the surroundings in a vet
erinary clinic or have no interestin specific females for
unknown reasons. Libido assessment is easy ifthe male is
extremely interested in collection with or without a
female, but a less-than-expected libido is more difficult
to categorize with certainty.
Semen Coffection
Manual manipulation to achieve erection and ejacula
tion is the most commonly used method to collect
semen samples from dogs because it is generally
very successful and is not stressful to the male
Electroejaculation after the administration of general
anesthesia can be used for wild canids but is seldom indi-
cated or used for domestic dogs. The quality of the ejac
ulate collected by electroejaculation is not as good as
that collected by manipulation.
The process for the collection of semen varies
greatly from one individual to the next. As long as the
basic premise "do no harm to the spermatozoa" is fol-
lowed, the exact method is insignificant. The method I
use is described herein.
The male dog, with or without a teaser bitch, is
placed in a suitable quiet environment. Most males, once
accustomed to collection, do not require the presence of
a bitch but do ejaculate a greater number of spermatozoa
106
Semen Collection and Evaluation
if a bitch is present, especially if the bitch is in estrus.
Teaser bitches need not be in estrus in all cases; I have
found that a beagle bitch of proper disposition makes an
excellent teaser and will stand and permit males of any
size to mount, even when she is not in estrus. Some veteri-
narians have had success using pheromone-like sub-
stancessaid to stimulate themale's interestin a nonestrus
bitch. I have not had success with this type of product.
The use of cotton sponges impregnated with vulvar secre-
tions of bitches in estrus and maintained in a freezer until
needed is more successful in stimulating uninterested
males to perform. The female and male also can be per-
estbeforesemencollection.
The veterinarian grasps the male dog's penis and
putting pressure proximal to the bulbus glandis and
pushing toward the preputial opening. I believe that it is
important to have the bulbus glandis completely outside
thie preputial opening before attempts to collect semen
aremadebecause some malesexhibit pain near the time
of collection if the bulbus glandis is permitted to remain
within the prepuce during complete erection. The bul-
bus glandis of these animals appears to become larger
than the prepuce can accommodate.
Next, a latex cone, the inner liner from a bovine arti-
ficial vagina, is introduced over the exposed penis. The
latex liner (Nasco,Fort Atkinson,Wisc.) itself serves as
SemenColfectionandEvaluation
107
an artificial dog vagina. The latex liners should be
soaked overnight in water when first purchased and
rinsed in distilled water the next day to ensure removal
of any byproducts of the manufacturing process that are
detrimental to spermatozoa. The top of the latex cone is
folded over and the top of the fold lightly lubricated with
a sterile, nonspermicidal lubricant. The clinician then
places the thumb and forefinger in the fold of thie liner
to assist in holding it proximal to the bulbus glandis.
Latex has been reported to decrease spermatozoal
motility, but this has been reported to occur only if the
spermatozoa remain in contact with the latex for 20 min-
utes or longer. During the semen collection procedure
described subsequently,the contact time of the semen
and latex is less than 30 seconds. No obvious change in
semen quality has been reported with use of this equip
ment. Use of other types of containers, such as plastic
bags or small cups, may affect semen quality because of
the presence of spermicidal residues in those contain-
ers. The concern usually is not that a particular con-
tainer will kill all the spermatozoa but that significant
enough quantities will be damaged or killed to signifi-
cantly reduce semen quality. I have observed one animal
that had an allergic reaction to a plastic disposable col-
lection device made for bulls
The penis is completely protruded from the pre-
puce, and the latex liner is introduced over the penis.
The thumb and forefinger, which are within the cone at
108
SemenCollection and Evaluation
the top of the latex liner, are placed around the penis
proximal to the bulbus glandis, and alternating pres
sure is applied(Figure 4-1).This is all the stimulation
that is required to obtain a collection. Manipulation of
the distal penis should be avoided because it is a very
vascular area and bleeding easily can be induced. It is
extremelyundesirabletohaveblood contaminate the
ejaculate.
The first fraction of the canine ejaculate is designed
to flush the urethra, and it is not advisable to collect this
fraction. I prefer to permit this fraction to be ejaculatect
onto the floor. Some clinicians collect this fraction to
measure the volume, but I have not seen a reason to do
so. Most males move a great deal while ejaculating the
first fraction. When the movement decreases, the cloudy
second fraction usually is ejaculated.
The second, or sperm-rich, fraction should be col-
lected into a clear graduated plastic tube attached to the
end of the latex liner. During the latter part of the collec-
tion procedure, it is very common for the male to step
over the hand of the collector and even to turn his body
90-180 degrees from the direction of the bitch.This is
tube must be watched during the collection, and when
the ejaculate running down the side of the tube becomes
clear, it should be removed immediately. The volume of
the second fraction is then recorded; normal values
range from 1-3 ml (Figure 42).
Semen ColfectionandEvaluation
109
Figure 4-1.Latexlineroverpenis during semen collection.
110
Semen Collection and Evaluation
Figure 4-2. Second fraction of the canine ejaculate in a
graduatedplastictube.
SemenCoffectionandEvaluation
111
The clear thirdfraction of the ejaculatemakes up
the largest portion by volume; volume collected varies
with the length of time the latex liner and clear plastic
tube remain over the penis and may be greater than
35 ml. This fraction is detrimental to spermatozoa that
are to be shipped or frozen and must be removed as
quickly as possible. It also is not recommended to have a
large volume ejaculate when performing artificial
inseminationwithfresh semen(see Chapter 3)
Once collection is completed, especially in those
breeds with longhair coats, the penis should be observed
returning into the prepuce because hair may accom
pany the penis and cause irritation to the penis and pre
puce. Return of the penis to the prepucc can be
hastened by walking the mlale or applying cold packs to
thepenisand prepuce.
SemenEvafuation
Reported abnormalities of semen quality in dogs
include the following: azoospermia, lack of spermatozoa
in the ejaculate; oligozoospermia,decreased number of
spermatozoa
.inthe
ejaculate;teratozoospermia,
decreased number ofmorphologically normal sperma
tozoa; and asthenozoospermia, decreased motility of
spermatozoa (see Chapter 19).
Once collected, the semen should be maintained at
a relatively constant temperature. Canine spermatozoa
112
Semen Collection and Evaluation
seem to be more resistant to temperature fluctuations
(“cold-shock") than spermatozoa of other domestic
species. The ejaculate can be maintained in an incuba-
tor for short periods or can do very well when placed on
a countertop at room temperature. The temperature of
holding, within reason, does not seem to be as important
as avoiding fast temperature fluctuations.
VOLUME Volume varies with the amount of the third frac-
tion collected. The volume should be recorded before
any samples are removed; this value is needed to calculate
the total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate.
COLoR The color and opacity of the semen sample
shiould be observed immediately after semen collection.
Red indicates blood from either the surface of the penis
or the prostate. Dark brown indicates older blood from
the prostate. Yellow indicates the presence of urine, and
white particles may indicate the presence of white blood
cells.
MOTlllTY Motility is the first criterion examined. The
slide and coverslip should be at body temperature for
this procedure. Although canine spermatozoa are rela-
tively resistant to cold-shock, exposure to temperatures
cooler than body temperatures has a tremendous impact
on the observed motility, leading to the possibility of
erroneous conclusions if a cold slide isused.A heated
SemenCollectionandEvaluation
113
substage on the microscope is beneficial but not manda-
tory. The motility assessment should be made immedi-
ately after placing the slide on the microscope stage if
heat is not provided; motility on a slide significantly
declines after1-2minutes on alightedmicroscope.
Toassessmotility,thevcterinarianplacesonedrop
ofsemen on a slide and examines it at100x-200xmagni
fication. The spermatozoa should be evaluated for
speed and direction of movement. The speed should be
extremely rapid, so one does not see the narrow side of
the spermatozoa, and the spermatozoa should traverse
across the microscope field in only 2-3 seconds. The
direction of movement should be in a straight line.
Circular movement is undesirable andprobably related
toabnormalmorphology.Thegeneralacceptablepercentage
ofprogressivemotilityofcaninespermatozoais70%orgreater.
Themovementofthespermatozoacanbegreatly
influenced by the prostatic fluid, if it is abnormal. A
increase in secondary morphologic abnormalities (see
Morphology). When a sample is examined and the
majorityof the spermatozoaarefoundtobenonmotile,
it may be helpful to examine spermatozoa on the same
eosin-nigrosin-stained slide that is used for morpho
logic examination. If there is a problem with seminal
plasma components, the spermatozoa will be alive but
immobilized instead of damaged; these immobile but
intact spermatozoa may be less likely to take up stain and
114
Semen Collection and Evaluation
appear white on an eosin-nigrosin-stained slide.
MoRPHoLOGY The shape of the spermatozoa is an
important characteristic becausc it affects motility. This
portion of the examination is best performed by using a
stain such as eosin-nigrosin and a light microscope with
an oil immersion lens (l00ox magnification). A wet-
mount slide also canbe used,with a phase-contrast
microscope, but because of the availability of light
microscopes in practice, the former is recommended.
To prepare an eosin-nigrosin-stained morphology slide,
a drop of stain is placed on a prewarmed glass slide and a
drop of semen added. The size or number of drops of
each is somewhat dependent on the concentration
of the ejaculate. The two drops are mixed with the end of
another slide, and the mixture of that slide is streaked
across a third slide, similar to the technique for making a
blood smear. Permit the slide to dry; it should remain
warm.
Another staining technique uses modified Giemsa
stain (DiffQuik; Baxter Healthcare, Miami, Fla.).A drop
of semen is drawn across a slide, as for a blood smear, and
allowed to dry. Ihe slide is thenimmersed in the three
different stain solutions for 5 minutes each,rinsed,and
allowedtodry.
The stained morphology slide should be exam-
ined under oil immersion; this magnification is recom-
Semen CollectionandEvaluation
115
mended to allowfor the clear visualization of abnormali
ties.The veterinarian should count 1o0 spermatozoa.
Spermatozoa are labeled as normal or as having primary
or secondary abnormalities. Acceptable samples generally
contain70%orgreatermorphologically normalspermatozoa.
Primary or major abnormalities are those that occur in
the testes during production. These abnormalities
include unusual size and shape of the head, bending of
themidpiece,presence
e of proximal cytoplasmic
droplets, and detached heads if they are present in very
high numbers. The secondary or minor abnormalities
occir during maturation in the epididymis, in transit
through the vas deferens or urethra, or as artifacts of
sample collection or preparation. These include bent or
coiled tails, detached heads, and distal cytoplasmic
droplets (Figures 4-3 and 44).
CoNCENTRATloN Determination of the spermatozoa
concentration easily can be performed with a Unopettc
system (Becton-Dickinson, Rutherford, NJ) and a hema-
cytometer. A No. 5853 Unopette is used as the diluting
chamber. The top of the diluting chamber is pierced
with the pipette cover. Semen is drawn up into the
pipette and dispensed into the chamber. The solution is
then placed on a hemacytometer. The loaded hemacy-
tometer should rest for approximately 5 minutes before
the onset of counting. This allows the spermatozoa to
gravitate to the bottom and makes counting easier. Any
116
Semen Collection and Evaluation
：
Figure 4-3.Spermatozoal abnormalities.A,Bent tail.
B.Detached head. C, Distal cytoplasmic droplet.
D,Proximal cytoplasmicdroplet.E,Detached acrosome.
F, Bent midpiece.
Semen Collection and Evaluation
117
PrimaryMorphologicAbnormalities
Abnormalitiesofhead shape
and size
Midget
Giant
Flame
head
head
head
Doubling of any portion
ofthespermatozoon
Double head
Bending of the midpiece
Tighty coiled tail
Abaxial midpiece attachment
Abaxial middlepiece
Proximal cytoplasmic droplet
Proxirnal droplet
Figure 4-4.
Prirmary and secondary morphologic abnor-
malitiesofcaninespermatozoa.
Continued
118
Semen Collection and Evaluation
Secondary Morphologic Abnormalities
Detached and separating heads
Separated head
Bending or coiling of the tail
Distally coiled tail
Distal cytoplasmic droplet
Distal droplet
Figure 4-4, cont'd. For legend see p. 117.
SemenCoffectionandEvafvation
119
three of the large nine squares on the grid can be
counted, and the total (S) should be noted. The clini-
cian then multiplies the number obtained by 3 (3S), cal
culates 10% of that number (3Sx 0.1), and adds it back
to the total(3S +[3S × 0.1]). The resultant number is
divided by 10; this value equals the concentration of
spermatozoa in the ejaculate in millions per milliliter
(Figure 4-5).
The normal range in concentration varies greatly with
thevolume collectedand the number of spermatozoa
being produced by the male. The concentration most
important to theveterinarian is that of the secondfraction.
The average anticipated in this fraction is 125 million/ml,
but norimal values varyfrom 20 million to 2 billion sperma-
tozoa/ml. The totat numberof spermatozoa in the ejaculate(con
jaculate, with a range of 3O0 million to 2 billion. The great vari
ability is related to age, breed, and size of the male's testes.
pH Assessment of the pH of the ejaculate seems to be of
little value. Ifit is to be used, it must be measured imme-
diately and shouldbe determined by using a very accu-
rate method; this does not include dipsticks.
OTHER FACTORS It must be determined whether there are
any other cells present in the sample that would be consid-
ered abnormal and that could be detrimental to the sper
matozoa. These include epithelial cells, neutrophils, and
120
Sermen Collection and Evaluation
Unopette System No.5853 (Acetic Acid1:100)
Count any three of the total nine large squares and add them
together.
Square 1 = 105 cells
Square 2= 119 cells
Square3=113cels
Total
337 cells
Muttiply by 3:
337× 3=1011cells
Add10%of thevalueobtained above:
1011 + 101.1 =1112.1
Divide by 10 to get the number of milion sperm cells per ml
of semen:
1112/10 = ↑11.21 million sperm/ml
When counting thespem inlarge squares,the number obtained
between squares should not vary by more than 20. lf a
discrepancy exists, recount the squares. If there is still a
discrepancy, take a new unopette sampie.
f a sperm is touching or
crossing a large square
border, count only those
sperm touching the right or
bottom sides of the large
squares.
See example below:
DON'T count
COUNT
Figure 4-5.Use of thehemacytometer forcalculation
ofconcentrationofspermatozoa intheejaculate.
Semen Coffection andEvaluation
121
erythrocytes. Examination of the pellet from a centrifuged
sample is more accurate than is evaluation of semen
diluted with prostatic fluid.
ADDITONAL COLLECTIONS A second collection obtained
within 2 hours after the first may contain up to 50% fewer
spermatozoa than the first collection. Males that have not
had semen collected for long periods may have a slighitly
increased number of abnormal spermatozoa in the ejacu-
late; this is because of the presence of aged spermatozoa,
which generally make up approximately I0% of the sper-
matozoa in that ejaculate. The advantage of collecting the
semen to dispose of these aged spermatozoa before ship
ping or freezing must be weighed against the decrease in
total number of spermatozoa obtained if the second sam
ple is collected very soonl after the first.
Other Tests
Other tests that should be conducted during a com
pleteBsEinclude a serologic testfor canine brucellosis
(see Chapters 7 and 16) and measurement of thyroid
hormones (see Chapter 19).
Summary
It is cssential to know the quality of the semen being used
to inseminate bitches before they are bred. This is criti-
122
Semen Collection and Evaluation
cal because of the long periods of time betweenl cstrous
periods in bitches and the relatively limited number of
heats during the bitch's lifetime. One of the major rea-
sons for performing artificial insemination is so that the
semen quality can be ascertained before the insemina-
tion occurs. The summary statement of the BSE should
take into account all the portions included in the evalua-
tion. Males exhibiting known genetically linked abnor-
malities should fail this examination, and the reason
should be stated. It will be the owner's decision whether
to use the animal after the opinion is provided, but by
bringing it to the attention of the owner, we will not have
endorsed the use of a male that is genetically inferior.
Bibliography
Althouse GC, Ko JC, Hopkins SM et al: Effect of latex
and vinyl examination gloves on canine spermato.
zoal motility,JAm Vet Med Assoc199:227,1991.
Bartlett DJ: Studies on dog semen: I. Morphological
characteristics, IReprod Fertil 3:173, 1962.
Boucher JH, Foote RH, Kirk RW: The evaluation of
semen quality in the dog and the effects of frequency
of ejaculation upon semen quality, libido, and deple
tion of sperm reserves, Cornell Vet 48:67, 1958.
England GC: Semen quality in dogs and the influence of
a short-interval second ejaculation, Theriogenology
52:981,1999.
Semen Collection and Evafuation
123
Froman DP, Amann RP: Inhibition of motility of bovine,
canine and equine spermatozoa by artificialvagina
lubricants, Theriogenology 20:357, 1983.
Goodwin M, Gooding KM, Regnier F: Sex pheromone in
the dog, Science 203:559, 1979.
Johnson G, Jacobs J, Walker R: Diagnosis and control of
Brucella canisin kennel situations: morphology stain
induced spermatozoal abnormalities. Proceedings
of the Society for Theriogenology, San Diego, 1991.
Johnston SD: Performing a complete canine semen eval-
uation in a small animal hospital, Vet Clin North Am
21:545, 1991.
Oettle EE: Sperm morphology and fertility in the dog.
JReprodFertilSuppl47:257,1993.
Olar TT, Amann RP, Pickett BW: Relationships among
testicular size, daily production and output of sper-
matozoa, and extragonadal spermatozoal reserves
of the dog, Biol Reprod 29:1114, 1983.
Purswell BJ, Althouse GC,Root MV: Guidelines for using the
canine breeding soundness eualuation form, Nashville,
1992,Society forTheriogenology.
Roberts SJ: Veterinary obstetrics and genital diseases,
Woodstock, 1986, SJ Roberts.
Sekoni VO, Gustafsson BK, Mather EC: Influence of wet
fixation, staining techniques, and storage time on
bull sperm morphology, Nord Vet Med 33:161, 1981.
51
Contraception and Pregnancy
Termination
MichelleAnneKutzler
ATAGLANCE
· Contraception
· Surgical
-Ovariohysterectomy: Ovariohysterectomy is the best
technique for estrus suppression in bitches and queens.
125
126
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
· Medical
- Progestogens:  Megestrol
acetate (Ovaban;
Schering-Plough, Kenilworth, NJ) can be adminis-
tered during anestrus or during the first 3 days of
proestrus. Megestrol acetate is the only drug
approved for estrus suppression for bitches in the
UnitedStates.
- Androgens: Mibolerone (Cheque; Pharmacia &
Upjohn, Peapack, NJ) can be used safely but is not
readily available.
- Immunization against zona pellucida proteins:
experimental,
· Pregnancy termination
· Surgical
Ovariohysterectomy:Ovariohysterectomy isthepre
ferred techniqueforpregnancy termination inall bitches
andqueensnotintendedforbreeding
* Medical
- Pregnancy diagnosis ideally precedes treatment
(seeChapter8)
- Treatment with estrogenic compounds ("mis-
mate shots") is not recommended.
& Upjohn) can be effectively used any time after
the fifth day of diestrus.Lower dosages are more
effective later in gestation.At midgestation, the
suggested dosage is 250 μg/kg administered
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
127
subcutaneously twice a day for 4 days. Side effects
include hypersalivation, emesis, and diarrhea.
The side effects subside within several hours of
administration of the drug and decrease in sever-
ity over the course of treatment.
-Prolactin inhibitors: Bromocriptine mesylate
(Parlodel; Novartis, East Hanover, NJ) and caber
goline (Dostinex, Pharmacia & Upjohn) can be
effectively used after midgestation.
Dexamethasone: An effective rcgimen has not
been well described. Owners of prcgnant dogs
that must be treated with glucocorticoids must be
cautioned that therapy may terminate pregnancy
in their bitches.
Contraception
Definition
·Prevention of pregnancy
· Can be permanent (sterilization) or temporary
(estrus suppression)
Surgicaf Methods for Estrus Suppression
OVARIOHYSTERECTOMYAND OVARIECTOMY
Mechanism of action Removal of the ovaries with or
without the uterus results in complete regression and
128
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
atrophy of the remaining reproductive tract, provided
that all the ovarian tissue is removed and no exposure to
Advantages
+ Ovariohysterectomy and ovariectomy produce per-
manent results.
+ Health benefits include prcvention of ovarian and
uterine disease and reduced risk of mammary
neoplasia if performed before the next estrus; this
benefitofovariectomy islostbythetimethe
bitch reaches 2.5 years of age or has cycled four
times.
·Ovariohysterectomyisthebestlechniqueforestrussuppres
siominmostbitchesandqueens.
Disadvantages
+ Ovariohysterectomy and ovariectomy produce a
decreased resting metabolic rate in cats and have
been associated with obesity in dogs.
·Urinary incontinence:There is no significant
difference in the occurrence ofurinaryinconti
nence between animals that have undergone ovar-
iohysterectomy and those that have undergone
ovariectomy. Urinary incontinence results from
displacement of the bladder neck into the pelvic
cavity.
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
129
TUBALLIGATION
Mechanism of action Ligation and removal of a portion of
the uterine tube (oviduct) prevents gamete movement
in either direction.
Advantages
· Potentially reversible
· Can be performed laparoscopically, which requires
less surgical time and postoperative care
· Widely accepted technique in human medicine
Disadvantages
● Does not offer the health advantages of the previous
two surgical methods because steroid production is
unaltered
· Little information available regarding the use of this
technique in small animals
Pharmacologic Methods for Estrus
Suppression
PROGESTOGENS
Mechanism of action
· May act locally to prevent follicle growth, estrogen
production, and ovulation
· Do not alter circulating levels of luteinizing hor-
monc (LH)
130
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
Compoundsdescribed
Megestrof acetate(Ovaban;Schering-Plough)
· Megestrol acetate is the only progestogen approved
for use for estrus suppression in bitches in the
United States. It is not approved for estrus suppres-
sion in cats.
● Dosage (canine): If therapy is instituted during
anestrus, the recommended dosage is 0.5 mg/kg per
os once daily for 32 days. If therapy is instituted within
the first 3 days of proestrus, the recommended dose is
2 mg/kg per os once daily for 8 days. If treatment is
begun after the third day of proestrus, a fertile estrus
may ensue despite therapy. Return to estrus after drug
withdrawal isvariable (l-9 months).
np pannsu si Adeia J :(u) aaesoa o
anestrus, reported dosages are 2.5 mg/cat per os once
S    g A    G  
instituted within the first 3 days of proestrus, the
reported dosage is 2.5 mg/cat per os once daily for 110
longer than 14 days. Return to estrus after drug with-
drawal varies from a few days to several weeks.
·The manufacturer does not recommend that mege
strol acetatebe administered during abitch's first
estrus because it might cause irreversible prolonged
anestrus. Similarly, no more than two consecutive
estrous cycles should be suppressed in a given bitch
to decreaseriskofinfertility via chemical steriliza
tion. Long-term use in cats is not recommended.
Contraception andPregnancy Termination
131
Medroxyprogesterone acetate(Depo-Provera;Pharmacia&
Upjohn)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is 2 mg/kg
administered intramuscularly every 3 months.
Norethindrone(Primofut N;Schering-Plough)
● Dosage (canine): Reported dosages are 0.075 mg/kg
administered orally oncedailyor0.15mg/kg admin-
istered orally weekly.
Profigestone(Covinan; Intervet, Mifisboro,Del.)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dose is 10 mg/kg
administered subcutaneously or intramuscularly
every3months.
· Dosage (feline): The recommended dose is 1 ml
administeredsubcutaneouslyevery6months.
Levonorgestrel(50μg)/ethinylestradiol(30μg)(Nordette;
Wyeth-Ayerst,Philadeiphia)
tered orally daily.
Advantages
●Progestogens are effective at suppressing cstrus.
·The manufacturer of megestrol acetate reports no
adverse effects on fertility when administered as
directed.
Disadvantages
· Only megestrol acetate is licensed for use in
dogs.
132
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
·Side effects depend on the type of progestogen
administered, dosage, when treatment is initiated,
treatment regimen, and age and species of the
patient.
Uterine side effectsinclude stimulationof the
endometrium with incrcased incidence of cystic
endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra. The
reported incidenice of uterine lesions after treat-
ment with medroxyprogesterone acetate is more
than60%.
Incidence of mammary carcinoma reportedly is
increased in dogs and cats treated with exogenous
progestogens. Mammary development may occur
in dogs and mammary hypertrophy in cats.
An increased number of prolactin-secreting cells
may be present in the anterior portion of the pitu
itary gland. Pancreatic changes typical of diabetes
mellitus may occur, and systemic insulin resist-
ancemaydevelop
If administered during pregnancy, masculinization
offemale fetuses and fetal death,maceration, o1
mummification may occur.
Gencral side effects reported include increased body
weight and morphologic changes (acromegaly)
consistent with high secretory activity in growth
hormone-producing cells.Additional side effects
reported in queens include temperament changes
(e.g., depression, lethargy, loss of social order),
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
133
adrenal cortical suppression,and suppression of
fibroblast and T-cell function. Injectable progesto
gens are not recommended for use in queens.
ANDROGENS
Mechanism of action Negative feedback to thc pituitary
gland decreases synthesis and release of LH and follicle-
stimulatinghormone(FSH).
Compoundsdescribed
Mibolerone
· Mibolerone is the only androgen approved for
estrus suppression in dogs in the United States.
· Dosage (canine): The recommended dosage
depends on the weight and breed of the dog:
30 μg administered orally once daily for 0.5-12 kg of
bodyweight
60 μg administered orally once daily for 12-25 kg of
bodywcight
120 μg administered orally once daily for 25-45 kg of
bodyweight
180 μg administered orally once daily for dogs
weighing more than 45 kg and for German shep-
herd dogs and their crosses
· Therapy must begin 30 days before the next
expected estrus.Mibolerone will
Inotarrest
proestrus or estrus once it has begun.
134
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
· Return to estrus averages 70-90 days, with a range of
7-240 days after drug withdrawal.
+ The only commercially available product (Cheque
drops, Pharmacia & Upjohn) has been discontin-
ued, but generic suspensions are available through
compoundingpharmacies.
Testosterone combinations(Durateston, Intervet)
· Dosage (canine and feline): The reported dosage is
0.5-1 ml/10 kg administered intramuscularly every
4 weeks.
● Each milliliter contains 6 mg of testosterone propi-
onate, 12 mg of testosterone phenylpropionate,
12 mg of testosterone isocaproate, and 20 mg of
testosteronedecanoate.
TestosteroneCypionate(Depo-Testosterone,Pharmacia&
Upjohn)
● Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is 0.5 mg/kg
administered intramuscularly every 5 days.
Testosterone enanthate(Delatestryf;BTGPharmaceuticals
[sefin, N)
·Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is
0.5 mg/kg administered intramuscularly every
5 days.
Boidenone undecanoate (Vebonol, Novartis)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is
1-2 mg/kg administered intramuscularly every
4 weeks.
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
135
Methyltestosterone(Android;iCNPharmaceuticals,Costa
Mesa,Cafif.)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is 1 mg/kg
administered orally twice weekly
Advantages
· Androgens are effective at suppressing estrus.
· Lack of estrogenic or progestational effects decreases
incidenceofcystic endometrialhyperplasia/pyome
tra and mammary neoplasia as side effects.
Disadvantages
+ Only mibolerone is licensed for use in dogs.
· Testosterone products are controlled substances
(C III)
·Reported sideeffects includemucoidvaginal dis-
charge with or without concurrent vaginitis, clitoral
hypertrophy, increased serum
1liverenzyines,
change in temperament, and increased body
weight.Anabolic effects may be seen with adminis-
tration ofhigh dosages.
· The manufacturer of Cheque drops recommends that
miboleronenotbeused inBedlington terriers,in dogs
with a history of liver disease,inbitches before their
first estrus,in animals intended for breeding, or in
pregnant dogs because masculinization of the
external genitalia of female pups can occur. There is no
136
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
safedoseformiboleroneincats.Catstreatedwith
mibolerone may develop fatal hepatic or thyroid
disease.
GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE AGONISTS
Mechanism of action
● Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists
bind to GnRH receptors on pituitary cells, resulting
in downregulation and decreased production of
FSH and LH.
Compoundsdescribed
Desforelin acetate(Peptech Animal Heafth, New South Wales)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dose is 3-12 mg/dog
administered subcutaneously,once.
· Dosage (feline): The reported dose is 6 mg/cat
administered subcutaneously,once.
Advantages
· These compounds can suppress estrus for up to
27 months in the dog and up to 14 months in the cat.
· No long-term effects on fertility have been reported.
Disadvantages
· The initial response to administration of the GnRH
agonistis estrus induction,but this can be prevented
with simultaneous treatment with a progestogen
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
137
(megestrol acetate at 1-2mg/kg administered orally
once dailyfor 2-3weeks).
· Minimal edema may develop at the site of drug
administrationfor3-5days.
GnRH ANTAGONISTS
Mechanism of action
· GnRH antagonists bind to GnRH receptors on pitu
itary cells and decrease the secretion of IH and FSH
by preventing gene transcription.
Compounds described
Detirelixacetate
· No information is available about appropriate
dosages in small animals.
Advantages
· Detirelix acetate produces atrophy of the reproduc
tive organs and inhibits ovulation.
· The effect is reversible. Time to recovery of normal
reproductive organ morphology and function is
directly related to the dose administered.
Disadvantages
· The drug is very expensive.
● Localized skin erythema and pruritus may develop
at the injection site.
138
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
IMMUNOCONTRACEPTION
· Definition: injection of a reproductive protein to
produce a humoral immune response that leads to
infertilityfor a definedperiod
·Disadvantages:
Skin irritation and/or localized pain at the immut
nization site, similar to that associated with other
immunizations
Continual presence of circulating antigen-antibody
lonephritis
immunization againstzonapeliucida
Mechanismofaction
· Zona pellucida (ZP) is an extracellular glycoprotein
matrix thatsurrounds the oocyte and contains spe
cificreceptorsforbindingof spermatozoa.
·Antibodies directed against ZP prevent binding of
spermatozoa and fertilization and impair oocyte
development and ovulation.
Advantages
·Immunocontraception will last for several months
after vaccination.
· Immunocontraception is reversible in some species.
Disadvantages
·Ovarian
pathologic abnormalities described
as occurring in dogs vaccinated against porcine
ZP proteins include premature ovarian atrophy
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
139
polycyslic ovarian disease, and autoimmune
oophioritis.
·Ovarian damage leads to immunosterilization,an
immune response that leads to thc animal's steriliza-
tion by destroying oocytc-granulosa cell complexes
or causing ovarian follicular failure.
● Vaccine made from rcadily available porcine ZP pro-
teins is not effectivc in the cat.
immunizationagainstGnRH
Mechanism ofaction
·Antibodies bind to GnRH.These antibody-GnRH
complexes are unable to bind to GnRH reccptors on
pituitary cells, resulting in decreased LH and FSH
secretion.
Disadvantages
·It is difficult to prescnt GnRH in an immunogenic
form.
· Duration of immune response is variable among
individuals.
· Immune response diminishes after booster immu-
nizations.
INDUCTIONOFPSEUDOPREGNANCY(FELINE)
Mechanism ofaction
·During cstrus,ovulation can be induced echan
ically by vaginal stimulation or pharmacologically by
140
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
administration of exogenous hormones. Ovulation
occurs within 24-36 hours, and 30-45 days of pseudo
pregnancy then occurs if the animal is neither
matednorinseminated.
Compoundsdescribed
Gonadorelin (Factrel; Fort Dodge, Fort Dodge, fowa)
· The gonadorelin compound acts as GnRH, causing
release ofendogenousLH and FSH.
· Dosage: The reported dose is 25 μg adininistered
intramuscularly, once.
Humanchorionicgonadotropin
· Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) binds to
and activates IH receptors in the cat.
· Dosage:'Ihe reported dose is 50-500 IU adiminis-
tered intramuscularly, once.
Pregnancy Termination
Definition
* Expulsion from the uterus of the products of con-
ception before the fetus is viable
· Synonyin = induced abortion
● Can be achieved by surgical or pharmacologic
methiods
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
141
Objectives
·To induce abortion only if the bitch or quecn is
pregnant; in one study, 30 (62%) of 48 bitches exam-
ined at 30-35 days after a single, unplanined breed-
ing were not pregnant.
· Use a method that is reliable, easy to administer, and
efficacious, with a product that is safe for the ani-
mal's health and subsequent fertility.
· General considerations include the following:
Ovariohysterectomyshonuldbeperformed inallanimats not
specifically intendedforbreeding.
Estrogenic compounds are not recommended for
pregnancy termination in dogs and cats.
Pregnancy diagnosis (see Chapter 8) ideally pre-
cedes treatment.
Drugs available for pregnancy termination in dogs
and cats in the United States include PGFza, pro-
lactin inhibitors, and dexamethasone (Table 5-l).
No drugs are approved for pregnancy termina-
tion in dogs and catsin the United States.
Surgicaf Methods for Pregnancy Termination
OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
Advantages
●This is the treatment of choice for mismated animals
when future reproductive potential is not important.
· The animal will not become pregnant again.
142
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
Table 5-1.Pregnancy TerminationProtocols forthe Dog
and Cat
Stage of gestation
Effectivemethods
Comments
Fertilization:
Luteolytic
●Pregnancy
implantation
agents (PGF2α)
terminationismore
(from day of LH
high dosages);
difficult because of
surge to 21 ±1
not effective
the refractoriness
days past LH
until after day5
of the corpora
(abins
of diestrus
lutea to luteolytic
●Inhibitors of
treatments.
progesterone
●Pregnancy
action
termination at this
(mifepristone)
stage of gestation
● Inhibitors of
may be imposed on
progesterone
nonpregnant
secretion
animalsbecause
(epostane)
pregnancy cannot
yet be confirmed.
Implantation:
Luteolytic
●Pregnancy
fetal ossification
termination at this
(from about
low or high
stage of gestation
21-41±1 days
dosages)
is associated with
past LH surge)
 Combination of
fetal resorption.
dopamine
agonists
(bromocriptine,
cabergoline) and
● Inhibitors of
progesterone
action
(mifepristone)
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
143
Table 5-1.
 Pregnancy Termination Protocols for the Dog
andCat-cont'd
Stageofgestation
Effective methods
Comments
·Dexamethasone
● Inhibitors of
progesterone
secretion
(epostane)
Fetal ossification:
· Luteolytic
Pregnancy
parturition (from
termination at this
about 41-65 ± 1
low or high
stage of gestation
days past LH
dosages)
is associated with
surge)
· Dopamine
fetal expulsion; if
agonists or
performed beyond
serotonin
day 50-55 of
antagonists
gestation,viable
(bromocriptine,
fetuses may be
cabergoline)
delivered.
Combination of
dopamine ago-
●Inhibitors of
progesterone
action
(mifepristone)
Dexamethasone
● Inhibitors of
progesterone
secretion
(epostane)
144
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
· Health benefits include prevention of ovarian and
uterine disease and reduced risk of mammary neo
plasia if performed before the next estrus; this bene
fit of ovariectomyis lost by the time the bitch reachhes
2.5 years of age or has cycled four times.
· Production of unwanted pets is prevented.
Disadvantages
· Surgery may be more complicated because of
increased vascularity of the gravid uterus; difficulty
of surgery increases with advancing gestation.
· Lactation may result after ovariohysterectomy dur-
ing pregnancy or diestrus (see Chapter 14).
Pharmacologic Methods for Pregnancy
Termination
ESTROGENICCOMPOUNDS
Mechanism of action
+ Delay transport of embryos through the uterine tubes
·Induce endometrialcongestion
1andedema
thereby preventing normal embryo migration and
implantation
·Exert direct embryotoxic effects
· Alter comiposition of uterine milk, making uterine
environment less hospitable to conceptuses
· Only safe and effective if given after ovulation and
before onset of cytologic diestrus
ContraceptionandPregnancyTermination
145
Compounds described
Diethyistibestro!
· Dosage (canine): The reported dose of repositol
diethylstilbestrol (DES) is 0.5 mg/kg adminis
tered intramuscularly, once. The reported dosage
of orally administered DES is 0.1-1 mg/kg oncc
daily for 5 days beginning 24-48 hours afte1
mating.
·Efficacywith the oral product isverypoor.Efficacy
with the injectable product is better, but at present,
no injectable DES products are commercially avail-
able. Prcparations may be available from coin-
poundingpharmacies.
Estradiol cypionate(Depo-Estradiol,Pharmacia&Upjohn)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dose is 0.02-0.044
mg/kg (not to exceed a total dose of 1 mg) admin-
istered intramuscularly, once. The historical
recommendation of administration of the drug
within 72 hours of mating has no basis in
science. To be efficacious and safe, the drug must
be administered after ovulation(evidenced by
serum  progesterone  concentration  grealer
than5 ng/ml)andbefore onset of cytologic
diestrus (evidenced by noncornified vaginal
cytology).
● Dosage (feline): The reported dose is 0.125-0.25 mg
administcred intramuscularly, once,within 40 hours
of mating.
146
Contraceptlon and Pregnancy Termination
Estradiolbenzoate
· Dosage (canine): The reported dose is 5-10 μg/kg,
to a maximum total dose of 1 mg. The calculated
dose is divided into two to three injections, adminis-
tered subcutaneously at 48-hour intervals beginning
2days aftermating.
Tamoxifen citrate(Novadex;Astrazeneca,Wilmington,Def.)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is 1 mg/kg
administered orally twice a day for 10 days
Disadvantages
· Ineffective at terminating pregnancy if adminis-
tered before ovulation
·Side effects:
likely to develop if the drug is administered dur
ing diestrus; as many as 25% of bitches treated
with estradiol cypionate (ECP) developed pyome
tra in one study
Prolongedbehavioral estrus may occur.
Medullary aplasia of bone marrow resulting in
thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, aplastic anemia,
and death develops in some cases. Bone marrow
toxicity is idiosynicratic and dose dependent, with
the first clinical signs occurring 5-10 days after
treatment. Dogs are more susceptible to bone
marrow toxicity from estrogenic compounds thall
are cats.
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
147
Because of the potential for serious adverse effects,
estrogeniccompoundsare notrecommended for
pregnancy termination in dogs and cats.
LUTEOLYTICAGENTS(PROSTAGLANDINS)
Mechanismofaction
+ Prostaglandins induce vasoconstriction that reduces
blood flow to the corpora lutea with subsequent
cellular degeneration. Prostaglandins also induce
myometrial contractility and contribute to cervical
dilation.
Compounds described
Dinoprost tromethamine (Lutalyse, Pharmacia & Upjohn)
· Dosage (canine): Reported dosages are 250 μg/kg
administered subcutaneously twice a day 0r 10-50
Hg/kg administered subcutaneously every 4-8
hours. Therapy must be instituted on day 5 of
diestrus at the earliest. Lower dosages are more
effective later in gestation.
· Dosage (feline): Reported dosages are 500 μg/kg
administered subcutaneously two to three times
a day for 5 days beginning at least 30 days after
mating or 500-1000 μg/kg administered once daily
for 2 days beginning after 40 days after mating.
The lowest effective dosage for cats has not been
established.
148
Contraception and PregnancyTermination
Cioprostenol(Estrumate,Schering-Plough)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is l-2.5
μg/kgoncedaily.
Fenprostalene(Bovilene,FortDodge)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is 20 μg/kg
once daily.
Advantages
· Luteolysis can be induced as early as l week after the
onset of cytologic diestrus.
· Efficacy is 80%-100%.
· PGF2q analogs require less frequent injections and
are associated with few side effects if administered in
appropriate doses.
Disadvantages
·The duration of treatment averages 4 days (range, 3-
11 days). Longer duration of treatment is required
with administration oflower dosagesor treatment
administered early in gestation. Treatment should
be continued until serum progesterone concentra-
tion decreases to less than 2 ng/ml for more than
2 days oruntil there is no ultrasonographic evidence
of fetal viability.
+ Length of the interestrous interval may be reduced.
· Side effects include tachypnca, hypersalivation, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, ataxia, urination, anxiety, pupil dilation,
and abdominal discomfort. Onset of side cffects is
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
149
within 5-30 minutes of administration of the drug.
Side effects subsidewithin 2-3hours.Severity ofsidle
effects varies depending on individual sensitivity, but
generally the side effects are more severe after the ini-
tial dose and when prostaglandins are administercd at
high dosages (greater than 100-150 μg/kg of body
weight). Side effects may be alleviated in dogs by walk-
ing the dog for15-30minutes after drug administra-
tion or by concurrent administration of atropine
(0.025 mg/kg administered subcutaneously). Side
effects are less severe in cats.
DOPAMINEAGONISTSANDSEROTONINANTAGONISTS
Mechanism ofaction
● Inhibition of prolactin secretion results in luteolysis
Compoundsdescribed
Bromocriptine mesylate (Pariodel, Novartis)
· Dosage (canine): Reported dosages are 50-100
ug/kg administered orally or subcutaneously
twice a day for 7 days or 25-50 μg/kg administered
orally or subcutaneously three times a day for 7
days.
Cabergoline (Dostinex, Pharmacia & Upjohn)
· Dosage (canine): Reported dosages are 5 μg/kg
administered orally once daily for 7 days or 1.65
μg/kgadministeredsubcutaneouslyoncedailyfor
5days.
150
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
· Dosage (feline): Reported dosages are 2.5 μg/kg
administered orally once daily for 5 days or 5 μg/kg
administered orally once daily for 3 days.
Metergoline
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosage is 400-500
μg/kg administered orally once daily for 5 days.
Advantages
· Efficacy is 100% after 40 days past the LH surgc
Disadvantages
· Efficacy is less than 66% before 40 days past the LH
surge.
· Bromocriptine produces side effects similar to those
produced by PGF 2o, especially emesis.
Mechanism of action
● The mechanism of action is the same as for the indi-
vidual compounds. The synergistic effect allows for
reduced dosages of both drugs to be administered,
with aresultantdecrease in side effects.
Combinations described
Bromocriptine and cloprosteno!
·Dosage (canine): The reported dosages are 5 μg/kg
body weight bromocriptine administered orally
ContraceptionandPregnancyTermination
151
once daily for 7 days in conjunction with 2.5 μg/kg
cloprostenol administered subcutaneously on days
1, 3, and 5 of treatment.
Cabergolineandcloprosteno!
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosages are 2.5-5
μg/kg cabergoline administered orally once daily
for 7 days in conjunction with 1 μg/kg cloprostenol
administered subcutaneously on days 1, 3, and 5 of
treatment.
· Dosage (feline): The reported dosages are 5 μg/kg
cabergoline administered orally once daily for
8 days in conjunction with 5 μg/kg cloprostenol
administered subcutaneously on days 1, 3, and 5 of
treatment.
Advantages
·Efficacy is 100% when initiated after 25 days past the
LH surge.
INHIBITORSOFPROGESTERONEACTION
Mechanism ofaction
● Progesterone receptor antagonists bind to proges
terone receptors with higher affinity than that asso
ciated with endogenous progesterone, but they do
not activate the receptors, preventing progesterone-
induced effects.
152
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
Compoundsdescribed
Mifepristone(RU486)(Mifeprex;Danco Laboratories,NewYork
NY)
· Dosage (canine): Reported dosages are 2.5 mg/kg
administeredorallytwiceadayfor4-5daysor
10-22.7 mg/kg administered subcutaneously, once.
· Dosage (feline): The reported dosage is 20-34.3
mg/kg administered orally or subcutaneously as a
single injection.
Aglepristone(RU534)(Alizine;VerbacLaboratories,Carros,
France)
· Dosage (canine): The reported dosagc is 10 mg/kg
administered subcutaneously once daily for 2 con-
secutive days.
Advantages
· Pregnancy is effectively terminated in the dog
within 4-7 days of instituting therapy.
· Few side effects are reported, and those that do
occur are not as severe as those thhat occur after treat-
Disadvantages
· Side effects include mammary gland development
and lactation.
Contraception andPregnancyTermination
153
· Seems to be less effective in terminating feline preg-
nancy; pregnancy loss is reported to occur less than
20% of the time.
· Progesterone levels are not diminished during treat-
ment or at the time of abortion.
DEXAMETHASONE
Mechanism of action
· Corticosteroids mediate a lutcolytic effect that is not
wellunderstood,
Dosage
· Dosage (canine): Reported dosages are 5 mg/kg
administered intramuscularly twice a day for 10 days
or 0.2-0.5 mg/kg administered orally onc to three
times a day for 5 days, followed by another 3-5 days
during which the dosage is progressively reduced to
0.16-0.02 mg/kg
Advantages
surge.
Disadvantages
·Transient corticosteroid-induced side effects, includ
ing anorexia, polydipsia, and polyuria, are observed
using this protocol.
154
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
INHIBITORSOFPROGESTERONESECRETION
Mechanismofaction
● Epostane inhibits progesterone synthesis by cornpeti-
tive inhibition of enzymes involved in the conversion
of pregnenolone to progesterone (3β-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase and △-4-5-isomerase).
Compounddescribed
Epostane (Hoescht-Roussei,Kansas City,Mo.)
· Dosage (canine): Reported dosages are 15-20
mg/kg administered intramuscularly, once, or
50 mg/kg administered orally once daily for 7 days
starting on the first day of cytologic diestrus.
Bibliography
Baldwin C, Evans LE, Peter AT: Evaluation of natural
prostaglandin therapy for pregnancy termination in
the domestic cat,Feline Pract28:16,2000.
Banks DH, Stabenfeldt GH: Luteinizing hormone
release in the cat in response to coitus on consecu-
tive days of estrus, Biol Reprod 26:603, 1982.
Bowen RA, Olson PN, Behrendt MD etal: Efficacy and tox-
icity ofestrogens commonly used to terminate canine
pregnancy,JAm Vet Med Assoc186:783,1985.
Bowen RA, Olson PN, Young S et al: Efficacy and toxicity
of tamoxifen citrate for prevention and termination
of pregnancyin bitches,Am /Vet Res 49:27,1988.
ContraceptionandPregnancyTermination
155
Brown L, Bush M, Wildt DE et al: Effects of GnRH
analogues on pituitary-testicular function in free-
ranging African elephants (Luxodonta africana), J
Reprod Fertil99:627,1993.
Burke T: Pharmacologic control of estrus in the bitch
andqueen,VetClinNorthAm12:79,1982
Chan SY, Chakraborty PK, Bass FJ et al: Ovarian-
endocrine-behavioural function in the domestic cat
treated with exogenous gonadotrophins during
Imid-gestation,JReprodFertil65:395,1982
Chester AE, Fairchild DG, Depass LR: Acute anid
subchronic toxicity studies with detirelix, a luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone antagonist, in the rat
and monkey, Fundam Appl Toxicol17:505, 1991.
Concannon PW: Biology of gonadotropin secretion in
adult and prepubertal female dogs, J Reprod Fertil
Suppt47:3,1993.
Concannon PW: Fertility regulation in the bitch: contra-
ception,sterilization,andpregnancy termination.
In Kirk RW(ed):Current veterinary therapyVIHl,
Philadelphia, 1983, WB Saunders.
Concannon PW:Use ofDES,gonadotropins,GnRH ago
nists and dopamine agonists for rapid induction of
fertile estrus in dogs. Proceedings of the Society for
Theriogenology, Jacksonville, Fl, 1993.
Concannon Pw, Hansel W: Prostaglandin F2 alpha
induced luteolysis, hypothermia and abortion in
beaglebitches,Prostaglandins13:533,1977.
156
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
Concannon PW, Meyers-Wallen V: Current and pro-
posed methods for contraccption and termination
of pregnancy in dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
198:1214, 1991.
Cocanllon Pw, Yeager A, Frank D et al: Terminalion1 of
pregnancy and induction of premature luleolysis by
the antiprogcstagen, mifepristone, in dogs, / Reprod
Ferti/88:99,1990.
Davidsoni AP: Thc use of prostaglandins in small aninal
reproduction. Proceedings of the Society for
Theriogenology, San Antonio, 1992.
Dunbar BS, Schwocbcl E: Fertility studies for the beilefit
of animals and human beings: development of
improvedslerilization andcontraceptivemethods,
/Am Vet Med Assoc 193:1165, 1988.
Figenmann JE, Eigenmann RY: Influenice of medrox-
yprogestcrone acetate (Provera) on plasma growth
horinonle lcvcls and on carbohydrate metabolism.
I1. Studics in the ovariohysterectomized,estradiol-
primed bitch, Acta Endocrionot (Copenh) 98:603,
1981.
Evans JM, Sutton DJ: The use of hormones, especially
progestogens to control estrus in bitches, / Reprod
Fertil Suppt39:163,1989.
Fayrer-Hosken RA, Dookwah HID, Brandon Cl:
Immunocontrol in dogs, Anim Reprod Sci 60-61:365,
2000.
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
157
FeldmanEC,Davidson AP, Nelson RWetal:Prostaglandin
induction of abortion in pregnant bitches after misal-
liance, IAm Vet Med Assoc 202:1855, 1993.
Ferguson RG: The reproductive cycle and progcsterone
levels in greyhounds. Proceedings of the Australian
Greyhound VeterinaryAssociation, Surfers Paradlise,
Queensland, Australia, October 29, 1988.
Fieni F, Dumon C, Tainturier D et al: Clinical protocol
for pregnancy  termination  in  bitches using
prostaglandin F2 alpha, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 51:245,
1997.
Freshman JL, Olson PN, Amann RP et al: The effects of
methyltestosterone on reproductive function in
male greyhounds, Theriogenology 33:1057, 1990.
Galac S, Kooistra HS, Butinar J: Termination of mid-ges-
tation pregnancy in bitchies with aglepristone, a
progesterone receptor antagonist, Theriogenology
53:941,2000.
Gannon J: Clinical aspects of the oestrus cycle in the
greyhound, Racing Greyhound 1:12, 1976.
Gerstenberg C, NothlingJO: The effects of metergoline
combined with PGF2a treatment on luteal function
and gestation in pregnant bitches, Theriogenology
44:649,1995.
Gonzalez A, Allen AF, Post R et al: Immunological
approaches to contraception in dogs, J Reprod Fertil
Supp139:189,1989.
158
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
Goodrowe KL,Howard JG, Schmidt PM etal: Reproductive
biology of the domestic cat with special reference to
endocrinology, sperm function and in-vitro fertiliza-
tion,JReprodFertilSuppl39:73,1989.
Henik RA, Olson PN, Roysychuk RA: Progestogen ther
apyin cats,Comp Cont Edu 7:135,1985.
Herron MA, Sis RF: Ovum transport in the cat and the
effect of estrogen administration, Am J Vet Res
35:1277,1974.
Hubler M, Arnold S, Dobeli M: The use of low dose
prostaglandin F-2 alpha in the bitch, J Reprod Fertil
Suppl47:555,1993.
Jackson EK: Contraception in the dog and cat, Br Vet
/140:132,1984.
Janssens LA, Janssens GH: Bilateral flank ovariectomy in
the dog: surgical technique and sequelae in 72 ani-
mals,/ Small Anim Pract32:249, 1991.
Jewgenow K, Rohleder M, Wegner I: Differences
between antigenic determinants of pig and cat
zona pellucida proteins, J Reprod Fertil 119:15,
2000.
 Jochle W, Arbeiter K, Post Ket al: Effects of pseudopreg-
macologic suppression of prolactin secretion in
female dogs and cats, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:199, 1989.
Johnston SD: Canine pregnancy termination with
prostaglandin F2 alpha. Proceedings of the Society fo1
Theriogenology, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 1990.
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
159
Johnston SD: Questions and answers on the effects of
surgically neutering dogs and cats, JAm Vet Med Assoc
198:1206,1991.
Keister DM, Gutheil RF, Kaiser LD et al: Efficacy of oral
epostane administration to terminate pregnancy in
mated laboratory bitches, J Reprod Fertil Suppl
39:241,1989.
Kwochka Kw, Short BG: Cutaneous xanthomatosis and
diabetes mellitus following long-term therapy with
megestrol acetate inacat,Comp ContEdu6:185,1984.
Lange K, Gunzel-Apel R, Hoppen HO et al: Effects of
low dosesofprostaglandinF2 alpha duringthe early
luteal phase before and after implantation in beagle
bitches, J Reprod Fertil Suppl51:251, 1997.
Lloyd JB: Alternatives to surgical sterilization of the dog
and cat,Aust VetPract18:68,1988.
Mahi-Brown CA, Yanagimachi R, Nelson ML et al:
Ovarian histology of bitches induced by active
immunization with porcine zonae pellucidae, Am
JReprodImmunol18:94,1988.
McCannJP,AltszulerN,HampshireJet al: Growth hor
mone, insulin,glucose, cortisol, luteinizing hor
mone, and diabetes in beagle bitches treated with
medroxyprogesterone acetate, Acta Endocrinol
(Copenh) 116:73, 1987.
Misdorp W, Romijn A, Hart AA: Feline mammary
tumors: a case-control study of hormonal factors,
AnticancerRes11:1793,1991.
160
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
Morris JS, Dobson JM, Bostock DE: Use of tamoxifen in
the control of canine mammary neoplasia, Vet Rec
133:539,1991.
Munson L, Bauman JE, Asa CS et al: Efficacy of the
GnRH analogue for suppression of oestrous cycles
in cats, J Reprod Fertil Suppl57:269, 2001.
Nachreiner RF, Marple DN: Termination of pregnancy
in cats withprostaglandin F2α,Prostaglandins7:303,
1974.
Noakes DE, Dhaliwal GK, England GC: Cystic endometrial
hyperplasia/pyometra in dogs: a review of the causes
and pathogenesis, J Reprod Fertil Suppl57:395, 2001.
Norval M, Else RW, Maingay J: The effect of tamoxifen
on tumours induced by cells from a canine mam-
mary carcinoma cell line in athymic mice, Res Vet Sci
44:76,1988.
Okkens AC, Dieleman SJ, Kooistra HS et al: Comparison
of long-terrn effects of ovariectorny versus ovariohys
terectomy in bitches, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 51:227,
1997.
Olson PN, Johnston SD: New developments in small ani-
mal population control, J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:904,
1993.
Olson PN, Nett TM: Small animal contraceptives. In
Ettinger SJ (ed): Textbook ofveterinary internal medi-
cine, Philadelphia, 1983, WB Saunders.
Olson PN, Nett TM, Bowen RA et al: A need for steriliza-
tion, contraception and abortifacients: abandoned
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
161
and unwanted pets. Part IlI. Abortifacient, Comp
ContEdu8:235,1986.
Olson PN, Nett TM, Bowen RA et al: A need for steriliza-
tion, contraception and abortifacients: abandoned
and unwanted pets. Part IV. Potential methods of
controlling reproduction, Comp Cont Edu 8:303,
1986.
Olson PN, Root Kustritz MV, Johnston SD: Early-age
neutering of dogs and cats in the United States,
ReprodFertilSuppt57:223,2001.
Onclin K, Silva LD, Verstegen JP: Termination of
unwanted pregnancy in dogs with the dopamine
agonist, cabergoline, in combination with a syn
thetic analog ofPGF2a,either cloprostenol or
alphaprostol, Theriogenology 43:813, 1995.
Onclin K, VerstegenJ: Practical use ofa combination of a
dopamine agonist and synthetic prostaglandin ana-
logue to terminate unwanted pregnancy in dogs,
JSmallAnimPract37:211,1996.
Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook, Ames, Iowa, 1999,
Iowa State UniversityPress.
Post K: Induced pregnancy termination in dogs.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology
Jacksonville, Fl, 1993.
Prats AE: Ovarian remnant symdrome in the queen, EVS-
SARNewsletter4:5,2001.
Romagnoli SE, Camilla F, Cela M et al: Clinical use of
natural prostaglandin F2 alpha to induce early
162
 Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
abortion in the mismated bitch: serum proges
terone, treatment outcome and interval to subse-
quent estrus. Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Canine and Feline Reproduction,
Liege, Belgium, 1992.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN: Effect of prepuberal
and postpuberal gonadectomy on heat production
measured by indirect calorimetry in male and
female domestic cats, Am/Vet Res 57:371, 1996.
Sankai T, Endo T, Kanayama K et al: Antiprogesterone
compound, RU 486 administration to terminate
pregnancy in dogs and cats,JVetMed Sci 53:1069,
1991.
Singh V: Active immunization of female dogs against
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH)
and its effects on ovarian steroids and estrus sup-
pression,Ind/ExpBiol23:667,1985.
Stocklin-Gautschi NM, Hassig M, Reicher IM et al: The
relationship of urinary incontinence to early spay-
ing inbitches,/ReprodFertil Suppl57:233,2001.
Sutton DJ, Geary NM, Bergman GB: Prevention of pre-
clinical trial using low dose of oestradiol benzoate,
IReprodFertilSuppl51:239,1997.
Trigg TE, Wright PJ, Armour AF et al: Use of a GnRH
analogue to produce reversible long-term suppres-
sion of reproductive function in male and female
domestic dogs,JReprod Fertil Suppl57:255,2001.
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
163
Verstegen J, Ballabio R: Interruption of pregnancy in
bitches using cabergoline,RivZootVet20:35,1993
Verstegen J, Decoster R, Brasseur M: Influence of estro.
gens on blood parameters in bitches, Ann Med Vet
125:397,1981.
Verstegen J, Onclin K, Donnay I et al: Luteotropic
action of prolactin in dogs and effects of a
dopamine agonist, cabergoline, J Reprod Fertil Suppl
47:403,1993.
Verstegen J, Onclin K, Silva LD et al: Abortion induction
in queens and bitches using cabergoline, a specific
dopamine agonist, Ann Med Vet 137:251,1993.
Verstegen J, Onclin K, Silva LD et al: Regulation of pro
gesterone during pregnancy in the cat: studies on
the roles of corpora lutea, placenta and prolactin
secretion,JReprodFertilSuppl47:165,1993
Vickery BH, McRae GI, Goodpasture JC et al: Use of
potent LHRH analogues for chronic contraception
and pregnancy termination in dogs, J Reprod Fertil
Suppl39:175,1989.
Von Berky AG, Townsend WL: The relationship between
the prevalence of uterine lesions and the use of
medroxyprogesterone acetate for canine popula-
tion control, Aust Vet J70:249, 1993.
Wanke M, Loza ME, Monaschi N et al: Clinical use of
dexamethasone for terminationof unwanted
1997.
164
Contraception and Pregnancy Termination
Wildt DE, Seager Sw: Ovarian response in the estrual cat
receiving varying doses of HCG, Hormone Res 9:144,
1978.
Wildt DE, Seager SW: Reproduction control in dogs, Vet
ClinNorthAm7:775,1978
Wright PJ, Verstegen JP, Onclin K et al: Suppression of
the oestrus responses of bitches to the GnRH ana-
logue deslorelin by progestin, J Reprod Fertil Suppl
57:263,2001.
Zone M, Wanke M, Rebuelto M et al: Termination of
pregnancy in dogs by oral administration of dexa-
methasone, Theriogenology 43:487,1995.
Prepuberal Gonadectomy (Early-Age
Neutering) of Dogs and Cats
Patnicia N. Olson
ATA GLANCE
 Prepuberal gonadectomy is surgical sterilization of
puppies and kittens at a very early age, usually younger
thanl6weeks.
· Pet overpopulation is a very real problem in the
United States. If animals could be adopted from
165
166
Prepuberal Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
humane organizations already having undergone
gonadectomy, they would not be able to repopulate
sheltersbybearingyoung.
· No significant short- or long-term side effects have
been reported to occur in either dogs or cats; spayed
and neutered animals differfrom intact animals,but
age at time of surgery makes no difference regarding
physical andbehavioral changes observed.
· Considerations associated with pediatric anesthesia
include the following:
· Pediatric animals are prone to hypothermia and
hypoglycemia.
· Uptake, distribution, and excretion of anesthetic
agents are different in pediatric animals than in
adult animals, which alters the required dosages.
· The surgical technique used to perform ovariohys
terectomy and castration is as for adult animals,bear
ing in mind the increased fragility of pediatric tissues
and the need formeticuloushemostasis.
The neutering of puppies and kittens as early as
7 weeks ofagemaybe considered for several reasons:
· An owner desires to have a young animal neutered
before sale or adoption.
· The procedure may be beneficial in curbing the
numbers of unwanted pets in the United States (pet
overpopulation).
· The health and temperament of an animal
neutered before puberty may be improved.
Prepuberal GonadectomyofDogsandCats
167
· The surgical and recovery times are often shorler
than when animals are neutered at older ages or
after body fat has increased.
Population Contro!
Prepuberal gonadectomy is not a new procedure. For
many years veterinarians in the United States have rec-
ommended that female dogs and cats be neutered
before the first estrus (prepuberally) to reduce the risk
of mammary neoplasia and eliminate the possibility of
unwanted pregnancies. What is new, however, is the age
of prepuberal animals that many veterinarians are llow
neutering. Traditionally, female dogs and cats not
intended for breeding were neutered at approximately
6 months of age and male dogs and cats were neutered at
approximately 6-9 months of age. However, in an
attempt to reduce the number of unwanted pets in the
United States, veterinarians began to question whether
it was safe to neuter puppies and kittens at an even
younger age.
Although animal shelters oftenrequest thatneuter
contracts be signed at the time of adopting a pet, 10%-
50% of all people who sign neuter contracts fail to com-
ply with the terms of their contracts. This compliance
failure occurs even when financial reimbursement is
the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
168
Prepuberal Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
toAnimals and conductedby the Dorr Research
CorporationofBoston,73%and87%of500households
with dogs and cats, respectively, stated that their pets
wereneutered,butnearly20%oftheneuteredanimals
had produced at least one litter of offspring before
being sterilized. In fact, in a telephone survey of 343
respondents with 88 dogs and 121 cats, the rate of litter
production did not differ significantly between
neutered and intact animals, at 0.31 litter per neutered
animal and 0.40 litter per intact animal. Many authors
have proposed mathematical models for the number of
offspring that can be produced over time, even when
animals are allowed to reproduce only for a limited
period. For example, it has been suggested that when
cats are allowed to reproduce for only 1 year, a male and
female cat can be the progenitors of more than 70,000
cats in 6 years, more than 400,000 cats in 7years, and
more than 13 million cats in 9years.
In addition to controlling the numbers ofpuppies
and kittens born, prepuberal gonadectomy could prove
beneficial in controlling thie number of dogs and cats
surrendered to animal shelters andimpoundmentfacili
ties because of undesirable behaviors. Many "adoles
cent" animals are abandoned or relinquished to shelters
when they begin to exhibit certain hormonally influ-
enced behaviors. The role of animal behavior has been
the focus of many researchers and trainers and also has
Prepuberal GonadectomyofDogsandCats
169
been the focus of the National Council on Pet
Population Study and Policy. In personal interviews,
people surrendering their dogs and cats to 12 animal
shelters in 4 regions of the United States listed 71 rea-
sons for relinquishment. Many of the reasons cited were
categorized as“behavioral,”suggesting that future inter-
vention strategies should include those designcd to
modify animal behavior. Retaining pel aniinals in their
homesisanissue ofethicalandeconomicalsignificance
to the veterinary profession. The public expccts the vet-
erinary profession to help prevent the euthanasia of mil-
lions of healthy dogs and cats each year. In return the
veterinary profession experiences increased income as
animals are allowed to age in permanent and loving
homes.Information collected by Professional Software
Inc. (Hils) verified what many pet owners alrcady know:
pet ages. Thus retaining a dog or cat in a good home
makes ethical and economic sense.
Although numerous scientific studies now suggest
also want to be assured that the procedure does l1ot
result in long-term adverse effects on health or behav-
ior. Early-age neutering has now been performed on
Puppies and kittens for several decades in the United
States; therefore it seems unlikely that the procedure is
associated with significant health or temperament risks.
170
Prepuberal Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
In fact, there are data suggesting that early-age neuter
ing may be associated with health and temperament
benlefits.
Physical and Health Considerations
Growth
Growth plate closure is delayed in dogs and cats that are
neutered before puberty, but this delay generally does
not result in animals that are notably taller or larger.
Individual dogs of large breeds neutered at 7 weeks may
ofindividual animals,however,rarely notice this subtle
difference. The lanky appearance is not as apparent in
smaller breeds of dogs or cats, even when littermates are
available for comparison. The rate of bone growth is not
affected by gonadectomy, but the growth period is
extended because of the delayed growth plate closure.
This can result in greater final radial or ulnar length
when measured on radiographs.
Weight
Although obesity can occur in both neutered and intact
animals and is influenced by a number offactors such as
diet and activity level, neutered animals may gain
significantly more weight than those remaining intact.
Prepubera! Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
171
Information regarding 8268 dogs from 11 veterinary
practices in the United Kingdom revealed that spayed
obese as intact female dogs. However, in a study of work-
ing dogs, no change in body mass was found among
sham-operated controls, ovariectomized dogs, or
ovariectomized dogs with ovarian autografts. Perhaps
exercise differences among the working dogs and those
presented to the 1l veterinary practices accounted for
the different results. Neutered cats are also more likely
toweighmorethansexuallyintact cats.Neuteredcats
have relatively more falciform fat, higher body condition
scores, and higher body mass indices than intact cats.
Heat coefficient, a measure of resting metabolic rate, is
lower in neutered cats,leading to the recommendation
that neutered male cats be fed 28% fewer calories than
intact male cats and that neutered female cats be fed
33% fewer calories than intact female cats.
Urethral Function
Theincidence of estrogen-responsive urinaryinconti
nence is increased in neutered female dogs. In some
spayed dogs, urinary incontinenice develops within days
of ovariohysterectomy, and in others, not until years
later. In one study the average onset was 2.8 years after
surgery.Estrogen-responsive urinary incontinence was
reported in 34 (4%) of 791 bitches spayed at traditional
172
Prepuberal Gonadectomyof Dogs and Cats
ages and in 7 (0.3%) of 2434 of sexually intact bitches.
In a study of 269 dogs neutered at animal shelters at var-
ious ages (either younger than or older than 24 weeks),
follow-up surveys of owners revealed that one dog
neutered at the earlier age and two dogs neutered at
the later age developed urinary incontinence. In
another study of 206 bitches spayed before their first
estrus that had been neutered for at least 3 years, uri-
nary incontinence occurred in 9.7% of the bitches.
This incidence was approximately half of that for dogs
evaluated in the same study that had been spayed after
the first estrus. However, compared with late spaying,
the clinical signs of urinary incontinence were more
distinct after early spaying. To date, there is little
increased in puppies neutered as early as 7 weeks of
age, something many veterinarians initially feared
might correlate with an earlier age of spaying. However,
continued assessment of the incidence and magnitude
of urinary incontinence in puppies neutered at various
ages is still important for long-term assessment of the
procedure.
The incidence ofurinary incontinence is very low
in cats and male dogs, regardless of neuter status.
When incontinence does occur in the cat, it is more
likely to be associated with a neuropathy or with feline
leukemia virus infection than with a hormonally medi-
ateddisorder.
Prepuberal Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
173
PhysicaiCharacteristicsofthePenis,Prepuce
Urethra, and Vufva
The penis, prepuce, and os penis are infantile in puppies
who are neutered as early as 7 weeks of age compared
with puppies neutered at traditional ages or those
remaining sexually intact. The infantile secondary sex
characteristics have not been associated with an
increased risk of balanoposthitis. Complete penile
extrusion is not possible in many cats neutered at tradi-
tional or early ages. The clinical significance of failure to
extrude the penis in the cat is unknown, although it can
increase the difficulty of catheterizing animals that
require such a procedure for urethralobstruction.
Urethral diameters as determined by contrast retro-
grade urethrography are similar among neutered and
intact cats. In addition, the incidence of urethral
obstruction in 263 cats adopted from shelters and
neutered at less than 24 weeks of age or more than
24 weeks of age did not differ during the follow-up
period of the study.
Vulvas of puppies neutered before puberty appear
smaller when compared with intact bitches but can also
appear “infantile" in intact bitches during anestrus or in
some bitches spayed later in life. Although perivulvar der-
matitis has been associated with weight gains and recessed
vulvas after ovariohysterectomy, there is little information
to suggest that the occurrence is higher in bitches spayed
at early ages over those neutered at traditional ages.
174
Prepuberal Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
Behavioral lmplications
Neutering male dogs should most readily affect sexually
dimorphic behaviors, such as mounting, copulatory intro
mission, display of ejaculatory patterns,urine marking
roaming. and aggressive dominance toward owners and
other dogs. Because such behaviors can be objectionable
beliaviors develop. Although many of these behaviors are
eventually lost or diminished after castration, it may take
several weeks for the behavior to abate. Urine marking,
tration in roughly half of male dogs. Roaming is reduced
in almost all male dogs after castration. Conversely, there
seems to be little improvement in dogs exhibiting territo
rial aggression or fear aggression and limited improve
ment in aggressive dominance toward owners.
Objectionable sexualbehaviors inmale cats include
fighting, urine spraying, and roaming. Castration is
effective in eliminating these problem behaviors in 80%-
90% of the affected cats.
Althoughmanystudieshaveevaluatedthebehaviors
ofadult animalsafter castration,someresearchsuggests
that objectionable behaviors in puppies and kittens may
relate to intrauterineposition or exposure to androgens
during gestation. To date, there are limited data regard.
age will reduce the incidence of undesirable sexually
dimorphicbehaviors.
PrepuberaiGonadectomyofDogsandCats
175
There is also considerable interest in whether the
age of neutering affects the outcome of guide or service
dog trainability. In an observational studyconducted at a
service dog organization, the success of dogs trained to
provide assistance to disabled people was measured in
28% for dogs neutered at traditional ages (age 7 months,
n= 76 dogs) and 39% for dogs neutered early (age
7 weeks, n = 77 dogs). There is always concern that such
improved “success”may result from the placebo effect,
whichishard to concealfromevaluatorsbecausemale
dogs neutered early have altered secondary sex charac-
teristics, such as an infantile prepuce. Nevertheless,
many professional service and guide dog instructors are
convincedthatmoremaledogsbecomereliableguides
when neutered early. In an epidemiologic stuudy
conducted on a data set at Guide Dogs for the Blind,
records were evaluated from dogs born after January 1,
1988, that had successfully been trained for a blind
or visually impaired student. The data set consisted of
6393 dogs with a gender distribution of 47.8% females
and 52.2% males.Breeds represented were Labrado1
retrievers, golden retrievers, German shepherd dogs,
and Labrador-golden retriever crosses.When two dogs
with a difference of 6 months in their ages at the time of
neutering (with all other factors being equal) were com-
pared, the dog neutered at a younger age was 1.3 times
aslikely toexperience training success.Aprospective
176
Prepuberal Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
study is now in progress at Guide Dogs for the Blind, with
more than100Labrador-goldenretrievermale dogs
already entered into the study. Puppies are assigned to
groups by birth sequence and are later neutered at 7
weeks, 7 months, or 12 months of age. Dogs in the study
will be evaluated for various behaviors throughout
puppy raising and formal guide-dog training.
Surgical and Anesthetic Considerations
Anesthetic and surgical considerations for the pediatric
patient include the potential for hypoglycemia and
hypothermia, a relatively small blood volume, and the
delicate nature of thepediatric tissues.Because hepatic
glycogen stores are minimal in neonates, prolonged
fasting may result in hypoglycemia. Food should be
withheld no longer than 8 hours before surgery, with
3-4 hours recommended for the youngest patients (6-7
weeks of age). Arimals may be fed a small meal within
1-2 hours after recovery from anesthesia.Hypothermia
can be lessened by using warm water blankets and by
giving warmed intravenous fluids. Minimizing surgery
time also helps lessen the severity of hypothermia.
Excessivewettingof thepediatricpatient duringprepa
ration of the surgical site should be avoided, and the use
ofwarmed scrub solution (chlorhexidine) and avoid-
ance of alcohol are beneficial in helping preserve body
heat.
Prepuberal GonadectomyofDogsandCats
177
Pediatric tissues are very friable and should be han-
dled carefully. The relatively small blood volume of pedi-
atric patients makes meticulous hemostasis very
important. Fortunately, the small size ofblood vessels
and the presence of minimal abdominal and ovarian
bursal fat allow for excellent visualization of the vascula
ture and make precise hemostasis simple to achieve.
Pediatric ovariohysterectomies are performed simi-
larly to adult ovariohysterectomies. In puppies the
abdominal incision is started relatively more caudal to
the umbilicus than in adult dogs. Generally, the uterus is
more easily exposed in puppies if the incision is started
at least 2-3 cm caudal to the umbilicus (resulting in an
incision placed nearer the middle third of the distance
from the umbilicus to the cranial brim of the pelvis, simi
lar to a feline incision). In kittens the incision is placed
in a similar location as in adult cats. As the abdomen is
entered, it is common to encounter substantial amounts
of serous fluid in both puppies and kittens. It may be
necessary to remove some of the fluid using gauze
sponges to improve visualization. It is recommended
that a Snook ovariohysterectomy hook notbeused
because of the delicate nature of the tissues. The uterus
is easy to locate by looking between the urinary bladder
and colon. Uterine tissue is extremely friable; therefore
care must be taken to avoid excess traction.
When the abdomen is being closed, it is important
to carefully identify the ventral fascia and the overlying
178
Prepuberal Gonadectomyof Dogs and Cats
subcutaneous tissue because they can occasionally be
difficult to differentiate, particularly in some puppies.
The subcuticular layer can be closed with an absorbable
suture material in a continuous intradermal pattern to
avoid theuseofskin sutures.Alternatively,skinsuturescan
be looselyplaced after closure of the subcutaneous tissules.
Puppy castration also is performed with modifica-
tionis to the techniques used in adult dogs. As with adult
canine castrations, it is important to ascertain that both
testes have descended before commencing surgery
Because of the small size and mobility of puppy testes,
the entire scrotal area can be clipped and surgically
prepped to permit the scrotum to be included in the
sterile field. This will greatly facilitate testis localization
and manipulation and does not cause scrotal irritation,
as in adult dogs, because the scrotal sac is not yet well
developed. Puppies can be castrated through a single
midline prescrotal or scrotal incision. Alternatively, two
scrotalincisionscanbeused,similar toafeline castra
tion. Closed castration is performed via a standard tech-
nique. Incisions can be closed using one to two buried
interrupted sutures in the subcuticular layer, or inci-
sions can be left open to heal by second intention.
Closure of the incisions prevents postoperative contami-
nation with urine or feces and prevents fat from extrud.
ing from the incision.
Kitten castration is performed using techniques that
are identical to those used in the adult cat. Care should
Prepuberal Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
179
be used when exteriorizing testes to prevent tearing of
the spermatic cord that might occur because of its small
size. As with adult cats, incisions are left open to heal by
secondintention.
In one study of 32 pairs of male and 36 pairs of
female puppies neutered at approximately 2 or
7 months of age, recovery from anesthesia was uneventful
in both groups and faster in the younger animals. In
another study of 1213 dogs and 775 cats that were
obtained from two humane organizations and that
underwent ovariohysterectomy or castration performed
by fourth year veterinary students, the duration of sur-
gery was shorter in animals younger than 12 weeks than
erinary students who participated in the program indi-
cated that their confidence in performing anesthesia
and surgery on young animals had increased overall,
 o ars tm  sos un sn uo
gonadectomy was needed for pediatric patienis.
Summary
Prepuberal gonadectomy, or early-age neutering, is safe
for puppies and kittcns if anesthetic and surgical proce
dures are modified appropriately. Neutered animals
  e  o    a
intact animals. Thus caloric requirements may need to
be adjusted or exercise programs implemented to
180
Prepuberal Gonadectomy of Dogs and Cats
maintain ideal body weight for some neutered animals.
Although scientific studies to date suggest that there are
minimal risks for neutering puppies and kittens as early
as 7 weeks of age, long-term studies of the incidence of
various disorders associated.with early-age neutering
should continue to be conducted. The benefits and risks
should be carefully evaluated for each species, breed,
andindividual
Bibliography
Crenshaw WE, Carter CN: Should dogs in animal shel-
ters be neutered early? Vet Med 90:756, 1995.
Edney AT, Smith PM: Study of obesity in dogs visiting vet
erinary practices in the United Kingdom, Vet Rec
118:391, 1986.
Faggella AM, Aronsohn MG: Anesthetic techniques for
neutering 6-to 14-week-old kittens, J Am Vet Med
Assoc202:56,1993.
Faggella AM, Aronsohn MG: Evaluation of anesthetic
protocols for neutering 6- to 14-week-old pups, J Am
Vet MedAssoc205:308,1994.
Hart BL, Eckstein RA: The role of gonadal hormones in
the occurrence of objectionable behaviors in dogs
and cats,AppAnimBehSci52:331,1997.
Howe LM,Olson PN: Prepuberal gonadectomy: early-age
neutering of dogs and cats, International Veterinary
Information Service, 2000. Available at www.ivis.org.
Prepuberal Gonadectomyof Dogsand Cats
181
Lieberman LL: A case for neutering pups and kittens at
two months of age, JAm Vet Med Assoc 191:518, 1987.
Lindsay SR: Handbook ofapplied dog behavior and training.
Ames, Iowa, 2000, Iowa State University Press.
Manning AM, Rowan AN: Companion animal demo-
graphics and sterilization status: results from a sur-
vey in four Massachusetts towns, Anthrozoos 4:192,
1992.
Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals: Spay/neuter summary, Boston, 1991,
MSPCA.
Olson PN: Questions and answers on the effects of prepuberal
gonadectomy:thecaseforearly neutering,Englewood
1996, American Humane Association.
Root MV: The effect of prepuberal and postpuberal
gonadectomy on the general health and develop
ment of obesity in the male and female domestic cat,
doctoral thesis, Minneapolis, 1995, University of
Minnesota.
Scarlett JM, Salman MD, New IG et al: Reasons for relin-
quishmentofcompanionanimalsinU.S.animal
shelters:selected health and personalissues,JAppt
Anim Welfare Sci 2:41, 1999.
Stocklin-Gautschi NM, Hassig M, Reichler IM et al: The
relationship of urinary incontinence to early spay-
ing in bitches, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 57:233, 2001.
Thrusfield MV: Association between urinary inconti-
nence and spaying in bitches, Vet Rec 116:695, 1985.
7
Infectious Diseases of the
Reproductive Tract of the Bitch
Peter R. Morresey
ATAGLANCE
● Infectious diseascs of the qucen: discussed in detail in
Chapter 19
●Canine brucellosis (Brucella canis)
183
184
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
·Ingestion is the most common natural route of
transmission.
· Agglutination tests are good screening tests; all posi
tivetestresultsshouldbeverifiedbycultureoragar
gel immunodiffusion testing.
· Affected dogs often are asymptomatic. The classic
sign of infection in female dogs is late gestation
abortion. The classic signs in male dogs are scrotal
dermatitis, epididymitis, and poor semen quality.
· Antibiotic therapy decreases bacteremia and anti-
body titers but is unlikely to eradicate the organism
from theanimal'sbody
●Canine herpesvirus (CHV)
CHV and readilyfightoffdisease.
·Animals likely to show clinical evidence of CHV
infection are naive bitches during the last 3 weeks of
gestation (stillbirths, mummified pups, macerated
pups, and normal pups, all born in one litter) and
neonates during the first 3 weeks oflife (acute onset
of hemorrhagic septicemia and death).
·Affected bitches usuallylose only one litter.Isolate
naive bitches and pups. No vaccine is available.
·Bacteria and mycoplasma
· These organisms are ubiquitous and are part of the
normal vaginal flora; pathogenicity is difficult to
determine in a given bitch, especially if she is asymp
tomaticforreproductivetractdisease.
infectiousDiseasesofthe Reproductive Tract
185
Canine Brucellosis
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Brucella canis is the only bacterial organism proven to
cause infertility in the bitch. The host range is limited
compared with other species of Brucella. Only domestic
dogs and wild Canidae are susceptible; other domestic
animals experimentally are resistant. Canid infections
with Brucella melitensis,Brucella suis,andBrucella abortus
have been reported.
Several routes of natural transmission are recog-
nized. Most commonly, ingestion or inhalation via
oronasal or conjunctival contact with aborted materials
is suspected. Other sources of exposure include vaginal
discharges after abortion and during estrus and urine
and milk (low concentration).Venereal and transpla-
cental transmission also may occur.
The Brucella organism penetrates the mucous meim-
branes of the oral cavity, vagina, and conjunctiva
Phagocytosis occurs at the site of mucosal infection.
Transport to lymphatic and genital tissues ensues, and
multiplication occurs at those sites. Bacteremia begins
1-4 weeks after infection and lasts 6-64 months.
Lymphoreticular hyperplasia and hyperglobulinemia
occur. Antibodies are produced but are nonprotective
and have little effect on organism quantity. The greatest
numbers of Brucella organisms are found in lymph
nodes, spleen, and gonadal steroid-dependent tissues.
186
InfectiousDiseases of theReproductiveTract
The nongravid, diestrual uterus is not a favored site.
B.carisusuallyisconfinedtomononuclearphagocytes
but may enter the placcntal epithelium.Endarterial cir-
culation filters bloodborne organisms and immune
complexes, resulting in a wide range of discase foci and
clinical presentations, including the intervcrtcbral discs
(discospondylitis),eyes (anterior uveitis),kidneys
(glomerulonephritis), and meninges (meningoen-
cephalitis)
The highest concentration of B. canis organisms is
found in vaginal discharge, making this the most likely
sourcc of infection after aborted material. Shedding
of organisms into vaginal discharge continues for up
to 6 weeks after abortion.Urinary excretion of B.canis
begins afewweeksafter onsetofbacteremia andcontin
uesfor atleast3months.B.canisis shortlivedoutside
the host and is readilyinactivated by comrnon disinfec-
tants;fomitetransimissionmay occur.
Spontaneous recovery may occur 1-5 years after
infection. Bactereimia may persist during this time.
Appropriate thierapy accelerates recovery. Tissue persist-
ence may occur,and in the absence of bacteremia
serum,anitibodylevelsdecline.Naturally recovered dogs
may have low or negative serum antibody concentra
tions but are immune to reinfection because of
protective cell-mediated immunity. Immunosuppressivc
therapy increases initial susceptibility to B.canisinfec-
tion but does not alter the clinical course of the diseasc.
InfectiousDiseasesof the Reproductive Tract
187
Signaiment
No age or breed predisposition has been reported.
History and Ciinical Signs
Disease most often is inapparent. Infection with B. canis
does not interfere with normal estrous cycling. Fever is
an uncommon clinical sign. Overt clinical signs usually
involve reproductive disturbances in sexually mature
animals, Conception failure may occur. Early embryonic
loss can occur any time after breeding. Thcre may be
inapparent abortion caused by either rcsorption of
embryos early in gestation or ingestion of abortuses by
the bitch in late gestation, The most common presenta-
tion is abortion in late gestation (45-60 days) without
signs of maternal illness in previously healthy fcmales. If
pregnancy reaches term, both live and dead pups may be
whelped.
Physical Examination Findings
Late-term abortion is characterized by brown or gray
death some time before abortion.
Pups born live to infected bitches die within
hours to days. If pups survive longer, generalized lym
phadenomegaly, hyperglobulinemia, recurrent fever,
188
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
leukocytosis,and seizures can occur. Splenomegaly
osteomyelitis, multifocal pyogranulomatous dermatitis.
anterior uveitis, and endophthalmitis accompanied by
hemorrhage also have been reported.
DiagnosticTestsandResufts
Canine brucellosis is a reportable disease in most states
of the United States.
BACTERIAL ISOLATON Isolation of B. canis is thc defini-
tive diagnostic procedure. The organism grows well in
aerobic culture on media for other Brucella species.
However, growth is slow and Brucella may be over-
whelmedbycontaminants.
·Bacterialculture:Preferredsamplesinclude
abortedmaterial andvulvardischarge.
·Blood culture:Whole blood (5 ml,heparinized
refrigerated) is required for isolation as the organ
ismpersistswithinmacrophages.Bacteremia is sus
tained but may be intermittent in chronic cases.Do
not useblood cultures as the sole diagnostic testper
formed if results are negative.
· Urine: Culture of urine may be positive in dogs
infectedwithB.canis;collecturine samplesbycysto
centesistoavoidcommensal overgrowth.
● Necropsy: Fetal necropsy findings include sub
cutaneous edema,congestion,subcutaneous hem
InfectiousDiseases of the Reproductive Tract
189
orrhage, and serosanguineous peritoneal effusion.
The organism is recoverable from internal organs or
lymph nodes of pups born live and from stomach
content of stillborn pups. If an infected bitch dies or
is euthanized, the organism can be recovered from
lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow, gravid or
estrual uterus, placenta, and vaginal and uterine
fluids.
SEROLOGIC TESTING For all serologic tests, at least 2 ml
of serum needs to be collected and refrigerated until
analyzed. Compared with bacterial isolation, serologic
tests have the advantage of being rapid, easy to perform,
andwidely available.However,although sensitive,most
ative during the first 3-4 weeks after infection, despite
bacteremia. Antibody titers are high in response to bac
teremia (l:400-l:3200) but decline and become equivo
cal as bacteremia ceases (l:50-l:200). Chronically
infected females display equivocal antibody titers and
negative blood cultures.Recrudescence ofbacteremia
andelevation in antibody titers occur durimgproestrus,
estrus, pregnancy, and abortion, making these the most
reliable times to test.Antibiotics may suppress bac
teremia and associated serologic responses.For this rea
son, it is important to avoid antibiotic treatmenll of
individuals or infected kennel populations before
screening is complete.
190
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
Aggiutinationtests
Rapidcardagglutination test The rapid card agglutina
tion test (RCAT) is rapid, inexpensive, sensitive, and
highly specific(99%)and detects antibodiesearly.False-
positive results occur through cross-reaction with
Bordetella species, Pseudomonas species, and other bacte-
ria.Addition of 2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME) reduces
false-positive results by eliminating less specifically react
ing heterologous immunoglobulin M (lgM). The RCAT
for canine brucellosis is commercially available for in
hospital use (Synbiotics, San Diego, Calif.).
Tube agglutination test. The tube agglutination test (TAT)
is widely uscd, improperly, as a confirmatory test for
dogs positive for B. canis by the RCAT with 2-ME.False
positive results occur because of the presence of bacteria
other than Brucella species, as for RCAT. False-positive
results also may be caused by hemolysis of the serum
sample submitted. Significant titers develop approxi-
mately 5-8 weeks after infection. The TAT is available
throughmost diagnosticlaboratories.
Both the RCAT and TAT can be considered screening
tests. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) antigens of several bacter-
ial species cross-react with B. canis. False-positive results
occur more commonly than do false-negative results.
Agar gel immunodiffusion Agar gcl immunodiffusion
(AGID) is a sensitive test for B.canis that uses either cell wall
antigen (somatic, sAg) or cytoplasmic antigen (cAg). The
InfectiousDiseasesofthe Reproductive Tract
191
latteris highly specific for B. canisinfection and can beused
as a confirmatory test for dogs that are serologically posi
tive by the RCAT or TAT. The AGID may detect infcction
with other Brucella species, but. infection with other than
B. canisis uncommon in dogs. Testing for sAg is positive
earlier than for cAg (5-10 weeks versus 8-12 weeks, respec
tively). The AGID is available only through the veterinary
diagnostic laboratory at Gornell University (Ithaca, NY).
Enzyme-finked immunosorbent assay The ezyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is a very specific test but
is less sensitive than screening tests. It also is available
through the veterinary diagnostic laboratory at Cornell
University.
Indirect fuorescent antigen With indirect fluorescent anti-
gen (IFA), the organism is directly visualized in the test
substrate. This is a useful screening test, but it is not read-
ilyavailable.
General principles for serologic testing for diagnosis of canine
bruceffosis
·Very early in infection, bacterial isolation is superior
toserologic testing for identification ofinfected
individuals. False-negative culture results may occur
because of difficulty growing the organism.
· A single high titer with the TAT may indicate active
infection, but confirmation is required.
192
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
·Asymptomatic animals with positive agglutination
test (RCAT or TAT) results should not be consid-
ered positive for brucellosis until the infection is
confirmed with blood culture or with cytoplasmic
antigen testing (AGID orELISA).
· With the exception of cytoplasmic antigen testing by
AGID or ELISA, all tests measure antibodies to LPS
andcantherefore give false-positive results.
Negative results may occur with recent infection;
testing should be repeated in 30 days.
MISCELLANEOUSDIAGNOSTICTESTS ChanIgeSon
complete blood count and serum chemistry profiles are
nonspecific. Hyperglobulinemia with associated hypoal-
buminemia may be present in cases of chronic infection
Some animals infected with brucellosis have positive
results on Coombs'test inthe absence of anemia
Abnormalities consistent with dickospondylitis or
osteomyelitis may be seen radiographically, as may signs
of fetal death just before abortion (e.g-, gas within or
around fetuses,collapse of the axial skeleton,overlap of
cranial bones) . Urinalysis findings usually are unremark-
able despite intermittent bacteriuria.
Treatment
Controlin kennel situations often requires euthanasia
of infected animals. If animals are to be maintained,
infectiousDiseasesofthe ReproductiveTract
193
long-term combination drug therapy is necessary, yet it
is unable reliably to effect a cure. The intracellular loca-
tion ofBrucella organisms makes achievement of effec-
tive antibiotic levels difficult. Nonbreeding companion
animals should receive an appropriate course of antibi-
otic therapy and be neutered. Tissue persistence of the
organism has been demonstrated after ovariohysterec-
tomy or castration, but shedding of Brucella is conisid-
ered less likely after removal of gonadal steroids.
The most effective antibiotic regimen reported
involves a combination of minocycline or doxycycline
(25 mg/kg administered orally once daily for 4 weeks or
12.5 mg/kg administered orally twice a day for 4 weeks)
with streptomycin (20 mg/kg administered once daily
intramuscularly or subcutaneously) for the first 2 weeks.
Restricted availability of streptomycin has led to use of
the less reliably efficacious gentamicin at the same
dosage. Fluoroquinolone therapy has been demon-
strated to be efficacious in vitro, but use as a single agent
is associatedwithrelapse.
Testingfor success of treatment atcessation of thier-
apy alonemay miss recurrence of bacteremia and is not
recommended. Response is evaluated by relesting with
culture and serology 6 months after the completion of
antibiotic treatment. Reinstatement in breeding pro
grams of animals that are negative for canine brucel-
losis after antibiotic treatment is very risky and is
strongly discouraged. Clinically normal but persistently
194
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
infected females may transmit infection to male and
offspring.
Contro!
· Test newly acquired animals at least twice at 30-day
intervals before introduction to the breeding ken
nel. A low titer may indicate previous or recent infec-
tion; repeat serologic testing or attempt isolation of
the organism.
● Remove proven positive animals from breeding pro
grams. Recommend neutering or euthanasia of
infected animals.
· In an infected kennel, strict hygiene procedures
within the colony and isolation from the general
population are indicated. Remove all positive ani-
mals immediately when found and continue to
test all animals in the facility at monthly intervals
until three consecutive tests find all animals in the
kennel to be concurrently negative. This process
may take 6-9 months. Regularly monitor by test-
ing all animals in the kennel at 3- to 6-month
intervals.
Prognosis
Prognosis is guarded for cure without recrudescence.
Owners must be informed that although relatively
InfectiousDiseasesoftheReproductiveTract
195
uncommon, human infection is possiblc with any
species of Brucella, including B. canis.
Canine Herpesvirus
Definition and Pathogenesis
The CHV host range is restricted to domestic and wild
Canidae.Biologicbehavior is similar to α-herpesviruses
infecting other species. Both humoral (B cell) and cell-
mediated (T cell) responses occur, the latter being
cssential for CHV control. Concurrent disease affecting
Tcell function may enhance pathogenesis. CHV is read-
ily inactivated by most common disinfectants and lipid
solvents and by acidic conditions (pH value less thian 5)
andheat.
In adult animals,transmission is primarily via
oronasal secretions, by either direct or aerosol contact.
Venereal spread occurs rarely. Virus replication is lim-
ited to the nasopharynx, genital tract, tonsillar tissue,
and retropharyngeal and bronchial lymph nodes. CHV
persists in the tonsils and parotid salivary glands.
Localized genital, respiratory, and conjunctival infec-
tionl can result in virus shedding despite the presence of
circulating antibodies. Latency is established at thc site
of initial infection, usually the nerve ganglion innervat-
ing the oropharyngeal region. In adult dogs, high prcva-
lence is associated with a history of repeated exposure
196
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive fract
(80%-100% in show or kennel dogs). Female dogs
recently introduced to a new or stressful environment
are particularly susceptible. Recrudescence has beenl
reportedtooccuraftercorticosteroidadministration.
In neonatal pups infection most often is acquired
transplacentally or during passage through the birth canal
after exposure to cervical and vaginal secretions. Oronasal
secretions from recenty infected littermates or the dam
are responsible for infection after birth. Lack of both nor-
mal thermoregulation and immune competence make
neonates susceptible to rapidly fulminating disease.
Signaiment
All canine population subgroups are susceptible to CHV
infection. Infection usually is inapparent in all dogs
3weeks).
History
In adult dogs the classic presentation of a bitch infected
with CHV is loss of a previously confirmed pregnancy or
birth of abnormal or nonviable pups. Stillborn pups,
pups with low birth weight, and healthy pups all may be
born in the same litter.
In affected neonates, death that occurs at less than
1 week of age indicates in utero exposure. Between
InfectiousDiseasesofthe Reproductive Tract
197
1 and 3 weeks of age, postnatal infection results in rap-
idly fulminating disease. Lack of adequate colostral
transfer or maintenance in an environment with
relatively low ambient temperature may predispose
neonates to clinical disease.
Physical Examination Findings
In infected bitches, self-limiting hyperemia and lym-
phoid nodules may be present on the vaginal mucosa.
Occasionally, submucosal hemorrhage may occur. Mild
alsomayoccur.
Infected neonates maybeborn dead,mummified,
or macerated or may be born alive but weak. Pups born
infected at or after birth classically present with signs of
acute hemorrhagic septicemia, hypoglycemia, and
necrosis of extrermities caused by vasculitis with resultant
thrombocytopenia. Animals that survive the septiccmia
may demonstrate interstitial pneumonitis, encephalitis.
cerebellar and retinal dysplasia, and segmental renal
necrosis.
Diagnostic Tests and Resuits
SEROLOGIC TESTING CHV is poorly immunogenic,
resulting in a poor, short-lived antibody response.
Paired serum samples, collected 10-14 days aparl, need
198
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
to be submitted for testing. Titers that rise and fall
rapidly (4-8 weeks) after exposure indicate a diagnosis
of spontaneous abortion resulting from CHV. Titers of
1:2-1:32 are considered low, but any titer greater than
1:2 with suggestive clinical signs is diagnostically signif-
icant.A fourfold rise in titer is indicative of active
infection.
VIRUS ISOLATION, FlUORESCENT ANTIGEN CHV may
be recovered from nasal or vaginal swabs or from
fetal endothelium, liver, adrenals, lung, spleen, kid-
ney, and lymph nodes during necropsy of infected
pups.
HISTOPAIHOLoGY Pathognomonic lesions present in
formalin-fixed tissues include placental necrosis,visible
grossly as multifocal, small, gray-white foci with
detectable viral inclusion bodies; necrosis and intranl
clear inclusion bodies in liver, spleen, kidney, lung, and
heart of aborted fetuses; and necrosis and hemorrhage
of the kidney, liver, spleen, lungs, and adrenals and
serosanguineous effusion ofbody cavitiesin infected
neonates.
HEMATOLOGICAND SERUM CHEMISTRY PROFILE VALUES
Nonspecific changes are present in affected adults.
Marked thrombocytopenia is prcsent in infected
neonates.
infectiousDiseasesoftheReproductiveTract
199
Treatment
In adults treatment is unnecessary. Infection is self-limit-
ing in immune-competent ainimals, and clinical signs, if
apparent,spontaneouslyresolve.
In neonates survival with antiviral (acyclovir) therapy
has been reported, but neurologic and myocardial dam
age may persist. Recovering puppies shed large amounts
of virus in secretions for 2-3 weeks.Neonatal prophylaxis
in infected kennels may be achieved by intraperitoneal or
subcutaneous administration ofimmtine scrum from pre-
viously infected animals.Viral transfer via fomitcs can be
avoided with good hygiene and isolation protocols.
Adequate intake ofcolostrum andl good nutrition must be
cnsured. In addition, adcquate environmental tcmpera
turemust bc maintained because CHVrcquires low tem
peratures for replication. Raising thie cnvironmental
temperaturc of clinically affected neonates usually does
not. alter the course of disease.
Contro!
Eradication is not practical because CHVis endemic in
the population. Serologic testing is not useful bccause
thc poor antigenicity of CHV precludles development of
pcrsistently elevated titers in all exposed animals. No
commercial vaccineis available.
Susceptiblefemales shouldbe adaptedtothekcn-
ncl cnvironment for a sufficient pcriod before breeding
200
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
Infection must be avoided during the risk period, which
is from 3 weeks before until 3 weeks after whelping
Infection of the litter can be prevented by isolating sus-
pected naive females during the third trimester and
until the pups are 3 weeks old.
Prognosis
Prognosis in adult dogs is good. Previous exposure and
abortion do not preclude future successful reproduc
tion. Colostral antibodies from previously infected
dams are transferred to subsequent litters, which are
protective for clinical disease but not for inapparent
infection during the first 3 weeks of life. Recrude
scence and abortion in subsequent pregnancies occur
rarely.
Overt clinical disease in neonates has a grave prog-
nosis. CHV usually is fatal to pups infected at or immedi-
ately after birth.
Bacteria and Mycoplasmal Infections
Bacteriaf Infection
DEFINITION AND PATHOGENESIS The most important
bacterial agent infecting the reproductive tract is
B. canis. Opportunistic infections by vaginal flora can
cause abortion.The organisms most commonly
Infectious Diseasesofthe Reproductive Tract
201
reported are Escherichia coli,Streptococcus species
Salmonella species, and Campylobacter species. A predis
posing cause often is present, such as cystic endometrial
hyperplasia (CEH) in older females. The most serious
bacterial infection of the female reproductive tract is
pyometra (see Chapter 12).
SIGNALMENT Cycling females of breeding age may
undergo ascending infection anytime the cervix is open
(e.g.: proestrus, estrus, postpartum). Susceptibility may
increase with repeated progesterone exposure from suc-
cessive estrous cycles because of the development of
CEH.
HISToRYBacterialinfectionsmayoccur after arecent
estrous cycle or in the presence of a previously diag-
nosed uterine pathologic abnormafity.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS Overt vulvar dis-
charge may be present. Vaginal cytologic examination
reveals high numbers of degenerative neutrophils. Signs
of generalized illness, such as fever and lethargy,also
mayoccur.
DIAGNOSTICTESTSAND RESULTS Samplesfrom the antc-
rior vagina may be collected, with a guarded swab if
possible, and submitted for culture. Heavy growth of a sin-
gle organism is significant. Neutrophilia may be present in
202
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
systemically ill bitches. Pups that are born dead or that die
as a result of septicemia may be submitted for necropsy
and culture of internal organs and stomach content
TREATMENT Supportive treatment with fluids and
antipyretics is required if systemic illness is present. The
clinician should encourage uterine evacuation if the
cervix is patent. One effective drug regimen is
prostaglandin F2α at a dosage of 0.1-0.25 mg/kg adminis-
tered subcutaneously twice a day. If closed cervix pyome-
tra or prescnce of a macerated fetus is suspected, surgical
intervention is indicated (see Chapter 12). Parenteral
therapy with a broad-spectrum antibiotic should be insti-
tuted pending culture results; a prolonged treatment
course may be necessary to effect a cuire.
PROGNosls Aerobic bacteria can be eliminated com
Recolonization occurs immediately upon cessation of
antibiotic therapy. Underlying defects of the reproductive
tract,such as CEH,must be addressed if present.Severity
of associated systemic illness alters management of the
patient and increases the risk of a negative outcome.
MycopfasmafInfection
DEFINITIONAND PATHOGENESIS Mycoplasmas(genera
Mycoplasma,Ureaplasma,Acholeplasma)are present in
InfectlousDiseasesoftheReproductiveTract
203
natural mucosal flora, are fragile outside the host, a1d
depend on their environment for nutrients.Mucous
membranes of the respiratory and urogenital tracts
provide ideal conditions for colonization. Lack of a
rigid cell wall allows resistance to cell wall-active antibi-
otics, such as penicillins and lysozyme. Few mycoplas
mas have been proven to be pathogenic. Mycoplasmas
are involved in inflammation of mucosal or serosal silr-
faces when organisms are present in sufficient numbers
and when host factors are favorable. These organisms
may become intracellular, resulting in persistent infec-
tions. Canine respiratory and genital tracts contain the
same species of mycoplasma; spread can occur by air-
borne droplets and nasal contact in addition to genital
contact.
SIGNAlMENT These organisms are part of the normal
flora of the reproductive tract of sexually mature
females.
HISToRY The owmers may report presence of a concur-
rent bacterial genital infection or previous antibacterial
treatment for an unrelated conidition.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS Inflammation of
mucosal or serosal surfaces of the reproductive tract may
be present and may be evidenced by mucopurulent vul-
var discharge characteristic of vaginitis.
204
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductlve Tract
DIAGNOSTICTESTSANDRESULTSMycoplasImaOrganisms
are fragile outside a host. Samples for culture must be
refrigerated and shipped on ice within 24 hours.
Samples can be frozen and shipped with dry ice iflonger
transport time is necessary. Vaginal culture specimens
can be collected with cotton swabs and grown out on
Amies medium (noncharcoal) or Hayfields broth
medium. Isolation of mycoplasmas from the vagina does
not constitute a basis for diagnosis of disease of the cau-
dal reproductive tract because mycoplasmas often are
recoverable as part of a mixed bacterial infection.
Isolation of mycoplasma organisms from internal
organs of aborted fetuses is significant. Growth of
Mycoplasma species or Ureaplasma species from biopsy
specimens recovered in a sterile manner from the
uterus,uterine tubes, or ovaries is significant because
mycoplasmas are not a normal inhabitant of these areas.
IREATMENTSensitivity data is not routinely available.
Mycoplasmas are susceptible to macrolides, tetracycline
chloramphenicol,lincosamides,fluoroquinolones,and
nitrofurantoin. Treatment for an extended period is
required to eradicate the organism, and recolonization
Occurs almost immediately. With antibiotic therapy, sus-
ceptible bacteria rapidly are eradicated from the vagina
Mycoplasma species and E.coli emerge during and after
antibiotic therapy. This is an argument against routine
prophylactic use of antibiotics in healthy breeding
Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
205
bitches. Tetracycline and chloramphenicol should be
avoided in pregnant bitches.
PROGNOsIS The significance of these organisms in cases
ofreproductive failureis controversial.Mycoplasma canis
has been isolated from dogs with endometritis, where it
is considered to have an opportunistic role during
mixed infections. Ureaplasma species are isolated more
often from vaginal samples from infertile dogs than
from reproductively normal dogs, but growth of
Mycoplasma species in cultures of the vagina or semen is
not significantly different between fertile and infertile
dogs
Bibliography
Carmichael L, Greene C: Canine brucellosis. In Greene
C(ed): Infectious diseases of the dog and cat
Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
Carmichael L, Greene C: Canine herpesvirus infection.
In Greene C (ed): Infectious diseases of the dog and cat,
Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
Evermann J: Diagnosis of canine herpetic infectionis. In
Kirk R, Bonagura J (eds): Current veterinary therapy X,
Philadelphia, 1989,WB Saunders.
Greene C: Mycoplasma,Ureaplasma,and L-form infec
tions. In Greene C (ed): Infectious diseases of the dog
andcat,Philadelphia,1998,WBSaunders
206  Infectious Diseases of the Reproductive Tract
Hashimoto A, Hirai K, Okada K et al: Pathology of the
placenta and newborn pups with suspected
intrauterine infection of canine herpesvirus,Am
Vet Res40:1236,1979.
 Johnson C: Managemcnt of Brucella canis outbreaks i1l
breeding kennels. In Bonagura J, Kirk R (eds):
Current veterinary therapy Xll, Philadelphia, 1997, WB
Saunders.
Linde-Forsberg C, Bolske G: Canine genital mycoplas
mas and ureaplasmas. In Bonagura J, Kirk R (eds):
Current veterinary therapy Xll, Philadelphia, 1997, WB
Saunders.
Miyoshi M, Ishii Y, Takiguchi M et al: Detection of canine
herpesvirus DNA in the ganglionic neurons and the
lymph node lymphocytes of latently imfected dogs,
I Vet Med Sci 61:375, 1999.
Nicoletti P: Diagnosis and treatment of canine brucel-
losis. In Kirk R, Bonagura J (eds): Current veterinary
therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
Okuda Y, Ishida K, Hashimoto A et al: Virus reactivation
in bitches with a medical history of herpesvirus
infection, Am / Vet Res54:551, 1993.
Poulet H, Guigal PM, Soulier M et al: Protection of pup
pies against canine herpesvirus by vaccination of the
dams,Vet Rec148:691, 2001,
Strom B, Linde-Forsberg C: Effects of ampicillin and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole on the vaginal bac
terial flora of bitches, Am J Vet Res 54:891, 1993.
8
Pregnancy
Ahmed Tibary and Mushtaq Memon
ATA GLANCE
· Gestation length in bitches varies from 59-72 days
from the first breeding, 64-66 days from the preovula-
tory surgein luteinizinghormone(LH),and 56-58
days from the first day of cytologic diestrus.
207
208
Pregnancy
· Pregnancy diagnostic methods include the following:
· Abdominal palpation: Abdominal palpation is best
performed during days 22-30 of pregnancy.
Gestational sacs are not palpable earlier and
become confluent later. Mineralized pups may be
palpable late in gestation,
· Abdominal radiographs: Radiographs are definitive
for pregnancy
yonlyafterfetalmineralization
has occurred, after days 42-45 of pregnancy.
Radiography performed late in gestation is the best
technique for assessment of litter size.
· Abdominal ultrasonography: Gestational sacs can
be identifiedreliably after about day 25of preg-
nancy by using abdominal ultrasonography.Beating
fetal hiearts are first visible between days 22-29, and
fetal movement can be identified after about day 28
of pregnancy. Real-time (B-mode) ultrasonography
is the best technique for assessment of fetal viability.
● The following should be considered regarding hor-
moneassays:
- Measurement of progesterone in serum is not
useful for pregnancy diagnosis in bitches, which
all have a prolonged luteal phase after estrus, or
in queens, which maintain functional corpora
lutea after induction of ovulation regardless of
pregnancy status.
- A relaxin assay is available for pregnancy diagno
sis indogs after about day 25 of pregnancy.
Pregnancy
209
· Care of pregnant bitches includes the following:
· Do not vaccinate or unnecessarily medicate preg-
nant bitches.
· Maintain pregnant bitches on a good plane of nutri-
tion and continue regular exercise.
·Provide extra calories only in the second half of
gestation.
A discussion of pregnancy diagnosis in the bitch
and queen requires an understanding of behavior and
hormonal events associated with the estrous cycle and
breeding. Pregnancy length is highly variable in dogs,
ranging from 59-72 days. Many dog breeders use the
first or last breeding date as a reference point for sub-
sequent pregnancy events. This is the least accurate
method for staging pregnancy because there is a large
variation in the duration of proestrus and estrus in the
bitch. Reduced variability of pregnancy length and
increased accuracy in prediction of whelping date can
be obtained by detcrmining the first day of diestrus by
appearance of neutrophils and a preponderance of
noncornified vaginal epithelial cells on vaginal cyto
logic examination (see Chapter 2).Whelping occurs
inmost bitches 57± 3 days after the first day of
diestrus. An even more precise method for staging
pregnancy and prediction of due date is the use of the
LH peak as the reference date. Gestation length in thc
bitch is 65 ± l days from the IH peak. The day of
the LH peak usually is determined based on incrcase
210
Pregnancy
in plasma progesterone that precedcs ovulation in the
canine species (see Chapter 2). For this discussion of
different techniques of prcgnancy diagnosis, we
assume, unless othcrwise stated, that the reference
date used is thc day of thc LH peak, which occurs
48hoursbcforc ovulation.
Chronology of Fetal Development
Knowlcdge of chiroulologic events of the development
of the embryo and fetus ini the dog and cat, relative
to the preovulatory peak of LH and coitus, respec-
tively, drive lhe veterinarian's choice of thc
most appropriale pregnancy diagnostic technique
(Table 8-1).
Methods of Pregnancy Diagnosis
Pregnancy diagnosis in the bitch and queen can be
based on behavioral, physical, or hormonal changes or
on precise clinical examination involving palpation or
imaging of uterine contents. The main methods of
imaging are radiography and ultrasonography When
a method of prcgnancy diagnosis is being chosen,
the most important criteria are the accuracy of the
mcthod, thc practicality of the method, and the
window of prcgnancy during which the method is
accurate.
Pregnancy
211
Table 8-1. Chronologic Events of the Development of
the Embryo and Fetus in the Dog and Cat
Relative to the LH Peak
Event
Dog
Cat
Oocyte present in the
3 to 5
4 to 5
uterine tube
Fertilization
3days
2 days
Migrationofearlyembryo
9 to 13
4to8
into theuterus
Nonfixed, mobile uterine
9-13 to
4-6 to 12
stagesof the blastocyst
20-21
Implantation
18 to 20
12 to 14
Formation of embryonic
18 to 23
20 to 15
vesicles
Individual gestational sacs
20 to 30-35
15 to 30-35
Confluent gestational sacs
30-35 to 45
30-35 to
40-45
End of embryogenesis
30-32
28-32
Beginning of ossification
40-42
38-40
Beginning of mammary
30-42
45
development
Detection of fetalmovement
55
45
with transabdominal
palpation
Modified from Verstegen J, Silva LD, Onclin K: Ann Med Vet 140:81, 1996:and
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine and feline therrogerology
Philadelphia,2001,WvBSaunders
212
Pregnancy
External Examination and Behavioral Changes
External signs and behavioral changes are not good
indicators of pregnancy status and easily could be con-
fused with pseudopregnancy (see Chapter 14). The
pregnant female shows mammary gland development,
increase in laxity of the abdomen, and behavioral
 changes that may be appreciated subjectively. Breeders
usually mention abdominal laxity at approximately day
25 of pregnancy and male attraction between days 30-35,
but thiese are not objective criteria for the detection of
pregnancy.
Weight gain generally occurs in the pregnant bitch.
An average increase in body weight of 36.2 ± 1.7%
(range, 20% to 55%) has been reported. However, many
bitches may show increased body weight during diestrus
ing proper nutrition. Mammary development starts at
in nonpregnant animals.
AbdominalPalpafion
Abdominal palpation to detect chorioallantoic swellings
(gestational sacs) in the uterus is the oldest clinical
method for the diagnosis of pregnancy in the bitch and
queen. Its major advantage is that it does not require spe-
cial equipment. However, this technique is limited in
that it is not easily accomplished in all animals and the
Pregnancy
213
window of pregnancy during which it is most accurate is
very short. Abdominal palpation is difficult or even
impossible in obese animals and in animals that are
tense when their abdomen is palpated. This technique
has poor accuracy for determination of litter size,partic
ularly during the last trimester of pregnancy.
Pregnancy is diagnosed with abdominal palpation
by gently isolating the uterus between the urinary blad
der and the rectum immediately cranial to the cervix.
Next, the uterine horns are examined from the caudal
part to the cranial extremity between the thumb and fin-
gers. Palpation of the gestational sacs is possiblc as early
as l8 days but it is preferably performed during days
22-24 afterbreeding at the earliest in the bitch and dur
ing days 1420 after breeding at the earliest in thc qucen.
The gestational sacs in the caudal part of the utcrine
horns often are easiest to detect (Figure 8-1).
The chorioallantoic swellings are palpable for 7-15
days.At 28 days, these swellings average 3-5 cm in diame-
ter. As pregnancy advances, the swellings increasc in size,
change to an oblong shape, and become confluent and
difficult to distinguish.The enlarged fluid-filled uterine
horns drop and become difficult to differentiate from
other abdominal viscera, making diagnosis very difficult
after day 30 of pregnancy. Palpation of mineralized
fetuses becomes possible after day 40-45 of pregnancy. In
practice, palpation for pregnancy in the bitch should be
scheduled to be perforrmed 26-28 days after first mating.
214
Pregnancy
Figure 8-1. Top, Technique of abdominal palpation
for pregnancy diagnosis in the bitch. Bottom, Pregnant
bitchuteruspresenting13gestationalsacs.
Pregnancy
215
If no prcgnancy can be detected a1 that time, a second
examination should be performed a week later.
Abdominal palpation has been reported to be 88% accu-
rate for pregnauicy diagnosis in the bitch but only 12%
accurate for the determination of fetal number. The
most common mistakes are falsc-positive results from
palpation of a stool-filled colon and scgmental uterine
cnlargement resulting from pyometra.
Radiography
Radiography is an accurate method of pregnaincy diag-
nosis, but only during the later stages of pregnancy.
Radiography allows accurate determination of litter size,
detection offetal abnormalities,and determinationof
fetal size. It is therefore the method of choicc for a
prepartumexamination.
Radiography can be used starting at 3 weeks of preg-
nancy to detect uterine enlargement. Early diagniosis,
betweenthcthirdandfifthweekofpregnancy,may
require the use of a contrast agent in the abdomenl, such
as injection of either carbon dioxide gas,room air,or
radiopaque solution. This technique allows visualization
of the embryonic vesicles but not the fetus itself and is
neither practical nor commonly used.
Mineralization of the fetal skeleton is detectable by
radiography 42-45 days after the LH peak. In practice, it
is better to wait until days 45-50 after the LH pcak to
216
Pregnancy
increase the accuracy of diagnosis and determination of
fetal number. The vertebral column becomes visible at
6 weeks; shadows from the skull are recognizable from
day 45. At 7 weeks, the head, spine, ribs, pelvis, and limbs
are sufficiently mineralized and can be visualized in dogs
and cats. Determination offetal number is based on enu-
meration of skulls and associated vertebral colurnnis
(Figure 8-2). Fetal viability should be questioned if
radiographs show intrauterine gas pockets or misshapen
fetal skeletons. Radiographic signs of fetal death can be
seen within 48 hours after the occurrence of fetal death
Figure 8-2. Radiograph of near-term pregnancy in a bitch.
Note the numerousfetal skulls.
Pregnancy
217
and include depression of the frontal bones of the cra-
nium and abnormal angulations of the spine.
Frequent use of radiology is not recommended dur
ing the same pregnancy. Exposure of the fetus to radia-
tion may cause abnormalities,particularly during the
Organogenesis phase of fetal development (30-35 days).
Radiography should be considered when there is a risk
ofmalformation or complication. This examination is
best performed after day 55 of pregnancy. Prediction of
dystociaresultingfromfetomaternal disproportionhas
been suggested based on measurement of fetal skulls in
relation to the maternal pelvis, but the usefulness of this
is debatable.
Uitrasonography
Since its introduction in the 1970s, ultrasonography has
become the gold standard technique for pregnancy
diagnosis in the dog and cat. It is accurate from as early
as days 13-15 after matingin the queen and from days
16-18 after fertilization (days 19-21 after the LH pcak) in
the bitch. This technique is used extensively for early
pregnancy diagnosis, evaluation of fetal viability, and
tentative determination of fetal number.
Ultrasonographic imaging of the uterus is done
transabdominally with asector or linear transducer with
a frequency of 5.0 or 7.5 MHz. Use of a 5.0-MHz trans-
ducer is recommended for large-breed dogs. Use of a
218
Pregnancy
7.5-MHz transducer is recommended for pregnancy
breed dogs and cats.
Ultrasonographic examination usually is performed
with the bitch in dorsal rccumbency. Standing examina
tion also may be pcrforined and has the advantage of
reducing the distaice between the fetus and the probc.
With either positioning, the hair of the abdominal wall
needs to be clipped from the pelvis to the umbilical scar,
and coupling gcl should be applied to improve image
quality. Next, the probe is placed on the linea alba just
cranial to the pelvic brim. The urinary bladder is visual-
ized as the primary landmark. The uterus usually is
detected dorsal to the bladder. The nonpregnant uterus
is difficult to visualize, whereas the pregnant uterus is
relatively easy to image. Each uterine horn can be exam-
imed along its entire length. Diagnosis of pregnancy with
ultrasound is possible as soon as the embryonic vesicles
can be idenitified as discrete anechoic spherical struc-
tures. The earliest stage possible for the diagnosis of
these structures depends on the quality of the equip
ment, the frequency of thc transducer used, patient
characteristics (e.g., obesity, ncrvousness, breed, age),
and most important, thc cxpcrtise of the operator.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC CHRONOLOGY OF PREGNANCY IN
THE 8ITCH Although diagnosis of pregnancy with use of
ultrasonography has been described as being possible as
Pregnancy
219
early as day l0, most authors agree that in the best condi-
tions, with precise timing of the LH peak andl use of a
7.5-MHz transducer, detection is not possible until day 17
after the LH peak or approximately I1 days after the first
day of diestrus, at the earliest. Authors using the date of
first mating as the reference date report dctcction of
pregnancy between days 18-28. Gestational sacs appcar
11-25 days after the last mating. When the LH peak is
used as a reference,pregnancy diagnosis is highly accu-
rate after days 21-23. It is importanl to note that when
diagnosis is made very early, confirmation examinatio11
is needed at. a later stage. Pregnancy losses that may
occur in the early stages of gestation may not. be accom-
panicd by clinical signs of spontaneous abortion.When
the date of the LH peak is not known, pregnanicy diagn1o-
sis should be attempted approximately 30 days from the
lastmating
Embryonic vesicles are spherical anechoic struc-
tures, 2 mn in diameter. The dorsal and ventral poles of
the conceptus are brighter than is the center. I'he uterus
is more echogenic in the areas of contact with the con-
ceptus and less echogenic in areas between the embry
onic vesicles. The gcstational sacs increasc in size and
become oblong with increased gestational age. Thc
embryo proper can be detected 23-25 days after the LH
peak or 16 days after the onset of diestrus.By day 24 the
allantoic sac can be visualized near the einbryo. Fetal
heartbeats first are detected between days 22-29.First
detectionoffetalmovementshasbeenreportedto
220
Pregnancy
occur between days 28-36 of pregnancy. The embryonic
limb buds and choroidal plexus of the brain are suffi-
ciently differentiated and identifiable by day 32 of preg-
nancy. The identification of the head, trunk, and
abdomen is possible by day 35 (Figure 8-3). The hypere-
choic fetal skeleton is evident from day 33 onward. The
heart valves and aorta become easily identifiable at this
time as well (Figure 8-4). The diameter of the trunk
exceeds that of the head after day 40 of pregnancy. At
that stage of pregnancy, other organs become recogniza
Figure 8-3. Ultrasonogram of the fetus in a bitch. H, Head;
T, thorax.
Pregnancy
221
Figure 8-4. M-mode ultrasonogram (right side) of the fetus
showingheart(arrow)activity.
ble; the lungs, diaphragm, liver, and stomach are the
most easily detected. The bladder and urachus become
identifiable a few days later.During the last 3 weeks of
pregnancy, the kidneys, fetal vasculature (including
umbilical vessels), and intestines are detected.
An attempt to determine fetal age has been made
based on measurement of the biparietal or trunk diame-
ter. However, these measurements have to take into con-
sideration differences related to breed and litter size. In
222
Pregnancy
one study in which crown-rump length, biparietal diame-
ter, and body diameter of fetuses were measured in a vari-
ety of breeds of dog,it was demonstrated that the canine
fetus grows rapidly in body diameter at 4-5 weeks of gesta
tion and grows rapidly in bodylength and head diameter
about 1 week later. Considerable variation was noted in
these measurements among individual bitches and cven
among littermates. It is preferable to average the meas-
urements ofseveralfetuses toincrcasethepredictive
accuracy of stage of pregnancy with this technique.
Attempts also have been made to determine litter
size with ultrasonography. The accuracy of fctal number-
ing has been shown to be only 38% during early preg-
nancy and even lower later in pregnancy. However, if the
estimation is limited towhether thebitchis carrying five
pups or more versus folur pups or fewer, the predictive
value of ultrasonography increases to 100% and 83.2 %,
respectively. The best stage for determination oflitter
size is between days 25-35 after implantatio1l.
nancy detection and fetal numbering is the incidence of
fetalloss.Fetal resorption is known to occur throughout
pregnancy without effect on the adjacent concepti.
Embryonic resorption is recognized by the low volume
and increased echogenicity of embryonic fluid, loss of
embryonic mass and heartbeat, collapse of the concep-
tus with thickening of the uterine wall, and reduced size
in comparison with adjacent concepti.
Pregnancy
223
ULTRASONOGRAPHICCHRONOLOGYOFPREGNANCYIN
THE QUEEN In the queen,embryonic vesicles are
detected earlier than in the bitch. Ultrasonographic
diagnosis of pregnancy is highly accurate betweer 11-
16 days after breeding. Heartbeats are detecled betwee1l
days 16-25. The enlarged uterus of pregnancy may be
detectable as early as 4 days postcoitus. An anechoic
region corresponding to the gestational sac is apparent
between 1l-l4days.Gestational sacsincrease in1 size
37 mm on day 29. The echogenic fetal pole is visualized
between days 15-l7 postcoitus. Fetal hearibeats are
detected between days 16-20. The fetal membranes
fetal limbs and head are sufficiently differentiated and
easily recognized.Fetalmovements are apparent
between days28-40.
Diameters of gestational sacs vary considerably at the
same stage of pregnancy among fetuses both within and
between litters. Ultrasonographic estimation of littcr size
is best made early in gestation, although the possibility of
suhsequent fetal resorption still exists and should be con-
sidered. Early examinations may completely miss some of
the gestational sacs.Fetuses located closest to the uterine
bifurcation tend to be the first detected.Fetuses tend to
be distributed evenly between the two uterine horns.
Nonviable fetuses show no motion and rapidly lose iden-
tifiable morphology within 1 day of fetal death.
224
Pregnancy
Ultrasonography routinely is scheduled to bc per-
formed approximately 16 days from the last observed
mating. The earliest that pregnancy can be confirmed by
ultrasonography in cats is between days 1l-l4 of gesta-
tion. If negative results are obtained at that time, the
procedure should be repeated 5-7 days later. The
chronology of appearance of specific ultrasonographic
characteristics of the fetuses can be used to estimate
stage of pregnancy with relative accuracy, at least during
thefirst30days.
Acute-Phase Proteins
Acute-phase proteins are released as part of an inflam-
mation-like response to the invasion of the uterus by
fetal tissue during implantation and placentation. This
response seems to be peculiar to the canine species.
Acute-phase proteins used for pregnancy testing include
C-reactive protein (CRP) and fibrinogen. Elevation in
both CRP and fibrinogen can be used as an indicator of
pregnancy in the bitch between days 30-50 of pregnancy.
However, other inflammatory processes, such as pyome-
tra, may increase plasma fibrinogen and CRP. Increase
in CRP also is seen in dogs with hepatitis, acute nephri-
tis,orperitonitis.
CRP belongs to a group of plasma proteins pro-
duced by the liver during the acute phase of an inflam-
matory reaction. Canine CRP is a glycoprotein that can
Pregnancy
225
be detected as early as 24 hours after an inflammatory
reaction. A significant increase in CRP is observed in
  r   s g
Detection of CRP requires a homologous canine CRP
assay because human CRP assays are not very accurate.
No such assay is commercially available at this time.
Fibrinogen increases significantly in pregnant
midgestation.Fibrinogen concentrations of greater
than 280-300 mg/dlare consistentwith pregnancy at
this stage. Assay of this protein has not proved useful in
clinical practice
Hematologic Changes
Normal packed cell volume (PCV) in the nonpregnalt
bitch during diestrus is 40%-55%. A decrease in PCV is
observed in pregnant bitches starting at approximalely
day 20 after the LH peak.Around day 35 and near term,
PCV may be below 40% and 35%, respectively. However,
this parameter is not useful on an individual basis
because of thc large variability between animals.
normochromic anemia. Mean corpuscular volume and
hemoglobin concentrations remain unchanged. This
anemiaprobablyresults fromhemodilutionbecause of
increased plasma volume. From midpregnancy until day
50, bitches may have a leukocytosis with neutrophilia. It
226
Pregnancy
is important to keep in mind that an increase in white
blood cells and decreased PCV during diestrus also may
be caused by pyometra or other pathologic processes.
Hormonal Methods
PROGESTERONE The pattern of secretion of progcs-
terone is similar in both the pregnant and nonpregnant
bitch and cannot be used as a method for pregnanicy
diagnosis in the dog. In the queen, progestcrone may
nancy after day 35 postcoitus. In this species, proges-
terone levels decrease progressively to basal levels by 40
days in pseudopregnant females but are maintained
above l ng/ml in pregnant females until the day of
parturition.
RELAxiN Relaxin is the only hormone known to be spe
cific for pregnancy in carnivores. Relaxin is produced
primarily by the fetoplacenntal unit. In the bitch relaxin is
detected from the third week of pregnancy. Plasma con-
centration peaks at 45 ng/1ml at days 40-50 of pregnancy.
Plasma relaxin concentrations decrease slowly after par-
turition but remain at detectable levels for the first 4-9
weekspostpartum.
In the queen relaxin is not present during estrus or
pseudopregnancy. It becomes detectable from day 25
of pregnancy, plateaus between days 30-35, and is
Pregnancy
227
detectable until 10-15 days prepartum, after which time
plasma concentrations slowly decrease.
letermination ofplasmalevels ofrelaxinis acconl-
plished by performing radioimmunoassay o1 cnzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay tcchniques, which are
available in a few specialized laboratories. Rapid relaxin
tests have been developed for in-clinic pregnancy testing
of dogs (ReproCHEK and Witness; Synbiotics, San
Diego, Calif.) . These tests allow detection of pregnancy
starting around day 25 after ovulation. False-positive
results occur in the presenice of fetal resorption.
PROLACTIN Prolactin concentrationsbegin toincrease
significantly in the pregnant bitch 25-30 days after the
LH peak, reaching concentrations as high as 60 ng/ml
close to parturition. Prolactin cannot be used for preg-
nancy diagnosis before day 35 after the LH peak in.the
bitch. In the pregnant queen, plasma prolactin concen-
tration increases from days 20-25 after mating; no
increase is observed in the nonprcgnant queen1.
Summary
·Audominal ultrasonographyis the best methodforpreg
nancy diagnosis.It can be used for early detection of
pregnancy and evaluation of fetal development and
viability and is relatively accurate in estimating fetal
number during early pregnancy.
228
Pregnancy
· Abdominal palpation is the easiest and cheapest
method for pregnancy diagnosis in cats and dogs.
However, its accuracy can be affected by operator
experience and the size andbodyconditionof the
patient. It should be uised between days 24-28 or
after day 45 of pregnancy in the bitch.
· Radiography is precise but only after days 42-45 of
pregnancy. It does not allow an evaluation of fetal
viability but is very accurate for the determination of
litter size. It is best used after day 55 after the LH
peak.
·Relaxin assay is commercially available and detects
the LH peak.
· CRP and fibrinogen are increased in pregnant
bitches, but they are not specific to pregnancy. PCV
is decreased after implantation in pregnant bitches
but cannot be used as a diagnostic tool.
Care of the Bitch and Queen
during Pregnancy
Breeders often ask veterinarians questions about proper
care of the pregnant bitch or queen. Proper care mainly
involves nutrition and prevention of early fetal loss,
abortion, and fetal defects. However, care of the preg-
nant female also should include monitoring during the
pregnancy, particularly for those animals that are at risk
Pregnancy
229
for fetal defects or dystocia or have medical conditions
that may be exacerbated by pregnancy.
Nutrition during Pregnancy
NUTRITION OF THE PREGNANT BITCH In dogs most fetal
growth occurs during the last 3-4 weeks of pregnancy.
More than 75% of fetal weight gain occurs between days
40-55of pregnancy.Therefore adjustment of feeding fo1
pregnancyrequirementsisnotnecessaryuntilthelast
4 weeks of pregnancy, particularly in bitches that were
in good body condition at the time of breeding.
Maintenance requirements have been estimated as
132 kcal of metabolizable energy (ME) per kilogram of
cient during the first 4 weeks of pregnancy. Energy
intake should be increased by 10% per week during the
last 3-4 weeks of pregnancy, to reach levels 25%-30%
above the maintenance level by parturition.With this
adjustment, most animals will register a 15%-25%
increase in body weight by the time of whelping. Protein
requirementsgenerally areestimated tobe25%-30%of
the total energy, or 71-85 g of protein for each 1000 kcal
of ME. From 30%-40% of protein should be of animal
origin to prevent amino acid deficiencies. Lipids
increase energy density and palatability of the feed and
play an important role in fetal development. Lipids
should represent 25%-65% of the energy in a diet; this
230
Pregnancy
translates to 30-70 g offat pe1 1000 kcal of ME or 120-280
g/kg dry matter in the feed. Carbohydrates generally
need not be supplemented during prcgnancy, especially
if the fecd contains enough of the amino acids nccessary
for glucose formation. Fiber should not excced 5%.
Increase in uterine size during thie last fcw weeks of
pregnancy is an important limiting factor for food
intake. Pregnant bitches should be fed food that is high
in calories and protein in multiple small boluses. Growth
orlactationcommercialfeedisappropriate(3.6kcal/kg
food drymatter).
Precise nutritional supplementation is difficult in
the pregnant bitch because it depends primarily on litter
size. Most conmercial pet food is well balanced and can
be used safely. Excessive caloric intake may result in
heavy fetuses and increased risk of dystocia. Weight
gained during pregnancy will be lost immediately after
whelping. Most balanced commercial feed provides ade
quate amounts of calcium and vitamins. It is important
to avoid cxcessive supplementation with calcium or vita
mins during pregnancy because they cail predispose the
bitch to eclampsia and dystocia and can cause physical
abnormalitiesinthcpups.
NUTRITiON OF THE PREGNANT QUEEN Unlike in the
bitch, the pregnant queen shows a steady increase in
weight beginning the second week of gestation. At about
3 weeks of gestation, many queens undergo a short
Pregnancy
231
period of inappetence lasting 3-I0 days that may be
accompaniedbymildweightloss.Queenswillloseone
third of the weight gained during pregnancy innmedi-
ately after parturition. The remaining two thirds are
stored as body fat thiat is gradually lost during lactation.
Nutrition of the pregnant queen should be slowly
adjusted starting the second week of pregnancy to
exceed maintenance 1evels by 25%-50% at parturition.
During the final weeks of gestation, caloric intake
should be approximately 220 calories/kg. Commercial
food usually is well balanced, but some dry foods may be
lowinnutrients thatproduceenergy
DrugsIncompatiblewithPregnancy
Most of the drugs used in canine and feline practice
have not been tested for their effect on pregnancy and
fetaldevelopment.The toxic effect on the fetus
depends on the dose, duration of use, stage of preg-
mancy, and ability of the drug to cross the placenta.
Drugs that are potentially the most harmful includc
aminoglycoside antibiotics, which are neurotoxic; chlor-
anphcnicol,which decrcascs bone marrow dcvclop
ment; tctracyclinc, which causes malformations of the
bones alld teeth; and anesthetics, which 1nlay produce
respiratory deprcssion in the fetus. Corticosteroids may
cause abortion, fetal death, and abnormalities such as
cleft palate. Estrogenic and androgenic compounds
232
Pregnancy
may cause malformation of the genitourinary system
(see Chapter 10).
Monitoring the Pregnant Female
Owners should be instructed to monitor changes in behav
ior, food intake,excessive mammary devclopment,exces
sive abdominal distension, onset of lactation, and
abnormal vulvar discharge in pregnant queens and
bitches and to report any abnorimalities to their vcterinari-
ans promptly. High-risk pregnancies include those bitches
andqueenswith systemic disease,obesity,small litter sizc
or a history of dystocia. A thorough physical examination
should be performed at least three times during preg-
radiographs should be obtained late in gcstation to assess
the size of the puppies or kittens and the litter size.
Pregnancy toxemia has been reportcd to occur in
bitches carrying large litters. Ketosis devclops during late
pregnancy in bitches that are not able to meet the nutri-
tional requirements of pregnancy and develop a negative
energy balance.Anorexia during late pregnancy always
should be taken seriously. Pregnancy toxemia occurs in all
breeds of dog, but Yorkshire terriers and Labrador retriev
ers seem to bc predisposed, Affected bitches must be pro
vided with parentcral nutrition if they will not or cannot
eat and the prcgnancy ended by elective termination (see
Chapter 5) or cesarean section (C-section).
Pregnancy
233
The effect of pregnancy on glucose homeostasis may
lead to onset of diabetes mellitus.Animals with diabetes
mellitus should not be bred purposefully. Development
of gestational diabetes inpreviouslyhealthybitches is
thought to be the effect of progesterone on carbohycdrate
metabolism; progesterone stimulates sccretion of growth
hormone, which antagonizes insulin. Pups from diabelic
bolic changes, predisposing the bitch to dystocia.
Monitoring of the pregnant bitch also should
include prediction of onset of parturition. Deter-
mination of the LH peak or first day of diestrus helps
reduce the variability in pregnancy length. Nesting
behavior is displayed within a week of whelping. Rectal
temperature should be recorded thrce to four tiines
daily, starting at 54 days after mating. A drop of 1°F (usu-
ally to less than 99.0' F) indicates onset of parturition
within 8-24 hours. In high-risk pregnancies, external
monitoring devices based on uterine activity and fetal
heart rates should be used (see Chapter 9).
Bibliography
Addiego LA, Tsutsui T, Stewart DR et al: Determination
of the source ofimmunoreactive relaxin in the cat.
Biol Reprod 37:1165, 1987.
Allen WE,Meredith MJ: Detection of pregnancy in
the bitch: a study of abdominal palpation, A-mode
234
Pregnancy
ultrasound and Doppler ultrasound techniques,
SmallAnimPract22:609,1981.
Barr FJ: Pregnancy diagnosis and assessment of fetal via-
bility in the dog: a review, J Small Anim Pract 29:647,
1988.
Biourge V, Istasse L, Gielen M et al: Alimcntation du
chien. II. Les besoins du chien a l'ciitretien [in
French], Ann Med Vet 131:81, I987.
Bondestam S, Alitalo I, Karkkainen M: Real-time ultra-
sound pregnancy diagnosisin thc bitch,/Small Anim
Pract24:145,1983.
Brown RG: A comparison of ccrtified and non-certified
pet foods, Can Vet J38:707,1997.
Cartee RE, Rowles T: Preliminary study of the ultrasono-
graphic diagnosis of pregnancy and fetal develop-
mentin the dog,Am/Vet Res45:1259,1984.
Concannon PW: Canine pregnancy and parturition, Vet
Cin.NorthAm16:453,1986.
Concannon PW, Gimpel T, Newton l.F: Postim-
plantation increasc in plasrna fibrinogen concentra-
tion with increase in relaxin concentration in
prcgnant dogs,An/VetRes57:1382,1996.
Concannon PW, McCann JP, 1emple M: Biology and
endocrinology of ovulation, pregnancy and parturi
tion in the dog, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:3, 1989.
Concannon
 PW, Powers ME， Holder W et al:
Pregnancy and parturition in the bitch, Biol Reprod
16:517, 1977.
Pregnancy
235
Concannon P, Whaley S, I ein D et al: Canine gestatio11
length: variation related to time of mating and fer
tile life of sperm, Am/VetRes44:1819,1983.
Davidson AP, Nyland TG, Tsutsui T: Pregnancy diagnosis
with ultrasound in thc domestic cat,Vet Radiol
27:109,1986.
DeCoster R, Beckers JF, Beerens D et al: A homologouls
radioimmunoassay for canine prolactin: plasma lev
els during the reproductive cycle, Acta Endorrinol
(Copenh)103:473,1983
Diez M, Istasse I .: Les alimens industriels chez le chici1: car-
acteristiques et utilisation dans differents etats physi
ologiques [in French], Ann Med Vet 139:309, 1995.
Eckcrsall PD,ConnerJG:Bovine and canine acute phase
proteins, Vet Res Commun 12:169, 1988.
Eckersall PD, Harvey MJ, Ferguson J et al: Acute phase
proteins in canine pregnancy (Canis familiaris),
IReprodFertilSuppl47:159,1993.
England GC: Ultrasonic assessment of abnormal preg-
nancy,VetClinNorthAm28:849,1998
England GC: Ultrasound evaluation of pregnancy and
spontanlcous cmbryonic resorption in the bitch,
SmallAnimPract33:430,1992.
England GC, Allen WE: Diagnosis of pregnancy and
pyometra in the bitch using real-time ultrasonogra-
phy,Vet Annu30:217,1990.
England GC,AllenWE:Studies ofcanine pregnancy using
B-mode ultrasound: diagnosis of early pregu1ancy and
236
Pregnancy
the number of conceptuses,J Small Anim Pract
31:321, 1990.
Gentry PA, Liptrap RM: Influence of progesterone and
pregnancy on canine fibrinogen values,J Small Anim
Pract 22:185, 1981.
Gunzel-Apel AR, Hayer M, Mischke R: Dynamics of
haemostasis during the oestrus cycle and pregnancy
in bitches,J Reprod Fertil Suppl51:185, 1997.
Holme Dw: Practical use of prepared food for dogs and
cats. In Edney AT (ed): Dog and cat nutrition, Oxford,
1982, Pergamon Press.
Johnston SD,Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine and
feline theriogenology,Philadelphia,200l,WBSaun1clers.
Kronfeld DS: Optimal ranges of nutrieiits for dogs and
cats, Tisch Dierg Suppl1:425,1986.
Kronfeld DS: Optimal regimens based on recipes for
cookinginhome orhospital orinproprietarypct
food. In Anderson RS (ed): Nutrition and behaviour
in dogs and cats, Oxford, 1982, Pergamon Press.
Lamm AM: Ultrasound diagnosis of pregnancy in thc
dog. Acta RadiolSuppl 319:293, 1972.
Lawler DF, Bebiak DM: Nutrition and management of
rcproduction in thc cat, Vet Clin North Am 16:495,
1986.
Lewis LD,Morris ML:Small animal clinical nuirition,
Topeka, 1984, Mark Morris Associates.
Lewis LD,Morris ML,Had MS: Small animal clinicat
nutritiomn IHl, Topeka, 1987, Mark Morris Associates.
Pregnancy
237
Loveridge GG: Body weight changes and energy intake
of cats during gestation and lactation, Anim Technol
37:7,1986.
Mailhac JM, Chaffaux S, Legrand JJ et al: Pregnancy
diagnosis in the cat: use of echography, Rec Med Vef
156:899,1980.
McCann JP, AItszuler N, Hampshire JE: Growth hor-
mone, insulin, cortisol, luteinizing hormone, and
diabetes in beagle bitches treated with medroxy-
progesterone acetate,Acta Endocrinol (Copenh)
104:167,1987.
Moser D: Feeding to optimize canine reproductive effi-
ciency, Probl Vet Med 4:545, 1992.
Mosier JE: Nutritional recommendations for gestation
and lactation in the dog, Vet Clin North Am 7:683,
1977.
Nett TM, Akbar AM, Phemister RD et al: Levels of
luteinizing hormone, estradiol and progesterone in
serurm during the oestrus cycle and pregnancy in
the beagle bitch. Proceedings of the Society for
ExperimentalBiologyandMedicine,1975
Nguyen P:Feedingof the cat:2.Commercialcat food
and homemade food,PointVet28:241,1996
Okkens AS, Bevers MM, Dieleman SJ et al: Evidence for
prolactin as the main leutotrophic factor in the
cyclicdog,VetQ12:193,1990.
Okkens AS,Silva LD,DonnayI etal: Luteotrophicaction
of prolactin in dogs and the effects of a dopamine
238
Pregnancy
agonist, cabergoline, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 47:403,
1993.
Papich MG: Effects of drugs on pregnancy. In Kirk RW,
Bonagura JD (eds): Current veterinary therapy X,
Philadelphia,1989,WBSaunders.
Ralston SL; Feeding for breeding. Proceedings of the
Society for Theriogenology, Toronto, Ontario
Canada, 1990.
Rivers B, Johnston GR: Diagnostic imaging of the repro-
ductive organs of the bitch: methods and limita-
ions,VetClinNorthAm21:437,1991.
Shille VM: Reproductive physiology and endocrinology
of the fennale and male. In Ettinger SJ (ed): Textbook
of veterinary internal medicine, Philadelphia, 1989, WB
Saunders.
Shille VM, Gontarek J: The use of ultrasonography for
pregnancy diagnosis in the bitch, J Am Vet Med Assoc
187:1021,1985.
Sloan JM, Path MR, Olivier IM: Progesterone-induced
diabetes in the dog, Diabetes 24:337, 1975.
Smith MS, McDonald LE: Serum levels of luteinizing
hormone and progesteronc during the estrous
cycle, pseudopregnancy and pregnancy in the dog.
Endocrinology94:404,1974.
Steinetz BG, Bullesbach EE, Goldsmith LT et al: Use
of synthetic canine relaxin to develop a rapid
homologous radioimmunoassay, Biol Reprod
54:1252,1996.
Pregnancy
239
Steinetz BG, Goldsmith LT, Brown MC et al: Use of
serum relaxin for pregnancy diagnosis in the bitch.
In Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds): Current veterinary
therapy XIll,Philadelphia, 2000,WB Saunders.
Steinetz BG, Goldsmith LT, Lust G: Plasma relaxin levels
in pregnant and lactating dogs, Biol Reprod 37:719,
1987.
Stewart DR, Stabenfeldt GH: Relaxin activity in the preg-
nantcat,BiolReprod32:848,1985.
Stowater J, Memon M: Ultrasonic features of the dog
uterus andfetus,JReprodFertilSuppl39:329,1988.
Stowater J, Memon M, Tidwell A et al: Ultrasonographic
features of feline fetal development. Proceedings of
the Society for Theriogenology, Orlando, 1988.
Tiedmann K, Henschel E: Early radiographic diagnosis
ofpregnancyinthe cat,J SmallAnimPract14:567,
1973.
Toal RL, Walker MA, Henry GA: A comparison of real-
time ultrasound, palpation and radiography in
pregnancy detection and litter size determination in
the bitch,VetRadiol27:102,1986.
Verstegen J, Onclin K, Silva LD et al: Regulation of pro.
gesterone during pregnancy in the cat: studics on
the roles of corpora lutea, placenta and prolactin
secretion,JReprodFertilSuppl47:165,1993
Verstegen J, Silva LD, Onclin K: Mise au point sur le diag-
nostic de gestation chiez les carnivores domestiques
[in French],Ann MedVet140:81,1996.
240
Pregnancy
Wolter R: L'alimentation du chien et du chat,Paris,1982,
MaisonAlfort.
Yaeger AE, Concannon Pw: Association between the
preovulatory luteinizing hormone surge and the
early ultrasonographic detection of pregnancy and
fetal heartbeats in beagle dogs, Theriogenology
34:655,1990.
Yaeger AE, Mohammed HO, Meyers-Wallen V et al:
Ultrasonographic appearance of the uterus, pla
centa, fetus, and fetal membranes throughout accu-
rately timed pregnancy in beagles, Am J Vet Res
53:342,1992.
9
Parturition and Dystocia
JaneA.Barber
ATAGLANCE
● Induction of parturition is mediated by the fetuses. If
the litter is very small or the fetuses are dead, labor
may not be initiated.
· In bitches, serum progesterone concentration must
be less than 2 ng/ml for labor to begin. Decline in
serum progesterone is reflected by a transient
241
242
Parturition and Dystocia
decrease in body temperature. Monitoring rectal tem
day 54 of pregnancy or directly measuring serum
progesterone concentration canhelp to determine
whether parturition is imminent.
· Stages of labor are as follows:
· Stage I: The cervix dilates, duration averages 6-12
hours, dam is restless, and pants.
·Stage II:The offspring are
passed,duration
depends on litter size, and coordinated abdominal
contractions are evident.
· Stage III: The placentas pass, duration depends on
litter size, and dam usually alternates passage of
pups and placentas.
· Labor can be monitored with external devices that
record uterine contractions and can be used to detect
fetal heartbeats.
+ Postpartum care includes the following:
· Do not allow bitches and queens to eat the placenl-
tas. They are of no benefit and may cause gastroen
teritis.
varies in color from brick red to green-black, has no
odor, and may persist for up to 3 weeks.
· Abnormalities of the dam seen postpartum include
mastitis (see Chapter 14), metritis and subinvolution
of placental sites (see Chapter 12), and eclampsia.
Parturition and Dystocia
243
- Eclampsia is hypocalcemia. It is most common in
small-breed dogs nursing large litters and typically
occurs at 2-3 weeks of lactation. Clinical signs
include ataxia, restlessness, and disorientation1.
Glinical progression to seizurcs, hyperthermia,
and death may occur. Calcium is administered
intravenously or subcutaneously for immediate
treatment; calcium and vitamin D, to be adminis-
tered orally, are sent home withi the dog.
+ Dystocia is abnormal birth. Causcs include the following:
·Maternal factors:uterine inertia,inadequate size of
birth canal
· Fetal factors: fetal oversize, abnormal orientation of
the fetus as it eniters the birth canal
· Determine whether dystocia is present by doing the
following:
·History:StageIlaborformore than12hours,stro1ng
stage IIlabor for more than 30 minutes, weak stage
I1 labor for more than 4 hours before first ncornate
born,more than 2 hours betwcen offspring, history
of dystocia, abnormal vulvar discharge passed.
Physical examination:Digital vaginal examination
reveals puppy or kitten obstructing birth canal with
or without abnormal orientation, bitch systemically
ill, abnormal vulvar discharge present (e.g., frank
hemorrhage, pus, green discharge before any
neonates born[indicatesplacental separation]).
244
Parturition and Dystocia
· Diagnostic tests: Tests include abdominal radio-
· Treatment options for dystocia include the
following:
● Manipulation: difficult because of small size ofbitch
or queen
·Medical therapy
- Oxytocin: 0.25-4 1U administered intramuscu-
larly; repeat at 20- to 30-minute intervals; give n0
more than three doses if no effect seen
· Surgical therapy
- Cesarean section (C-section)
-Resuscitation ofneonates
Remove fluid from oral and nasal cavities.
Rub puppy or kitten vigorously to stimulate res-
piration and warm them.
(doxapram), or anesthetic reversal agent
(naloxone).
Endocrinology of Parturition
Corticosteroids
Normal parturition in the bitch results from a com-
plex cascade of endocrinologic events. Although the
exact mechanisms leading to initiation of parturition
are not completely known,this hormonal cascade
Parturition and Dystocia
245
is thought to be initiated by the fetuses. During thc last
5-l0 days of gestation, the fetuses become stresscd,
perhaps from crowding or from hypoxia that occurs
when fetal oxygen requirements exceed placental
delivery capability. In response to fetal stress, the fetal
pituitary gland secretes adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH). Fetal ACTH then induces secretion of gluco
corticoids, primarily cortisol, from the fetal adrenal
gland. Cortisol acts on the placenta to cause decreased
production of progesterone concurrent with an
increasedproduction ofestrogen12-48 hours before
parturition.
Prostagiandins andProgesterone
Both fetal cortisol and placental estrogen promote syn-
thesis and release of prostaglandins locally in the pla-
centa and endometrium.Prostaglandins probably also
are produced in the myometrium, cervix, and fetal
membranes. Prostaglandins are potent luteolytic agents.
In the bitch the ovary is the sole source of progesterone,
Parturition cannot occur in bitches until the serum
progesterone concentration falls to less than 1-2 ng/ml.
Endogenous or exogenous prostaglandin F2α (PGF2a)
can be used to induce luteolysis, cause maternal proges-
terone levels to plummet, and initiate parturition in
many species, including the dog.
246
Parturltion and Dystocla
Estrogens
Estrogens enhance prostaglandin synthesis. The
increase in estrogen secretion near parturition leads
to increased prostaglandin synthesis. In addition, oxy-
tocin stimulates direct prostaglandin release from the
uterus.
sensitizing the uterus to oxytocin through an upregula
tion of oxytocin receptors. Elevated estrogen concentra-
tions also induce oxytocin release from the posterior
lobe of the pituitary gland. Oxytocin, in turn, further
stimulates prostaglandin production in the endometrium.
Prostaglandins,in addition tobeing luteolytic,also act
directly on the myometrium to increase uterine contrac-
tility. Meanwhile, progesterone-mediated inhibition of
myometrial contractility decreases as progesterone con-
centrations decline.
Oxytocin
Uterine contractions propel the fetus caudally. The
cervix dilates in response to the presence of estrogen,
fetalhead.Stretchingofthecervixstimulatesaner-
vous impulse (Ferguson's reflex), leading to the secre-
tion and release of oxytocin,which reinforces and
maintains the ecbolic effect of prostaglandin. Uterine
contractions and dilation of the cervix then feed back
Parturition and Dystocia
247
on the pituitary gland to promote further oxytocin
release. Oxytocin release may regulate labor; the bitch
can voluntarily inhibit its release if she is frightened or
stressed.
Relaxin and Prolactin
Other pregnancy-specific endocrine changes in the
bitch include progressive increases in relaxin and
prolactin during the second half of pregnancy.
Prolactin, secreted from the posterior pituitary gland,
is elevated by days 30-35 and peaks 1-2 days before
whelping. Prolactin then decreases for 1 or 2 days
after parturition,before increasing again inresponse
tosuckling by neonates during the postpartum
period.
Relaxin is a peptide hormone produced by the
fetoplacental unit. Relaxin levels in the bitch increase
during the third week of pregnancy, peak by midgesta-
tion, and remain elevated to term. Relaxin con-
centrations then decline at parturition and reach
nondetectable levels 1-6 weeks postpartum. Relaxin
probably functions to promote myometrial quiescence
during late gestation, to elongate the collagenous
interpubic ligament facilitating vaginal delivery, to
alter the cervical structural collagen to soften the
cervix, and to induce oxytocin receptors in the
myometrium.
248
Parturition and Dystocia
Normal Parturition or Eutocia
Onset ofParturition
Accurately predicting the whelping date can be dif-
ficult. Predictions based on breeding dates can be
inaccurate; gestation length can range from 57 days
from the last breeding to 72 days from the first breed-
ing. When gestation length in the bitch is timed from
the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge, parturition
occurs 64-66 days afterward. Similarly, when ovulation
date is used, gestation length ranges from 62-64 days.
After breeding, daily vaginal cytology smears can be
used to accurately predict the
parturitiondate.
Parturition occurs 57 ±1 days after the oiset of cyto
logic diestrus (see Chapter 2). Ultrasonographic
determination ofgestational age based on fetal head
and trunk measurements is limited by normal
variation in puppy size by breed and litter size.
Radiography performed late in gestation may be lise-
ful; fetal teeth can be observed radiographically 3-8
days prepartum. Onset of lactation, nesting behavior,
and vulvar relaxation occur days to weeks before par-
turition and are not useful.
Assessment of the normal decline in serum
progesterone concentration before whelping is an
accurate indicator of imminent parturition in normal
dogs. In the bitch serum progesterone concentration
drops below 1-2 ng/ml 18-30 hours before parturition.
Parturition and Dystocia
249
From 10-14 hours after the progesterone drops, rectal
temperature transiently fallsbelow1oo°F and
recognizable signs oflabor usually begin within 18-24
hiours. The mechanism of hypothermia is poorly
understood, but it is known that moderate doses of
progesterone are thermogenic in humans and it is
hypothesized that the temperature drop reflects an
inability of the thermoregulatory mechanism to
compensate for the rapid removal of progesterone
associated with luteolysis. The prepartum rectal
temperature drop in the bitch usually can be detected
if the temperature is recorded three to four times
daily beginning about 54 days after breeding. After
the drop occurs, temperature returns to normal (101"
to 102" F) before parturition onset. Direct measure-
ment of progesterone concentrations in serum also
canbe usedto assess thelikelihoodof imminent
parturition.
In queens, gestation length ranges from 62-71 days
from the first breeding. Average gestation length in
queens is 66-67 days. Queens show no changes in
behavior, such as nesting, or in mammary develop
ment, such as lactation, before queening. Serum pro-
gesterone.concentration
doesnotconsistently
decrease before queening, so the rectal temperature
drop described for bitches is not useful. Measurement
of crown-rump length on radiographs may be used to
estimategestationalage.
250
Parturition and Dystocia
StagesofLabor
STAGE I Stage I of labor begins with the onset of uterine
contractions and ends when the cervix is fully dilated.
Although it is comparable to the long,first stage of labor
in humans, it is not recognized easily in the bitch.
Uterine contractions, occurring at regular but progres
sively shorter intervals, are not visible externally, and the
anatomy of the bitch prevents digital palpation and
detection of cervical dilation. The duration of stage
I labor in the bitch is 6-12 hours but may last up to
24 hours. The bitch may seem restless and nervous and
may refuse food. Other behaviors of stage I labor include
shivering, panting, vomiting. chewing. scratching at the
floor, and pacing. Most bitches seek seclusion and
exhibit nesting behavior, but some eat normally and are
more gregarious. Probably the most characteristic exter-
nal sign is panting. Vulvar discharge, if present, should
beclearandmucoid.
STAGE Il Stage II, the stage of delivery, begins with full
dilation of the cervix and ends with expulsion of the
fetus or fetuses. The onset of the second stage of labor is
nal muscle contractions, with the bitch either on her
side or in a squatting position. Puppies are delivered, onl
average, every 30-60 minutes. With passage of a pup
through the birth canal, the outer chorioallantoic mem-
Parturition and Dystocia
251
bitch. The mother normally licks each newborn vigor
ously, thereby removing the inner alloamniotic mem-
brane and stimulating respiration.
The order of puppy delivery typically alternates
between uterine horns. Parturition usually is complete
in 3-6 hours, although normal deliveries can take up to
24 hours, especially with large litters. Ihe interval
between pups is irregular, and the bitch may deliver a
few pups and then rest for several hours before complet-
ingdelivery.
STAGE Ill During stagc IHI of labor, the fetal membranes
are expelled, usually within 15 minutes of delivery of a
fetus. Normally, the parturition process alternates
between stages II and III until delivery of all fetuses and
placentas is complete. The bitch severs the umbilical
cord with her teeth and consumes the placenta unless it
is removed. Placental ingestion may result in mild diar-
rhea or vomiting and has no known benefit. Normally,
one placenta is expelled for each pup delivered. Careful
observation, including counting of placentas as they are
expelled, ensures that no fetal membranes are retained
in theuterus.
Monitoring Labor
Detection of labor onset is usually limited to the client's
observation of behavior change and detection of a drop
252
Parturition and Dystocia
in rectal temperature. Because the drop is abrupt and
transient, it easily can be missed if temperature measure-
ments are not made at least three to four times daily
Likewise, the standard approach to parturition manage-
ment involves the client's monitoring the progression of
labor and the condition of neonates. Intrapartum moni-
toring, now the accepted standard of practice in human
medicine, is credited for dramatically reducing morbid-
ity and mortality in human obstetrics. Labor monitoring
provides a means for both early detection and timely
intervention in cases ofabnormal labor and/or fetal dis
tress. Two parturition management services are avail-
able commercially to veterinary practitioners (Bettcr
Your Breeding; Biomedical Systems Veterinary Division,
Denver,  Colo.;
WhelpWise;
VeterinaryPerinatal
Specialtes,Wheat Ridge,Colo.).
TOcODYNAMOMETRYBoth labor-monitoring services
offer computer-modemed tocodynamometry com
bined with Doppler ultrasound fetal heart rate
monitoring. The tocodynamometer detects and
records intrauterine pressures. An external tocosen-
sor is loosely belted around the bitch's abdomen.
Recorded data are transmitted via modem to trained
technicians who interpret the data and consult with
the attending velerinarian. Monitoring can be per-
formed either in the home setting or in the veterinary
hospital.
Parturition and Dystocia
253
Beginning 3-7 days before the expected delivery
date, uterine activity is recorded twice daily for l hour
each time. A measurable prelabor pattern of uterine
contractions is established. An organized pattern of
uterine activity characterized byincreased contraction
frequency and strength signals the onset of stage I of
labor. Thus the onset oflabor can be accurately identi-
drop in rectal temperature. Once labor has begun, uter
ine activity is monitored constantly throughout the par
turitionprocess.
In human medicine a clear correlation exists
between the length and quality oflabor and the fetal via-
bility and vigor. If labor is prolonged or dysfunctional,
exhibits characteristic patterns of contractility, with vari-
ations in contraction frequency from 0-l2 per hour and
strength from 15-40 mm Hg, with spikcs to 60 mm Hig.
During active labor, contractions usually last 2-5 min-
utes. Recognizable patterns of utcrinc activity cxist
before the onsel of labor and during the active stagcs of
labor Tocodynamometry confirms normal labor-related
uterine activity and detects uterine inertia or abnorrnial
patterns of uterine contraction.Weak or prolonged
labor patterns are associated with fetal distress.
FETAL HEART RATE MONITORING The parturition man-
agement services also incorporate the use of a small,
254
Parturitlon and Dystocie
handheld ultrasonic Doppler unit that audibly detects
fetal heart rates. Clients can be instructed in its use so
that fetal heart rate monitoring, like tocodynamometry,
can be performed in the home. An attempt should be
made to identify a normal heart rate for each fetus.
Individual fetuses can be monitored during labor to
identify fetal compromise. Once labor has begun.
hourly fetal heart rate determinations are recom
mended. Normal fetal heart rate at term gestation is 170.
230 beats per minute (bpn). Transient accelerations
occur with fetal movement. Fetal heart rates of fewer
than 150-l60 bpm indicate stress. Fetuses with heart
rates of fewer than 130 bpm have poor survival if not
delivered within 2-3 hours, and fetuses with heart rates
of fewer than 1o0 bpm require immediate intervention.
One study of 50 whelpings reported that outcomes
varied significantly as a factor of management technique
used. Perinatal mortality rates were 33% in the group
with traditional (non-data-based) interventions and 6%
in the group with data-based interventions. The same
rate for C-section as for therapy, 30%, was reported for
eachgroup.Intrapartum fetal death rateincreased as
length of labor increased; an even higher correlation
was observed in cases in which stage I labor exceeded
18hours.
Combined use of tocodynamometry and fetal heart
rate monitoring removes much of the guesswork from
labor management. Both fetal distress and uterine iner-
Parturition and Dystocia
255
tia can be detected.Evaluation of uterine contractions
provides a direct indication for oxytocin administration
when contraction frequency is waning. Similarly, cal
cium gluconate administration is indicated to improve
the strength ofuterine contractions.Knowledge of uter
ine activity also can be used to titrate medications to
achieve a more physiologic pattern of uterine contrac-
tion. As little as 0.25 IU of oxytocin may be sufficient to
stimlate a normal contraction pattern. This small dose
of oxytocin reduces stress to the bitch and her unborn
pups. During a uterine contraction, blood flow (and oxy
gen delivery) to the fetuses is reduced. Although fetuses
tolerate this for short periods, labor patterns made up of
long, dysfunctional contractions may contribute to fetal
mortality. Similarly, injudicious administration of oxy
tocin to a bitch that already is having maximal uterine
contractions can result in fetal hypoxia. Assessment via
uterine monitoring provides objective data that are use-
ful in making decisions regarding choice and dosage of
therapeutic agents. Labor monitoring also can identify
contraindications to drug use and prevent further fetal
compromise in certain cases of dystocia,
Dystocia
Dystocia refers to abnormal or difficult parturition.
An increased incidence of dystocia is reported in
certain dog breeds, including the bulldog, Chihuahua,
256
Parturition and Dystocia
dachshund, miniature poodle, Pekingese, Pomeranian,
and Yorkshire terrier. In cats dystocia is uncommon.
Persian cats, however, may be predisposed. Maternal
and fetal risk factors can occur singly or collectively to
cause dystocia. Correct identification of all contributing
factors allows theveterinarian todecide on necessity and
typeofintervention.
Causes ofDystocia
MATERNAL FACTORS
● Uterine inertia: Uterine inertia is described as one
of the most common causes of dystocia in bitches
and queens.Uterine inertia is lack of normal,
sequential uterine contractions with subsequent
failure to expel fetuses through the birth canal.
Primary uterine inertia is characterized as being
either complete or partial. It is complete if stage I
labor fails to proceed to stage II labor and partial
when parturition begins normally and proceeds to
stage II labor but the contractions cease before
fetal expulsion occurs.Although the causes of pri
mary uterine inertia are unclear, the condition
has been associated with an inherited breed
predisposition; ovcrstretchiing of the uterine
musculaturein largelitters;inadequateuterine
stimulation as a result of insufficient oxy-
tocinrelease inbitches withsmalllitters or
Parturition and Dystocia
257
malpositioned pups; uterine torsion; systemic
imbalances such as obesity, hypocalcemia, hypo-
glycemia, or septicemia; age-related changes; psy-
chogenic causes; and exhaustion.In secondary
uterine inertia, parturition starts and proceeds
normally to stage I1 labor, but stage 11 labor
becomes excessively prolonged as a result of fetal
obstruction.Maternal exhaustion ensues,and
uterine contractions eventually cease.
·Inadequate birth canal size: Congenital causes of an
unusually small birth canal include an inherited
breed predisposition and reproductive immaturity
An example ofan acquired cause is narrowing of the
pelvic canal after spontaneous healing or surgical
repair of a pelvic fracture.
·Obstruction ofanormal birth canal:Uterine torsion
is more common in the queen than in the bitch but
is rare in both species. Vaginal sources of obstruc-
tion include anatomic anomalies, prolapse, and
masses (see Chapter I3).
·Lack of normal abdominal prcss:Any condition
thatweakensabdominalmusculature decrcases
functional abdominal
press andprecludes
normal whelping. Examples include a ruptured
diaphragm; tracheal perforation; obesity; and
administration of drugs such as progesterone,
paralytic agents, anesthetic agents, and muscle
relaxants.
258
Parturition and Dystocla
FETAL FACToRS Fetal oversize results in obstructive dys
tocia. Oversize may be of the entire body, as with a single
ton fetus, fetal monster, or anasarca fetus. Relative
oversize of the fetal head occurs with hydrocephalus.
Orientation of the fetus as it encounters the cervix
and enters the birth canal can predispose to dystocia.
Both cranial and caudal presentations are normal in
the bitch and queen. About 40% of puppies are born in
a caudal presentation. The normal caudal presenta-
tion, with hips extended, should be differentiated from
the abnormal breech position, in which the hips are
flexed with the hind limbs extended beneath the pup's
body (Figure 9-1). Transverse presentations, although
rare, usually occur with bicornual pregnancy of a single
fetus and often result in obstructive dystocia(see
Figure 9-1). Other, less common abnormal positions
include lateral and ventral neck deviation, ventral neck
flexion with a cranial "poll" presentation, and the “dog
sitting” posture in which the pup presents cranially
with its hips flexed and hind limbs extended beneath
itsbody.
Historicaf Criteria
Differentiating dystocia from normal parturition can be
a diagnostic challenge. When available, accurate histori
cal data are extremely useful. Diagnosis also requires
clinical evaluation,laboratory assessment,orimaging
Parturition and Dystocia
259
Figure 9-1. Fetal presentations, postures, and positions.
A,Normal cranial presentation.B,Normal caudal presentation.
C,Forelimbs are retained under the body. D, Rear limbs are
retained under the body in a breech posture. E. Lateral deviation
of the neck. F, Ventral deviation of the neck. G, Transverse presen-
tation.(FromJohnston SD,RootKustritzMV,OisonPN:Canine
andfelinetheriogenology.Philadefphia,2o01,WBSaunders.)
260
Parturition and Dystocia
A diagnosis of dystocia is made when any of the following
oCcur:
· Gestation length is prolonged. Rule out false preg-
nancy with abdominal radiographs. Gestation
length calculated from breeding dates is the most
common but least reliable predictor of delivery
date. A gestation length of more than 72 days
afterbreeding is alwaysconsideredprolonged.
Prolonged gestation is confirmed more accurately
when gestation length is more than 67 days from the
LH surge, more than 65 days from ovulation, or
more than 60 days from onset of cytologic diestrus.
Gestation also is prolonged when a bitch fails to
levels decreasing to less than 2 ng/ml or within
24hoursofthebitch'srectaltemperaturedropping
below 100' F.
·Stage I labor lasts more than 12 hours.
· Vigorous stage II labor fails to produce a pup or kit-
ten within30 minutes.
·Weak or intermittent stage II labor fails to produce
the first pup or kitten within 4 hours.
● No further pups or kittens are born within 2 hours of
a successful delivery.
· Partial delivery of a pup or kitten occurs.
· A vulvar discharge is present for 2 hours without deliv-
ery of the first pup. Green-black vulvar discharge indi
cates that at least partial separation of at least one
Parturition and Dystocia
261
placenta has occurred. Passage of clear, watery fluid
usually represents amniotic or allantoic fluid and
should not be confused with passage of urine.
· Evidence of fetal compromise is prescnt. Distressed
pups do not move when viewed by ultrasonography
and have heart rates that consistently are of fewer
than180bpm.
· Evidence of fetal death is present, either on ultra-
sound (no heartbeat or felal movement) or radio
graphs (e.g., intrafetal or perifetal gas, overlapping
of skull bones, collapse of axial skeleton).
·Maternal compromise is present and prevents nor-
mal progression of labor. Examples include cases of
septic metritis, pregnancy toxemia, uterine torsion,
uterine rupture, and herniation ofa gravid uterine
horn through the inguinal canal. In each case the
pain, weakness, and collapse, which may progress
rapidlytoshock
DiagnosticCriteria
· Confirm that the bitch is pregnant and not experi-
encing false pregnancy. Pregnancy can be con-
firmed with abdominal palpation, digital vaginal
examination, radiography, or ultrasonography
· Confirm that the bitch is at term. Documcnt that
the bitch experienced a drop in rectal temperature
262
Parturitron and Dystociz
toless than 99°F. If that information is unavailablc,
a progesterone assay canbeperformed toverify
that progesterone levels are less than 2 ng/ml.
Term gestation is more difficult to confirm in the
queen because there may be no prepartum rectal
temperature drop and serum progesterone con-
centrations may still be above baseline at the time of
parturition.
·Confirm that labor has begun and is not progressing
normally. A minimum database includes a complete
physical examination and a thorough digital vaginal
examination. Laboratory assessment minimally
includes a packed cell volume, blood urea nitrogen,
serum glucose,and serum calcium.A complete
blood count, serum biochemical panel, and urinaly
sis often are helpful. Radiographic and ultrasono-
graphic imaging may document risk factors or
confirm a diagnosis of dystocia. Doppler units offer
an accurate and inexpensive means of assessing fetal
heart rates when conventional ultrasonography is
not available. Tocodynamometry can characterize
uterine activity.
Treatment of Dystocia
Manipulative, medical, or surgical treatment for dysto
cia may be indicated, depending on the contributing
causes and their chronicity. The goal of any treatment is
Parturition and Dystocia
263
to deliver live, vigorous puppies or kittens without com-
promising the health of the dam.
MANIPULATIVE TREATMENT Manipulative treatIment is
used to deliver a pup lodged in the birth canal when the
pup is only slightly oversized, when there is a correctable
malposition or when uterine inertia prevents delivery of
the final pup. Small birth canal size restricts manipula-
tive attempts in the queen.
· Perform manipulations with the bitch in a standing
position.
· Use plenty of lubrication.
· Use two fingers to gently perform manipulations.
· Do not grasp distal extremities or the tail. Degloving
injuries are common.
ofthepup.
· Exercise extreme caution when using instruments
such as the Snook ovariohysterectomy hook, sponge
forceps, and clamshell forceps, unless the pup already
has died.Undesirable sequelae associated with instru-
ment useincludemutilation ofthepup andlaceration
of the bitch. Do not use instruments in the queen.
· Concurrent abdominal or rectal palpation may aid
manipulative efforts.
MEDICAL TREATMENT Medical treatment primarily
involves labor augmentation through the use of ecbolic
264
Parturition and Dystocia
agents, which increase uterine contractions. Medical
management is indicated when the bitch is in good
health and condition, the cervix is relaxed and dilated,
fetal size is appropriate, and labor has not been pro-
longed.Ideally, tocodynamometry is performed to doc
ument the need for and monitor the response to the
administration ofecbolic agents.
·Ecbolic agents absolutely are contraindicated in cases of
obstructivedystocia.
· Oxytocin is the most commonly used ecbolic agent.
Oxytocin increases the frequency of uterine con-
tractions. Start with a low dosage (0.25-0.5 IU per
dog) and do not exceed 4 IU per dose per dog.
Higher dosages can cause uterine tetany,during
which placental blood supply is reduced and fetal
compromise is likely to occur because of hypoxia.
Following a "three strikes, you're out" philosophy, a
bitch should be taken to surgery if three doses of
oxytocin,administered at 30-minute intervals,d0
notresultin delivery ofapup.
·Calcium,in the form of 10%calciumgluconate,
often is administered in conjunction with
oxytocin. Calcium increases the strength of uter-
ine contractions. Ionized calcium, required for
myometrial contraction, may be depleted when
total serum calcium concentration is normal. The
recommended subcutaneous dose is 1-5 ml per
dog
Parturition and Dystocia
265
·Othermedical treatmentsincludefluidreplacement
with balanced electrolyte solutions in dehydrated
patients and oral or intravenous administration of glu-
cose if hypoglycemia is detected. Low dosages of phe
nothiazine tranquilizers have been used to facilitate
examination or manipulation in nervous patients and
to overcome voluntary inhibition of stagc H labor.
Their use is discouraged because of risk of fetal
depression after placental passage of these drugs.
SURGICALTREATMENTSurgical treatmentusually con-
sists of a C-section (hysterotomy); concurrent ovariohys-
terectomy can be performed safely. Rarely, an episiotomy
is required to relieve obstruction in a primigravid bitch
with aninsufficientvulvarcleft.
Anestheticconsiderations
·Althoughlocal or epidural regional anesthesia can
be used for C-sections, general anesthesia most
often is used because it offers total immobilization
and complete analgesia. A variety of anesthetic pro
tocols can be used successfully, with the following
recommendations:
Premedicate with either glycopyrrolate (0.011
mg/kg givenintramuscularly or subcutaneously)
or atropine (0.04 mg/kg given intramuscularly or
subcutaneously)tocounteractvagal stimulation
occurring secondary to visceral manipulation.
266
Parturition and Dystocia
Prepare the surgical site by clipping the ventral
abdomenfrom thexiphoidto thepubis andper
forming the initial scrub of the area before anes-
theticinduction.
Administer isotonicfluids,with or without 2.5%
dextrose, intravenously.The addition of dex-
trose is beneficial for patients that maybe devel-
oping hypoglycemia. A patent intravenous line
also is invaluable for compromised patients;
emergency drugs may be required.
Oxygenate the patient before induction by adminis-
tering oxygen through a mask. This helps prevent
fetal hypoxemia.
Induce anesthesia with one of the following:
- Propofol (5.5-7.0 mg/kg administered intra-
venously)
Diazepam
1 (0.2 mg/kg administered intra-
venously) and oxymorphone (0.05-0.1 mg/kg
administered intravenously)
- Ketamine (5-10 mg/kg administered intra-
venously)
）combinedwith diazepam(0.2
mg/kg administered intravenously)
Intubatequicklyandmaintainanesthesiawith
isoflurane.Use of enflurane,halothane,or
methoxyflurane also is described.
Puppy vigor after C-section, as assessed by presence
of spontaneous breathing, movement, and vocal-
ization, is enhanced by use of isoflurane as the
Parturition and Dystocia
267
inhalant anesthetic and decreased with llsc of
thiobarbiturates or ketamine for induction.
Complete surgical preparation of the patient as rap
idly as possible.
Anecdotal reports suggest that intravenous adminis
tration of 0.5-2.0 ml doxapram to the bitch before
incising the uterus may promote spontaneous res-
piration in the pups.
Surgicaitechnique
·Perform the C-section quickly and efficiently
because long induction to delivery times are associ-
ated with increased fetal hypoxia and depression.
Therecommendedsurgicaltechniqueforhyster
otomyis asfollows:
Use a ventral midline approach, taking care to avoid
the engorged, hypertrophied mammary tissue.
Exteriorize the uterus by carefully lifting each uter-
ine horn through the incision. Pack off the area
with saline-moistened laparotomy sponges to pre-
vent abdominal contamination with fetal fluids.
Makeadorsalmidlineincisioninarelatively avascu
lar area of the uterine body, taking care not to
inadvertently lacerate an underlying pup.
Usually, it is possible to remove all pups through this
incision, beginning with the presenting pup in
the uterine body. Bring each fetus to the incision
by gently "milking it down" the uterine horn. If
268
Parturitlon and Dystocia
necessary, additional incisions through the uter-
ine horns can be made to facilitate rapid removal
ofpups.
Once each fetus nears the hysterotomy incision,
grasp it and apply gentle traction to remove it
from the uterus. A saline-soaked sponge often
aids the surgeon in obtaining a secure hold of the
pup.
Remove the fetal membranes from the pup's head
and wipe its nose with a gauze sponge.
Gently separate the zonary placenta from the
nying placenta to an assistant.
Deliver all pups in a similar fashion.
Before closing, palpate the uterus in its entirety to
be certain that all pups and placentas have heen
removed. Inspect the uterine lumen to be certain
thathemorrhage into the uterine lumen is not
excessive. Diagnostic procedures, such as bacter-
ial culture of the uterine lumen or uterine biopsy,
maybeperformed at this time.
Administration of oxytocin (0.25-2.0 IU intramuscu-
ine involution and reduce hemorrhage.
Close the hysterotomy incision in two layers routinely
and cleanse the uterus with warmed sterile saline
solution before replacing it in the abdomcn. Close
the abdomen in a routine manner.
Parturition and Dystocia
269
NeonatalResuscitation
Resuscitation of the neonate is necessary when the bitch
fails to or is unable to perform this task or when a puppy
does not respond to typical maternal manipulations.
Equipment needed includes the following:
· A box prewarmed with a heating pad or hot water
bottles
·Gauze sponges
● Warm towels
● Cotton-tipped swabs
· A suction device (airway suction apparatus or rub-
ber bulb syringe)
+Hemostaticforceps
·Scissors
·Suture
·Diluted iodine solution
· Supplemental oxygen source
After delivery of the neonate, the fetal membranes
need to be removed, beginning with those covering the
nose and mouth. Use of gauze sponges aids in removal.
Next, fluids need to be removed from the mouth and
nose using swabs or gentle suction. Puppies and kittens
are often wrapped in warm towels and “swung" with their
heads down, using centrifugal force to clear the mouth
and nose of fluid. This is effective in some cases but
should be done carefully and gently, with the head and
neck of the neonate fully supported in the resuscitator's
hands to prevent trauma. As the initial drying and
270
Parturition and Dystocia
suctioning is being performed, the puppy should be
whether it has a heartbeat. A cyanotic puppy with a good
strong heartbeat with a rate of more than 120-150 bpm
should be supplemented with oxygen in addition to
receiving continued stimulation. Once a pup is breath-
ing normally, the umbilical cord can be ligated and cut
2-3 cm from the body wall. The stump should be disin-
fected with dilute iodine solution, and the neonate
should be examined for the presence of congenital
defects such as cleft palate,deformed limbs, or
imperforate anus. The neonates are then placed in a
prewarmed box until the dam can assume their care.
Thermoregulation in puppies and kittens at birth is
poor, and it is essential to get the neonate dried off and
into a warm environment.
If the puppy or kitten is apneic and has a slow or
weak heartbeat,ventilation must be established before
cardiac compressions are begun.Ventilatory efforts
must come first because it is unlikely that cardiac mes
sage will be effective in a hypoxic animal. Supplemental
oxygen can be administered by mask, pharmacologic
respiratory stimulants can be administered,or the Jen
Chung acupuncture site can be stimulated by inserting a
25-gauge needle into the nasal philtrum at the base of
the nares and twisting once to reach the periosteum. For
cardiac massage, in most breeds the chest compressions
should be applied across the lateral chest wall. In some
Parturition and Dystocia
271
barrel-chested breeds (e.g., Chinese pugs, French bull-
dogs), sternal compression may be more effective.
Gaining intravenous access in a newborn puppy is
not easy because of the puppy's small size and fragile vcs-
sels. The most ready access is through the umbilical vein.
Some drugs may be administered intramuscularly with
the caveat that this will not be very effective if the circula-
tion is poor. Some drugs have been applied sublingually,
but there is little information regarding their uptake by
this route in the neonate. Drugs may be administered via
a transpulmonary route. This entails endotracheal intu-
bation and the placement of the drug into the lower air-
way. This requires technical expertise and a very gentle
technique to prevent trauma to the airway. Drugs placed
in the trachea rather than the lower airways will have
much lower uptake. Because the bones of the puppy are
soft, it is easy to obtain a “venous” access by use of an
intraosseous technique.A 22- to 25-gauge needle can be
inserted into the medullary canal of the femur via the
greater trochanter or the tibia via the tibial crest (see
Chapter 10). Intracardiac injections should be avoided
because of the risk of damage to the lungs and heart.
Drugs used for neonatal resuscitation include the
following.
·Doxapramis arespiratorystimulantthatmay
increase ventilatory effort once it has begun.
However,it probably cannot initiate ventilatory
effort in an apneic, hypoxic puppy or kitten. It can
272
Parturition andDystocia
be administered intramuscularly or sublingually if
intravenous access is not available.Doxapram is not
used routinely for human neonatal resuscitation.
·Naloxone is beneficial to the neonate only when the
dam has received an opioid anesthetic. Administer
naloxone only if the puppy is showing signs of respi-
ratory depression.
· Atropine is administered for its parasympatholytic
effect. However, atropine is no longer recom-
mended for resuscitation ofnewbornhumans.If
bradycardia is thought to be drug induced, it is bet-
ter to antagonize the specific drug if possible.
·Epinephrine increases mean blood pressure and
improves myocardial oxygen delivery. It is recom-
mended for neonatal cardiac arrest in humans.
Endotracheal administration should be avoided
because it can cause intense vasoconstriction of the
tracheal mucosa, thereby inhibiting uptake into the
systemiccirculation.
·Glucose canbe used to correct neonatalhypo
glycemia thatcan occurwithdystocia ormaternal
malnutrition. Hypoglycemic neonates should receive
glucose only after initial resuscitation is complete.
saryif thereisadelayinthe dam'srecovery
● Sodium bicarbonate may be beneficial in treating
neonatalacidosis and shouldbeconsidered for the
depressed puppy that has had a marginal oxygen
Parturition and Dystocia
273
supply for some time. Because sodium bicarbonate
will react with hydrogen ions to produce carbon
dioxide,it is essential that adequate ventilation be
achieved before its administration.It must be given
slowly intravenously (l-2 mmol/kg). The standard
preparation of sodium bicarbonate is hypertonic
(2000 mOsm/L); it can be diluted with sterile water
(1 ml of bicarbonate in 5.7 ml of water) to render an
isotonicsolution.
Periparturient Disorders of the Bitch
and Queen
Care of the Postpartum Bitch
When delivery is complete, soiled bedding in the
birthing box should be replaced with clean bedding. A
thorough cleansing followed by liberal rinsing of the
dam's perineal and ventral abdominal regions also is rec-
ommended. Because fetal fluids and placental tissues
offer an optimal environment for bacterial growth,
attention to hygiene reduces the risk for bacterial con-
tamination and infection of both the dam and her
neonates.
Owners often request that a “clean-out shot" of oxy-
tocin be administered to the bitch. This usually is uninec-
essary. Owners should be jnstructed that suckling by the
pups stimulates endogenous oxytocin release in the
274
Parturitlon and Dystocla
bitch. Oxytocin therapy may be indicated when the bitch
have been retained.
Postpartum management primarily consists of care-
ful monitoring to allow for early detection ofperipar
turient disorders, should they arise. Periparturient
disorders include mastitis (see Chapter 14), metritis and
subinvolution of placental sites (see Chapter l2), and
eclampsia
Owners need to evaluate the postpartum bitch or
tum, the dam should appear bright, alert, and attentive
to her newborns. She should resume eating and drink-
ing. As lactation progresses and peaks, she may consume
two to three times her normal food intake. Mammary
glands should be inspected daily'for discoloration and
evidence of purulent discharge and should be palpated
for heat, pain, and changes in consistency. Milk should
be uniformly white or slightly yellow. It should not be of
varying consistency and should notbe grcenish yellow,
pink, or red. The bitch should not experience pain whien
milk is expressed. Normal postpartum endometrial
desquamation is evidenced as a vulvar discharge, called
lochia, which gradually diminishes and ceases within
3 weeks. Lochia typically is brick red to green-black and
without significant odor. If lochia turns creamy or devel-
ops a foul odor, it is abnormal. Little or no discharge is
observed in postpartum queens. Rectal temperature
Parturition and Dystocia
275
may be elevated for 2-3 days postpartum but should not
exceed 103" F.
Eclampsia (Postparturient Hypocalcemia,
Puerpera! Tetany)
DEFINITIONANDPATHOGENESISEclampsia is associated
with ionized calcium depletion in the extracellular com-
partment of the body. Depletion of membrane-bound
calciun increases membrane permeability and results in
spontaneous muscle depolarization.
SIGNALMENT Hypocalcemia occurs more commonly in
toy breeds of dogs and is rare in the queen.
HISTORYAND CLINiCAL SIGNS Although hypocalcemia
can occur before parturition or during any part of lacta-
tion, by far, most cases present 1-4 weeks postpartum,
when lactational demands are greatest. Signs include
restlessness, nervousness, whining, panting, muscle
tremors, dilated pupils, and hyperthermia. If hypocal-
cemia is left untreated, within hours, signs can progress
to recumbency, extensor rigidity, convulsions resulting
from cerebral edema, and death.
DIAGNOSTICTESTS AND RESULTS A totaI serum calcium
concentration of less than 7 mg/100 ml indicates
hypocalcemia. However, a diagnosis usually is made
276
Parturition and Dystocia
before obtaining laboratory results on the basis of the
history and clinical signs. Some patients, when pre
sented early in the course of the disease, may have a nor-
mal total calcium concentration.Hypoglycemia may
occur concurrently with hypocalcemia, but it alone can-
not cause muscle rigidity. A differential diagnosis list
would include other causes of seizure activity, such as
toxicosis, epilepsy, and other neurologic disorders. A
history of recent parturition aids the clinician in a diag-
nosis ofeclampsia,
TREATMENT Treatment of eclampsia consists of the
following:
● Immediate calcium supplemen tation can be intra-
venouslyadministered slowlyveffect.Commercial
calcium solutions vary widely in their concentra-
tions of elemental calcium. For example, a 10% cal-
cium chloride solution contains about three times as
much elemental calcium (in milligrams per milli-
liter) as does a l0% solution of calcium gluconate.
Concurrentmonitoring ofheart rateby ausculta
tion, or preferably
yby electrocardiography, is
strongly recommended.Intravenous administration
of calcium should be discontinued if progressive
bradycardia or tachycardia develops or if dysrhyth-
mias occur. If muscle tremors have not subsided
when intravenous administration of calcium is dis-
continued, additional calcium can be administered
Parturition and Dystocia
277
by either subcutaneous or intramuscular routes.
Care must be taken to ensure that preparations are
labeled and safe for the intended route of adminis-
tration.
· Hypoglycemia, if present, can be corrected with
intravenous dextrose solutions.
·The body temperature of hyperthermic patients can
be reduced with cool water baths and alcohol soaks
to areas of rapid heat exchange, such as the ear pin-
nae and footpads.
least 24 hours and, if possible, weaned.
● Calcium supplementation can be dispensed at the
time of discharge. The recommended dosage of oral
min D, which enhances uptake of calcium from the
intestinal tract. Calcium supplementation should
continue until the end of lactation.
Glucocorticoid therapy for treatmentof eclampsia
is no longer recommended. It is contraindicated
because it further compromises the patient by decreas-
renal excretion of calcium.
PROGNoSIS It is important that the owner understand the
need for continued monitoring of serum calcium concen-
tration, particularly if puppies continue to nurse.
Hypocalcemia may recur in the current lactation, and the
278
Parturition and Dystocia
bitch will be at risk for another episode of eclampsia with
subsequent litters.It should be emphasized that oversup
plementation of calcium during pregnancy may be coun-
terproductive because it may hinder the bitch's ability to
rapidly mobilize calcium from bone at peak lactation
Dietary recommendations include feeding balanced diets
with calcium/phosphorus ratios in the 1:1-1.2:1 range to
pregnant bitches. Dog foods that contain high amounts of
phytates, which are contained in soybean meal, should bc
avoided. The phytates combine with ionized calcium and
render the calcium unavailable physiologically
Bibliography
Al-Bassam MA, Thomson RG, O'Donnell L: Normal
postpartum involution of the uterus of the dog, Can
JCompMed45:217,1981.
Bebchuk TN, Probst CW, Bojrab MJ et al (eds): Current
techniques in small animal surgery, Philadelphia, 1998,
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Bennet D: Canine dystocia: a review of the literature,
JSmallAnimPract15:101,1974.
Concannon PW: Physiology of reproduction. In Burke
TJ(ed): Small animal reproduction and fertility
Philadelphia, 1986, Lea & Febiger.
Concannon Pw, McCann JP, Temple M: Biology and
endocrinology of ovulation, pregnancy and parturi-
tion in the dog, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:3, 1989.
Parturition and Dystocia
279
Copley K: Canine parturition management. Proceedings
of the Society for Theriogenology,Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada, 200l.
Darvelid AW, Linde-Forsberg C: Dystocia in the bitch: a
retrospective study of 182 cases, J Small Anim Pract
35:402,1994.
Davidson A: Periparturient problems in the bitch.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 1997.
Ekstrand C, Linde-Forsberg C: Dystocia in the cat: a ret-
rospective study of 155 cases,JSmall Anim Pract
35:459, 1994.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine and feline endocrinology
and reproduction, Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders.
Frand MN, Honig KL, Hageman JR: Neonatal cardiopul-
monary resuscitation: the good news and the bad,
PediatrClinNorthAm45:587,1998.
Friedman E: Use of labor pattern as a management
guide,JReprod Med2:57,1968.
Gaudet DA:Retrospective study ofl28 cases of canine
dystocia,JAmAnimHospAssoc21:813,1985.
Gaudet DA, Kitchell BE: Canine dystocia, Comp Cont Ed
7:406,1985.
Ginsberg HG, Goldsmith JP: Controversies in neonatal
resuscitation, Clin Perinat 25:1, 1998.
Holladay JR: Routine use of doxapram hydrochloride in
neonatal pups delivered by caesarian section, Vet
MedSmallAnimPract66:28,1971.
280
Parturition and Dystocla
Johnston SD: Management of the postpartum bitch and
queen. In Kirk RW (ed): Current veterinary therapy
VIIl, Philadelphia, 1983,WB Saunders.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine
and feline theriogenology, Philadelphia, 2001,WB
Saunders.
Johnston SD, Smith FO, Bailie NC et al: Prenatal indica-
tors of puppy viability at term, Comp Cont Ed 5:1013,
1983.
Jones RL: Special considerations for appropriate antimi-
crobial therapy in neonates, Vet Clin North Am
17:577,1987.
Laliberte L: Pregnancy, obstetrics and postpartum man-
agement of the queen. In Morrow DA (ed): Current
therapy in theriogenology, Philadelphia, 1986, WB
Saunders.
Leuthner SR, Jansen RD, Hageman JR: Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation ofthenewborn,PediatrClinNorthAm
42:893,1994.
Monheit AG, Stone ML, Abitol MM: Fetal heart rate and
transcutaneous monitoring during experimentally
induced hypoxia in the fetal dog, Pediatr Res 23:548,
1988.
Moon-Massat PF, Erb HN: Perioperative factors associ-
tion, JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 38:90, 2002.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN: Estrous length, preg-
nancy rate,gestation and parturition lengths, litte1
Parturition and Dystocia
281
size, and juvenile mortality in the domestic cat, J Am
AnimHospAssoc31:429,1995.
Schmidt PM: Feline breeding management, Vet Clin
NorthAm16:435,1986.
van der Weyden GC, Taverne MA, Dieleman SJ et al:
Physiological aspects of pregnancy and parturition
in dogs,J Reprod Fertil Suppl39:211, 1989.
10
Neonatology
MargaretV.RootKustritz
ATAGLANCE
· Physical examination of neonates
· The owner should weigh the pups or kittens daily.
Neonates should maintain or gain weight every day,
doubling birth weight by 7-10 days of age. Loss of
weight often is the first sign of a disorder.
283
284
Neonatology
·Eyes open at 5-14 days of age.Ear canals open at 6-14
daysofage.
·Rectal temperature is lower than that of adults until
7 weeks of age. A rectal temperature of less than
95°Fis abnormalatany age.
· Normal behavior during the first 2-3 weeks of life
includes suckling and sleeping. Abnormalities
include lying apart from the littermates or dam and
cryingexcessively.
·Common abnormalitiesofneonates
·Congenital defects can be present.
·Septicemiais systemicinfection.Entry oforganisms
mostcommonly occurs throughthe umbilicus.
Escherichiacoliisthemostcommonorganismiso-
lated.Treatwith antibiotics.Blood or urine can
be cultured to guide therapy; penicillins and
cephalosporins are appropriate empirical choices
pending culture results.Adjunctive therapy with flu-
ids and oxygen may be required.
·Neonatalisoerythrolysis occurs inkittensborn to a
dam with a blood type different from their own.
Antibodiesingestedinthecolostrum destroythe
neonate'sredbloodcells(RBCs).Treatbyrcmov-
ing the kittenfrom its dam and performing a blood
transfusion;the dam serves asagood donorbecause
herRBCs arenotaffectedbyher serum antibodies.
·Canine herpesvirus causes fulminating hemor-
rhagic necrosis of the internal organs in puppies
Neonatology
285
exposed during the first 3 weeks of life. Treatment
generally is unrewarding.
·Internal and external parasites can be present.
observed. Causes include septicemia,inadequate
environment, low birth weight, congenital abnor-
malities, maternal neglect or trauma, lack of inges-
tion of colostrum, and inadequate milk
· Feeding of orphan puppies and kittens
· Use a commercial milk replacer.
● Tube feeding is quick but may be associated with
aspiration of milk replacer and excessive suckling of
littermates, inanimate objects, or self.
·Warm the milk replacer to 95*-100" F. Feed four
times daily for the first 2 weeks oflife and then three
times daily until weaning at about 6 weeks of age.
·Stimulate urination and defecationuntil thepup or
kitten is mobile and can void spontaneously. at
about3weeksofage.
Physical Examination of Neonates
Rectaf Temperature
Rectal temperature varies with age and environment.
Normal rectal temperature is 96.0" ± 1.5" F (35.6° ±
0.7" C) during the first week of life, is 98.6*-100.0" F
(37.0"-38.2" C) during the second and third weeks of
286
Neonatotogy
life, and gradually rises to adult levels by the age of
7weeks.
Behavior
During the first 2-3 weeks of life, puppies and kittens
spend most of their time sleeping. They huddle together
or near the dam and will not ordinarily sleep apart from
littermates or the dam until 5-6 weeks of age.When
awake, neonates suckle vigorously. During examination,
normal puppies and kittens easily can be encouraged to
suckle the examiner's fingers. The veterinarian should
immediately examine all pediatric animals that are
observed to lie apart from littermates or the dam, cry
excessively, are extremely restless,or are recumbent.
EyesandEars
Eyelids separate in puppies and kittens from 5-14 days of
age. Abyssinian kittens may exhibit eyelid separation
substantially earlier (0-5 days of age).Corneal cloudi-
ness resulting from overhydration resolves within 2-3
weeks of eyelid separation, Menace and pupillary light
responses develop slowly but should be present by
21 days of age. Shirmer tear testing for adequacy of
lacrimation can be performed any time after eyelid
separation. The external auditory canals open at
approximately 6-14 days of age. A thorough otoscopic
Neonatology
287
examination is possible in animals as young as 4 weeks.
Assessment of hearing in the clinic is difficult.Percussive
hearing tests, such as hand clapping out of the animal's
field of vision, are inaccurate because distracted animals
with normal hearing may not react (false-negative
result) and deaf animals may react as a result of pressure
changes (false-positive result). A brainstem auditory
evoked response (BAER) test measures electrical potenl-
tial from the cochlea, cochlear nerve, and brainstem in
response to auditory stimuli. Functional maturity of
hearing and an accurate BAER test should be possible
by 4-6 weeks of age. If the test result is negative, the ani-
malisfunctionallydeaf.
SkinandHairCoat/HydrationStatus
Assessment of the entire skin and hair coat should be
performed.Dermatologic conditions such as flea infes-
tation and dermatophytosis are relatively common in
young animals. The umbilicus falls off or is removed by
the dam at 2-3 days of age. The umbilicus should be
examined for evidence of infection.Traumaticinflam
suckling on each other. Skin turgor is difficult to use as a
measure of dehydration,but dehydrated pediatric ani-
mals exhibit more wrinkling and less turgor of the skin
and exhibit deepening of the red color of the ventral
abdomen and muzzle. Other signs of dehydration
288
Neonatology
include dryness of the eyes and oral mucous membranes
and visible yellow color of the normally dilute urine.
Neurologic System
Neurologic examination of pediatric patients is possible
at birth, but neurologic fumction does not mature until
6-8 weeks. Normal neonatal puppies and kittens can
crawl; suckle; vocalize if distressed; and respond to odor
touch, and pain. Withdrawal reflexes are present but
slow at birth. Flexor dominance is present until about
4 days; onset of extensor dominance varies from days 5-
21. Postural reactions, including nonvisual placing,
extensor postural thrust, and hemiwalking, are not fully
developed until 6-8weeks and generally develop in the
forelimbs before the hind limbs
Musculoskeletal System
Assessment of the musculoskeletal system includes evalua-
tion of movement and palpation of the bones and joints.
Puppies and kittens can lift their heads at birth. They crawl
for the first 7-14 days of life and should be able to support
weight on their forelimbs by 10 days. Locomotion is pres
ent by 3 weeks, allowing assessment of gait. Muscle tone
should be evaluated; decreased muscle tone often pre
cedes other signs ofillness. Radiographic assessment of
bone and joint abnormalities is difficult in puppies and
Neonatology
289
kittens because mineralization of bone is decreased. The
quality of the radiographs can be enhanced by decreasing
kilovolts peak (kVp) to half that for an adult of the same
thickness or, for puppies, by using 2 kVp for each 1 cm of
soft tissue measured for values up to 80 kVp.
ThoracicCavity
The heart may be difficult to auscult in puppies and kit-
tens because of the small size of the heart and rapid
heart rate. Heart rate is greater than 220 beats pcr
minute during the first week of life. Cardiac murmurs of
grades I-II1/Vl, most commonly heard at the base of the
heart on the left side, are often functional murmurs
caused by anemia,hypoproteinemia, fever, or sepsis
Congenital cardiac abnormalities usually are associated
with murmurs of gradeslll-Vl/Vl and abnormal periph
eral pulses. Lung sounds are auscultated easily with a
stethoscope with a pediatric head. Respiratory rate is 10-
35 breaths per minute during the first week of life and
reaches adult levels by 4 weeks.
OrafandAbdominafCavities
The deciduous teeth are present by 6 weeks. Permanent
teeth erupt, displacing the deciduous teeth, at
46 months. Abdominal palpation should permit
recognition of the left kidney, small intestines, colon,
290
Neonatology
and urinary bladder. If the spleen is palpable,
splenomegaly is present. Hepatomegaly is present if the
liver margin is palpable beyond the ribcage.
Common Disorders of Neonates
General information
PREWEANING MORTALITY/GENERAL SIGNS OF ILLNESS
Mortality of puppies and kittens is high, even in well-
managed colonies. The greatest incidence of mortality
occurs within the first week of life and averages 27.3% in
kittens and 26.0% in puppies. Overall mortality rates by
weaning at 8-12 weeks of age average 23.2% in kittens
and 18.7% in puppies. It is recommended that all dead
puppies and kittens be submitted for necropsy.
Behavior that suggests illness of a pediatric patient
includes separation from the dam, indicating either fever
or culling by the dam; crying for more than 20 minutes at a
time; and decreased activity. On physical examination,
decreased muscle tone, pale to cyanotic mucous mem-
branes, lack of normal bowel sounds, panting or labored
breathing, rough hair coat, and diarrhea may be evident.
SystemicDisorders
ANoxlA Length of the anoxic episode is not associated
with outcome in neonates. Anoxia is associated with
Neonatology
291
bradycardia and hypoventilation in very young animals
and often is accompanied by hypothermia and a subse-
quent lower oxygen demand.
CONGENITALDEFECTS Congenital defects,thosepresent
at birth, may be hereditary or developmental, or may
result from exposure of the dam to teratogenic sub-
stances. The fetuses are most susceptible to noxious
influences during the first third of pregnancy, during
organogenesis. The congenital defect most commonly
vey of 1679 pups that were 8-16 weeks old identified
cryptorchidism, patellar luxation, cardiac abnormalities
with murmurs, cleft palate, and umbilical and inguinal
hernias as the most common congenital defects.
Excellent reviews of congenital and hereditary
defects in puppies and kittens exist. If a particular defect
occurs in more than one litter from a particular dam or
sire or if frequency of the defect increases with inbreed-
ing, a hereditary basis should be suspected and the ani-
mals involved removed from the breeding program.
Gross anatomic abnormalities are visible at necropsy.
Microanatomic and biochemical abnormalities may be
identified by special testing available at the University
of Pennsylvania.Availability of tests for hereditary
disorders is consistently updated on the American
Kennel Club Canine Health Foundation website
(http:/ /www.akcchf.org/research/genetic.htm).
292
Neonatology
Effects of drugs during pregnancy in dogs and cats
often are extrapolated from work in other species (Box
10-1). Teratogens present during the first 26 days after
conception often cause cephalic,ocular, otic,or cardiac
abnormalities, whereas those present during the transi-
tion period immediately after day 26 are more likely to
cause palate, cerebellar, or urogenital defects. Defects of
the central nervous system, cardiovascular system, and
respiratory tract, depending on degree, often are
incompatible with life. Queens infected with or, presum
ably, vaccinated with modified live virus vaccine for pan-
leukopenia may give birth to kittens with cerebellar
hypoplasia.
"FADING"PUPPIES AND KITTENS Causes of fading in
puppies and kittens depend on a definition of the term.
Taken at itsbroadest meaning, the term fading puppies
and kittensincludes those that are either born weak and
fail to thrive or are vigorous but then weaken, dying by
approximately l week of age. The causes are many and
include septicemia, inadequate environment, low birth
weight, congenital abnormalities, maternal neglect or
trauma, lack of ingestion of colostrum or inadequate
milk, and neonatal isoerythrolysis (described as occur-
ring in cats only). In most cases more thian one of these
factors probably is causative, with primary factors such as
hypothermia, deficient colostrum ingestion, and immu-
nodeficiency predisposing the animal to secondary
infection, with subsequent hypoglycemia and dehydration
Neonatology
293
leading to cardiopulmonary failure. Treatment of fad-
ing puppy and kitten syndrome depends on identifica-
tionoftheunderlyingcause
HYPOTHERMIA Rewarming of hypothermic puppics and
kittens should be gradual, taking 30 minutes to 2 hours.
The neonate should be turned and rectal temperature
monitored frequently. Rectal temperature should not
exceed 10l" F (36.3° C) because this will cause dehydra
tion. Rewarming can be accomplished with careful use
of surface heat, such as circulating hot water pads and
hot water bottles, warmed inspired air, or warmed fluids
administered intravenously or intraosseously
Body temperature of less than 94'-95* F (34.5'-35.0° C)
is associated with failure to suckle and ileus (i.e., visceral
paralysis). Milk products should not be given1 orally until
body temperature is returned to normal because
hypothermic animals are incapable of digesting milk
and are predisposed to aspiration if the stomach is dis-
tended. Calories can be provided by parenteral or oral
administration of glucose-rich solutions,which do not
require normal peristalsis for absorption.
LOW BIRTH WEIGHT/POOR GROWTH RATE The puppy or kit-
ten should have been weighed at birth and shiould be
weighed daily thereafter. Kittens should weigh approxi-
 s  q    (  ) o 'g 
breed; estimates for various breeds are 4.2 oz (120 g) for
Pomeranians,9 oz (250 g) forbeagles,17oz(490 g) for
294
Neonatology
Box 10-1.Teratogenicity of Drugs Used in Veterinary
Practice
sdA1
Representative Drugs and Effects
Anticonvulsants
Primidone: cardiac defects,cleft palate,
skeletal abnormalities
Antinfectives
Griseofulvin:microphthalmos(kittens)
cleft palate(puppies)
Ketoconazole:stilibirths(dogs)
Tetracycline and aminoglycoside
antibiotics: bone and teeth
malformations(tetracycline),deafness
andrenal disease(aminoglycosides)
Metronidazole:described only as being
teratogenic in laboratory animals: no
specific disorders are described; not
recommended for use in animals
Antinflammatories
Aspirin: embryonic death
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO): described as
being teratogenic in aboratory animals;
manufacturerdoesnotrecommend its
application to breeding animals
Glucocorticoids: anasarca in
brachycephalic breeds
Antineoplasticagents
All: embryotoxic and can produce a
variety ofmalformationsinoffspring
that survive; examples of
antineoplastic drugs commonly used
in small animal oncology include
cisplatin, cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate,andvincristine
Neonatology
295
Box 10-1. Teratogenicity of Drugs Used in Veterinary
Practice-cont'd
Type
Representative Drugs and Effects
Hormones
Diethylstilbestrol and estradiol cypionate:
feminization of males
Testosterone and mibolerone:
masculinization of females
Progesterone: masculinization of
females
Sedatives
Diazepam and midazolam:congenital
defects in laboratory anirnals and
human beings; not recommended for
use during early pregnancy in dogs
andcats
Vitamins
Excess vitamin A: cleft palate,
kinked tails, cardiac defects
(kittens)
Excess vitamin D: tissue calcinosis,
enamel hypoplasia, cardiac
defects
greyhounds, and 22 oz (625 g) for Great Danes. Low birth
weight is correlated with poor survivability in puppies and
kittens. Birth weight is not influenced by sex of the
neonate and is more likely an indicator of inadequate
intrauterine nutrition or congenital abnormalities than of
296
Neonatology
prematurity. A guarded prognosis should be made regard-
ing neonates with lower than average weight at birth.
Slight weight loss may occur in the first 24 hours of
life. Puppies that lose more than 10% of thcir birth
weight during the first day of life have a poor prognosis.
After that, the puppy or kitten should gain weight daily.
doubling thebirth weight by 7-10 days ofage.
Pediatric animals with poor growth rates should be
assessed for adequacy of nursing. The veterinarian
should ensure that they are not being excluded from
nursing by competition with stronger littermates, that
the nipples are not hyperkeratotic, that mastitis is not
present, and that there are no congenital abnormalities
in the patient precluding effective suckling (e.g., cleft
palate). During and after weaning the animal should be
fed a high-quality food that is dense with energy-
providing nutrients.Animals with slow growth and poor
body condition may have disorders such as a portosys-
temic shunt, renal failure, megaesophagus, exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency, or cardiac disease. Animals
with slow growth and normal body condition may have
disorders such as hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, or
adrenaldisease.
NEONATAL ISOERYTHROLYSIS (KITTENS) Neonatal isO-
erythrolysis is anacute disease of kittensthat can occur
during the first days of life. Cats have naturally occurring
antibodies against the blood type they are lacking; devel-
Neonatology
297
sion. There are two main feline blood types: A and B.
Type A cats have weak anti-B antibodies, whereas type B
cats have strong anti-A antibodies. Kittens with blood
ingestion of colostrum and absorption of her anti-A
antibodies.
Clinical signs in the kittens include anemia, icterus,
capillaries and localized thrombus formation, weakness,
tachypnea, tachycardia, hemoglobinuria, and sudden
death. Severity of signs may vary within the litter, pre-
sumably because ofvariabilityin antibody uptake.
The mortality rate is high in affected kittens, even
with prompt intervention. The kittens should be
removed from the dam and given blood transfusions if
necessary. The dam is a good blood donor because she
has no antibodies to her own RBCs.
Prevention involves avoiding incompatible matings
(type B queens to type A toms). Estimation of propor-
tion of incompatible matings by breed is 0.25% for
domestic shorthaired cats, and as high as 14%-25% for
Persians and Abyssinians. The type B blood type is most
prevalent in the Devon and Cornish Rex and British
Shorthair breeds (Table 10-1). Blood typing can be per-
formed in-house (DMS Laboratories, Flemington, NJ;
800-567-4367) or at commerciallaboratories.
SEPTICEMIA Septicemia, also called neonatal sepsis, is sys
temwide infection with one or more bacterial organisms.
298
Neonatology
Table 10-1.Frequency of Type A and B Blood in Cats
in theUnited States
Breed
Type A (%)
Type B (%)
Abyssinian
81
19
Birman
82
18
British Shorthair
41
59
Devon Rex
57
43
Himalayan
80
20
Persian
76
24
Scottish Fold
85
15
Somali
78
22
DomesticShorthair
99
1
Entry occurs most commonly via the umbilicus. The ani-
mal may be predisposed to septicemia by inadequate
ingestion of colostrum or concurrent disease of the
neonate or dam. Gram-negative organisms are most
commonly involved, with E. colibeing the most prevalent
isolate.
Clinical  signs vary with
1 the organs affected.
Reported syndromes include gastroenteritis with foamy
vomitus,liquid diarrhea,reddening of the anus,rapid
dehydration, and death; pyelonephritis with abdominal
pain, fever, dehydration, and hematuria; omphalitis;
conjunctivitis; pneumonia with respiratory distress
and cyanosis; and nonspecific weakness, vocalization,
and dehydration, Acute respiratory distress syndrome,
Neonatology
299
characterized bylife-threatening noncardiogenicpul
monary edema,may occur secondary to septicemia, as
may sloughing of the extremities, perhaps because of
concurrent disseminated intravascular coagulation, tis-
sue hypoxemia, or vasculitis.
Putative diagnosis isbased on clinical signs,pres
ence ofnormocytic normochromic anemia,thrombocy
topenia and mild to moderate neutrophilia with a left
shift on complete blood count, and hypoglycemia
revealed by serum chemistry profile. Hypoglycemia may
developbecause ofimpairedglycogenolysisand gluco
neogenesis, decreased liver perfusion resulting from
congestion of major organs,and increased use of glu
cose by bacteria and leukocytes.Definitive diagnosis
requires blood culture. Blood cultures can be per
formed by diluting 1 ml of whole blood with 5-10 ml of
enrichment broth and examining the broth culture 6-18
hours later. Urine culture may be positive in some sep-
ticemic animals. Septicemia commonlyis diagnosed at
necropsy
Treatment of septicemia requires fluid therapy to
counter dehydration and hypoglycemia (balanced elec-
trolyte solution with 5% dextrose and potassium chloride
[KCl] supplement if serum potassium concentrations are
less than 2.5 mEq/L), oxygen therapy for management of
tissue hypoxemia, and appropriate antibiotic therapy.
Penicillins and cephalosporins are appropriate empirical
choices, pending culture and sensitivity results.
300
Neonatology
InfectiousDiseases
Severity of clinical signs with infectious disease is
dependent on nutrition, thermoregulation, concurrent
parasitism, developmental or hereditary defects of the
irmune system,and acquisition ofpassive immunity.
PUPPIES
Herpesvirus Herpesvirus is an opportunistic virus that
most readily infects bitches in late gestation, causing
stillbirths and abortion, or infects puppies during pas-
sage through the birth canal or during the first 3 weeks
of life, causing acute neonatal viremia. Puppies exhibit
abdominal pain and constant crying and die within 24
48hours of onset of signs.Diagnosis usually is made at
necropsy, during which hemorrhagic necrotizing
changes are observed as petechiation of the kidneys,
liver, and intestinal mucosa. Excessive pleural and
abdominal fluid may be present, and inclusion bodies
may be identified in hepatocytes. Treatment generally is
unrewarding. The optimal temperature for incubation
of the virus in tissue culture is 95.0-98.6°F (35.0-37.0*C);
replication may be inhibited in infected puppies by
maintaining body temperature ahove 101.0'-102.2" F
(36.3*-37.0° C).
Infectious canine hepatitis Puppies may be infected with
infectious canine hepatitis, an adenovirus, in utero or
Neonatology
301
during passage through the birth canal. This disease
usually is diagnosed at necropsy; characteristic intranu-
clear inclusion bodies are present in hepatocytes.
Infectious canine hepatitis resulting from vaccination
occurs rarely.
Canine distemper Canine distemper is uncomimon
because of vaccination.It usually is diagnosed at
necropsy in puppies; thymic atrophy, bronchopncumo
nia, and characteristic intranuclear inclusion bodies are
observed.
KITTENS
UpperrespiraforyinfectionA complexofrespiratorydis
eases occurs in cats and is caused by viruses, such as
rhinotracheitis and calicivirus; bacteria, including
Bordetella bronchiseptica and Chlamydiapsittaci;and rarely,
fungal organisms. Queens often are asymptomatic until
stressed by queening, at which time organisms are shed
and the less
s immunocompetent
tkittensbecome
infected. Clinical signs vary from mild conjunctivitis and
serous oculonasal discharge to sneezing, tenacious ocu-
lonasal discharge, self-trauma related to pawing at the
face, and respiratory distress. The condition usually is
self-limited and resolves in 10-14 days. Antibiotic therapy
may hasten resolution of clinical signs. Appropriate vac-
cination within the colony is important for control.
302
Neonatology
Calicivirus infection may be associated with mononul-
clear cell infiltration of joints, causing a lameness that
usually is self-resolving; this is sometimes termed limping
hittensyndrome.
Panfeukopenia Kittensinfectedwithfeline distemper
parvovirus in utero develop cerebellar hypoplasia.
Those infected as neonates exhibit acute onset of vom-
iting and diarrhea, fever, rapid dehydration, leukope-
nia, and death. The disease is rarely caused by
vaccination,
Feline feukemia Feline leukemia virus can be transmitted
tosusceptible kittens while nursing or through any other
close contact with infected animals. Infected kittens
undergolymphoiddepletion with thymic atrophy.
Clinically, they exhibit failure to thrive and secondary
sepsis.
Feline infectious peritonitis Feline infectious peritonitis
rarely is described as a cause of mortality in very young
kittens.Diagnosis via serologic examination is difficult
because of cross-reaction with the relatively nonpatho
genic enteric coronavirus (FECV). Animals infected
with FECV, including kittens, shed virus before becom-
ing viremic, lessening the value of serologic testing as a
means to decrease introduction of infected animals into
the cattery.
Neonatology
EOE
Disorders of Specific Systems
DERMATOLOGIC DISORDERS Fleas are a common exter-
nal parasite ofyoung animals.Severe flea infestatioil can
cause anemia; clinical signs includc pale mucous mem
branes,lethargy, tachycardia,collapse, and death. Fleas
also can transmit tapeworms. The preferred treatment
for fleas in animals younger than 2 months is thorough
bathing and grooming with a flea comb. Lufenuron
(Program, Sentinel [with milbcmycin]; Novartis, East
Hanover, NJ) is an orally administered product
approved for use in kittens 4 weeks or older to prevent
and control fleas. Sentinel also controls roundworms,
whipworms, and hookworms and prevents heartworms.
Nitenpyram (Capstar, Novartis) is an oral product
appropriate for use in animals in facilities with a heavy
flea infestation; the youngest age at which it can be used
safely has not been defined. Selamectin (Revolution;
Pfizer, New York, NY),imidacloprid (Advantage; Bayer,
Shawnee Mission, Kan.), and fipronil (Frontline; Merial,
Iselin, NJ) are topical flea control products reportedly
safe for use in kittens older than 6,8,and 12 weeks,
respectively.Selamectin also controls heartworms,
roundworms, hookworms, and ear mite infestations.
Dermatophytosis is relatively common, especially in
catteries.Microsporum caninumis the most common iso-
late. The kittens exhibit progressive crusty alopecia and
may or may not be pruritic. The organism lives in dead
skin and in the hair shafts of infected animals. It is difficult
304
Neonatology
to eradicate from the environment and is zoonotic. If
griseofulvin is used for treatment, kittens may exhibit side
effects ofanorexia,vomiting,diarrhea,anemia,leukope
nia, and ataxia. Griseofulvin is slowly metabolized in kit-
tens and may be hepatotoxic. Vaccination against
M. caninum reportedly is variable in efficacy in catteries.
GASTROINTESTINALDISORDERS/PARASITES ToxiCmilk
syndromeis a term often used to describe increased vocal
ization and abdominal distention in 3- to 14-day-old pup
pies or kittens. This is more likely to be caused by
hypothermia, with secondary ileus, or to overfeeding
than to abnormalities ofthe dam'smilk.
Diarrheaoften occurs secondary to overfeeding of
neonates or disruption of the normal gastrointestinal
environment with changes in diet or with antimicrobial
therapy. Diarrhea may be difficult to diagnose in young
animals with zealous dams and may be first observed as
lack of weight gain and dehydration. Treatment is sup
portive care with fluid therapy and assessment of the
feeding schedule.
Intestinal parasites are commoninyoung animals,
especially those born in warm climates or in closely man-
aged facilities. In puppies, roundworms (Toxocara canis)
andhookworms(Ancyclostomacaninum)areverycom
mon. Roundworms can pass transplacentally in late ges-
tation. Within infected puppies the larvae may migrate
to the lungs and liver, causing a nonproductive cough
Neonatology
305
and poor weight gain. Hookworms are passed via the
dam's milk and can cause significant blood loss in
infected pups within 8 days of infection, although
oocysts are not shed in the feces until approximately
14 days after infection. Puppies 2 weeks or older are
treated with pyrantel pamoate (5-10 mg/kg adminis-
tered orally once daily for 2-3 weeks). Prevention
involves treatment of thebitch with fenbendazole
(50 mg/kg administered orally once daily) from the for-
tieth day of gestation to 14 days postpartum. Kittens also
can be infected with roundworms; treatment is with
pyrantel pamoate, as described previously. Use of piper-
azine is not recommended in kittens.
Coccidiosis can occur in either puppies or kittens.
Infection usually is asymptomatic and self-limited. If
diarrhea occurs, treatment may be instituted with sul-
fadimethoxine(30 mg/kg once daily or 15 mg/kg twice
a day in puppies, 30 mg/kg once daily in kittens weigh-
ing at least 1 kg) until signs regress. Similarly, infection
with Giardia species usually is asymptomatic and self-
limited. If necessary, puppies and kittens can be treated
daily for 7-10 days or 25 mg/kg given twice a day for
5 days and then 10 mg/kg given twice a day) or fen-
bendazole (50 mg/kg administered orally once daily
for 3-7 days).
Hemobartonella felis may be an incidental finding on
complete blood counts in kittens or may be a cause of
90E
Neonatology
RBC destruction, anemia, and icterus. It can be treated
with doxycycline (10 mg/kg once daily) and decreasing
dosagesofprednisone.
Toxoplasmagondiiis an uncommon cause of a syll
drome in kittens characterized by neurologic signs,
fever, respiratory disease, anemia, lymphadenopathy,
and death within 3-12 days. The mode of transmission is
undefined, but congenital infection seems likely
because the disease has been definitively diagnosed in
kittens as young as 2 weeks. Treatment is with triple sul-
fonamides, pyrimethamine, and folic acid; efficacy is
questionable. Infected kittens, their feces, and their bed-
ding should be isolated and all contaminated materials
destroyed. Toxoplasma oocysts are resistant to com-
monly used disinfectants.A zoonotic potential exists;
pregnant women should not handle infected cats or con-
taminatedmaterials.
NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS Neurologic disorders may be
congenital, such as hydrocephalus and cerebellar ataxia,
or may be acquired, such as traumatic injury to the
spinal column, lead toxicity, or parasitism. Localization
of neurologic disorders can be accomplished in
neonates as in adults (Box 10-2).
OPHTHALMIA NEONATORUM/JUVENILE CATARACTS
Ophthalmia neonatorum is conjunctivitis and infection
behind closed eyelids in kittens and puppies younger
Neonatology
307
Box 10-2.Localization of Neurologic Dysfunction
in Puppies and Kittens
Sign
Location
Head tilt
Vestibulardefect,ipsilateral
Seizures, abnormal mental
Cerebrum
status
Intention tremor, ataxia, limb
Cerebellum
incoordination
Gait and posture deficits
without cranial nerve deficits
Forelimbs only
Peripheral
 All four limbs
UMN all
Upper cervical spine or diffuse
LMN front, UMN rear
Lowercervicalspine or diffuse
Pelviclimbs only
UMN
T2-L3
LMN
L4-S1
Dilated anus, flaccid tail
S1-S3
LN,Lower motor neuron; UMN,upper motor neuron.
than 10-14 days. It is common in catteries with endemic
herpesvirus (rhinotracheitis) infection. Treatment is
gentle separation of the eyelids and application of topi-
cal ophthalmic ointment.
Cataracts may develop in puppies and kittens fed
either commercial or homemade milk replacers. These
small focal cataracts usually resolve spontaneously after
weaning.
80E
Neonatology
"SWIMMER" PUPPIES Swimmer puppies and kittens
have dorsoventral compression and lateral widening of
the thoracic cavity. The cause is unknown; hereditary
and environmental factors (e.g., slippery flooring) may
be involved. Treatment is taping of the limbs in an
adducted position or provision ofa nonslip surface or an
uneven surface, such as egg carton foam. Nandrolone
laurate (10 mg) can be administered twice over a 2-week
interval, presumably to promote growth of muscle and
joint-associated connective tissue.
Normal Laboratory Values in Neonates
Sample Coffection
Venipuncture in pediatric patients can be difficult
because the animal may be intractable and the veins are
very small and collapse easily. Blood usually is most easily
collected from the external jugular vein, although the
cephalic vein can be used in larger puppies. The femoral
vein is too friable for venipuncture in pediatric patients.
The area over the vein should be moistened with water,
not alcohol. Puppies or kittens may be restrained either
by pulling the forelimbs down over the edge of a table
while extending the neck as for larger animals or by
laying the animal on its back, pulling the forelimbs
toward the abdomen, extending the neck, and introduc
ing the needle toward the thoracic inlet. Appropriate
Neonatology
60
equipment is a 22- to 25-gauge needle attached to a 3-ml
syringe. Hemolysis and venous collapse are less likely to
occur if the needle is well seated into the vein and the
bloodisdrawnslowly
The recommended minimum database for assess-
ment of sick pediatric patients is a hematocrit and total
protein, blood glucose concentration, blood urea nitro
gen (BUN), and urine specific gravity and sediment.
The clinician should contact the laboratory to find the
minimum sample size needed. Blood volume in an ani-
mal weighing 1 pound (454 g) is 25-40 ml. In-house ana-
lyzers need smaller samples andhave faster turnaround
times than do commercial laboratories but mayhave less
rigorousqualitycontrol.
The blood sample should be placed in a small-
diameter tube to ensure adequate mixing with any anti-
   d   s g
serum or plasma to aspirate after centrifugation.
Often, a greater volume of plasma than of serum is
obtained from a particular sample;green-topped
(heparinized) tubes are preferred to red-topped
(serum) tubes. Purple-topped (ethylenediaminete-
traacetic acid [EDTA]) tubes should not be used
because EDTA alters the size and shape of RBCs.The
plasma sample should be removed from the clot as
quickly as possible to prevent an artifactual decrease in
glucose caused by RBC metabolism and increase in
phosphorus caused by hemolysis
310
Neonatology
NormafLaboratoryVafues
COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT (TABLE 1O-Z) Hematocrit is
normal at birth but declines during the early weeks of
life because of dccreased production and shortened
RBC life span. An increase in polychromasia, nucleated
RBCs, Howell-Jolly bodies, and Heinz bodies (kittens) is
evident. Hematocrit is normal by 8 weeks. Neutrophilia
resulting from stress during venipuncture may occur.
SERUMCHEMISTRYPROFILE(TABLE10-3)Alanineamino
transferase concentrations are decreased in young ani-
mals.Alkaline phosphatase (AP) concentrations are
increased by as much as two times adult concentrations
and remain elevated throughoutrapid growth,peaking
in kittens at 7 months of age. Total protein (TP) is
decreased in young animals as plasma volume expands
faster than hepatic protein synthesis develops; TP is
normal by 6-9 months. Fasting and postprandial bile
acid concentrations are as adult concentrations by
4weeks.
Glomerular filtration rate is reduced in puppies and
kittens, varying from 20% of adult values at birth to
100% of adult values by several weeks of age. BUN varies
with relation of time of sampling to ingestion of the most
recent meal but is still a more sensitive indicator of renal
function than is creatinine in young animals.
Neonateshavematernalbloodglucoseconcentra
tions at birth and then experience a decrease in blood
Neonatology
311
Basos, Basophils; eos, eosinophils fmphs, lymphocytes; monos,monocytes; neuts, neutrophils; WBC, white blood
Basos
0-2
Complete Blood Count Values for Puppies (P) and Kittens (K)
1
Eos
0-2
O11
0-1
d
Monos
Dlfferential (× 10²/ul)
0-1
Z-0
0-2
3-4
6-7
6-7
8-11
Lymphs
2-7
1-8
3-17
3-7
0-0.1
0-0.2
0-0.3
E'0-0
'0-0
8-11 0-0.3
6-80-0.3
Q-1
8-9
Neuts
5-7
3-10
4-13
4-18
16-206-12
9-10
14-17
16-19
(x103/)
13-27
31-3929-3113-17
29-5334-377-23
9-26
 Hematocrit
26-27
26-28
(%)
Table 10-2.
27-37
26-36
cell number.
2
4
6
312
Neonatology
Table 10-3.
Serum Chemistry Profile Values in Puppies (P)
and Kittens (K)
Total
Age
ALT
AP
Albunin
proteln
(wk)
(U/L)
(IU/L)
(gm/L)
(g/L}
(mmol/L)
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
2
10-3411-24
176-560
68-269
20
20
40
40-50
6-8
4-7
4
20-22 14-26
135-201
90-135
10-2020
40
50
5-6
6
9
16-17
125-132
40-5020
30-4040-50
7
<7
8
9-24
144-177
20-3020
40-5050
8-15
<7
AtT, Alanine aminotransferase; AF; alkaline phosphatase; BU/y, blood urea nitrogen.
glucose to approximately 45 mg/dl during the first
4-6 hours of life, with stabilization at approximately
70 mg/dl by 72 hours of life. Significant hypoglycemia is a
blood glucose concentration of less than 50 mg/dl.
Pathologic hyperglycemia is uncommon in pediatric
patients. Juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus has been
reported to occur in several breeds of dog and in one
cat as young as 6 weeks, with blood glucose concentra-
tions of 200-700 mg/dl; glucosuria; and clinical
signs of disease, including weight loss, polyuria,
polydipsia, polyphagia, cataracts, and concurrent
infections.
Serum sodium concentrations may be decreased
during the first several days of life but normalize quickly.
Phosphorus is elevated during rapid bone growth and is
normal by 8-12 months of age; normalization may take
longer in giant breeds.
Neonatology
313
Table 10-3.S
Serum Chemistry Profile Values in Puppies (P)
and Kittens (K)—cont'd
BUN
Creatinine
Sodlum
Chloride
Potassium
Calcium
(mmol/L)
(μumol/L)
(mmol/L)
(mmol/L)
(mmol/L)
(mmol/L)
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
d
K
<11
<11
一
44
149-153
120-124
一
4-5
2-3
<11
88-354
53
148
151-156
105
119-125
5
5-6
3
3
<11
62
150-152
119-125
一
4-5
Z-3
URINALYSIs Urine specific gravity is decrcascd in pedi-
atric patients, at 1.006-1.017. Physiologic protcinuria is
present during the first days of life as colostral antibodies
are absorbed and excretedin theurine.Nonpathologic
glucosuria may be present until renal function matures.
Treatment of Neonates
Emergency Resuscitation
For puppies and kittens that very recently died or that
arrest during examination, the following steps should be
taken:
· A = airway: Aspirate secretions from the oral cavity
and respiratory tract; intubate if possible.
 B = breathing: Provide 100% oxygen via endotra-
cheal tube or mask or room air with an Ambu bag.
314
Neonatology
· C = circulation: Direct chest compressions should
approximate normal heart rate. If intrathoracic car-
diac compression is attempted,it shouldbe insti-
tuted within 2 minutes of starting cardiopulmonary
resuscitation.Other techniques that may bc used
include intermittent abdominal compression, epi
mephrine (0.04-0.4 mg/kg intratracheal or intracar-
diac), or stimulation of the Jen Chung acupuncture
site, in which a 25-gauge needle is inserted into the
lasal philtrum at the base of the nares :  1 twisted
olice to reach the periosteum.
FluidTherapy
Pediatric animals require more water relative to body
mass compared with adults and sustain relatively
approximately 200 ml/kg day. Pediatric animals have
decreased cardiac capacity and underdeveloped renal
function and thus cannot toleratc large volume
replacement.
Fluids canbe administered via intraperitoneal,
subcutaneous, intravenous, or intraosseous routes.
Absorption of fluids from the intraperitoneal space is
slow, especially in hypovolemic animals, and fluids must
be administered via strict aseptic technique. Similarly,
subcutaneous administration of fluids ismade difficult
by the limited amount of fluid that can be provided in
Neonatology
315
the subcutaneous space; sporadic absorption can occur,
even in only moderately dehydrated animals. Isotonic
fluids without glucose should be administered subcuta
neously to prevent sloughing of skin over the injection
site. Intravenous and intraosseous routes are preferred
for administration of fluid to neonatal puppies and
kittens.
Intravenous catheters for bolus or continuous infu
sion of fluids are best placed in the cxternal jugular vein.
Catheters 23 to 25 gauge can be placed in the cephalic
vein, but the small size of the veins and short legs of
pediatric animals make cephalic placeinent and mainte-
nance of fluid flow difficult. One recommended proto-
col for intravenous rehydration in pediatric patients
is 4-10 ml/kg/hr 0.45% saline,with or without 5%
dextrose..
Intraosseous administration of fluids is an alterna-
tive to intravenous therapy in animals in which place-
ment of an intravenous catheter is impossible or
would take an excessive amount of time.An 18- to 22-
gauge spinal needle is passed through the soft cortical
bone at the trochanteric fossa of the femur orgrealer
tubercle of the humerus. The needle is inserted paral-
lel to the long axis of the bone into the intramedullary
canal. Fluid flow rates of up to 11 ml/min can be
achieved with gravity, and the fluid is readily
absorbed. Catheter maintenance is as for intravenous
placement.
316
Neonatology
AntibioticTherapy
Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of
drugs are altered in pediatric patients.Absorption
of drugs injected intramuscularly is sporadic because of
the small size and poor vascularity of the muscle mass.
Drugs administered orally are absorbed differently than
in adults because of increased gastric pH, slow gastroin-
testinal transit time, and decreased intestinal blood flow
in young animals. Distribution of drugs is altered by the
small amount of total body fat and increased total body
water and by the decreased concentration of circulating
proteins in pediatric patients. Water-soluble medica
tions must be given at a higher dosage to counter dilu
tion, and fat-soluble drugs need to be given at a lower
dosage.Finally,metabolism and excretion are altered by
immature hepatic and renal function (Table 104)
Therapy can be altered either by decreasing the
interval. Treatment of the lactating dam is not an effec-
tive way to deliver medications to nursing puppies or kit-
tens; although deposition of drugs into milk varies with
lipid solubility, only about 1%-2% of the dam's dose will
reachtheyoung.
Antibiotics that should be avoided in young animals
are aminoglycosides (nephrotoxic and ototoxic), tetra-
cycline (dental and skeletal abnormalities,hepatotoxic,
and nephrotoxic), trimethoprim/sulfonamides and
chloramphenicol (inappetence and hematopoietic
Neonatology
317
Table 10-4. Antibiotic Therapy in Pediatric Patients
Drug
Kitteris
Puppies
Amoxicillin
22 mg/kg PO q8-12h
20 mg/kg P0 q8h
Ampicillin
20-40 mg/kg
PO q6-8h
10-20 mg/kg
IV, IM, SC q6-8h
Amoxicilin/
clavulanate
12.5-25.0 mg/kg
20-30 mg/kg PO
POq12h
ugb
Cefazolin
25-35 mg/kg IV, IM
10-30 mg/kg PO
q8h
q8h
Cephalexin
10-30 mg/kg PO,
SC, IV q8-12h
Cefotaxime
20-80 mg/kg IV, IM,
25-50 mg/kg PO
SC q12h
q8h
abnormalities), and fluoroquinolones (cartilage abnor-
malities in rapidly growing animals).
Feeding Orphan Kittens and Puppies
Orphans
Support of orphaned puppies and kittens involves main-
taining an adequate environmental temperature, feed-
ing a well-balanced milk-based diet for the first 3 weeks
oflife, and stimulating urination and defecation.
318
Neonatology
MAINTENANCE OF BODY TEMPERATURE PediatriC ani
mals do not have well-developed thermoregulatory sys
tems and rely on an external heat source, ideally the
dam, for maintenance of normal body temperature.
Orphans should be maintained in an environment at
about 85° F (29.5° C) for the first 2 wecks of life and
about 80° F (26.5° C) for the subsequent 2 weeks.
Warmed and cooler areas should be available so that the
puppies and kittens can crawl to an area appropriate in
temperature.Among surface sources ofheat,circulating
hotwater blankets arebest.Hot water bottlesshould be
wrapped in towels and frequently changed. Regula1
heating pads may heat unevenly and more easily burn
the fragile skin ofneonates.Heat lamps are an excellent,
safe way to provide radiant heat.
INGESTION OF COLOSTRUM If possible, it nccds to be
ascertained whether the puppy or kitten has ingested
colostrum. If the owner is unsure whether a puppy has
ingested colostrum, blood can be drawn from the puppy
ofinterest and a littermate that is known to have nursed
andserum AP and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
concentrations can be compared between the two.
Concentrations rermain high for up to 10 days in puppies
that have ingested colostrum. If a puppy or kitten has
not ingested colostrum, antibodies can be provided by
subcutaneous administration of serum from the dam or
another immunocompetent animalin the household.
Neonatology
319
Amount and frequency of serum to be administered are
undefined.
BODY WEIGHT The puppy or kitten should have been
weighed atbirth and should be weighed daily thercafter.
Slight weight loss may occur during the first 24 hours of
life. After that, the puppy or kitten should gain weight
daily, doubling the birth weight by 7-l0 days. Kittens
shouuld gain 1.8-3.5 oz (50-100 g) weekly. Puppies should
gain 0.05-0.1 oz (1-2 g) per pound (2-4 g/kg) of antici-
pated adult weight daily, about a 10% increase per day.
Monitoring of body wcighitis an early indicator of ade-
quacy of food and water intake in hand-fed animals.
DIET Milk is the primary diet of puppies and kittcns up
to 3 weeks of age. In addition to providing passive immu-
nity and nutrients, milk, compriscd of approximately
85% water, is the primary source of fluid for neonales. It
is vital for maintenance of normal hydration and fluid
volume and for provision of nonnutritive bioactive
agents, such as enzymcs, hormones, and growth factors.
Aneffort alwaysshouldbemadetofind anotherlac
commercial or homemade milk replacer contains all the
components of a bitch's or queen's milk. The protein
content and percentage of calories from protein in milk
are positively correlated with growth rate in animals.
Cow's milk is lower in protein than either bitch's o1
320
Neonatology
queen's milk. Goat's milk, a commonly described sup-
plement for orphans, also is a poor substitute for bitch's
and queen's milk.
Commercial milk replacers are recommended over
homemade diets. Commercial formulas are balanced,
are of high nutrient density, are low in fiber, and contain
protein of high biologic value. Feline milk replacers
must contain a source of taurine for optimal growth to
occur. Homemade diets are best used in emergency situ
ations (Box 10-3).
Problems reported with feeding of either commer-
cial or homemade milk replacers to puppies and kittens
include small, focal cataracts resulting from deficiencies
in vitamins or amino acids that resolve after weaning and
slower growth rate as a result of lack of enzymes neces
sary for fat digestion. By several months of age, hand
raised puppies and kittens achieve the same size as
littermates that were allowed to nurse. The high lactose
content of cow's milk and decreased caloric density of
formulas make it difficult to provide orphans with an
adequatenumberofcalorieswithoutinducingdiarrhea.
If feeding induces diarrhea, the formula can be diluted
1:2 with electrolyte solution until the neonate can toler-
ate it.
Figuring dietary requirements The amount tobe fed varies
with the caloric density of the formula and the age and
weight of the animal. Kittens should receive 100-175 kcal
Neonatology
321
Box 10-3. Emergency Homemade Milk Replacers
for Puppies and Kittens
Puppies
Kittens
1. 3 parts evaporated milk
1. 1/2 cup (120 ml whole
(not skimmed) to 1 part
milk, 1 egg yoik, 1 drop
water
liquid infant vitamins
2. 1 cup (240 ml) whole milk
2. 1/2 cup (120 ml)
1 tsp (5 ml) vegetable oil,
condensed milk,1/2 cup
1dropliquid infantvitamins
(120 ml) water, 1/2 cup
plain yogurt, 3-4 eg9 yolks
3.1/2cup(120 ml) whole milk
1/2 cup (120 ml) water. 1-2
egg yolks, 2 Tums (calcium
supplement), 1 tsp (5 ml)
vegetable oil
4. 1 cup (240 ml) whole milk,
1 Tbsp (15 ml) vegetable oil,
apinchof salt,3 egg yolks.
1 drop liquid infant vitamins
per pound (220-380 kcal/kg) daily, split into four to six
feedings. Puppies should receive 105-120 kcal per
pound (230-260 kcal/kg) daily, split into four feedings.
Feeding frequency can be decreased to three times daily
after the orphan reaches 2 weeks of age.
Feeding neonataf puppies and kittens The formula should
322
Neonatology
2-week-old animals.If the animal has been experiencing
inappetence,it maybebeneficial tofeed half the calcu
lated dosefor 1-2 days.Equipmentfor feeding ofpediatric
animals includes spoons, droppers, bottles, or tubes.
·Spoonanddropperfeedingsaredangerousbecause
the limited gag reflex of puppies and kittens easily
permits aspiration of formula into the lungs.
· Bottle feeding poses less risk of aspiration and more
readily satisfies the neonate's need to suckle.Small
bottlesmarketedfor animalsorbottlesintendedfor
premature human infants can be used. The hole in
thenippleshould allowmilktooozeslowly.Thebot-
tle should never be squcezed to force expulsion of
milk while the animal is nursing
· Tube feeding is quick. Caution must be used to
ensure proper placement of the tube into the gas-
trointestinaltractandtopreventoverflowingand
regurgitation. The animal should be held horizon-
tally on its ventrum.Thefeeding tube varies in
diameterandlengthwithage.A5-Frfeedingtube
should be used in animals weighingless than 300 g
andan8-to10-Fr feeding tube shouldbe used in
animals weighing more than 300 g. Measure the
lengthofthefeedingtubebymarkingoff75%ofthe
distancefrom theanimal'slastrib to thetipofits
nose.Thislength ensures placementin the stomach
without kinking of the tube within the gastrointesti-
nal tract.Length should berechecked and adjusted
Neonatology
323
weekly. The warmed formula is gently expelled
through the tube with a syringe. Monitor gastric
distention; average stomach capacity in neonates is
approximately 0.7 fl oz (4 tsp) per pound (40 ml/kg).
The genital area should be massaged with a cotton
ball or soft cloth moistened with warm water after
feeding to promote urination and defecation,
Weanlings
Weaning,introduction of solid food, begins at 3 weeks of
age in puppies and at 3-4 weeks in kittens. A growth food
appropriate for the species, not human baby food,
should be introduced. Young animals need more nutri-
ents to allow for normal growth and development but
take longer to ingest food and have a smaller digestive
capacity,necessitating feeding of a highly digestible food
should be offered as a gruel initially, formed by
thoroughly blending 1 part dry food to 3 parts water or
2 parts canned food to l part water for puppies, and
1part dryfood to3 parts formulaor 2parts canncd food
to l part formula for kittens. Fewer problems with post-
prandial gastric distention occur if the food is thor-
oughly soaked. Fresh water always should be provided.
Gradually, less water or formula is mixed with the food
until the puppy or kitten is eating dry food exclusively.
Weaning usually is complete by 6-8 weeks of age. By the
324
Neonatology
time the animal is weaned, it should have a body weight
that is approximately 6-10 times its birth weighit
Bibliography
Addie DD, Toth S, Thompson H et al: Detection of feline
parvovirus in dying pedigree kittens, Vet Rec142:353,
1998.
Anvik JO: Clinical considerations of canine herpesvirus
infection, Vet Med April:394, 1991.
Atkins CE: Disorders of glucose hemostasis in neonatal
and juvenile dogs: hyperglycemia, Comp Cont Ed
5:851,1982.
Atkins CE: Disorders of glucose hemostasis in neonatal
and juvenile dogs: hypoglycemia: part I, Comp Cont
Ed6:197,1984.
Berman E: Fetal and neonatal growth and development.
InMorrowDA (ed):Current therapyin theriogenology
Philadelphia, 1986, WB Saunders.
Blunden TS: The neonate: congenital defects and fad-
ing puppies. In Simpson GM, England GC, Harvey
M(eds):BSAVA manualofsmall animal reproduction
and neonatolwgy, Cheltenham, England, 1998, British
Small AnimalVeterinaryAssociation.
Bounous DI, Boudreaux MK, Hoskins JD: The
hematopoietic and lymphoid systems. In Hoskins JD
(ed):Veterinary pediatrics: dogs and cats from birth to six
months, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders
Neonatology
325
Bucheler J: Fading kitten syndrome and neonatal iso-
erythrolysis,Vet Clin North Am29:853,1999.
Canine ConsumerReport:Aguideto hereditary andcon
genital diseases in purebred dogs, Vacaville,1994,
Association ofVeterinarians forAnimal Rights.
Casal ML: Feline paediatrics, Vet Annu 35:210, 1995.
Center SA, Hornbuckle WE, Hoskins JD: The liver and
pancreas. In Hoskins JD (ed): Veterinary pediatrics:
dogs and cats from birth to six months, Philadelphia.
1995,WBSaunders.
Dial SM: Hematology, chemistry profile, and urinalysis
for pediatric patients, Comp Cont Ed 14:305, 1992.
Dubey JP, Carpenter JL: Neonatal toxoplasmosis in litter-
mate cats,JAmVetMedAssoc203:1546,1993
Earle KE: Calculations of energy requirements of dogs,
cats and small psittacine birds, J Small Anim Pract
34:163,1993.
Fettman MJ, Allen TA: Developmental aspects of fluid
and electrolyte metabolism and renal function in
neonates, Comp ContEd13:392,1991.
Fisher EW:Neonatal diseases of dogs and cats,BrVet
138:277,1982.
Gelens HC, Ihle SL: Failure to grow, Vet Clin North Am
29:989, 1999.
Giger U, Casal ML, Niggemeier A: The fading
kitten syndrome and neonatal isoerythrolysis.
Proceedings of the ACVIM Forum. Lakc Buena
Vista, Fl, 1997.
326
Neonatology
Harpold LM, Legendre AM, Kennedy MA et al: Fecal shed-
ding of feline coronavirus in adult cats and kittens in
an Abyssinian cattery, J Am Vet Med Assoc215:948, 1999.
Haskins ME, Casal ML: Interpreting gross necropsy
observations in neonatal and pediatric kittens. In
August JR (ed): Consultations in feline internal medi-
cine, Philadelphia, 1997, WB·Saunders.
Hosgood G: Surgical and anesthetic management of
puppies and kittens, Comp Cont Ed 14:345, 1992.
Hoskins JD: Clinical evaluation of the kitten: from birth
toeight weeksof age,Comp ComtEd12:1215,1990.
Hoskins JD: Congenital defects of cats, Comp Cont Ed
17:385,1995.
Hoskins JD: Fading puppy and kitten syndromes, Feline
Pract21:19, 1993.
Hoskins JD: Pediatric health care and management, Vet
ClinNorthAm29:837,1999.
Hoskins JD: Pediatrics in small animals. Proceedings of
the Metropolitan Animal Hospital Association
Spring Conference, St Paul, Minn, 1993.
Hoskins JD: The puppy's first veterinary examination:
physical examination and preventive health pro-
gram,Vet Tech 12:521, 1991.
Hoskins JD, Taboada J: Congenital defects of the dog.
Comp ContEd14:873,1992.
Jemmett JE, Evans JM: A survey of sexual behaviour and
reproduction of female cats, J Small Anim Pract
18:31,1977.
Neonatology327
Jezyk PF: Metabolic diseases: an emerging area of veteri-
nary pediatrics,Comp Cont Ed5:1026,1983.
 Johnson CA, Grace JA: Care of newborn puppies and kit-
tens, Kal KanForum9,1987.
Johnson CA, Grace JA, Probst MR: The effect of mater-
nal illness on perinatal health, Vet Clin North Am
17:555, 1987.
Jones RL: Special considerations for appropriate antimi-
crobial therapy in neonates, Vet Clin North Am
17:577,1987.
Kirk CA: Feeding the neonate: how to turn the young
and the restless into the bold and the beautiful.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology.
Nashville, 1999.
Kraft H, Hartmann K, Dereser R: Age-related variations
in clinicochemical values for dogs and cats, Tierarzt
Prax23:502,1995.
Laliberte L: Neonatal and orphian kitten care. In
Morrow DA (ed): Current therapy in theriogenology
Philadelphia,1986,WB Saunders.
Lawler DF: Neonatal puppies and kittens: physical and
environmental evaluation, Vet Tech 14:337, 1993.
Lawler DF: The role of perinatal care in development,
Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 10:59, 1995.
Lawler DF, Monti KL: Morbidity and mortality in neona-
tal kittens, Am / Vet Res 45: 1455, 1984.
LewisLD,Morris ML,HandMS:Small animalclinical
nuirifion, Topeka, 1992, Mark Morris Associates.
328
Neonatology
Macintire DK: Pediatric intensive care, Vet Clin North Am
29:971, 1999.
Marks SL: Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and oxygen
therapy,VetClinNorth Am29:959,1999.
Merton DA: Selective breeding in the dog and cat: part
I1. Known and suspected genetic diseases, Comp
ComtEd4:332,1982
MohrmanRK:Thecare ofnewbornorphanpuppies
St Louis, 1980, Ralston Purina Pet Nutritionl and
Care Research.
Moore PH: Care and management of the neonate. In
Simpson GM,England GC, Harvey M (eds): BSAVA
manualofsmallanimalreproductionandneonatology
Cheltenham, England, 1998, British Small Animal
VeterinaryAssociation.
Piechotta D, Kolb E: Concentrations of sodium, potas
sium, calcium,magnesium,inorganic phosphate,
copper, zinc and alkaline phosphatase in the plasma
of cats of different ages, Tierarzt Umschau 49:439,
1994.
Poffenbarger EM, Olson PN, Ralston SL et al: Canine
neonatology: part I1. Disorders of the neonate,
Comp ContEd13:25,1991.
Poffenbarger EM, Ralston SL, Chandler ML et al:
Canine neonatology: part I. Physiologic differences
between puppies and adults, Comp Cont Ed 12:1601,
1990.
Neonatology
329
Povey RC:Reproduction in the pedigree female cat: a
survey of breeders, Can Vet / 19:207, 1978.
Root MV,ohnson KH, Allen WT et al: Diabetes mellitus
associated with pancreatic endocrine insufficiency
in a kitten,JSmall Anim Pract 36:416,1995.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN: Estrous length, preg
nancy rate, gestation and parturition lengths, litter
size, and juvenile mortality in the domestic cat, J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 31:429,1995.
Ruble RP, Hird DW: Congenital abnormalities in imma-
ture dogs from a pet store: 253 cases (1987-1988),
IAmVet Med Assoc 202:633,1993.
Shores A: Neurologic examination of the canine
neonate,CompContEd5:1033,1983.
tens. In Simpson GM, England GC, Harvey M (eds):
BSAVAmanualofsmallanimalreproductionandneona-
tology, Cheltenham, England, 1998, British Small
Animal Veterinary Association.
Walkowicz C,Wilcox B: Successful dog breeding, New York,
1994,Howell Book House.
Willis EL: Flea control as we enter the next century,Vet
Forum40,2000.
11
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch
and Queen
CraigA.Smith
AT A GLANCE
·Ovarian cysts
· The most common type of ovarian cyst is the
functional follicular cyst, which secretes estrogen.
Presenting complaints reported include persistent
proestrus/estrus, prolonged anestrus, and infertil-
ity. Ovarian cysts may be visible with ultrasound. Thc
331
332
Ovarian Dlsorders of the Bitch and Queen
primary rule-out for an estrogen-secreting follicular
cyst is a granulosa cell tumor. Treat follicular cysts
with ovariohysterectomy (OHE) or by inducing
luteinization withgonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) or human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG).
+ Ovarian remnant syndrome
· Cats and dogs with ovarian remnant syndrome
(ORS) have signs of heat (e.g., vulvar discharge,
breeding behavior), despite having undergone
OHE.
· Diagnose by demonstrating cornified vaginal cytol-
ogy whien the animal is showing signs of heat (proves
estrogen secretion is occurring: see Chapter 2).
● Bitches ovulate spontaneously. Wait until the
bitch entersdiestrus and measure serumproges-
terone concentration; a concentration greater
than 2 ng/ml indicates thatluteinized tissue is
present.
· Queens do not ovulate spontaneously. When they
are in estrus, induce ovulation by administering
weeks later; a concentration greater than 2 ng/ml
indicates thatluteinized tissue is present.
· Treat by performing exploratory laparotomy and
removing remnant tissue from one or both ovarian
pedicles. Identification of the ovarian remnant is
enhanced by performance of surgery during estrus
OvarianDisordersoftheBitchandQueen
EEE
or diestrus, when the ovarian remnant is made visi-
ble by presence of follicular or luteal tissue, respec
tively.
· Ovarian neoplasia
● Ovarian neoplasia is uncommon in dogs and cats.
Granulosacelltumoris themostcommontype
these may produce estrogen, mimicking follicular
cysts.Treat with OHE.
Ovarian Cysts
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Cystic structures can develop from tissues located either
relative prevalence of ovarian and parovarian cystic
structures; in one study, approximately 90% of aged
female dogs had ovarian or parovarian cysts.
Follicular cysts occur in queens and bitches. They
are reported to be the most common lesion found in
ovaries of queens. The incidence appears to be lower in
bitches than in queens. Ovarian follicular cysts were
identified in 3% of 216 apparently normal beagles in
one study.However, in another study, 63 (15.8%) of 400
bitches had ovarian cysts. As in cattle, the apparent cause
for the development of follicular cysts is an aberrant or
ineffective ovulatory mechanism that results in the
tEE
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
persistence of mature graafian follicles. Follicular cysts
may be partially luteinized, which is characterized
grossly by tan or orange tissue that lines the inner sur-
face of the cysts.Because of their ability to produce sex
hormones, follicular and luteal cysts are commonly
referred to as functional ovarian cysts. Heritability of fol-
licular ovarian cysts in bitches and queens is unknow.
Cystic remnants of the mesonephric and para-
mesonephric ducts and tubules are common in ovaries
of bitches and queens. Cystic remnants of the
mesonephric tubules can be found at either pole of the
ovary. Those that develop from the cranial mesonephric
tubules are called cystic epoophoron, and those that
developfrom the caudal mesonephric tubules are called
cysticparoophoron.Usually more than one cyst develops
as a result of distention of the remnants of the
mesonephrictubules.
Cystic subepithelial structures arise from normal
infoldings of the epithelial cells that cover the ovaries.
Cells lining the surface of the ovaries undergo hyperpla-
sia and cystic distention. A single cyst or several clusters
of cystic structures may bevisible on the surface of the
ovary. These cystic structures occur in bitches and
humans, but there have been no reports of this condi-
tioninqueens.
Cystic rete ovarli most commonly are observed in
queens but also can develop in bitches. As their name
implies, these structures develop from the rete ovarii,
OvarianDisordersoftheBitch andQueen
335
which are derived from mesonephric tubules that pene-
trate the developing, undifferentiated gonads during
embryogenesis. The rete ovarii tend to dilate as bitches
age and may be grossly visible as cystic structures arising
from the medullary area of an ovary. In queens, cystic
rete ovarii develop slowly. Cells of the rete ovarii are
secretory, and it has been hypothesized that these cysts
arise in cats as a result of accumulation of secretion in
the blind-ended rete. These cysts can become large and
may compress the surrounding normal ovarian stroma.
Ovarian neoplasms may contain cystic structures.
They usually are easily distinguished from other cystic
  s     
internal structure(see OvarianNeoplasia).
Signaiment
Cystic ovarian structures are more common in older
bitches and queens. There does not appear to be a breed
predilection.
Previous pregnancies may affect development of fol-
licular cysts. In a study of 400 bitches 2-15 years of age, 41
had a solitary follicular cyst and 22 had multiple ovarian
cysts. Of the 41 bitches with a solitary cyst, 29 were nulli-
parous and only 7 were multiparous. On the other hand,
18 of the 22 dogs with multiple cysts were nulliparous.
Controversy exists regarding the effects of parity on the
frequency of luteal cysts. One source indicated that
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
luteal cysts were more common in older multiparous
bitches. However, in the study of 400 bitches described
previously, luteal cysts were found in 9 dogs; 6 of these
bitches were nulliparous.
History and Clinicaf Signs
Most ovarian cysts are nonfunctional structures or pro
duce quantities of estrogen and progesterone that are
too small to influence behavior or physiology in affected
bitches and queens. These animals appear to be clini-
cally healthy.Ovarian and parovarian cysts often are
coincidental findings during abdominal surgery (usu-
ally routine OHE) in healthy bitches and queens.
Prolonged anestrus is the most common clinical
sign associated with ovarian cysts of all types. Although
anestrus occurs with functional follicular and luteal
cysts, it is unknown whether it is attributable to the
effects of progesterone or associated with insufficient
quantities of sex hormones. It has been hypothesized
that anestrus is associated with the mass of a cyst rather
than its ability to produce hormones; cystic rete ovarii
may cause prolonged anestrus as a result of compression
of ovarian stroma.Prolonged anestrus may not be recog
nized in bitches, which exhibit a relatively prolonged
anestrus as part of the normal estrous cycle, or in queens
during the seasonal anestrus associated with short day
length (see Chapter 2).
Dvarian Disordersofthe Bitch and Queen
LEE
Persistent or prolonged proestrus or estrus is the
most commonly reported clinical sign of functional fol
licular ovarian cysts in affected bitches and queens.
Follicular cysts can produce normal or excessive
amounts of testosterone or estrogen, resulting in behav.
ioral signs of estrus and nymphomania. Behavioral
changes are accompanied by physiologic signs of estrus,
such asbloodyvulvardischarge.
Infertility is another historical complaint associated
with ovarian cysts. Large cysts of the rete ovarii can com
press normal ovarian tissue and cause infertility in cats.
Infertility in bitches and queens with luteal cysts may
which may lead to the development of cystic endome-
trial hyperplasia (CEH) and pyometra (see Chapter 12).
Finally, pressure from an ovarian cyst may result in
signs of pain. Although this is a nonspecific sign, bitches
and queens that have signs of pain in the region of the
ovaries that cannot be attributed to other causes should
beevaluatedforanovariancyst.
Physicaf Examination Findings
Most bitches and queens with ovarian cysts are healthy,
and results of physical examinations are unremarkable.
The exception is the bitch with a functional follicular
cyst that is secreting quantities of estrogen sufficient to
cause physical changes typical of proestrus and estrus,
338
OvarianDisorders of the Bitch and Queen
slich as serosanguineous vaginal discharge and vulvar
swelling (see Chapter 2).
DiagnosticTestsandResufts
Vaginal cytologic examination can be helpful in bitches
and queens that have signs of prolonged proestrus or
estrus.Presence of cornified vaginal epithelium indicates
an estrogenic influence. However, it does not necessarily
indicatethatthesourceoftheestrogenisanovariancyst
becausesomeovariantumors alsosecreteestrogens.
Serial measurement of estrogen in serum may be
useful in diagnosing follicular or luteal ovarian cysts but
is less commonly used for diagnosis than is vaginal cyto
logicexamination,which acts asabioassayforestrogen.
A concentration of estrogen in serum greater than
20 pg/ml is consistent with follicular activity in bitches
and queens. Thus in a bitch or queen with prolonged
proestrus or estrus,persistentlyincreasedconcentrations
of estrogen are indicative of a source of chronic estrogen
production, which is most likely to be a follicular cyst.
One-time measurement of serum estradiol concentra-
tionisnotadvisedbecausemeasurementofserumestro
gen in a single sample may be inaccurate, serum lipid
concentrations may affect assay results, the sensitivity of
the assay may be too high to allow accurate interpretation
of the test results, and estradiol concentrations less than
20 pg/ml in serial samples may be inconclusive.
Ovarian DisordersoftheBitch andQueen
6EE
Similarly,serial evaluation of progesterone concen-
trations in serum may be effective in identifying the pres
ence of a luteal cyst. A progesterone concentration
greater than 2 ng/ml for more than 80 days indicates
prolonged luteal function in the bitch, which is most
likely to occurbecauseof thepresenceof a luteal cyst.
Ultrasonography is the best option for the diagnosis
of ovarian cysts. Again, serial evaluations are most likely
to yield the best results. Follicles grow during proestrus
andestrus andreach a maximum diameter of1l mm
(mean, 6 mm) at the time of ovulation in larger bitches.
Ovulatory follicles in queens are slightly smaller.
Therefore the presence of multiple persistent follicular
structures greater than 10 mm in diameter is suggestive
of ovarian cysts. Cystic follicular structures also tend to
have a more distinct capsule compared with normal ovul-
latoryfollicles.
Surgical options for the diagnosis of ovarian cysts
Exploratory laparotomy allows examination of the
ovaries directly but is invasive.I am not aware of any
reports on the use oflaparoscopic techniques for the
identification of ovarian cysts in dogs and cats.
Treatment
Surgical removal of ovarian cysts often is the best option.
Complete OHE is preferred. Partial ovariectomy may be
340
Ovarian Dlsordersof theBitch and Queen
performed in bitches and queens that have great value
as breeding animals. Tissue removed during surgery
should be submitted for histologic examination.
Medical treatment forbitches and queens withfollic
ular cysts is aimed at inducing luteinization of the struc-
tures. Although induction of ovulation is the ultimate
outcome, it is doubtful that these structures are ovulatory
and formation ofluteal tissue is sufficient for clinical res
olution of the disorder. Administration of GnRH or
hCG can be used to simulate luteinization. In bitches,
reported drug regimens include a single intramuscular
injection of GnRH in a dose of 50-100 μg, a single intra
muscular injection of hCG in a dose of 100-l0o0 1U,
intramuscular injection of 500 IU of hCG once daily for
3 consecutive days, and injection of 1000 IU of hCG, half
of which is administered intravenously and half of which
is administered subcutaneously. If luteinization and a
decrease in clinical signs have not occurred by l week
after drug administration, treatment with GnRH or hCG
can be repeated. In queens, intramuscular administra-
tion of 25 μtg of GnRH or hCG (500 IU once or 250 IU on
2 consecutive days) stimulates formation of luteal tissue.
causesluteolysisin
bitches and queens with luteal cysts. I am unaware of
reports of the use of PGF, for the treatment of luteal
cysts, but a dosage regimen involving multiple injections
(similar to that used for pregnancy termination) should
be effective (seeChapter5).
OvarianDisordersoftheBitchandQueen
341
Prognosis
Prognosis is excellent for affected bitches and queens
after OHE. A guarded prognosis must be made for
bitches and queens treated with GnRH or hCG to induce
to induce luteolysis. Although it is likely that the treat-
ment will successfully resolve the follicular or luteal
cysts, it is possible that the condition will recur during
subsequent estrous cycles. Furthermore, subsequent
terone during diestrus potentiates development of CEH
and pyometra.
Ovarian Remnant Syndrome
DefinitionandPathogenesis
ORS is the presence of functional ovarian tissue after
routine OHE of a bitch or queen. The piece of ovarian
cortex that remains after surgery continues to develop
andbecomesfunctional,producingestrogen and pro
gesterone that cause signs of proestrus, estrus, and less
commonly, pseudocyesis (false pregnancy). Signs of
reproductive activity cause consternation in owners,
who assumed that this facet of their pet's life was irrevo-
cablyaltered.
Causes of ORS include surgeon error and the
presence of anomalous ovarian tissue. Most OHEs are
342
Ovarian Disorders of theBitch and Queen
elective surgeries in healthy animals and typically are not
associated withpathologicconditions of the reproduc
tive tract. Failure to completely remove ovarian tissue
during OHE may be attributed to poor visibility of the
tures, rather than adhesions or other lesions that might
obscurethelocationoftheovaries.
It has been hypothesized that some cases of ORS
result from a small piece of ovarian tissue inadvertently
being dropped into the abdominal cavity during ovarian
removal, with the remnant subsequently developing vas-
cular attachments to the peritoneum or other abdomi-
nal structures. This is an unlikely scenario because
almost all ovarian remnants are found at the ovarian
pedicles.In one study of 46cases of ORS,none of the
remnants were associated with an abnormal abdominal
location,such as the mesentery.
Age of the animal at the time ofOHE may play a role
because it may be difficult to completely discern ovarian
structures in extremely young animals (6-8 weeks)
through a small abdominal incision. However, in a study
of46cases ofORS,nonewerereported tohave occurred
in animals that were spayed when they were younger
than1 4 months.
Even the most experienced and competent sur-
geonshaveoccasionallyhadan animalwithanovarian
remnant and recurrence of estrous cycles after routine
OHE, leading to the hypothesis that another possible
OvarianDisordersoftheBitch andQueen
343
cause for ORS may be presence of an accessory ovary or
extraneous ovarian tissue in the proper ligament of the
ovary. The presence of anomalous ovarian tissue of this
type has been reported in cats and women. Removal of
the normal ovary during routine OHE allows the previ-
ously atrophic accessory ovary to become functional.
Signaiment
Some clinicians believe ORS is more common in cats
than in dogs.A study of 46 cases of ORS included 29 cats
and only 17 dogs. There does not appear to be a breed
predilection for this condition in dogs or cats.
Furthermore, there does not appear to be an increased
incideniceof ORSin animals inwhich OHEmaybe diffi
cult, such as deep-chested breeds of dogs,obese dogs
and cats, dogs and cats with pyometra, or dogs and cats
that have been spayed during gestation or as part of a
cesareanlsection.
History and Clinical Signs
By definition, the most commonly reported clinical sign
is manifestation of estrus in an ovariohystereclomized
animal. In bitches this may include swelling of the vulva,
serosanguineous vulvar discharge, flagging, and attrac-
tion of males. Signs in queens may include vocalization,
rolling, treading, lordosis, and attraction of males.
344
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
Affected bitches and queens may permit copulation, but
pregnancy cannot result from the mating. Owners
should be questioned carefully regarding the adminis-
tration of exogenous hormones that could account for
the clinical signs observed in their pets.
Onset of signs of estrus may be as soon as a few days
or as late as many years after OHE. Subsequent estrous
cycles recur at anticipated intervals for a particular
species.
In a few cases the only reported clinical signs were
behaviors of false pregnancy and lactation. In rare situ-
ations these clinical signs were reported despite the
Owners'not having observed signs of estrus before
presentation. Serum progesterone concentration
always is elevated in bitches after an ovulatory estrus
but is not elevated in queens unless ovulation is
induced. Because clinical signs of false pregnancy are
attributable to the decrease in serum progesterone at
the end of diestrus, false pregnancy associated with
ORS is reported more commonly in bitches than in
queens.
Physical Examination Findings
Bitches and queens with ORS are typically healthy and
do not have signs of systemic disease. Physical changes
associated with estrus or false pregnancy may be
present.
OvarianDisordersoftheBitchandQueen
345
DiagnosticTestsandResults
Vaginal cytologic examination,hormonal analyses, and
if necessary, exploratory abdominal surgery are the
diagnostic methods that are most useful in identifying
the cause for the clinical signs.
Vaginal cytologic examination is a fast, easy, and
inexpensive method for evaluating animals with a med-
ical history and clinical signs consistent with ORS.Avagi
nal cytology specimen should be collected when the
animal is exhibiting behaviors or physical signs of
proestrus or estrus (see Chapter 2). Cornification
ofvaginal epithelial cells is consistent with secretionl of
estrogen. In queens the vaginal cytologic changes dur-
ing estrus may be more subtle than those observed to
occur in bitches. However, an increase in cornified vagi
nal epithelial cells and a distinct lessening of back-
ground mucus and debris are consistent with estrogenic
influences on the vaginal mucosa in queens.
Hormonal analysis can be used to confirm the
results of vaginal cytologic examination or can be used
in animals in which vaginal cytologic examination is not
diagnostic.Themedical history and results of cytologic
evaluation should beused to determine the appropriate
hormonalanalysistoperform.
A serum estradiol concentration greater than
20 pg/ml is consistent with follicular activity in bitches
and queens. Unfortunately, a diagnosis based on the eval-
uation ofa single sample can be incorrect orinconclusive
346
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queer
because the sample could have been obtained at the
wrong part of the estrous cycle. In bitches serum estra
diol concentrations increase during proestrus, reach a
peak near the cnd of proestrus, and decrease rapidly
during estrus (standing heat). Onset of breeding behav-
ior and results of vaginal cytologic evaluations do not
accurately indicate the onset of estrus in bitches; a
serum sample with a low estradiolconcentration may be
incorrectly interpreted as an indication that the estrus
behavior of the bitch was not associated with follicular
activity when, in fact, the dog was in estrus at the time of
sample collection.A similar condition exists in queens
     s g
signs of estrus for a few days after serum estradiol con-
centrations decrease. The use of serial vaginal cytologic
evaluationsisagoodbioassayforthedetectionofestro
gen concentrations and represents a more reliable diag-
nostic test than does assay of a single sample for seruim
estradiol.
Analysis of serum progesterone concentrations is
useful for establishing a diagnosis of ORS in bitches.A
progesterone concentration greater than 2 ng/ml is
indicative ofluteal function in a bitch. The luteal phase
of the bitch lasts for approximately 2 months, but it
behooves veterinarians to measure progcsterone co1l-
centrations 2-3 wecks after the end of behiavioral estrus.
Measurement of a serum progesterone concentration
greater than 2 ng/ml in a bitch that had exhibited estrus
OvarianDisordersoftheBitchandQueen
LE
2-3 weeks prior allows one to unequivocally diagnose
ORS.
In cats, because they are induced ovulators, serum
progesterone concentrations will not be increased
unless the cat has been induced to ovulate by copula-
tion,manual stimulation, or administration of exoge
nous hormones. In queens that have been induced to
ovulate, serum concentrations of progesterone are
greater than 2 ng/ml for approximately 35-50days after
ovulation. Administration of GnRH (25 μg administered
intramuscularly) or hCG (250 IU administered intra-
muscularly) to a cat during behavioral or cytologic estrus
stimulates ovulation of follicles, formation of corpora
lutea, and an increase in serum progesterone concentra-
tions. Serum progesterone concentrations should
be measured 2-3 weeks after injection of GnRH or
hCG. Serum progesterone concentrations greater than
2 ng/ml are diagnostic of functional ovarian tissue.
It seems logical that ultrasonographic examination
performed during proestrus or immediately after the
onset ofestrus,when thepreovulatoryfollicles are at their
largest diameter, or during diestrus when the corpora
lutea are present would be a valuable diagnostic tool. I am
unaware of any reports of reliable use of ultrasonography
in the diagnosis of ORS in bitches or queens. It is difficult
to identify ovarian structures in sexually intact animals,
and the fact that the ovarian remnant usually is quite small
precludes successful use of this technique.
348
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
Exploratory surgery is a final diagnostic option.
Exploratory laparotomy enables thorough examination
of the ovarian pedicles and abdominal structures and
may be coupled with treatment.
Treatment
Surgical removal of the ovarian remnant is thepreferred
method of treatmenit. Many clinicians prefer to perform
exploratory laparotomy when the bitch or queen is in
estrus, when the follicular structures present on the ovar
ian remnant make it easy to identify. Other clinicians pre-
fer to perform exploratory laparotomy during diestrus,
when the corpora lutea present on the ovarian remmant
make it easy to detect and when hemorrhage is decreased
compared with that seen when surgery is performed dur-
ing estrus. If surgical exploration is to be attempted dur
ing diestrus in a queen, the cat should receive GnRH or
hCG during behavioral estrus, the presence of the ovarian
remnant should be verified by measurement of serum
progesteroneconcentrationgreaterthan2ng/ml several
weeks after induction of ovulation,and laparotomy
should be performed at that time.Surgicalexploration
during diestrus in bitches should be performed 20-50
days after estrus. Surgery should not be performed dur-
ing anestrus in affected bitches or queens because there is
a lower probability that the ovarian remnant will be identi
fied during that phase of the estrous cycle
Ovarian Disorders ofthe Bitch and Queen
349
Each side of the abdomen should be completely
explored from the caudal pole of the kidney to the
region of the ovarian pedicle. Residual ovarian tissue is
located most commonly in the region of the ovarian
pedicles. In one study about half of affected animals had
bilateral ovarian remnants that were located in thie
region of the ovarian pedicles. In that study unilateral
ovarian remnants were equally distributed on the right
and left sides. However, most studies have indicated that
unilateral ovarian remnants are predominantly identi-
fied in the region of the right ovarian pedicle. It is
believed that the right ovary is most often affected
because its location is more cranial than that of the left
ovary.
An increase in pedicle vascularity may provide an
indication of an ovarian remnant. The ureters should be
identified and avoided. Ovariantissue should be excised
carefully and submitted for histopathologic examina-
tion. In some cases ovarian remnants may not be evi-
dent. When an ovarian remnant cannot be identified,
any granulation tissue and adhesions in the region of the
ovarianpedicles shouldbe excised and submitted for
histologic examination.
In addition to remnants of the ovaries, remnants of
the uterus may be evident in some animals. These tis-
sues should be removed. Parovarian cysts may be
found, and clinicians often remove them; however,
these cystic structures do not secrete sex hormones,
350
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
and their removal is not necessary for a successful
outcome.
Although some owners may not opt for additional
surgery to correct the ovarian remnant condition in
their bitch or queen, the number of medical treatments
is limited (see Chapter 5).Mibolerone (Cheque;
Pharmacia & Upjohn, Peapack, NJ) is approved for use
in bitches for prevention of estrus, but the drug cur-
rently is not available in the United States. Megestrol
acetate (Ovaban; Schering-Plough, Kenilworth, NJ) is
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for
the prevention of estrus in dogs when administered
orally at a dosage of 0.25 mg/lb (0.11 mg/kg) beginning
32daysbefore the onset of anticipated proestrus.It can
also be used to stop the progression of estrous events
when administered orally at a dosage of 1.0 mg/lb
(0.45 mg/kg)for 8 days beginning during early proestrus.
However, this drug is not intended for long-term use.
No drugs currently are approved for use in cats for
the prevention of estrus. Megestrol acetate and medroxy-
progesterone acetate have been used to prevent estrus
in queens. However, queens are extremely susceptible to
the negative side effects of progestogens, including dia-
betes mellitus, adrenocortical suppression, develop
ment of CEH, mammary hypertrophy, and mammary
neoplasia.
Repeated manual stimulation of the vagina (four or
five sessions) with a moistened cotton-tipped swab may
OvarianDisordersoftheBitchandQueen
351
induce ovulation in a queen that is displaying signs of
estrus as a result of ORS, Also, administration of GnRH
or hCG to a queen, as described for diagnosis of ORS,
may result in ovulation and cessation of estrus. However,
resolution of the condition is short lived. In pseudopreg-
nant queens, induced corpora lutea regress in approxi-
mately 35-50 days and estrus recurs.
Finally, it should be mentioned thiat some owners
may opt to refrainfrom any additional treatment of their
animals. Owners must be willing to tolerate the clinical
signs associated with recurrent estrous cycles ald must
be cautioned that there may be an increased inicidence
untrcated bitches and queens.
Prognosis
The prognosis for animals after surgical removal of ovar-
ian remnants is excellent.However, multiple surgeries
may be required to identify ovarian remnants.In one
study, 9 of 11 gueens with ORS were treated successfully
withremovalofanovarianremnant duringasinglesur
gery. In the other two cats, the initial exploratory lapa
rotomies did not reveal any ovarian remnants but
ovarian remnants were identified and removed during
second exploratory laparotomies. None of the 1l cats
had subscquent recurrence of estrous cycles. Necessity
for repeat surgery can be minimized only by performing
352
OvarianDisordersoftheBitchandQueen
exploratory laparotomy when the ovarian remnant con-
tains structures, either follicles or corpora lutea, that
make its identification easier.
Ovarian Neoplasia
Definition andPathogenesis
Ovarian neoplasms are reported to constitute 1%-2% of
all tumors in dogs. However, in one study of 400 ran-
domly selected bitches that were necropsied, approxi-
mately 70% had ovarian neoplasms. Ovarian neoplasia is
less common in queens. Ovarian neoplasms almost
always are of primary ovariani origin. Metastasis of other
   s   i so a  s 
common for lymphomatous tumors, which have a
predilection for luteal tissue.
Primary ovarian tumors typically are not prone to
metastasis. It has been estimated that up to 30% of ovar-
ian tumors metastasize, with malignancy dependent on
the tumor type.Malignant teratomas and adenocarcino
mas have the highest rate of metastasis. Ovarian tumors
usually metastasize locally, involving the peritoneum,
adjacent kidney, oradjacent mesentery,but metastasis to
bone, the lungs, and the retroperitoneal space has been
reported.
Ovarian tumors are classified by the tissue of origin
Primary neoplasms may arise from surface epithelium.
OvarianDisordersoftheBitchandQueen
353
sex cord-gonadostromal tissue,germ cells, or mes-
enchymal tissues.
EPITHELIAL TUMORS Papillary adenomas,papillary car
cinomas, cystadenomas, and cystadenocarcinomas are
tumors thatarise from the ovarian surfaceepiihelium.
They are common in bitches, accounting for approxi-
mately 50% of the ovarian tumors reported. These
tumors most often affect both ovaries but can be unilat-
Adenocarcinomas usually are larger and more invasive
than benign papillary adenomas and cystadenomas.
Metastasis may occur through detachment of papillary
fronds, which seed the abdominal cavity
SEXCORD-GONADOSTROMALTUMORS Three typeS Of
tumors arise from the sex cord-stromal (gonadostro-
mal) tissues in bitches. These are the granulosa cell
tumor,thecoma,and luteoma.
Although granulosa cell tumors are the most com-
mon ovarian tumors reported to occur inmost species
ofdomestic animals,they arethe second most com-
mon ovarian tumors to occur in bitches and account
for 40%-50% of the ovarian tumors reported to occur
in bitches. Granulosa cell tumors usually are unilat-
eral and are functional. Metastasis apparently is
uncommon, reported to occur only about 20% of the
time.
354
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
Thecomasandluteomasareuncommon tumors
that arise fromsex cord-gonadostromal tissucs.
Thecomas typically consist of bundles of interlacing,
spindle-shaped cells. Luteomas often appear grossly as
yellow-orange masses that resemble luteal cells.
GERM CELL TUMORS Dysgerminomas and teratomas are
the two neoplasms that arise from germ cells.
Dysgerminomas are reported to be the third most com-
mon ovarian neoplasm in bitches and account for 6%-
12% of all ovarian neoplasms in bitches. They have been
reported to occur in cats, but incidence has not been
reported for queens. Dysgerminomas usually are unilat-
eral, round, and soft.
Teratomas are found more commonly in the bitch
and cow than in other domestic species. They arise from
a totipotent single germ cell that has completed its first
meiotic division but not its second. They are character-
ized by tissues of two or more embryonic germ layers. It
is not unusual to find sebaceous material, hair, adipose
tissue, bone, teeth, and respiratory epithelium in ter-
atomas. Potential for metastasis of teratomas in bitches is
relativelyhigh.
MESENCHYMALTUMORSOvariantumorsofmes-
enchymal origin are rare in bitches and queens,
although leiomyomas have been reported.Other
potential neoplasms in this category include fibromas,
OvarianDisordersofthe BitchandQueen
355
neurofibromas, myomas, hemangiomas, and lym-
phangiomas.
Signaiment
The frequency of ovarian neoplasms increases with age
in bitches and queens with the exception of teratomas,
which typically are found in younger dogs (younger than
6 years). Ovarian tumors have been reported as occur-
ring most commonly in small or medium size dogs, but
this is believed to reflect the longevity of the dogs and
the increased likelihood of tumor development in older
bitches rather than a predilection for ovarian neoplasia
in thesebreeds.per se.
History and Clinical Signs
Some ovarian tumors are responsive to hormonal stim
uli; administration of diethylstilbestrol has been shown
to induce ovarian neoplasms in bitches, as has treatment
with mibolerone. Owners should be questioned care
fully about contraceptive drugs received by the bitch.
Ovarian tumors can be associated with a wide range
of clinical signs. Small tumors may be inapparent. Many
ovarian neoplasms are functional, most commonly
secreting estrogen. Estrogenic effects that may be appar-
ent include nymphomania, prolonged estrus, symmetric
nonpruritic alopecia, a pendulous abdomen, and
356
Ovarlan Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
swelling of the vulva. Some dogs are reported to have
clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism. CEH and pyome-
tra are associated with hormone-producing neoplasms
in bitches. These bitches may be lethargic and have
polyuria and polydipsia. In queens, approximately half
of those with granulosa cell tumors had either pro
longed estrus or CEH in one study. Animals with malig-
nant tumors that have metastasized may have systemic
signsof disease.
Physicaf Examination Findings
Bitches and queens with ovarian neoplasia may appear
normal, may have findings consistent with estrogenic
stimulation (e.g., swollen vulva, serosanguineous vulvar
discharge),or may be critically ill. An abdominal mass
may be palpablc in bitches and queens withi ovarian neo
plasia.Abdominal distention resulting from increased
intraabdominal fluid also may be present.
Diagnostic Tests and Resufts
Vaginal cytologic examination and serum hormonc
analyses can be performed in bitches and queens with
signs ofprolongedestrogenicstimulation.Although
results of these examinations can provide supportive evi-
dence, they usually are not definitive for a diagnosis of a
functional ovarian tumor.
OvarianDisordersoftheBitchandQueen
357
Abdominal palpation may be used to identify fluid
or masses in the abdominal cavity. The location of these
masses may be suggestive of an ovarian tumor, but the
results are not definitive for diagnosis of an ovarian
tumor. Similarly, radiography can be used to identify
ovarian masses and displacement of abdominal struc-
tures. However, lack of detail usually does not allow
definitivediagnosis.
Ultrasonography is the most effective technique for
diagnosis of ovarian neoplasia in bitches and queens.
The kidneys can be used as a reference point, and the
location and appearance of ovarian masses can be used
tentatively to diagnose an ovarian tumor (Figure 11-1).
It is possible that bitches or queens may have ovaries that
ing a small functional neoplasm. Ovarian tumors may be
solid or may contain cystic striictures (Figure 1l-2). It
may be difficult to differentiate them from nonneoplas
tic cystic ovarian structures, such as follicular or
luteal cysts, but ovarian neoplasms generally are larger
thanotherovariancystic structures andthey are
often septate, containing multiple fluid-filled spaces.
Approximately 85% of ovarian tumors are unilateral,
and the left ovary is reported to be involved more often
than the right. The apparently nonneoplastic ovary
should be exarmined closely because it often is cystic.
Ultrasonography also should be used to examine the
uterus atthetime ofdiagnosis of anovariantumor
358
Ovarian Dlsorders of the Bitch and Queen
Rightswerenotgrantedtoincludethisfigureinelectronicmedia
Pleaserefer to theprintedpublication
Figure 11-1. Transverse ultrasonographic image of a solid
right ovarian adenocarcinoma (between arrows) ventral and cau-
dal to the right kidney (R) in a bitch. (From Diez-8ru N, Garcia-Rea!
MartinezEMetal:VetRadio10ltras0und39:226,1998.}
becausc of the associationbetween ovarian tumors and
theCEH-pyometracomplex.
Exploratorylaparotomy canbe used for examina
tion of abdominal masses, to confirm the presence of a1l
ovariantumor, andto look for gross metastases.
Treatment, by surgical excision, can be performed con-
currently. Laparoscopy seems to offer an effective means
for diagnosis, but I am unaware of reports on the use of
laparoscopy to diagnose ovarian tumors.
Ovarian DisordersoftheBitch andQueen
359
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
Pleaserefertotheprintedpublication.
Figure 11-2. Sagittal. ultrasonographic image of a solid mass
with a cystic component (between plus symbois) in the right
ovary of a bitch with bilateral ovarian adenocarcinomas. The
rightkidney(RD)isusedasananatomiclandmark.Themassis
delineated by free fluid in the abdomen(f).Notice an anechoic
lesion (smaff arrow) and far enhancement (large arrow).(From
Diez-Bru N,Garcia-Rea!t, Martinez EM et al:Vet Radiol
Ultras0und39:226,1998.)
Hematologic and serum biochemical analyses
should be performed in critically ill animals. Although
not diagnostic for ovarian tumors, they can provide valu
able information regarding the status of the patient that
will be necessary for initiation of treatment. Similarly,
360
 Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
biochemical analysis and cytologic examination of a
sample of fluid obtained from the distended abdomen
of an affected bitch or queen can yield information that
may alter the course of treatment.
Treatment
Surgical removal of ovarian neoplasms is the preferred
treatment. A complete OHE should be performed and
the excised ovarian and uterine tissues submitted for his
tologic examination.
Grossly enlarged lymph nodes and obviously abnor
mal tissues should be removed, if possible, in bitches and
queens in which metastasis is evident. In animals in which
metastasis is suspected, it is prudent to remove area lymph
nodes, which should be submitted for histologic examina-
tion. OHE and debulking of neoplastic tissue should be
performed in animals that are to receive chemotherapy.
Medical treatment of ovarian neoplasms is not effec
tive. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy appear to have
little affect against primary ovarian tumors. However,
chemotherapeutics, such as cisplatin, can be effectively
used in anirmals with metastases from an ovarian tuumor.
Prognosis
Benign ovarian neoplasms treated with OHE are
associated with a good to excellent prognosis. Malignant
OvarianDisordersofthe Bitch andQueen
361
ovarian neoplasms are associated with a grave prognosis
in dogs and cats. Prognosis varies depending on the
degree of metastasis and the physical condition of the
affected animal. There are reports of dogs that were
treated with chemotherapeutics after the surgical
removal of a malignant ovarian tumor and any obvious
metastatic tissue that survived for 8 months to more than
I year after surgery.
Bibliography
Altera KP, Miller LN: Recognition of feline parovarian
nodules as ectopic adrenocortical tissue, J Am Vet
MedAssoc189:71,1986
Andrews EJ, Stookey JL, Helland DR et al: A histopatho
logical study of canine and feline ovarian dysgermi-
nomas,CanJ Comp Med38:85,1974.
Basaraba RJ, Kraft SL, Andrews GA et al: An ovarian ter-
atoma in a cat, Vet Pathol 35:14l, 1998.
Boyd JS, Renton JP, Harvey MJ et al: Problems associated
with ultrasonography of the canine ovary around
the time of ovulation, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 47:101,
1993.
Cellio LM, Degner DA: Testosterone-producing the-
coma in a feral cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:323,
2000.
Cheng NA: Aberrant behaviour in a bitch with a granu-
losa-theca cell tumour, Aust Vet J70:71, 1993.
362
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
Dehner LP, Norris HJ, Garner FM et al: Comparative
pathology of ovarian neoplasms. 3. Germ cell
tumours of canine, bovine, feline, rodent and
human species, J Comp Pathol80:299, 1970.
Diez-Bru N, Garcia-Real I, Martinez EM et al:
Ultrasonographic appearance of ovarian tumors in
10 dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:226, 1998.
England GC, Allen WE: Real-time ultrasonic imaging of
the ovary and uterus of the dog, J Reprod Fertil Supp?
39:91,1989.
Faulkner RT, Johnson SE: An ovarian cyst in a West
Highland White Terrier, Vet Med Small Anim Clin
75:1375,1980.
Fayrer-Hosken RA, Durham DH, Allen S et al: Follicular
cystic ovaries and cystic endometrial hyperplasia in a
bitch, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:107, 1992.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine female reproduction:
ovarian abnormalities.In Feldman EC, Nelson RW
(eds): Canine and feline endocrinology and reproduction,
Philadelphia,1987,WB Saunders.
Finn-Bodner ST: Reproductive tract sonography of the
dog and cat. Proceedings of the Society for
Theriogenology, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada,2001.
Foley GL: Ovarian neoplasms of domestic animals.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology.
Reproductive Pathology Symposium, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, 1997.
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
E9E
Gelberg HV, McEntee K: Feline ovarian neoplasms, Vet
Pathol22:572,1985.
Gelberg HB, McEntee K, Heath EH: Feline cystic rete
ovarli,VetPathot21:304,1984.
Greenlee PG, Patnaik AK: Canine ovarian tumors of
germ cell origin, Vet Pathal22:117, 1985.
Hayes HM Jr, Young JL Jr: Epidemiologic features of
canine 0varian neoplasms, Gynecol Oncol 6:348, 1978.
Johnston SD: Clinical approach to infertilityin bitches
with primary anestrus, Vet Glin North Am 2l:421,
1991.
Jones TC, Hunt RD: The genital system: diseases of the
ovary. In Jones TC, Hunt RD (eds): Veterinary pathol-
ogy, Philadelphia, 1983, Lea & Febiger.
Jubb KV, Kennedy PC, Palmer N: The female genital sys-
tem: the ovary. In Jubb KV, Kennedy PC, Palmer N
(eds): Pathology of domestic animals, New York, 1985,
AcademicPress.
Lein DH: Infertility and reproductive diseases in bitches
andqueens,Veterinary obstetrics andgenitaldiseases
(theriogenology), Woodstock, 1986, SJ Roberts.
Little S: Uncovering the cause of infertility in queens, Vet
Med96:557,2001.
Miller DM: Ovarian remnant syndrome in dogs and cats:
46 cases (1988-1992),JVet Diagn Invest 7:572,1995
Nagashima Y, Hoshi K, Tanaka R et al: Ovarian and
retroperitoneal teratomas in a dog, J Vet Med Sci
62:793,2000.
364
Ovarian Disorders of the Bitch and Queen
Norris HJ, Garner FM, Taylor HB: Comparative pathol
ogy of ovarian neoplasms. IV. Gonadal stroma
tumours of canine species,J Comp Pathol 80:399,
1970.
Olsen J, Komtebedde J, Lackner A et al: Cytoreductive
treatment ofovariancarcinomain a dog,JVetIntern
Med8:133, 1994.
O'Shea JD, Jabara AG: The histogenesis of canine ovar-
ian tumours induced by stilboestrol administration,
Vet Pathol4:137,1967.
Patnaik AK, Greenlee PG: Canine ovarian neoplasms: a
clinicopathologic study of 71 cases, including histol-
ogy of 12 granulosa cell tumors, Vet Pathol 24:509,
1987.
Pluhar GE, Memon MA, Wheaton LG: Granulosa cell
tumor in an ovariohysterectomized dog, J Am Vet
Med Assoc207:1063,1995.
Purswell BJ, Parker JA, Bailey TL et al: Persistent estrus
caused by functional granulosa cell tumor of the left
ovary, J Am Vet Med Assoc215:193, 1999.
Root Kustritz MV, Rudolph KD: Ovarian remnant con-
taining a teratoma in a cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc
219:1065, 2001.
Rowley J: Cystic ovary in a dog: a case report, Vet Med
SmallAnimClin75:1888,1980.
Schlafer DH: Non-neoplastic lesions of canine and
feline ovaries. Proceedings of the Society for
OvarianDisordersof theBitch andQueen
365
Theriogenology, Reproductive Pathology Sympo
sium, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 1997.
SeamanWJ: Canine ovarian fibroma associated with pro-
longed exposure to mibolerone, Toxicol Pathol
13:177,1985.
Telfer E, Gosden RG: A quantitative cytological study of
polyovular follicles in mammalian ovaries with par-
ticular reference to the domestic bitch (Canis famil
iaris), J Reprod Fertil81:137, 1987.
Trasti SL, Schlafer DH: Malignant teratoma of the ovary,
IAm Vet Med Assoc214:785,1999.
Vaden P: Surgical treatment of polycystic ovaries in the
dogs (a case report), Vet Med Small Anim Clin
73:1160,1978.
Wallace MS: Ovarian remnant syndrome. In Kirk RW,
Bonagura JD (eds): Current veterinary therapy XI,
Philadelphia,1992,WB Saunders.
Wallace MS: The ovarian remnant syndrome in the bitch
and queen, Vet Clin North Am 21:501, 1991,
Wallace SS, Mahaffey MB,Miller DM et al:
Ultrasonographic appearance of the ovaries of dogs
during the follicular and luteal phases of the estrous
cycle, Am / Vet Res 53:209, 1992.
Yamini B, VanDenBrink PL, Refsal KR: Ovarian steroid
cell tumor resembling luteoma associated with
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease) in a dog,
VetPathol34:57,1997
12
Uterine Disorders
Margaret V. Root Kustritz and Jane A. Barber
ATA GLANCE
· Metritis
● Metritis is infection of the uterus with no underlyi1ig
partum. Predisposing causes include prolonged
delivery, dystocia, anid retained fetuses or placentas.
The primary clinical sign is purulent vulvar dis
charge. The bitch or queen also may be depressed
367
89E
Uterine Disorders
and anorectic and may neglect her offspring.
Treatment includes stabilization of the patient with
fluids and antibiotic therapy based on culture
and sensitivity testing of the vulvar discharge.
Prostaglandin F2α (PGF2a) may be used to promote
clearance ofintrauterine fluid. Ovariohysterectomy
(OHE) is recommended in severely ill bitches or
queens, after stabilization.
· Subinvolution of placental sites (SIPS)
· SIPS is abnormal repair of the endometrial placen-
tal sites. This disorder is most common in the young
bitch after she has whelped her first litter. The pri-
mary clinical sign is lochia (postpartum vulvar dis-
charge) persisting beyond 3 weeks postpartum. The
bitch and pups are not ill. Diagnosis is by exclusion;
rule-outs include metritis, vaginitis, cystitis, and bru-
cellosis. Treatment is supportive. OHE is recom-
mended for bitches that become anemic enough to
require transfusion and for bitches not intended for
futurebreeding
● Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH) and pyometra
· Pyometra is a bacterial infection overlying CEH, an
endometrial pathologic abnormality that develops
after repeated exposure to estrogen and then pro-
gesterone, as happens in the normal estrous cycle
of bitches and those queens that are induced to
ovulate. Bitches and queens present clinically with
Uterine Disorders
369
pyometra in diestrus or anestrus. Escherichia coliis
the most common bacterial organism recovered.
The uterus fills with purulent fluid; clinical signs are
dependent on cervical patency. If the cervix is open,
purulent vulvar dischiarge is present and the bitch or
queen shows few signs of systemic illness. lf the
cervix is closed, abdominal distention occurs as the
uterus becomes larger and the bitch or queen shows
systemic signs of illness such as fever, depression,
leukocytosis with a left shift, and azotemia caused by
secondary renal disease. Diagnosis requires demon-
stration of fluiddistention of the uterus in the
absence of pregnancy, ideally with an abdominal
ultrasound.Acomplete blood count,serum chem-
istry profile, cytologic examination,and culture of
vulvar discharge also should be performed. OHE is
thetreatmentofchoiceforalldogsandcatswnthpyometra.
Medical therapy is best administered to bitches or
queens with open cervices, great breeding value,
and no evidence of azotemia. Medical therapy
includes treatment with an antibiotic chosen by cul-
ture and sensitivity testing of vulvar discharge and
promotes clearanceofintrauterinefluid.The
reported success rate of breeding after medical
treatment for pyometra is approximately 50%.
Reported recurrence rates vary from 10%-77%.
370
Uterine Disorders
· Uterine neoplasia
● Uterine neoplasia is uncommon in bitchcs and
queens. Benign leiomyoma is the most common
uterine tumor reported. OHE is the treatment of
choice.
Metritis
Metritis is inflammation of the uterus, involving both the
endometrium and the myometrium. Acute metritis is
associated with prolonged delivery, dystocia, and
retained fetuses or placentas. A dilated postpartum
cervix renders the uterus vulnerable to ascending infec
tion by normal vaginal flora, and retained tissues or
lochia can serve as an ideal culture medium.
Signaiment
Metritis occurs in the postpartum bitch or queen. No
age or breed predisposition has been reported.
History, Clinical Signs, and Physica!
Examination Findings
Presenting
signsofmetritisincludedepression
anorexia, fever, vomiting, and neglect of puppies or kit-
tens.A differentiating finding is the presence of a mal
odorous, red-brown, purulent or sanguinopurulent
Uterine Disorders
371
vulvar discharge. Severe cases may present with hypo-
volemic, septic,or endotoxemic shock.
Diagnostic Tests and Resufts
Vaginal smears from bitches or queens with metritis con-
tain large numbers of degenerate neutrophils. Serologic
testing for canine brucellosis should be performed (see
Chapter 7). Abdominal radiographs may reveal uterine
fluid or tissue.
Treatment
Initial treatment is directed at stabilizing the patient:
+Treat shock,if present.
· Administer balanced electrolyte solution intra-
venously to treat dehydration.
+Administer dextrose solution intravenously if hypo
glycemia has occurred as a result of septicemia or
toxemia.
· Correct other metabolic imbalances as indicated
from serum chemical profile results.
General therapy for metritis includes the following:
· Initiate broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy pend-
ing results of bacterial culture. One common
empirical choice is amoxicillin/clavulanate
(Clavamox; 14 mg/kg administered orally twice a
372
UterineDisorders
day).If hysterotomy is performed,obtain aerobic
and anaerobic culture samples directly from the
uterus.Obtain cultures from the cranialvagina
using guarded swabs from patients that will not
be undergoing surgery. Antimicrobial therapy
should bemodified on thebasis of cultureresults,
. if indicated.
· Consider use of ecbolic agents to clear the uterus of
retained tissue and promote expulsion of fluid.
Echolic agents must be used with caution to avoid
Tupture of a compromised, devitalized uterus.
Oxytocin is most commonly used, but its effective-
ness is limited to the immediate postpartum period.
PGF2a (25-250 μg/kg administered subcutaneously
twice a day for 3-8 days) also is used as an ecbolic
agent. Prostaglandin offers a potential advantage
over oxytocin in that it will stimulate uterine activity
after the immediate postpartum period has passed.
However, side effects of prostaglandin administra-
tion include vomiting, defecation,hypersalivation,
andrestlessness.
· Once the patient is stabilized, surgical therapy,
including OHE or hysterotomy,canbe consid-
ered.OHE is indicatedwhen retained fetalorpla
cental tissues are present, when the uterus is
devitalized or ruptured, when the animal will not
be used for breeding in the future,and for patients
thataresystemicallyill.In valuablebreeding
Uterine Disorders
373
animals, hysterotomy and uterine lavage can be
performed if the uterus contains no devitalized
areas.
Prognosis
Metritis is simple infection of a uterus with no
underlying pathologic abnormality and should be cur
able in most animals with appropriate antibiotic and
supportive therapy. Bitches and queens treated med-
ically that have no signs of systemic illness and that
recover completely should have normal subsequent
fertility.
Subinvolution of Placental Sites
Definition and Pathogenesis
SIPS is abnormal repair of the denuded uterine
lining. Normal uterine involution involves invasion
oftheendometrialplacentalsiteswithdecidua
like cells, replacement of these cells by collagen dur-
ing the first 3-4 weeks postpartum, and cventual
development of normal endometrium and uterine
glands. In dogs with SIPS, lack of thrombosis of
uterine vessels is apparent and hemorrhage that does
not allow progressive healing to occur continucs.
374
Uterine Disorders
Signaiment
Although SIPS may occur at any age and in any breed, most
cases are seen in primiparous bitches younger than 3 ycars
History and Clinical Signs
Historically, affected bitches have experienced uncom
bitches with SiPS, hemorrhage from the uterus may nol
be detected until normal, postpartum lochia gradually
wanes at about 3 weeks postpartum. With SIPS, uterine
hemorrhage persists for weeks and may even continue
into the next proestral period. The discharge is serosan-
guineous to frankly hemorrhagic and may be either per-
sistent or intermittent.
Physical Examination Findings
Physical examination rcsults of bitches with SIPS and
- s      
mochromic anemia may be present; this is a normal find-
ing in postpartum bitches.
Diagnostic Tests and Resufts
A. presumptive diagnosis of SlPS can be made when
Uterine Disorders
375
otherwise healthy bitch. Rule-outs include metritis,
vaginitis,cystitis, trauma, vaginal neoplasia, brucel-
losis, proestrus, and coagulopathy. Histologic confir
mation based on biopsy specimens is the definitive
diagnostic test for SIPS and rarely is performed.
Placental sites in bitches with SIPS are twice the size of
those in normal bitches and contain large masses of
collagen and hemorrhage and dilated endometrial
glands.
Treatment
In most cases, SIPs resolves spontaneously and
requires no treatment.OHE is indicated if hemor-
rhage is severe and in bitches not intendcd for
future breeding. Occasionally, secondary problems
such as anemia, metritis, or peritonitis may develop
that require medical or surgical treatment. Ecbolic
therapy with prostaglandin is not recommended.
Prognosis
When spontaneous remission occurs, reproductive
potential is not compromisednor are affected
bitches predisposed to SIPS in subsequent preg-
nancies.
376
Uterine Disorders
Cystic Endometrial Hyperplasia
and Pyometra
Definition and Pathogenesis
CEH is a progressive pathologic change of the uterine
lining. Pyometra is infection overlying CEH. Pyometra
and metritisare not synonymous (Table 12-1).
CEH develops after repeated exposure of the estro-
gen-primed uterus to progesterone. It has been demon-
strated experimentally that exposure to progesterone
alone can cause CEH but that lower doses of proges
terone are required if the uterus is exposed to estrogen
first. Development of CEH is not associated with an
increase in progesterone receptors or with unusually
high serum concentrations of progesterone. In the bitch
it has been demonstrated that CEH worsens with
repeated cycles because of the prolonged diestrus that
Table 12-1. Differentiating Pyometra from Metritis
Pyometra
Metritis
Underlying uterine
Cystic
None
pathologic
endometrial
abnormality
hyperplasia
Infection:primary or
Secondary
Primary
secondary
Timing reiative to
Diestrus or
Postpartum
estrous cycle events
anestrus
UterineDisorders
377
Occurs after every estrus in this species. In cats devclop-
ment is associated with retention of functional corpora
lutea, as may be seen after induction of ovulatio withiout
subsequent pregnancy (see Chapter 2). Bitches and
queens that have received estrogen for pregnancy termi-
nation or progesterone for estrus suppression may be
predisposed to development of CEH and subsequent
pyometra. Incidence of pyometra is not increased in
bitches with a history offalse pregnancy (see Chapter 14).
The pathogenesis of pyometra is as follows:
·Bitches and queens may have CEH with no clinical
evidenceofdisease.CEHisassumedtobe associated
with decreased fertility, perhaps by altering the envi-
ronment into which the spermatozoa are intro-
duced during coitus or the concepti enter after
fertilization or by not providing a normal surface for
placentation.
· The cervix opens during proestrus and estrus, allow.
ing bacteria to ascend from the vagina into the nor-
mally sterile uterus. This happens during every
cycle, and in healthy bitches, these bacteria are
expelled or destroyed without causing disease.
·In some bitches with CEH, bacteria readily colonize
the hyperplastic endometrium.E. coli is the most
common organism associated with canine and
feline pyometra. The cervix closes as the bitch
enters diestrus and under the influence of proges-
terone,uterine contractility decreases,secretory
378
Uterine Disorders
activity of the uterine glands increases, and move-
ment of neutrophils into the endometrium and
uterinelumen is depressed.
+ Intrauterine fluid accumulates as excessive bacterial
growth occurs. The cervix may or may not become
patentagain.
In animals in which the cervix becomes patent, uter-
ine drainage is established. Ongoing infection is
associated with mild systemic disease.
In animalsin which the cervix does notbecome
patent,the uterus distends with purulent fluid
The large endometrial surface provides continual
antigen exposure to the cells of the immune sys-
tem. Secondary systemic disease develops as anti-
body production leads to formation of circulating
antigen-antibody complexes that can cause mem-
branous glomerulonephritis.Endotoxemia result-
ing from lipopolysaccharides released from the
cell wall of dying gram-negative organisms causes
renal tubular dysfunction and immunosuppres-
sion.
Septicemia may develop with secondary hypo
glycemia,hypotension,tissuehypoxiaandische
mic injury, and development of septic shock.
Three conditions are described in which accumulation
of sterile fluid occurs in the uterus: hydrometra,
mucometra, and hematometra. Hydrometra is accumula-
tion of serous fluid, mucometra is accumulation of
UterineDisorders
379
mucoidfluid,andhematometrais accumulationofblood
within the uterus. These conditions may or may not be
associated with CEH. It is supposed that hydrometra and
mucometra develop as a result of increased secretory
activity of the endometrial glands in the presence of a
functionally closed cervix. It is unknown whether these
conditions are steps on the way to the more clinically evi
dent pyometra. Hematometra has been described to
occur in an animal suffering from rodenticide toxicity,
secondary to uterine torsion, and in a young animal with
severe CEH and pyometra.
Signaiment
CEH and pyometra are reported to occur most
commonly in dogs 8 years or older and in cats older than
5 years. Disease may occur in younger animals, especially
those that historically had received estrogen for preg-
nancy termination or progesterone for estrus suppres-
sion. No breed predisposition is reported. CEH and
pyometra may be more common in nulliparous than in
multiparous bitches. Pyometra of the uterine stump can
occur in spayed bitches and queens.
History and Clinical Signs
Pyometra occurs during diestrus or anestrus. Clinical
signs most commonly are reported to occur in bitches
380
Uterine Disorders
about 8 weeks after estrus, with a reported range of
1 week to 4 months after estrus. The clinical signs pres
ent and the degree of illness reported vary with cervical
patency (Table 12-2).
PhysicalExaminationFindings
In animals with open cervix pyometra, vulvar discharge
usually is readily apparent. The character of the dis-
charge varies from thick, creamy, and yellow-green to
thin, watery, and red-brown. The discharge usually has a
foul odor. In animals with nonpatent cervices, vulvar dis-
Table 12-2. Clinical Manifestations of Open Versus
Closed Cervix Pyometra
Open cervix
Closed cervix
pyometra
pyometra
Purulent vulvar
Yes
No
discharge
Abdominal
Usually none; if
distention
present, mild
Fever/depression/
Sometimespresent,
Usually present,
anorexia?
usually mild
oftensevere
Vomiting/diarrhea/
Sometimes present More often
polyuria-polydipsia
present, may
be severe
UterineDisorders
381
charge is less likely to occur and abdominal distention
often is present. The uterus often is palpably enlarged
Caution needs to be used when performing abdominal
palpation; too vigorous palpation potentially could rup
ture a friable uterus distended with purulent fluid
(Figure 12-1). Dogs and cats with pyometra often are
febrile,but those with severe disease and septicemia may
be hypothermic.
Figure 12-1. Distended uterus from a dog with closed cervix
pyometra.
382
Uterine Disorders
DiagnosticTestsandResufts
The hallmark for diagnosis of pyometra is verification of
the presence of accumulation of purulent fluid in the
uterus. Uterine enlargement must be confirmed, either
by abdominal palpation, radiography, or ultrasonogra-
phy. Remember that pyometra most commonly occurs
during the same time period as pregnancy in dogs and
cats and that uterine enlargement is the only radiograph-
ically visible sign of pregnancy until fairly late in gestation
(see Chapter 8). In animals that were bred and are at a
tirme in their cycle when pregnancy and pyometra are
both likely causes of uterine enlargement, abdominal
ultrasound is the preferred imaging technique.
Pregnancy diagnosis with abdominal ultrasound is
definitive any time after 24 days from ovulation(see
Chapter 8). CEH may be visible on abdominal ultrasound
as a fluffy thickening of the internal uterine wall on cross
section; irregular cystic elevations may be evident. If the
uterine horns are distended with fluid, the wall will be
compressed and CEH will not be visible. The chiaracter of
the intrauterine fluid cannot be definitively identified
with ultrasound. These same changes may be seen in ani-
mals with uterine stump pyometra, with the abnormal tis-
sue appearing adjacent to the urinary bladder.
Leukocytosis often is presentin animalswithpyome
tra,withelevationinwhitebloodcell(WBC) number
and degree of the left shift varying with cervical patency.
Dogs and cats with open cervix pyometra and adequate
UterineDisorders
383
drainage of uterine fluid generally have normal to
mildly elevated WBC numbers, whereas those with
closed cervix pyometra may have extremely elevated
WBC numbers with a left shift and possible lymphopenia
secondary to endotoxemia. Normocytic normochromic
anemia of chronic infection may be present.
Vulvar discharge, if present, should be collected for
cytologic examination and aerobic culture before insti-
tuting antibiotic therapy. Purulent vulvar discharge is
characterized by large numbers of degenerative
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) (Figure 12-2). If
Figure 12-2. Cytology of vulvar discharge from a dog with
open cervix pyometra.
384
Uterine Disorders
vulvar discharge is not evident, a guarded swab can be
used to collect a culture sample froin as far craniad in
the vagina as possible. Collection of intrauterine speci-
mens byinfusion andaspiration ofsterile saline through
a polypropylene urinary catheter passed transcervically
with endoscopic guidance has been described but is not
routinely used clinically. E. coliis the most common bac-
terial isolate from canine and feline pyometra. Other
aerobic organisms that are part of the normal vaginal
flora also may be seen, such as Streptococcus species,
Staphylococcus species, Pasteurella multocida, and Pseudo
monasaerugnosa.
Animals with infection caused by gram-negative
organisms,such as E.coli,and subseguentendotoxemia
and circulating antigen-antibody complexes may have
elevations in blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. Septic
anirmals may be hypoglycemic. Animals with tissue perfu-
sion injury secondary to septicemia, hypotension, and
tissue hypoxia may have changes on a serum chemistry
profile related to damage to specific organs.
Treatment
OHEisthetreatmentofchoiceforall bitchesandqueens with
pyometra. Although the infection may be curable with
appropriate antibiotic therapy, the underlying CEH is
irreversible and its presence predisposes the bitch or
queen to pyometra at each subsequent cycle. Severity of
UterineDisorders
385
disease before OHE was positively correlated with out-
coine in one study; animals with uterine rupture, sepsis,
Or severe secondary systemic disease, such as renai fail-
ure, were less likely to survive surgery than were those
animals that were stable before undergoing surgcry.
This emphasizes the necessity of rapid diagnosis and
treatment of pyometra in dogs and cats.Antibiotic ther-
apy should be instituted before surgery and continued
for 7-10 days after OHE; a common empirical antibiotic
choice is ampicillin at a dosage of 20 mg/kg adminis-
teredorallythreetimesaday.
Antibiotic therapy alone is not effective in treating
Pyometra. If OHE is not to be performed, antibiotic ther-
apy must be combined with use of an ecbolic agent to
help clear theuterus ofpurulent fluid.Adjunctive thera
pies that have been reported include acupuncture, estro
gens, androgens, oxytocin, and antiprogestins. Of these,
antiprogestins, such as the pregnancy termination agent
drugs are not available for use in veterinary medicine at
this time.The most common and efficacious ecbolic
agent used for medical therapy of canine and feline
Pyometra is PGFzα- Criteria for medical therapy for
pyometra in dogs and cats include the following:
· The animal is of breeding age and is a valuable com-
ponent of a planned breeding program.
· The animal's cervix is patent. Medical therapy of
closed cervix pyometra has been described, with
386
Uterine Dlsorders
the idea that contraction of the fluid-filled uterus
will put pressure on the internal cervical os and
promoteopeningofthecervixanduterine
drainage.However, if the cervix does not openl,
purulent fluid may be forced through the uterine
tubes or uterine rupture may occur, with subse-
quentperitonitis.
+ Secondary systemic disease, such as renal failure, is
not present. If medical therapy is not effective and
the animal undergoes OHE several days after med-
ical therapy was instituted, the likelihood of a posi-
tive outcome is greatly reduced.
If all of these criteria are met and the owner understands
that underlying CEH will not be affected by treatment,
the following protocol is used.
· Using a guarded swab, collect a specimen from the
cranial vagina for aerobic culture and sensitivity test-
ing. Institute empirical therapy with ampicillin
(20 mg/kg administered orally three times a day).
● Determine uterine size with a repeatable technique
(palpation,radiography,orultrasonography)
● Measure serum progesterone concentration. A
serum progesterone concentration greater than
2 ng/ml indicates that the animal has functional
luteal tissue. Elevated progesterone inhibits myonme
trialcontractility.
·Begin treatment with PGF,。 (Lutalyse; Pharmacia &
Upjohn, Peapack, NJ) at a dosage of 0.1-0.5 mg/kg
Uterine Disorders
387
administered subcutaneously. The drug can be
dosed one to three times daily. Iffunctional luteal
tissue is present, the drug must be given at least twice
daily to effect luteolysis and allow sufficient myome-
trial contractility to ensure expulsion of uterine
fluid. The drug should be given for 2-7 days or until
uterine size nears normal. Clinical response to the
drug, such as obvious increase in volume of vulvar
discharge or improvement in attitude or appetite of
the animal, may not be evident for up to 48 hours
therapy include hypersalivation, emesis, and diar
rhea.These signs are less severe with lower dosages
and decrease in severity with cach treatment. I
(MVRK) have seen one animal go into shock after
treatment with PGF2,; maintenance of a catheter for
tionfor20-30minutesaftertreatmentarerecom-
mended.
● The animal is maintained on appropriate antibiotic
therapy for a total of 4weeks.Vulvar discharge may
persist for weeks after therapy.
· At the next proestrus an anterior vaginal culture
sample should be collected and the animal placed
on an appropriate antibiotic to minimize recur
rence of pyometra. The animal should be bred and
OHE performed as soon as the bitch or queen has
produced the desired offspring.
388
Uterine Disorders
Prognosis
Prognosis for survival for dogs and cats diagnosed with
pyometra is fairly good; the reported survival rate is
83%-84%. For animals treated medically, reported
recurrence rate varies from 10%-77%. Of those dogs
bred after medical trcatment, 40%-68% were bred suc-
cessfully at least once.Some animals had recurrence of
Pyometra after a successful pregnancy. In bitches with
recurrent disease, the organism identified at the first
and later incidences of pyometra was the same, suggest-
ing that medical treatment is not associated with curing
the infection as much as with masking persistent infec-
tion by reducing it to a subclinical level.
Uterine Neoplasia
Definition andPathogenesis
Primary uterine neoplasia is uncommon in bitches and
queens, with a reported prevalence of less than 1% in
both species. Benign uterine tumors reported include
leiomyoma,fibroleiomyoma,lipoma,and fibroma.
Leiomyoma is the most common uterine tumor in
bitches and queens. Endometrial polyps are benign, non-
neoplastic, focal proliferations of endometrial tissue that
may be confused with uterine neoplasms. Malignant
uterine neoplasia also has been reported, with adeniocar
cinoma being the most common tumor type reported.
Uterine Disorders
389
Signaiment
Uterine neoplasia usually occurs in aged intact animals
but has been reported to develop at the uterinc stump in
ovariohysterectomized animals. No breed prcdisposi-
tion has becn reported for cats. Boxers were overrcpre-
sented in one retrospective study of canine utterine
neoplasia.
History and Clinical Signs
Many animals with uterine neoplasia are asymptomatic.
Uterine neoplasms are found incidentally during rou-
tine physical examination, during abdominal palpation
for pregnancy diagnosis, or at the time of routine OHE.
The most common clinical sign in symptomatic animals
is vulvar discharge. The character of the discharge varies
from serosanguineous to sanguinopurulent. Abdoininal
distention, dysuria, and/or hematuria may be observed.
Signs of systemic illness may be present in animals with
metastases from malignant uterine neoplasms, such as
vomiting and anorexia associated withliver metastases
and dyspnea associated with lung metastases.
Physica!ExaminationFindings
A firm abdominal mass often is palpable. Abdominal dis
390
Uterine Disorders
occur secondary to metastatic disease, such as icterus Or
increased respiratory sounds.
Diagnostic Tests and Results
Abdominal radiography or ultrasonography can be used
to localize the origin of the palpable abdominal mass.
Tumor type cannot be differentiated by echogenic char-
acteristics alone. A serum chemistry profile and thoracic
radiographs may be useful for assessment of metastatic
disease.
Treatment
OHE is the treatment of choice. In valuable breeding
animals, removal of the affected uterine horn only may
be attempted. Any excised tissue should be submitted
for histopathologic examination to determine tumor
type and malignancy and completeness of surgical
removal. Chemotherapy, either for the primary tumor
orfor metastatic disease,has not been described.
Prognosis
Prognosis for life is excellent in bitches or queens with
benign neoplasia. Prognosis for future fertility depends
on the tumor type and treatment used; leiomyomas are
reported not to interfere with pregnancy, but often the
UterineDisorders
391
animal has undergone OHE by the time the diagnosis of
tumor type is made. Unilateral uterine horn excision
does not interfere directly with the ability of the bitch or
queen to conceive but may reduce her ability to carry the
pregnancy to term because of the limited endometrial
surface available for placentation. Prognosis for animals
with malignant uterine neoplasia is dependent on com-
pleteness of surgical removal of the tumor and amount
ofmetastasis.
Bibliography
Asheim A: Pathogenesis of renal damage and polydipsia
in dogs with pyometra, J Am Vet Med Assoc 147:736,
1965.
Brodey RS, Roszel JF: Neoplasms of the canine uterus,
vagina, and vulva: a clinicopathological survey of
90 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc 151:1294, 1967.
Chen YM, Wright PI, Lee CS: A model for the study of
cystic endometrial hyperplasia in bitches, J Reprod
FertilSuppl57:407,2001.
Dickie MB, Arbeiter K: Diagnosis and therapy of the
subinvolution of placental sites in the bitch, J Reprod
FertilSuppl47:471,1993.
Dow C: The cystic hyperplasia-pyometra complex in the
bitch, Vet Rec 69:1409, 1957.
Dow C: The cystic hyperplasia-pyometra complex in the
bitch, VetRec 70:1102, 1958.
392
Uterine Disorders
Dow C: The cystic hyperplasia-pyometra complex in the
cat,VetRec74:141,1962.
Faldyna M, Laznicka A, Toman M: Immunosuppression in
bitches with pyometra, J Small Anim Pract 42:5, 2001.
Feldman EC, Nelson Rw: Diagnosis and treatment alter-
natives for pyometra in dogs and cats. In Kirk RW
(ed): Current veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989,
WBSaunders.
Gilbert RO, Nothling JO, Oettle EE: A retrospective
study of 40cases of caninepyometra-metritis treated
with prostaglandin F-2a and broad-spectrum anti-
bacterial drugs, J Reprod Fertil Suppl39:225, 1989.
Gonzalez CG, Sanchez BC, Velez HM et al: Neoplasms of
the reproductive system in bitches: retrospective
study 0ver 6 years,Vet Mexico28:31,1997.
Hardy RM, Osborne CA: Canine pyometra: pathophysi-
ology, diagnosis and treatment of uterine and extra-
uterine lesions,/AmAnim HospAssoc10:245,1974.
Heiene R, Moe L, Molmen G: Calculation of urinary
enzyme excretion, with renal structure and function1
in dogs with pyometra, Res Vet Sri 70:129, 2001.
Johnson ME: Hydrometra in the dog: case report, J Am
AnimHospAssoc20:243,1984.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine and
feline theriogenology, Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders.
Lawler DF, Evans RH, Reimers TJ et al: Histopathologic
features, environmental factors, and serum estro-
gen,progesterone,andprolactinvaluesassociated
UterineDisorders
393
with ovarian phase and inflammatory uterine dis-
ease in cats,Am/ Vet Res52:1747,1991.
Meyers-Walen VN, Goldschmidt MH, Flickinger GI.:
Prostaglandin F2α treatment of canine pyometra,
JAmVet MedAssoc189:1557,1986.
Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Stabenfeldt GH: Treatment
of canine  pyometra and endometritis with
prostaglandin F2o, JAm Vet Med Assoc181:899, 1982.
Noakes DE,Dhaliwal GK, England GC: Cystic endome-
trial hyperplasia/ pyometra in dogs: a review of the
causes and pathogenesis, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 57:395,
2001.
Padgett SL, Stokes JE, Tucker RL et al: Hematometra
secondary to anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity, §
AmAnimHospAssoc34:437,1998.
Pearson H: The complications of ovariohysterectomy in
the bitch,JSmAnim Prac14:257,1973.
Potter K, Hancock DH, Gallina AM: Clinical and patho-
logic features of endometrial hyperplasia, pyometra
and endometritis in cats: 79 cases (1980-1985), JAm
Vet Med Assoc 198:1427, 1991.
Root Kustritz MV: Postpartum disorders of the bitch and
queen,Pedigree BreederForum 5:3,1996.
Schultheiss PC, Jones RL, Kesel ML et al: Normal bacter-
ial flora in canine and feline uteri,/ Vet Diag Invest
11:560,1999.
Tello L, Martin F, Valdes A et al: Comparative study of
ultrasonographic,radiographic, and postoperative
394
UterineDisorders
characteristics of 50 bitches with pyometra, Arch
Med Vet28:137, 1996.
Watts JR, Wright PJ, Lee CS et al: New techniques using
transcervical uterine cannulation for the diagnosis
of uterine disorders in bitches, J Reprod Fertil Suppl
51:283,1997.
Wheaton LG, Johnson AL, Parker AJ et al: Results and
review of80 cases,JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 25:563, 1989.
13
Vaginal Disorders
BeverlyJ.Purstvell
ATAGLANCE
·Vaginal anatomic anomalies
· The vaginal anatomic anomalics most commonly
reported are vaginal septa and circumferential vagi
nal strictures. Abnormal embryologic development
of the genitourinary tract most often occurs just
cranial to the urethral papilla, where the para-
mesonephric ducts join the urogenital sinus.
395
396
Vaginal Disorders
Presence ofanatomic anomalies is associated with
pain when breeding, chronic urinary tract infec-
tions, urinary incontinence, and vaginitis. Diagnosis
is by digital vaginal examination,vaginoscopy, or
contrast vaginography. Surgical reconstruction is
thetreatmentofchoice.
·Vaginitis
● Vaginitis can occur in prepuberal bitches (juvenile
(adult-onset vaginitis) . Primary bacterial infection
of the vagina is unlikely to occur. Vaginitis most
often occurs secondary to anatomic anomalies o1
chronic urinary tract infections; idiopathic adult-
onsetvaginitisalsooccurs.Secondarybacterial
infection with resident flora occurs after the pri-
mary inflammation. Diagnosis is by visual inspec
tion (vaginal hyperemia) and demonstration of
purulent vaginal discharge. The underlying cause, if
known, is treated and symptomatic thcrapy pro-
vided. Symptomatic medications reported include
antibiotics, diethylstilbestrol, and glucocorticoids.
·Vaginalfoldprolapse
·Prolapse ofedematous vaginalfolds occurs during
proestrus and estrus in some large- or giant-breed
bitches. Serum estrogen concentrations are not
abnormal in these dogs, but the response of the
vaginal epithelium to estrogen is exaggerated, such
VaginalDisorders
397
that the vaginal tissue cannot be contained within
the vaginal vault and protrudes through the vilvar
lips. Diagnosis is by visual inspection. Treatment is
removal of the estrogenl stimulus; the condition
resolves spontaneously as the bitch enters diestrus
or ovariohysterectomy can be performed. Severely
traumatized prolapsed tissue can be surgically
resected. Relapse during subsequent cycles is com-
Imon,
· Vaginal neoplasia
●Vaginal neoplasia is extremely uncommon and usu-
ally is readily apparent as a mass protruding from
the vulvar lips. Animals with masses within the vagi-
nal vault often present with hemorrhagic vulvar dlis-
charge. Surgical excision is the treatment of choice
for all tumors except transmissible venereal tumor,
which is best treated with vincristine.
Vaginal Anatomic Anomalies
Definition andPathogenesis
Anatomic anomalies of the vagina and vestibule iniclude
anydevelopmentalmalformationsofthevulva
vestibule, and vagina (Table 13-1). Anatomic anomalies
form during the embryologic development of the repro
ductive tract. The urogenital sinus and genital folds,
398
Vaginal Disorders
Table 13-1.Anatomic Anomalies of the Distal
ReproductiveTractof theBitch
Vaginovestibular
Vagina
Junctlon
Vulva
1.Medialseptum
1. Imperforate
1. Dorsal
(double vagina)
hymen
commissure band
2. Segmental
a. Dorsal
2. Infantile vulva
hypoplasia or
ventral
3. inverted vuiva
aplasia
band
4. Vulvar cleft
3. Diverticulum
b.Annular
5. Perineal
stricture
dysgenesis
(360
6. Rectovaginal
degrees)
fistula
7.Vestibulovulvar
stricture
genital tubercle, and genital swellings become the
vestibule, the clitoris, and the vulva, respectively. The
paired paramesonephric (millerian) ducts give rise to
the uterine tubes (oviducts), uterus, cervix, and vagina.
The caudalendof the vaginal canalopens into the
vestibule by the joining of the paramesonephric ducts
to the urogenital sinus at the vaginovestibular junc
tion (Figure 13-1). This is the area of formation of
the hymen. The urogenital sinus also gives rise to the
urinary bladder and the urethra, which enters the
vestibule just caudal to the vaginovestibular junction.
Vaginai Disorders
66E
B
Figure 13-1. Anatomic relationship between the normal
vestibule and vagina in the bitch.A, Dorsal ventral band; broad
arrows, urethral opening; narrow arrows, vaginovestibular junc-
tion. B,Annular stricture at vaginovestibular junction, cranial to
the urethral opening. (Modified from Ettinger S), Feidman EC
{eds]: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine,Philadeiphia,
2000,WBSaunders.)
400
Vaglnal Disorders
Any aberration in the developmental process results i11
physical anomalies in the distal reproductive tract.
Medial septal defects of the vagina are a result of the
two paired paramesonephric ducts not joining com-
pletely. The septum can divide the vagina longitudinally,
giving the cffect of a "double vagina," or may persist as a
single, dorsoventral band or pillar of tissue just cranial to
the urethral papilla
Circumferential vaginovestibular strictures are aber-
rations in the joining of the paramesonephric ducts with
the urogenital siius. There normally is a narrowing at the
vaginovestibular junction, the cingulum, which should
mot be misinterpreted as an anomaly. The normal narrow-
ing of the vaginovestibular junction is especially evident
during anestrus and in spayed bitches, particularly those
bitches spayed prepuberally. A common misconception is
the narrowing of the vaginovestibular junction being con-
fused with the cervix when palpated digitally during
dystocia.Vestibulovulvar strictures are reported less com-
monly; these are aberrations of the genital folds joining
the genital swellings.Anomalies of the clitoris, particu
larly enlargements, are indicative of hermaphroditic con-
ditions(see Chapter 1)
Signaiment
Any bitch of any age can be affected by developmental
anomalies of the reproductive tract.
Vaginal Disorders
401
HistoryandClinicaiSigns
The incidence ofvaginal anomalies is difficult to deter-
mine because often there are no clinical signis associated
with these anomalies.The history of affected bitches
may include chronic urinary tract infections, urinary
incontinence, or vaginitis. Vulvar discharge or vulvar
irritation may be present with some anomalies in either
intact or spayed bitches. Anomalies of the vestibule, vagi-
novestibular junction, or the vagina may result in infer-
tility or in the inability to tie with the male dog at
breeding because of physical barriers or pain at copula
tion (dyspareunia). Some of the anomalies may not be
apparent until dystocia occurs, such as a dorsoventral
band at the vaginovestibular junction upon which a
puppy is trapped as it passes thirough the birth cainal.
PhysicalExaminationFindings
Anomalies involving the perineum and vilva will be evi-
dent grossly. Open vulvar clefts and perineal dysgenesis
will be seen as defects in the perineal area. Some prepu-
bertal bitches and bitches spayed for many years have
infantile and inverted vulvae that may be partially or
totally obscured by skin folds. This problem is exacer-
batedbyobesity.
Skin irritation, discharge, and discolored hair
may be evident around the vulva as a result of the disrup
tion of normal urination in bitches with vulvar or
402
Vagina! Disorders
vestibulovulvar anomalies or as a result of urinary incon
tinence or vaginitis in bitches with anomalies that are
not grossly evident.
DiagnosticTestsandResults
Anatomic anomalies of the distal reproductive tract
are diagnosed by digital vaginal examination. Tight
bands at the dorsal commissure and remnants of the
hymen at the vaginovestibular junction, forming
either a dorsoventral band or annular ring(see Figure
13-l), easily are detected with a digital examination.
Careful restraint of the animal must be used during
the digital examination because of the sensitivity of
the dorsal commissure and the sometimes sudden
resentful bites that may occur in response to pain at
palpation. On digital palpation the mucosa of the
vestibule may feel grainy, especially opposite the ure-
thral opening, which is evidence of chronic inflamma-
tion and the lymphoid follicles that result from this
inflammation.
Double vaginas, rare vaginal anomalies such as seg-
mental hypoplasia or aplasia, and vaginal diverticula are
diagnosed by vaginoscopy and contrast radiography.
Vaginoscopy may require sedation of the animal.
Contrast vaginography can be performed well only in
heavily sedated animals.Vaginography is recommended
if surgical repair of the anomaly is to be undertaken to
Vaginal Disorders
403
ensure complete knowledge of the abnormal vaginal
anatomy before a surgical approach is attempted.
Treatment
Anomalies of the reproductive tract thiat are incidental
findings do not require treatment, particularly if there
are no concurrent clinical signs. If therapy is necessary,
surgery is the treatment of choice.Conditions that
necessitate correction include desire of the client to
breed the animal and clinical signs that distress thc ani-
mal or the client, such as urinary incontinence. Medial
vaginal septa (double vagina) can be corrected surgi
cally, although the approach and technique may be diff-
cult because of the anatomic location of the vaginal
vault. Vaginal hypoplasia and vaginal aplasia may not be
correctable.
Vaginovestibularproblemsvaryintheirresponse
to treatment. Dorsoventral bands easily are corrected
with surgery. A midline episiotomy may be nccessary
to gain adequate exposure to the vaginovestibular
junction.Annular stricture rings of thevaginovestibu
lar region are difficult to correct surgically without
recirrence.The stricture may be excised completely
with the mucosa closed perpendicular to the initial
incision in an attempt to enlarge the lumen. Another
approach is to make a series of radial incisions perpen-
dicular to the lumen. Both procedures may require
404
Vaginal Disorders
frequent and repeated postoperative digital dilation
to prevent recurrence of the stricture. Clinical signs,
such as vulvar discharge and irritation, may persist
after attempted surgical correction, making treat
ment a frustrating exercise in some patients. Vaginectomy.
also called vaginal ablation, is another possible ther-
apy.It alleviates allproblems associated with the
have failed to relieve the climical signs. Bitches withi
annular strictures ofthe vaginovestibular junction or
tightbands at the dorsalcommissure that cannotbe
bred naturally may be bred artificially and reevaluated
immediately before parturition. Relaxation of these
strictures and bandsusually is sufficient to allow nor-
maldelivery.
Infantile and invertcd vulvae are corrected surgi
callyby removing the excess skinfolds around the vulva.
In intact bitches, spontaneous resolution may occur
when the bitch is allowcd to go through estrus. The
problemmayrecur with age after subsequent ovariohys
terectomy (OHE) if vulvar atrophy occurs, especially in
obese bitches. Surgical alteration of the perivulvar area
(episioplasty) usually alleviates the chronic urinary tract
infections and inflammation of the perivulvar skin and
the vestibule by allowing more complete urine voiding.
Vulvar clefts and perineal dysgenesis may be corrected
surgically if deemed necessary by the clinical signs asso-
ciated with the defects.
Vaginaf Disorders
405
Prognosis
Prognosis varies with the anomaly and the desired out-
come of the client. Anomalies of the vaginovestibular
junction, vestibule, and vulva easily are corrected and
are associated with a good prognosis. Prognosis after
correction of anomalies of the vaginal vault must be
guarded because of the difficulty of the surgical
approach to correct these anomalies and the ultimate
effect on reproduction.
Vaginitis
Definition andPathogenesis
Vaginitis is any inflammatory process that involves the
mucosal lining of the vestibule or vagina. Puppy vaginitis
is a purulent vulvar discharge in a prepuberal bitch, usu-
ally present without any discomfort to the animal. The
cause of puppy vaginitis is unknown but may be related to
immaturity of the vaginal canal and epithelium or imma-
turity of the immune system. Inflammation of the
vestibule and vagina in the adult bitchusuallyiscausedby
some predisposing condition, although idiopathic adult-
onset vaginitis does occur. Canine herpesvirus may cause
vaginitis, although the vaginal lesions seen with canine
herpesvirus may cause no clinical signs in the affected
animal. Anatomic anomalies may interfere with urine
voiding, thus causing inflammation of the vestibule and
406
Vaginal Disorders
distal vagina because ofurine pooling and resultant
urine scalding. Urinary tract infections may lead to
inflammation of the vestibule in the area of the urethral
papilla. Vaginitis can be brought about by alterations in
the normal bacterial flora after antibiotic therapy or by
an immunosuppressive systemic condition, such as dia-
betes mellitus. Any foreign body in the vaginal canal
causes inflammation. Vaginal neoplasia may be mistaken
for vaginitis because of the presence of vulvar discharge.
Signaiment
Any bitch of any age, spayed or intact, can be affected by
vaginitis. However, adult-onset vaginitis is more com
monly reported to occur in spayed than in intact bitches.
History and Clinical Signs
Vaginitis is associated with purulent or mucopurulent
vulvar discharge and irritation to the animal, as evi-
denced by excessivelicking of the perineal area.
Physical Examination Findings
Dischiarge or evidence of discharge can be observed at
the vulvar lips and in the surrounding hair. Vulvar hyper
emia and clitoralhypertrophy secondary to licking may
be present.
Vaginal Disorders
407
Diagnostic Tests and Resufts
Vaginal cytologic examination reveals large numbers of
neutrophils in addition to noncornified epithelial cells
from the vagina and vestibule in anestrous or spayed
bitches. Lymphocytes and macrophages may be pres-
ent in smaller numbers in the more chronic cases.
Vaginoscopy demonstrates hyperemia and possibly fol-
licular hyperplasia, indicative of chronic inflammation.
Vaginoscopy is helpful in identifying the source of the
discharge and in ruling out other causes of vulvar dis
charge, such as uterine disease or presence of a vaginal
foreignbody
Treatment
Treatment for vaginitis primarily involves identifying
and treating the predisposing cause, if possible. Urinary
tract infections can be identified by urinalysis and bacte-
rial culture performed on urine samples collected by
cystocentesis.Anatomic anomaliesshould beidentified
andcorrected.Infantileinvertedvulvae arenoted for
causing bitches discomfort and inflammation in the area
of the perineum and vestibule. Surgical correction of
theseconditions ofteneliminates theclinicalsigns.Ifa
foreign body is present, it should be removed.
Puppy vaginitis is a self-limiting condition. Most
cases require no treatment or only topical therapy with a
medicated douche to minimize clinical signs. Puppy
408
Vaginal Disorders
vaginitis resolves on its owm either before or during the
first estrus. Controversy exists as to whether allowing
one heat period prior to OHE hastens resolution of
vaginitis.
Systemic antibiotics alter the normal bacterial flora
of the vaginaandhavebeenshowntoselect for
opportunistic pathogens,such as Escherichia coli and
Mycoplasma species. Local antibiotic therapy, including
douching, is not recommended because usually it is not
effective, it may cause irritation and worsening of the
vulvar licking, and it may further alter the normal bacte-
rial flora of the vagina. If the animal has a concurrent
immunosuppressive condition, however, antibiotic ther-
apy may be beneficial if used with discretion. Whenever
antibiotic therapy is considered, bacterial cultures of the
vagina should be obtained using a guarded swab, thus
avoiding theheavily contaminated vestibule and skin.If
heavy growth of a single organism is present, systemic
antibiotic therapy can be chosen based on the organ-
ism's sensitivitypattern.
Ifno underlying causefor vaginitis is identified,
treatment with diethylstilbestrol (DES) may be consid-
ered in the spayed bitch. Protocols similar to those
described for urinary incontinence are used, decreas-
ing the frequency of doses until a minimal effective
dosage regimen is reached. One such protocol is 1 mg
of DES administered orally once daily for 5 days and
Vaginal Disorders
409
then 1 mg administered twice weekly for 2-3 weeks with
a further decrease to once weekly treatment unless
signs recur.
Other symptomatic therapies that may be used to
treat vaginitis include glucocorticoids and androgens.
Glucocorticoids should not be used in dogs with
urinary incontinence. Treatment with testosterone,
as for estrus suppression (see Chapter 5), may be
beneficial.
Surgical therapy is reported to hasten resolution of
idiopathic adult-onset vaginitis and of vaginitis associ-
ated with perivulvar dermatitis. Episioplasty (vulvo
plasty) is removal of tissue dorsal to the vulvar cleft with
subsequent eversion of the vulva from enveloping
perivulvar folds. In one study, episioplasty was reported
to effect a cure in 18 of 18 dogs with vaginitis.
Prognosis
The success of resolution of vaginitis depends on the
cause. Puppy vaginitis resolves spontaneously if left
untreated. Most cases of adult vaginitis resolve once the
predisposing condition has been correctcd. The most
difficult cases of adult vaginitis to treat are those result-
ing from anatomic anomalies because the anomaly itself
may be difficult to correct. Idiopathic adult-onset vagini-
tis resolves eventually, but the patient may require weeks
to months of symptomatic therapy.
410
Vaglnal Disorders
Vaginal Fold Prolapse (Vaginal Hyperplasia
Vaginal Hypertrophy, Vaginal Prolapse)
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Vaginal fold prolapse, historically and incorrectly
referred to asvaginal hyperplasia or vaginal hypertrophy,
is the extrusion of mucosal tissue through the vulvar
lips. This protrusion of mucosal tissue is associated
with the influence of estrogen on the vaginal epithe-
lium. Estrogen causes thickening of the vaginal
squamous epithelium and edema of the underlying
tissue in normal bitches during proestrus and estrus.
In cases in which the vaginal tissue prolapses through
the vulvar lips, it is thought to be an exaggerated
response to estrogen.There is evidence that the
condition is hereditary in some lines and breeds of
dogs. True vaginal prolapse (dislocation of normal
vaginal tissue through the vulvar lips) occurs rarely in
the bitch and usually is associated with dystocia, tenes
mus, or forced extraction of the male during the geni
tal tie.
Signaiment
Prolapse of vaginal tissue occurs almost exclusively in
intact bitches during proestrus and estrus. Occasionally,
the prolapse continues throughout pregnancy or recurs
atparturition.
Vaginal Disorders
411
History and Clinicaf Signs
Vaginal tissue prolapse occurs in the intact bitch during
proestrus and estrus, and it may occur during the first
estrous cycle or any cycle thereafter (Figure 13-2, A).
This condition is not associated with dysuria. The nor-
mal serosanguineous vulvar discharge of proestrus or
estrus usually is present.
Figure 13-2. Vaginal fold prolapse in the bitch. A, Peduncular
vaginal fold prolapse; note standing (flagging) response of estrus.
Continued
412
Vaginal Disorders
PhysicalExaminationFindings
The protruding mucosal tissue most commonly is secn
as a solid tumorlike mass protruding from the vulvar lips
(Figure 13-2, B). This mass originates from the ventral
vaginal floor immediately anterior to the urethral
papilla and may be peduncular (see Figure 13-2, A).
Occasionally, the prolapse is circumferential and pro-
trudes as a doughnut-shaped mass (Figure 13-2, C).
Figure 13-2, cont'd. B, Vaginal fold prolapse; note excoriation
ofmucosa.
Vaginal Disorders
413
Once prolapsed, the mucosal tissue will become excori-
ated because of exposure to the external environment.
Diagnostic Tests and Results
The influence of estrogen can be confirmed by cornifi
cation of the vaginal epithelial cells, the presence of the
characteristic serosanguineous estrous discharge, and
the presence of estrous behavior.
Figure 13-2, cont'd. C, Vaginal fold prolapse; 360-degree
doughnut-shaped prolapse. (From Ettinger S), Feldrman EC feos]:
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, Philadelphia, 2000, W8
Saunders.)
414
Vaglnal Disorders
Treatment
Ovariectomy or OHE permanently corrects this condi-
tion by removing the gonadal source of estrogen. The
prolapsed tissue regresses shortly after removal of the
ovaries.
Inbreeding bitches,treatment may not be necessary
or desirable because of the self-limiting nature of the
condition. In most cases the prolapsed tissue regresses
spontaneously with the onset of diestrus.If natural
breeding is not possible because of the size of the pro-
lapse, artificial insemination may be performed to
obtain a pregnancy. Occasionally, a prolapse will persist
throughout pregnancy. Prolapses that are present at par-
turitionusually donotresultin dystocia.
Surgicalremoval oftheprolapsedvaginal tissuemay
be attempted, especially in cases of larger peduncular
masses arising from the ventral floor of the vagina. The
surgery is performed through a midline episiotomy inci-
sion. Recurrence is possible after surgical removal, dur-
ing the subsequent proestrus or estrus. Surgery may not
be advisable in cases of circumferential prolapses
because of the extent of the tissue involved and thc
potential of strictures of the birth canal.
Prognosis
Vaginal fold prolapse is a self-limiting condition that
resolves spontaneously; the prognosis for life is
Vaginal Disorders
415
excellent. Presence of the prolapse may preclude natu-
ral service but does not affect fertility.
Vaginal Neoplasia
DefinitionandPathogenesis
For this discussion, the term vaginal neoplasia includes
any tumor arising from the vestibule or vagina
Vaginal neoplasia represents 2.5%-3% of all canine
tumors and 41 % of tumors involving the canine repro.
ductive tract.From 70%-80% of these tumors are
benign. Leiomyoma is the most common benign
tumor, and leiomyosarcoma is the most common
malignant vaginal tumor. The pathogenesis of vaginal
neoplasiais unknown but may be related to the effect
of ovarian hormones. Transmissible venereal tumor
(TVT) arises from an allogeneic cellular transplant
that contains a number of chromosomes different
from that seen in canine cells (TVT, 2n = 59 ± 5; nor-
mal dog cell, 2n = 78).
Signaiment
Any bitch at any age can be affected with vaginal
neoplasia. The risk increases with age. TVT is
more common
1in young, free-roaming, intact
bitches.
416
Vaginal Disorders
History and ChinicalSigns
The presenting signs of vaginal neoplasia may include per-
ineal enlargement, a mass protruding from the vulva, vul-
var discharge, tenesmus, or dysuria. Any vaginal mass in a
spayed bitch and any vaginal mass in an intact bitch unre
lated to the estrous cycle should be considered potentially
neoplastic. Any hemorrhagic vulvar discharge in a spayed
estrous cycle or pregnancy in the intact bitch should be
investigated as a potentially neoplastic process.
Physicaf Examination Findings
Tumors prolapsing from the vulva can be differentiated
from vaginal fold prolapse by evaluating the stage of
estrous cycle and its relationship to the onset of signs,
location of the mass, and failure of the mass to regress
postestrus. Vaginoscopy can be used to identify masses
within the vaginal canal that may be responsible for a
hemorrhagic vulvar discharge, tenesmus, or dysuria.
Benign leiomyomas often are peduncular. TVT may be
vegetativeand ulcerated.
DiagnosticTestsandResufts
Biopsy or excisional biopsy samples from the mass
should be submitted for histopathologic examination to
confirm the tissue type involved.
Vaginal Disorders
417
Treatment
Surgical excision, when possible, is the treatmcnt of
choice for most vaginal tumors. TVT responds readily to
chemotherapy; vincristine at a dosage of 0.025 mg/kg or
0.6 mg/m administered intravenously weekly causes
complete regression in two to seven treatments. As with
any chemotherapeutic regimen, surgical debulking of
neoplastic tissue before starting drug therapy may be
beneficial. OHE is recommended at the time of surgical
removal of vaginal masses because of the possibility of
hormonalinfluence on thetumor.
Prognosis
The prognosis for complete resolution of vaginal and
vulvar tumors is good, provided that metastasis has not
occurred with the malignant tumors.
Bibliography
Burke TJ, Smith CW: Vulvo-vaginal cleft in a dog, J Am
AnimHosp Assoc11:774,1975.
Hammel SP, Bjorling DE: Results of vulvoplasty for treat-
ment of recessed vulva in dogs,I AmAnimHospAssoc
38:79, 2002.
Holt PE: An evaluation of positive conitrast vagino-ure-
thrography as a diagnostic aid in the bitch, J Small
AnimPract25:531,1984.
418
Vaginal Disorders
Holt PE, Sayle B: Congenital vestibulo-vaginal stenosis in
thebitch,JSmallAnimPract22:67,1981.
Johnston SD: Vaginal prolapse. In Kirk RW (ed): Current
veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine and
feline theriogenology,Philadelphia,2001,WB Saunders.
Kyles AE, Vaden S, Hardie EM et al: Vestibulovaginal
stenosis in dogs: 18 cases (1987-1995), /Am Vet Med
Assoc209:1889,1996.
Lightner BA, McLoughlin MA, Chew Dl et al:
Episioplasty for the treatment of perivulvar dermati-
tis or recurrent urinary tract infections in dogs with
excessive perivulvar skin folds: 31 cases (1983-2000),
IAm Vet Med Assoc219:1577, 2001.
McEntee K: Reproductive pathology of domestic mammals,
San Diego,1990, Academic Press.
Memon MA, Pavletic MM, Kumar MS: Chronic vaginal
prolapse during pregnancy in a bitch, J Am Vet Med
Assoc202:295,1993.
Meyers-Wallen VN, Patterson DF: Disorders of sexual
development in dogs and cats.In Kirk RW (ed):
Current veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB
Saunders.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Johnston GR: Vaginal septa in
dogs: 15 cases (1983-1992),J Am Vet Med Assoc
206:56, 1995.
Vaginal Disorders
419
Schaefers-Okkens AC: Vaginal edema and vaginal fold pro-
lapseinthebitch,includingsurgicalmanagement,
International Veterinary Information Service, 2001.
Available at www.ivis.org.
Withrow SJ, Susaneck SJ: Tumors of the canine female
reproductive tract. In Morrow DA (ed): Current ther-
apy in theriogenology, Philadelphia, 1986, WB
Saunders.
Wykes PM, Soderberg SF: Congenital abnormalities of
the canine vagina and vulva, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
19:995,1983.
14
Mammary Disorders
Harry Momont and fane A. Barber
ATA GLANCE
·False pregnancy
· False pregnancy (pseudocyesis) is a syndrome char-
acterized by mammary development. and lactation
and behaviors of whelping and mothering. It occurs
in intact bitches approximately 2 months after
estrus. It is caused by the normal decline in scrum
421
422
Mammary Disorders
progesterone concentrations atthe end of diestrus
andisnot associatedwithreproductivetract disease.
Spontaneousremissionusuallyoccursin1-2weeks;
wrapping engorged mammary glands with an clastic
bandage may hasten resolution of clinical signs.
· Mastitis
●Mastitismost commonly
occursinpostparlum
bitches. It occurs rarely in postpartun queens and
by visual inspection; affected mammary glands are
red, turgid, and painful. Treat with an appropriate
antibiotic,based on culture and sensitivity of fluid
expressed frorn the affected glands. Puppies may be
allowed to nursefrom adjacent normalglands.
·Mammaryhypertrophy
● Mammary hypertrophy is nonncoplastic cnlargc-
 s  s     n
the influence of progesterone. Ovariohystercctomy
tration of exogenous progestogcns is curative.
·Mammaryneoplasia
● In dogs, mammary masses may be either benign
nant (adenocarcinoma). In cats, mammary neopla-
sia virtually always is malignant adenocarcinoma.
Bitches and queens spayed early in life have a
decreased incidence of mammary neoplasia when
they get older compared with animals that are left
MammaryDisorders
423
intact. Siamese cats are predisposed as a breed; no
breed predisposition is reported in dogs. Diagnosis
is confirmed with excision biopsy and submission
for histopathologic examination. Surgical removal
is the treatment of choice.More extensive surgery
(mastectomy versus removal of the mass only) may
be associated withdecreasedincidence of local
recurrence but is not associated with increased sur-
vival time.Effect of concurrent OHE on tumor
recurrence orsurvival timeis equivocal.
FalsePregnancy
Definition andPathogenesis
False pregnancy (also called pseudopregnancy or pseudocye
sis) is a norrmal consequence of canine reproductive phys
iology. The healthy, cycling bitch enters diestrus after
ovulation (see Chapter 2).This diestrus, orluteal phase,is
guishable from pregnancy. It also is similar in length to
pregnancy, usually lasting approximately 2 months. As a
result, all normal nonpregnant bitches experience false
pregnancy after estrus.The clinicalpresentation offalse
pregnianicy actually involves the development of signs and
behaviors associated with the end of the luteal phase and
may be more correctly thought of as false whelpimg. The
objectionable or overt signs of clinical false pregnancy are
424
MammaryDisorders
the result of declining progesterone concentrations at the
end of diestrus coupled with elevated concentrations of
estrogen and prolactin. Mammary gland developmenf
stimulation during diestrus, and lactation is initiated by
the rise in prolactin.
False pregnancy has been described as an atavistic or
vestigial pack behavior. The tendency for dogs to cycle
together results in subordinate bitches ending diestrus at
about the same time that a dominantbitch would end hei
pregnancy. The onset ofa synchronous lactation would
allow the subordinate females to serve as nursemaids for
the genetically superior pups of the dominant bitch.
Signaiment
Overt false pregnancy can occur in intact postpuberal
bitches of any age. It usually occurs 1-3 months after
estrus. It also may occur after OHE of the diestrual bitch
Spayed bitches suffering from ovarian remnant syn
drome also may experience false pregniancy.
History andClinical Signs
Most dogs with clinical false pregnancy were in estrus 2-3
months before presentation, were recently spayed, or
recently completed progestogen thierapy. The develop-
MammaryDisorders
425
ment of clinical signs is variable and may not occur dur-
ing every cycle. Clinical signs include mammary gland
enlargement and galactorrhea (inappropriate lacta-
tion), change in appetite, nesting behavior, and adop-
tion or mothering of objects or animals. Abdominal
distention sometimes may be observed, and many
clients are convinced that their bitch is pregnant. The
The duration of false pregnancy varies greatly but may
last as long as 4-6 weeks.
Physical Examination Findings
Most physical examination findings are normal. The
only common exception is galactorrhea,an enlarge-
ment of the mammae with the presence of a milklike
secretion. Mastitis may occur rarely and should be
treated as for the lactating bitch. Finally and obviously,
the bitch is not pregnant.
DiagnosticTestsandResults
Serum progesterone concentrations are low or declin
ing. No pups are seen on radiographs or ultrasonograms
(see Chapter 8). Serum relaxin concentrations are
nant bitch after 3-4 weeks of gestation. Thyroid function
should be evaluated in any bitch with clinical signs
426
Mammary Disorders
suggestive ofhypothyroidism and galactorrhea; elevated
thyroidreleasing
ghormone concentrations in the
hypothyroid bitch may stimulate prolactin release.
Treatment
No treatment is necessary for dogs with mild signs of
false pregnancy. In the absence of nursing pups the con-
dition usually is self-limited.Physical stimulation of the
mammae by the bitch or owner should be avoided
because it may encourage milk let-down and prolong the
lactation. For this same reason, it may be wise to remove
any adopted object from the bitch. A mild restriction of
food and water also may hasten the end of the lactation,
as may wrapping of the mammary glands with an elastic
bandage. Owners who object to mild signs of clinical
false pregnancy should be cautioned that a recurrence
after the next estrus is possible if not likely. Spaying the
bitch after theremission of clinical signs will prevent a
recurrence of the problem
In cases in which mammary development is exces-
sive or thebehaviorisparticularly objectionable,morc
ss     ssg
Hormone replacement therapy with androgens, estro-
gens, or progestogens has been used with variable suc-
cess. All hormonal therapy entails significant risk to
developing fetuses, so pregnancy must be definitively
ruled out before any treatment is begun. The only prod-
Mammary Disorders
427
uct approved for treatment of false pregnancy in the
United States is megestrol acetate (Ovaban; Schering-
Plough, Kenilworth, NJ). It is a progestogen that sup-
presses the signs of false pregnancy initiated by the
progesterone withdrawal at the end of diestrus. The rec-
ommended dosage of megestrol acetate is 2.5 mg/kg/ day
given orally for 8 days. Recurrence of clinical signs after
therapy has been discontinued is common. Progestogen
therapy should be avoided in dogs with diabetes mellitus
or mammary neoplasia. The serious side effects associ-
ated withi estrogen therapy in the dog precludes its use as
a treatment for a condition as relatively benign as false
pregnancy. Androgen therapy is a safer choice, and the
weak, synthetic androgen mibolerone at a dosage of
This product unfortunately is not consistently available
in the United States.
Drugs that block the secretion of prolactin, either
serotonin antagonists or dopamine agonists,also have
been effective for treatment of false pregnancy in the
bitch. None presently are approved in the United States
for this purpose.The serotonin antagonist, cabergoline
(Dostinex; Pharmacia & Upjohn, Peapack, NJ), at an
oral dosage of 5 μg/kg/day for 5-7 days, has been
reported to effectively suppress signs of false pregnancy
in most dogs. Bromocriptine (Parlodel; Novartis, East
Hanover, NJ),a dopamine agonist, at an oral dosage of
30 μg/kg/day for 16 days, also has been reported to
428
Mammary Dlsorders
effectively treat the signs of false pregnancy. Emesis is a
common side effect of bromocriptine therapy.
If an affected bitch is so aggressive as to require
sedation, dopamine antagonists such as acepromazine
or haloperidol should be avoided because they will
cause an increase in prolactin release.A 4- to 5-day
course of diazepam can be effective.Clients should
exercise caution with aggressive dogs and limit their
exposure to people and other dogs until the condition
lmproves.
Prognosis
False pregnancy is not associated with infertility or any
other diseases of the reproductive system. It should be
regarded as a normal condition resulting from the
unique physiology of diestrus in the dog. Recurrence
during subsequent cycles is possible and can be pre-
vented with OHE
Mastitis
Definition and Pathogenesis
Mastitis is inflammation of the mammary gland or
glands, invariably associated with bacterial infcction.
Risk factors for developing mastitis include poor
Mammary Disorders
429
sanitary conditions, trauma inflicted by offspring, and
systemic infection. Mastitis may be acute or chronic.
Signaiment
Mastitis occurs almost exclusively in the postpartum
bitch.It occurs less commonly in the postpartum queen.
Rarely, mastitis has been observed in the lactating.
pseudopregnant bitch,
History, Clinical Signs, and Physica!
ExaminationFindings
Mastitis may be localized (e.g., involving a single gland
sinus), diffuse within a single gland, or diffuse within
multiple glands. The presenting bitch may be asympto
matic or may be critically compromised. Milk from mas-
titic glands may appear normal grossly or may be of
abnormalcolororconsistency.
In acute mastitis the affected glands are hot and
painful. If acute mastitis progresses to septic mastitis, the
bitch shows signs of systemic illness such as fever,
depression, anorexia, lethargy, and neglect of pups.
Abscessation of mammary glands may develop, and the
bitch may present with either a turgid, fluctuant, painful
mammary mass or an ulcerated, draining lesion with
associated gangrene of mammary tissue. In chronic or
430
Mammary Disorders
subclinical mastitis the sole presenting complaint may
be failure of offspring to thrive.
Diagnostic Tests and Results
Diagmosis is made based on visual inspection. Microscopic
examination of milk may reveal inflammatory cells.
Culture of milk or fluid expressed from the affected
glands yields moderate to heavy growth of organisms
common on the skin, such as Escherichia coli and
Staphylococcusspecies.
Treatment
Treatment of mastitis involves the following:
·Stabilize the condition of the systemicallyill patient
by using fluid therapy targeted at correcting meta-
bolicdisturbances.
● Express milk from affected glands twice daily if pups
are not nursing. Pups may or may not be allowed to
continue nursing. The decision is based on the con-
ditionsofboth thedam and theneonates,thesafety
of the chosen antibiotic for the neonates, and the
capability of the owner to hand-raise the puppies.
Pups usually are removed if abscessation is present,
· Apply warm compresses to the affected glands twice
daily.
Mammary Disorders
431
·Keep the mammary glands and environment clean;
reduce potential sources of trauma by trimming thie
toenails of puppies and kittens.
· Surgically debride gangrenous tissue, and place
drainsin mammary abscesses.
· Institute appropriate antimicrobial therapy, based
on culture and sensitivity testing. Factors to consider
when choosing an appropriate antibiotic include
thefollowing:
The integrity of the blood-milk barrier: In acute
mastitis the blood-milk barrier is disrupted, allow-
ing most antibiotics to reach effective tissue levels.
In chronic mastitis the blood-milk barrier is
reestablishedand antibiotics are distributedon
the basis of pH partitioning. Simply stated, this
means that weak bases, such as clindamycin and
erythromycin, tend to concentrate in an acidic
milk environment.
The lipid solubility of antimicrobial agents: Even an
antibiotic of appropriate pH will fail to achieve
effective concentrations if it is not lipid soluble.
Clindamycin and erythromycin are examples of
antibiotics with high lipid solubility.
The safety of the drug in nursing neonates: Choose
"gut-friendly”agents that do not adversely affect
normal bacterial colonization of the neonatal
gastrointestinal tract. Indiscriminate use of
432
Mammary Disorders
ampicillin, in particular, has been associated
with overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria in
neonates.
Tetracyclines: Avoid use of tetracyclines if the bitch
will continue nursing her pups. When given to
juveniles, tetracyclines can cause bone deformity
and enamel dysplasia.
Therapeutic agents: Cephalexin (5-15 mg/kg
administered orally three times a day) and amoxi
cillin/clavulanate (Clavamox; 14 mg/kg adminis-
tered orally two tothree times aday)are
recommended as initial therapeutic agents pend
ing culture results.
Prognosis
Mastitis usually resolves with appropriate antibiotic
therapy. Function of the mammary gland is not com-
promised unless it is severely damaged, as with abscessa-
tion. Bitches may have mastitis during every lactation,
presumably because of mammary gland anatomy that
allowsready introduction ofenvironmental bacteria
through the teats. The pros and cons of breeding these
females and their daughters should be discussed with
theowner.
Mammary Disorders
433
Mammary Hypertrophy
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Feline mammary hypertrophy(also called mammary
hyperplasia and mammary fibroadenomatosis) is a benign
fibroglandular proliferation of the mammae. Proges
terone or progestogens are assumed to play a role in the
pathogenesis of this disorder; most affected cats are
either pregnant, in the luteal phase of the cycle, or being
presentation.
Signaiment
The disease most often occurs in intact queens younger
than 2 years. However, cats of any age, reproductive sta-
tus, or gender can be affected if treated with exogenous
progestogens. More rarely, older pregnant queens also
may be affected.
History and Chinicaf Signs
Affected queens may or may not have a history of having
been mated. They usually are pregnant or are in the
luteal phase of the estrous cycle (see Chapter 2). The
434
Mammary Disorders
condition most commonly occurs as a spontaneous dis-
order of young, intact females. Its occurrence in older,
neutered or male animals should suggest the possibility
of exogenous progestogen therapy. One or more mam-
mary glands (often all glands) undergo diffuse enlarge
ment over 2-4 weeks.
Physicaf Examination Findings
In most cases all of the mammary glands are firm and
enlarged. Mammary masses range from 1-5 cm in diame-
ter and can affect one, several, or all glands. In severe
cases ulcerative necrosis of the skin may occur. The con-
dition is not accompanied by lactation, but normal lacta-
tion can occur after delivery of kittens, even without
resolution of the hypertrophy
Diagnostic Tests and Resuits
Affected cats generally are under the influence of
progesterone or a progestogen. The pregnancy status
of the queen can be established by palpation, ultra
sonography, or radiography at the appropriate stage of
gestation (see Chapter 8). An assay for serum proges-
terone can be used to determine whether there is func-
tional luteal tissue in queens with no evidence of
MammaryDisorders
435
be detected by a progesterone assay, and the possibility
of their use should always be carefully explored in the
history. Histopathologic examination of affected tis-
sue reveals a circumscribed, unencapsulated bcnign
fibroglandular proliferation. The diagnosis in the
young queen with diffuse mammary enlargement genl-
erally is evident from the history and physical exami-
nation and does not require biopsy. Cats with discrete,
localized swellings, especially older animals, should be
managed as for mammary neoplasia (see following dis-
cussion). This should include excisional biopsy of the
complete mass and radiographs to check for evidence
ofmetastasis.
Treatment
In young queens, mammary hypertrophy spontaneously
resolves after progesterone declines at the end of preg-
nancy or diestrus. Surgical removal of the hypertro
phied glands is not recommended. Recovery can be
hastened with OHE or ovariectomy, or medical induc-
tion of luteolysis can be attempted.In older cats or those
with a history of progestogen therapy, the masses should
be removed and examined for evidence of neoplasia.
Progestogen therapy should be discontinued because it
may contribute to the potential for development of neo-
plasia in the hypertrophied mammary tissue.
436
MammaryDisorders
Prognosis
Complete recovery usually occurs in young queens after
luteal regression. OHE prevents recurrence of mam
mary hypertrophy. In older cats the prognosis is dictated
by the histopathologic and radiographic findings.
Mammary Neoplasia
Definition and Pathogenesis
Mammary neoplasia is the most common tumor
in female dogs and the third most common tumor in
female cats. In dogs, primary mammary tumors have an
equallikelihoodof being
benign
1（fibroadenoma
= mixed mammary tumor) or malignant (adenocarci-
noma). Virtually all mammary tumors in queens are
highly malignant adenocarcinomas.
Pathogenesis of mammary neoplasia in dogs and
cats is not completely understood. Bitches and queens
that are spayed before their first estrous cycle have a dra-
matically decreased risk of developing mammary neo
plasia when they get older, compared with animals that
are left intact. Overall, intact female dogs have a four
times greater risk and intact female cats have a
seven times greater risk of developing either benign or
malignant mammary tumors when they are older, com-
pared with ovariectomized animals. Dogs spayed before
their first estrous cycle have 0.5% the risk, those spayed
Mammary Disorders
437
after one estrous cycle have 8.0% the risk, and those
spayed after two cycles have 26.0% the risk of developing
mammary neoplasia compared with intact females.
lactation on development of mammary neoplasia in
dogs and cats, as may occur in women.
Receptors for estrogen and progesterone have been
identifiedinnormalandinneoplasticmammarytissue
but no correlation has been identified between type or
number of receptors present and type or severity of
mammary neoplasia. Often,the most aggressive,
anaplastic tumors have no definable hormone recep
tors. Administration of exogenous progestogens may be
associated with mammary tumor development in both
bitchesand queenis.
Bodyconformationanddiethavebeenassociated
with incidence of mammary neoplasia in bitches.
Bitches judged to have been thin at 9-12 months of age
had a decreased incidence of mammary neoplasia,
whereas those bitches judged to have been obese at
1 year of age had an increased incidence of mammary
One study demonstrated increased incidence of mam-
mary neoplasia in dogs that were fed homemade diets,
especially those containing large amounts of beef or
pork. In feline mammary tumors, virus particles have
been identified by electron microscopy in up to one
third of tumors; the significance of this is unknown.
438
MammaryDisorders
Signaiment
In dogs, mammary neoplasia most commonly occurs in
bitches older than 6 years. Mammary neoplasia is most
common in bitches left intact or spayed after 2.5 years of
age or after four estrous cycles and is more common in
purebred dogs than in crossbred dogs. Mammary neo-
plasia has been reported to occur in male dogs but inci-
denceisextremelylow.
In cats, mammary neoplasia is most common in
queens older than 6 years, with peak incidence at 10-11
years of age. As in the bitch,intact queens are more likely
to develop mammary neoplasia as are female cats spayed
after having gone through heat. Siamese cats are predis
posed compared with domestic shorthair and other
purebred cats. The incidence of mammary neoplasia in
male cats is extremely low.
HistoryandClinicalSigns
In both dogs and cats, mammary masses may be inciden
talfindingsofphysical examinationsperformed before
routine vaccinations or the animals maybe pre
sented because the masses were noted by the owners.
Appearance of neoplastic mammary masses is unrelated
to the time of the last estrus. Rarely, masses ulcerate and
cause pain and licking of the mass and adjacent man-
mary area. Systemic signs may be present if metastasis
has occurred andvary with siteofmetastasis.
Mammary Disorders
439
Physical Examination Findings
One or more masses may be present. Masses most com-
monly occur in the caudal pair of mammae in dogs
and occur with equal frequency in all four pairs of
mammae in cats. Mammary masses usually are firm
and freely movable and may be eithcr smooth or nodu-
lar. The most common sites of metastasis of malignant
tumors are the axillary and inguinal lymph nodes
and the lungs. Other reported sites of melastasis
include the abdominal organs, the eyes, the pleurae,
and the skin. Metastases may not be evident on physi-
cal examination.
Diagnostic Tests and Resufts
Palpable characteristics of the mass are not correlated
with tumor type or malignancy. Fine-needle aspirate,
scraping of ulcerated lesions, or cytologic examina
tion of fluid from affected glands may yield useful
information if evidence of malignancy is present. Lack
of neoplastic cells, however, does not imply that malig
nancy is not present. Definitive diagnosis requires
excision of abnormal tissue and submission for
histopathologic examination. Radiographs of the
chest and a serum chemistry profile should be
obtained, and possibly an abdominal ultrasound
should be performed, to check for metastasis before
surgery.
440
Mammary Disorders
Treatment
Surgery is the treatment of choice for all mammary
tumors and often isnecessaryfor definitive diagnosisof
tumor type. Surgery of various extents has been
described,including lumpectomy (removal of the mass
only), simple mastectomy (removal of the gland contain-
ing the mass), en bloc dissection (removal of the gland
containing the mass,intervening
glymphatics,and
regional lymph nodes), and unilateral mastectomy
(removal of the entire chain of glands on the side with
the mass, with or without the regional lymph nodes). No
definitive studies exist defining which surgery is best.
More aggressive surgery is not associated with longer
postsurgical survival time but may be associatedwith a
decreased incidence oflocal recurrence. Because of the
highly malignant nature of mammary neoplasia in cats,
more extensive surgery may be advisable. Concurrent
vival time or decreased incidence of tumor recurrence; if
tumor removal and OHE are performed at the same
time, the OHE should be performed first to prevent seed-
ing of mammary tumor cells into the abdominal cavity.
Chemotherapy can be used as an adjunct to surgery.
Chemotherapeutic agents described for use in the dog
include doxorubicinalone andacombinationof
cyclophosphamide,vincristine, and methotrexate.In
the cat, reported response of mammary neoplasia to
chemotherapy has been poor. Radiation therapy also has
Mammary Disorders
441
been described; again, response has been poor enough
to preclude its routine use as a therapy. Hormonal thera-
pies as described in women have not been reported to be
useful in dogs and cats.
Prognosis
In dogs, prognosis is very good with benign masscs and
poor to good with malignant masses, with poorest prog-
nosis associated with tumors greater than 2-3 cm in
diameter or the presence of metastasis. Seventy-five per
cent of dogs with malignant mammary tumors survive
less than 2 years after surgical removal of the primary
tumor. In cats, prognosis is associated with tumor size;
after surgery the median survival time for cats with
tumors less than 2 cm in diameter is 3 years, for cats
with tumors 2-3 cm in diameter is 2 years, and for
cats with tumors greater than 3 cm in diameter is
6 months. Cats with pulmonary metastases rarely sur-
vive longer than 2 months after diagnosis.
Agalactia
Agalactia (failure to produce or secrete milk) can be pri
mary or secondary. Primary, or true, agalactia (as a
result of anatomic or physiologic abnormality) is
extremely rare in the bitch. There is no treatment for
primary agalactia, and puppies must be hand-reared.
442
Mammary Disorders
Secondary agalactia,more commonly referred to as
poor milk let-down,can result from poor nutrition,stress,
anxiety, premature delivery, progestogen therapy, or sys-
temic illness (including mastitis, metritis, and endo
toxemia). Treatment of secondary agalactia is directed
at resolving the underlying, primary problem. For the
anxious, primiparous bitch, efforts should include pro.
viding a quiet, comfortable environment and reassur-
ance by the owner. Some bitches may benefit from
administration of phenothiazine tranquilizers, which
may calm the bitch and which stimulate prolactin
release. In some cases, administration of oxytocin may
be required for milk let-down to occur. Administration
either may stimulate endogenous oxytocin release after
desired nursing. If repeated dosing is required, use of
oxytocin nasal sprays, available through human pharma-
cies,is preferred over repeated injections.
Galactostasis
Galactostasis is accumulation of milk within a mammary
gland secondary to delayed passage of milk from the
gland. It can occur when there is a teat abnormality,
when puppies are abruptly weaned, or with concurrent
illness. It also can occur when milk production exceeds
milk consurmption or when there are no puppies avail-
able to nurse. Treatment is directed at decreasing milk
Mammary Disorders
443
production and reducing inflammation. Food intake is
decreased, and cool compresses are applied to the
affected glands. Administration of glucocorticoids,
diuretics, and analgesics may be beneficial. Wrapping
the mammary area with an elastic bandage proinotes
negative feedback to the pituitary gland, decreasing pro-
lactin release, and protects sensitive mammary glands
from trauma. Engorged mammary glands should not be
milked out; this prolongs prolactin secretion and milk
production,
Bibliography
Allen SW, Mahaffey EA: Canine mammary neoplasia:
prognostic indicators and response to surgical ther-
apy,JAm AnimHosp Assoc 25:540, 1989.
Bender AP, Dorn CR, Schneider R: An epidemiologic
study of canine multiple primary neoplasia involy-
ing the female and male reproductive systems, Preu
VetMed2:715,1984.
Brodey RS, Goldschmidt MH, Roszel JR: Canine mam-
mary gland neoplasms, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:61,
1983.
Chastain CB, Schmidt B: Galactorrhea associated with
hypothyroidism in intact bitches, J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc16:851, 1980.
Donnay I, Rauis J, Woutes-Ballman P: Receptors for
oestrogen, progesterone and epidermal growth
444
MammaryDisorders
factorinnormal and tumorous caninemammary
tissues,JReprodFertil Suppl47:501,1993.
Dorn CR, Taylor DO, Frye FL et al: Survey of animal neo-
plasms in Alameda and Contra Costa counties,
California. I. Methodology and description of cases,
INatl CancerInst40:295,1968.
Dorn CR, Taylor DO, Schneider R et al: Survey of animal
neoplasms in Alameda and Contra Costa counties,
California. I1. Cancer morbidity in dogs and cats from
Alameda County,/Natl CancerInst40:307,1968.
Fidler IJ, Brodey RS: The biological behavior of canine
mammary neoplasms, / Am Vet Med Assoc 151:1311,
1967.
Hahn KA, Adams WH: Feline mammary neoplasia: bio
logical behavior, diagnosis and treatment alterna-
tives,FelinePract25:5,1997.
Hahn KA, Richardson RC, Knapp DW: Canine malig-
nant mammary neoplasia: biological behavior, diag
nosis,and treatment alternatives,JAmAnim Hosp
Assoc28:251,1992
Hayden DW,Johnston SD, Kiang DT et al: Feline mam-
mary hypertrophy/fibroadenoma complex: clinical
and hormonal aspects, Am J Vet Res 42:1699, 1981.
Hayes HM, Milne KL, Mandell CP: Epidemiologic fea
tures offeline mammary carcinoma, VetRec108:476,
1981.
Hayes HM, Mooney S: Feline mammary tumors, Vet Clin
NorthAm15:513,1985.
Mammary Disorders
445
Janssens LA: Treatment of pseudopregnancy with
bromocriptine, an ergot alkaloid, Vet Rec 119:172,
1986.
 Jochle W, Arheiter K, Post Ket al: Effects on pseudopreg-
nancy, pregnancy and interoestrus intervals of phar
macological suppression of prolactin secretion in
female dogs and cats, J Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:199,
1989.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine and
feline theriogenology, Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders.
Misdorp W: Canine mammary tumours: protective
effect of late ovariectomy and stimulating effects of
progestins,Vet Q10:26,1988.
Misdorp W, Hart AA: Canine mammary cancer. 1.
Prognosis, J Small Anim Pract 20:385, 1979.
Olson JD, Olson PN: Disorders of the canine mammary
gland. In Morrow DA (ed): Current therapy in theri-
ogenology,Philadelphia,1986,WBSaunders.
Perez Alenza D, Rutteman GR, Pena L et al: Relation
between habitual diet and canine mammary tumors
in a case-control study, J Vet Intern Med 12:132, 1998.
Priester WA: Occurrence of mammary neoplasms in
bitches in relation to breed, age, tumour type, and
geographical region from which reported, J Small
AnimPract20:1,1979
Schneider R, Dorn CR, Taylor DO et al: Factors influenc
ing canine mammary cancer development and post
surgical survival, JNatl Cancer Inst 43:1249, 1969.
446
Mammary Disorders
Sonnenschein EG, Glickman LT, Goldschmidt MH et al:
Body conformation, diet, and risk ofbreast cancer
in pet dogs: a case-control study, Am J Epidemiol
133:694,1991.
Steinetz BG, Goldsmith LT, Harvey HJ et al: Serum
relaxin and progesterone concentrations in preg-
nant, pseudopregnant, and ovariectomized, pro-
gestin-treated pregnant bitches: detection of relaxin
as a marker of pregnancy, Am J Vet Res 50:68, 1989.
Voith VL: Functional significance of pseudocyesis, Mod
Vet Pract61:75, 1980.
Weijer K, Hart AM: Prognostic factors in feline mam-
mary carcinoma,/Natl CancerInst70:709,1983.
15
Contraceptive Techniques for Male
Dogs and Cats
RichardFayrer-Hosken
ATAGLANCE
· Surgical
* Castration is the contraceptive method of choice for
male dogs and cats that are not intended for breed-
ing. It is 100% effective as a contraceptive and
protects the animal from androgen-dependent dis-
orders, such as prostate disease.
447
448
Contraceptive Techniques for Male Dogs & Cats
·Vasectomy hasbeen described buthaslimiteduse
because vasectomized animals still are exposed to
negative consequences of lifelong cxposure to
androgen.
· Testicular/epididymal sclerosing agents can be
used.
· Medical (All medical contraceptive techniques for
male dogs and cats are experimental at this time.)
· Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) ago-
nists
·Immunocontraceptive vaccine
 In many countries, especially third world countries, the
need for contraception techniques in male dogs and
cats is approaching crisis levels. Several successful stratc-
gies are used in individual animals, but no population-
level techniques have been developed. Surgical
medical, and immunologic contraception strategies are
reported.
Male Reproductive Physiology
Spermatogenesis is stimulated and sustained by hypo
thalamic GnRH, which causes release of follicle-stimulat
ing hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)
from the pituitary gland. FSH stimulates the Sertoli cells
within the testes to produce androgen-binding protein
(ABP),which binds testosterone in the seminiferous
Contraceptive Techniques for Male Dogs & Cats
449
tubules, helping maintain the high intratesticular testos-
sis. The Sertoli cells also produce inhibin, which is
postulated to control FSH secretion by a simple ncgative
feedback mechanism. LH, also called interstitial cell--
stimulating hormone, stimulates theLeydig(interstitial)
cells to produce testosterone. Testosterone secretion is
precisely regulated by negative feedback to the pituitary
and subsequent decrease in serum concentration of LH.
Increases in serum testosterone decrease LH secretion
within approximately 1 hour, which in turn decreases
serum testosterone concentrations within l hour to sev-
eralhours.
Testosterone, bound to ABP in the seminiferous
tubules, is essential for initiation of meiosis of spermato-
gonia (primitive germ cells). Testosterone also is neces-
sary for epididymal maturation of spermatozoa,
development of secondary sex characteristics, and nor-
mal libido. Secretion of testosterone is pulsatile, so
serum concentration of testosterone, measured as a sin-
gle sample, can vary from 0.4-10.0 ng/ml.
the spermatozoon from the spermatogonium. All
domestic mammals have specifically defined periods
that are required for complete spermatogenesis, called
spermatogenic phases. In dogs and cats a complete sper
matogenic phase is about 60 days inlength
450
ContraceptiveTechniques for MaleDogs& Cats
The bulk of spermatogenesis occurs within the
blood-testisbarrier(BTB).TheBTB consists of thebase-
ment membrane of the seminiferous tubule, the Sertoli
cells, and the tight junctions apposing the Sertoli cells.
The primordial germ cells lie only partially within the
BTB and thus make them potential candidates for
immunologically targeted contraceptive strategies.
Contraceptive Methods
Surgica!
Two methods of surgical control that are well established
are castration and vasectomy. These are permanent
methods of contraception and are easily performed on
individual animals. Testicular or epididymal sclerosing
agents also have been described.
CASTRATION
·Definition:Castration is theremoval ofboth testes.
·Mechanism of action: All spermatogenic tissue, the
primary source of testosterone production,is
removed.
·Pros:
Permanent contraception
Decrease in androgen-dependent behaviors (e.g-,
roaming,urine spraying,intraspecies aggression)
Contraceptive Technlques for Male Dogs & Cats
451
and diseases (e.g., benign prostatic hypertrophy,
perianal adenomas)
·Cons:
Permanent contraception
Requires general anesthesia
Side effects associated with decline in serum testos
terone include obesity, testosterone-responsive
urinary incontinence, decrease in secondary sex
characteristics (cats), possible predisposition to
prostatic neoplasia (dogs)
Castration is the recommended contraceptive
method for male dogs and cats in the United States.
VASECTOMY
· Definition: Vasectomy is the bilateral removal or
occlusion of a segment of the ductus deferens.
+Mechanism of action: Spermatozoa cannot move
from the testes/epididymides through the vasa
deferentia into the urethra for ejaculation.
·Pros:
Testosterone production not altered; some people
consider the effect of testosterone on the animal's
behavior beneficial (teaser tom in cattery, for
example)
May be reversible
·Cons:
Requires general anesthesia
452
Contraceptive Techniques for Male Dogs & Cats
May be irreversible (Azoospermia has been reported
to develop within days after vasectomy, and
reanastomosis of the ductus deferens is very
difficult.)
No decrease in androgen-dependent behaviors or
diseases
TESTICULAR/EPIDIDYMALSCLEROSINGAGENTS
·Definition: Testicular/epididymal sclerosing agents
are compounds that are injected into the testes/epi-
didymides. Compounds described include sodium
alginate, lactic acid, zinc arginine, and chlorhexi-
dine.
·Mechanismofaction:Inflammationinduces subse
quent atrophy or fibrosis of spermatogenic tissue.
+ Pros:
Have been shown to have significant inhibitory
effectonfertility
Potentially reversible
·Cons:
Require heavy sedation or general anesthesia
Medica!
Medical contraceptive methods for male dogs and cats
are less invasive than surgical methods and do not
require sedation or anesthesia. They also are potentially
ContraceptiveTechniques forMaleDogs&Cats
453
reversible because they do not induce destruction of
spermatogenic tissue.
GnRH AGONISTS
· Long-term administration of GnRH agonists, such
as leuprolide acetate (0.1 or 1.0 mg/kg adminis-
tered subcutaneously) or nafarelin acetate (0.5 or
2.0 μg/kg administered subcutaneously once daily
for 44days)leadstocontinuednegativefeedbackon
the pituitary,with decreased serum concentrations
ofLHandtestosteroneandsubsequentaspermato
genesis. The duration of the effects depends on the
source and release profile of GnRH. GnRH has been
showntobeeffectiveforupto2years.
OTHERHORMONALTHERAPIES
· Progestogens: Progesterone can be used as an
inhibitoroflibidoandmayhavedeleteriouseffects
on spermatogenesis but also may induce diabetes
mellitus and mammary nodules, hypertrophy
(cats),or neoplasia.I recommend use of these com-
pounds sparingly, if at all.
·Estrogens: Fstradiol causes azoospermia and might
be
considered another contraceptive agent.
Negative side effects include bone marrow suppres-
sion and squamous metaplasia and secretory stasis
of the prostate.Irecommenduse of these coim-
pounds sparingly, if at all.
454
Contraceptive Techniques for Male Dogs & Cats
· Prolactin: Prolactin has been shown to cause
azoospermia aftersustainedadministration.Ifan
effective delivery method could be found, prolactin
might be an effective contraceptive candidate.
Immunologic
Immunologic strategies are targeted against systemic
hormones or specific stages of spermatogenesis.
Vaccines against GnRH have had varied degrees of suc
cess. The primary problem has been making the small
GnRH molecule (decapeptide) antigenic enough to
provide a sustained effect. Targeting primordial game
tes or spermatozoal proteins for contraception has been
the subject of significant research. This is an extremely
important facet of human contraceptive research
because these techniques generally do not affect libido.
This is not a primary goal of canine or feline male con-
traception. Although no effective male immunocontra-
ceptive vaccine is available, the possibilities for success
areconsiderable.
Bibliography
Aitken Rj: New techniques in contraception: gossypol,
vaccines and GnRH analogues. Proceedings of the
AnnualSymposium oftheEugenicsSociety,1983
ContraceptiveTechniquesforMaleDogs&Cats
455
England GC: Effect of progestogens and androgens
upon spermatogenesis and steroidogenesis in dogs,
Reprod Fertil Suppl51:123,1997.
Goodpasture JC, Hiller MB, Lewis B et al: Same day
appearance of orally administered, spermicidal
1-substituted imidazoles in dog ejaculates, J Andro
8:230,1987.
Hammami-Hamza S, Doussau M, Bernard J et al: Cloning
and sequencing of SOB3, a human gene coding for a
tein and potentially involved in zona pellucida bind-
ing, Mol Human Reprod 7:625, 2001.
Lacoste D, Dube D, Trudel C etal: Normal gonadal func-
tionsandfertilityafter23monthsoftreatment of
prepubertal male and female dogs with the GnRH
agonist [o-Trp6,des-Gly-NH2(10) ]GnRH ethyl-
amide,JAndro10:456,1989.
Miller LA, Johns BE, Elias DJ et al: Comparative efficacy
of two immunocontraceptive vaccines, Vaccine
15:1858, 1997.
Naz RK, Leslie MH, Zhu X: Inhibition of murine sperm
oolemma binding by antibodies to an oocyte mem-
vaccine development, Am J Reprod Immunol 45:52
2001.
Naz RK, Zhu X: Molecular cloning and sequencing of a
novel cDNA encoding for a protcin involved in
456
Contraceptive Techniques for Male Dogs & Cats
human sperm function, Biochem Biophys Res Commun
284:911,2001.
Naz RK, Zhu X, Kadam AL: Cloning and sequencing of
cDNA encoding for a novel human testis-specific
contraception vaccinogen: role in immunocontra-
ception, Mol Reprod Dev 60:116, 2001.
Naz RK, Zhu X, Kadam AL: Identification of human
immunocontraception, Biol Reprod 62:318, 2000.
Paramo RM, Renton JP, Ferguson JM et al: Effects of
medroxyprogesterone acetate or gonadotropin
releasing hormone agonist on suppression of sper-
matogenesis in the dog (Canis familiaris), J Reprod
Fertil Suppl47:387,1993.
Shafik A: Prolactin injection, a new contraceptive
method: experimental study, Contraception 50:191,
1994.
Talwar GP, Singh O, Pal R et al: Vaccines for control of
fertility and hormone dependent cancers, Int
J Immunopharm 14:511, 1992.
Vickery BH: Comparisons of the potential utility of
LHRH agonists and antagonists for fertility control,
ISteroidBiochem 23:779,1985.
16
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
William B. Ley, G. Reed Holyoak, Wynne A. Digrassie,
andDeborahCartisano
ATA GLANCE
· Cryptorchidism
· Cryptorchidism is lack of descent of one or both
testes into the scrotum by 6 months of age. The
condition is hereditary, with either a polygenic or
457
458
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
autosomal recessive inheritance hypothesized.
Diagnosis is by physical examination. Retained
testes are atrophic and generally are not visible on
abdominal ultrasound.Animals withbilateral
cryptorchidism are best differentiated from
castrated animals based on measurement of
serum
testosterone after administration of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). All
cryptorchid animals should be neutered.Retaincd
testes do not produce spermatozoa but do pro-
duce androgens, rendering affected animals
subfertile or infertile yet exposing them to andro-
gen-dependent disorders. Retained testes also are
predisposed to neoplasia and torsion of the sper-
matic cord. Medical therapy causing testicular
descent is not consistently successful and may be
unethical.
· Orchitis/epididymitis
·Orchitis and epididymitis refer to inflammation of
the testis and epididymis, respectively. These con
ditions may occur separately or concurrently.
Brucellosis is one infectious cause ofepididymitis
in dogs. Noninfectious causes include trauma and
autoimmune disease. Diagnosis is by physical
examination; affected testes/epididymides are
swollen and painful. Further diagnostic tests that
may be supportive include ultrasonography of the
TesticularandEpididymalDisorders
459
scrotal contents, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) for
cytology specimens and culture,and serologic
testing for canine brucellosis. Orchiectomy is the
treatmentofchoice.
+ Torsion of the sperrmatic cord
· Torsion of the spermatic cord is uncommon. The
involved testis usually is neoplastic. Animals
nitive diagnosis requires exploratory laparotomy.
Orchiectomy is the treatment of choice.
· Testicular neoplasia
· Testicular neoplasia is common in dogs and rare
in cats. The most common tumor types described
areSertoli cell tumor,seminoma,and interstitial
(Leydig) cell tumor. All three are equally preva-
lentin descended testes. Sertoli cell tumor is more
common in testes retained in the abdomen. None
of the three tumor types commonly undergoes
metastasis. Sertoli cell tumors may be associated
with a paraneoplastic syndrome caused by
estrogen production by the tumor, which is
characterized by bilaterally symmetric alopecia,
gynecomastia, and attraction of male dogs,
Diagnosisof testicular neoplasia usually is by
inspection.Small intratesticular tumors and
retained neoplastic testes may be visible on ultra-
sound.Orchiectomy'is the treatmentofchoice.
460
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
Cryptorchidism
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Cryptorchidism is a congenital defect in which one or
both of the testes do not descend into the scrotiim at the
appropriate time. Cryptorchidism may be unilateral or
bilateral, with the testicles retained anywhere along the
normal path of testicular descent. Retention usually is
classified as subcutaneous when the testis ispalpated
between the scrotum and the inguinal ring or as
inguinal or abdominal according to whether the testis is
in the inguinal ring or in the abdomen.
It is important to point out that monorchidism
(only one testis) and anorchidism (no testes at all) are
extremely rare. For this reason, in all cases involving
the absence of one or both testes, animals should
be considered to have cryptorchidism until proven
otherwise.
The incidence of cryptorchidism in cats has been
reported to be 1.7% (23 of 1345 animals in one study).
Two cats in that population had true monorchidism,
The prevalence of cryptorchidism was significantly
higher in Persian cats within that study population.
There were more unilaterally than bilaterally affected
cats. No significant difference was noted in location of
unilaterally retained testes when comparing inguinal
with abdominal and left with right sides. In general,
bilaterally retained testes are located intraabdominally,
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
461
but bilateral, subcutaneous inguinal testicles have been
reported to occur in the cat.
The incidence of cryptorchidism in dogs varies from
0.8%-9.8%. Heredity is almost certainly involved
because cryptorchidism is more common in certain
breeds, such as toy and miniature poodles, Yorkshire ter-
riers,Chihuahuas,boxers,and miniature schnauzers,
and in certain families. The degree of inbreeding
appears to be greater in bilateral than in unilateral cases
of cryptorchidism. Genetic factors do not explain all
cases; some unilateral cryptorchid dogs have been used
as breeding animals for years and produced many litters
with no evidence of defects in their offspring. The exact
mode of inheritance is unknown,but the possibility
exists of either polygenic inheritance or a sex-limited
autosomal recessive inheritance in which both male and
female animals can carry the gene and can pass it on to
their offspring. Gryptorchidism is associated with other
hereditary traits, such as hip dysplasia, patellar disloca-
tion, defects of the penis and prepuce, and umbilical
hernia.
In puppies, testicular descent occurs soon after
birth, normally from 3-10 days. In beagles and mixed-
breed dogs, the testes always are palpable from 20-25
days of age. Generally, accurate palpation of the testes is
possible at 24 weeks of age but normally takes place
around the time of weaning, at 5-8 weeks. Testes should
be palpable in all puppies at that time. If they are not
462
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
palpable within the scrotum by 8-10 weeks, a tentative
diagnosis of cryptorchidism is made. To make a defini-
tive diagnosis of cryptorchidism, it may be necessary in
some animalsto waituntil theinguinal canals close at
puberty, around 5-10 months of age.However,late testic
ular descent is not a desirable trait and should be
selected against in dogs intended for breeding.
The exact factors involved in regulating testicular
descent are unknowm. However, normal hypothalamir.
pituitary-gonadal axis, normal testicular hormone sett
tions, and perhaps normal mullerian-inhibiting factor
(MIF) secretion and receptor function appear to be nec-
essaryfor complete testicular descent.
Administration of GnRH and gonadotropinsinduces
earlier than normal testicular descent in humans and ani-
mals. Anecdotal evidence suggests that GnRH or
gonadotropin administration induces testicular descent
in cryptorchid males. For these reasons, it has been theo-
rized that cryptorchidism is caused by a deficiency in
gonadotropin secretion. When changes in luteinizing
hormone (LH) and testosterone concentrations were
compared between normal and cryptorchid dogs,GnRH
 a     
dogs were decreased. The effectiveness of administration
of either GnRH or human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG), which activates LH receptors in dogs and cats, in
causing the descent of a retained testis has not been scien
tifically tested and has been tried with mixed success.
TesticularandEpididymalDisorders
463
Normal levels of testicular hormones present dur
ing the right developmental periods arerequired for tes-
ticular descent.In the dog
gtheoutgrowthofthe
gubernaculum, which constitutes the intraabdominal
phase of testicular descent, requires the presence of
androgens. Testosterone also induces gubernacular
regression during the final (intrainguinal or scrotal)
phiase of testicular descent. Androgens also have been
implicated in the suppression of the growth of the cra-
nial suspensory ligament (CSL) of the gonad. In rmales
with fetal androgen deficiency,the CSL remains,causing
a maldescent of the testis. In fetal androgenized females,
the CSL is absent. Persistent bilateral CSL have been
documented as occurring in a bilateral cryptorchid dog.
indicating a potential role of these structures in inhibit-
ing proper outgrowth of the gubernaculum and subse-
quent testicular descent.
In addition to androgens, there appears to be
another testicular secretory factor associated with
normal testicular descent. In freemartin pigs with cryp
torchidism, gubernacular outgrowth does occur, lead-
ing to a well-developed cremaster muscle and vaginal
process. In experimental situations, gubernacular out-
growth was not induced in females treated with
androgens but was induced in females exposed to testic-
ular secretions. This suggests that a nonandrogen testic-
ular secretory product is involved in normal testicular
descent. In an attempt to elucidate factors associated
464
TesticularandEpididymalDisorders
with testicular descent in the dog. researchers per
formed orchiectomy with or without androgen replace
ment during gestation at the time of intraabdominal
testicular migration (gestational day 49), immediately
after parturition at the time ofintrainguinal migration,
and during the neonatal period (day 3 postpartum), at
the final scrotal descent phase. It was found that the
testis of the fetus and neonate induced gubernacular
outgrowth and regression and was necessary for com-
plete testicular descent. These processes were not com-
pleted in the orchiectomized puppies with androgen
replacement therapy. It was concluded that gubernacular
outgrowth and regression and subsequent testicu-
lar descent are regulated by an unidentified, nonan-
drogenic factor derived from Sertoli or germ cells. In a
study involving cryptorchid and normal colts, testicular
meiosis-activating sterol was shown to be associated with
normal testicular descent. This factor has not been eval-
uated in the dog.
Leydig cells and Sertoli cells of the normal male
fetal testis secrete testosterone and MlF, respectively.
during embryogenesis. The normal sequence of
reproductive tract development in the male requires
the secretion of testosterone for mesonephric (wolf-
fian) duct development into the epididymis, vas defer
ens, and seminal vesicles. Testosterone is converted to
dihydrotestosterone via 5o-reductase, which then
induces masculinization of the urogenital sinus and
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
465
external genitalia. The secretion of MIF induces a
regression of the paramesonephric (mullerian) duct
system. Defects in hormone production, timing of
secretion, transport, or receptor upregulation or
responsiveness lead to persistent mullerian duct syn-
drome. This syndrome often is accompanied by either
unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism, as described in
humans and miniature schnauzers(see Chapter l).
The role, if any, of MlF in testicular descent in normal
maleshasnotbeen delineated
DiagnosticTestsandResufts
The diagnosis of cryptorchidism normally is made based
on the findings of the initial physical examination per-
formed at about 8weeks of age.Careful examination of
the scrotum and perineal area for surgical scars may
indicate previous surgery in pubertal males. A thorough
ultrasonographic examination of the abdomen and
inguinal area may allow visualization of retained testes.
Radiographyusuallyis unrewarding because of the small
size and nondistinct tissue density of the retained testis.
Hormonal analysis is the most definitive diagnostic test
for differentiation of bilaterally cryptorchid animals
from castrated animals. Baseline serum testosterone
concentrations ofless than 0.02 ng/ml indicate a lack of
retained testicular tissue. In dogs with abdominally
retained testes, serum testosterone concentrations
466
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
usually are 0.1-2 ng/ml, whereas adult dogs with one or
two scrotal testes usually have serum testosterone conl-
centrations of 1-5 ng/ml. However, testosterone is
secreted in pulses throughout the day, so challenge test-
ing is more accurate than is evaluation of a single serum
sample. A hormonal stimulation test with hCG or GnRH
can be used to demonstrate the presence and produc
tion of testosterone.Several protocols exist.
PROTOCOL 1
· Draw a pretest blood sample.
● Administer either hCG (100 IU intramuscularly) or
GnRH (50 μg subcutaneously).
· Draw posttest samples 12 and 24 hours later.
·A twofold to fourfold increase from the baseline
value is considered significant.
PROTOCOL 2
● Administer GnRH (2 μg/kg intramuscularly) .
·Drawblood 60 minutes later.
+A serum testosterone concentration of 3 ng/ml or
greater is considered significant.
Treatment and Prognosis
Unilateral cryptorchids should be neutered because of
the hereditary potential and poor semen quality
observed in affected dogs.Although there is no current
TesticufarandEpididymafDisorders
467
definitive information that cryptorchidism is an inher-
ited trait in cats, there was a higher reported prevalence
in Persian cats, suggesting a hereditary basis. Testicular
neoplasia is up to 14 times more likely in cryptorchid
dogs than in normal dogs. Abdominal testes have an
increased risk of developing Sertoli cell tumors and of
undergoing torsion of the spermatic cord. Torsion of
cryptorchid testes probably occursbecause of neoplasia-
related growth and thie loose attachment of the testis to
the dorsal aspect of the abdomen via the mesorchium.
Inguinal testes also have an increased risk of bccoming
neoplastic, with seminoma being the tumor type that is
most commonly reported.Abdominally retained testes
are incapable of spermatogenesis but d'o produce testos-
terone, leaving the animal subfertile or infertile yet
prone to androgen-dependent disorders.Bilateral
orchiectonyisrecommendedinallcases ofcryptorchidism.
Breeding of the affected males, their parents, and their
siblings should be strongly discouraged.
Several surgical approaches have been described for
orchiectomy in both dogs and cats, depending on loca
tion of the retained testes.The use oflaparoscopy has
been reported in the diagnosis and treatment of cryp-
torchidism and testicular neoplasia in a dog. However, a
ventral midline approach and laparotomy generally are
used. If an inguinal testis is suspected, deep dissection to
the inguinal fatpad allows visualization of the external
inguinal ring and differentiation from the femoral
468
Testicular andEpididymalDisorders
triangle. Most abdominally located testes are found near
the urinary bladder. If not, the vasa deferentia may be
located as they cross over the ureters and may be fol-
lowed to and from the internal inguinal ring to locate
the ipsilateral testis.
There have been no controlled studies on the effi
cacy of hCG or GnRH in inducing testicular descent in
the dog. The administration of hCG has been reported
to improve testicular descent in puppies younger than
16 weeks, but not in older dogs. There also is anecdotal
evidence that GnRH may promote the descent of
retained testes. However, the use of these gonadotropins
is scientifically ambiguous. Their use will not help in
cases of abdominally retained testes as animals age
because the inguinal canal usually is closed by 6 months
of age. Therefore they would potentially be effective
only in cases of inguinally located testes. Furthermore,
because of the heritability of cryptorchidism in the dog,
the ethics of gonadotropin therapy are in question.
Although there may be short-term benefits for an indi-
vidual litter, the potential exists for propagating a
genetic defect to the detriment of the breed.
If the diagnosis has been made and bilateral
orchiectomy performed in dogs younger than 3 years.
prognosis is excellent. Testicular neoplasia has been
diagnosed in cryptorchid dogs as early as 3 years of age,
therefore affecting the prognosis in dogs diagnosed with
cryptorchidismlaterinlife.
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
469
Orchitis/Epididymitis
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Orchitis is inflammation of the testis.Epididymitis is
inflammation of the epididymides. The two conditions
may occur simultaneously or separately, depending on
the inciting cause. There is no breed predilection.
Young dogs are more commonly affected, although
the reported age at time of diagnosis ranges from
1l months to 10 years. Infectious agents that may cause
either orchitis or epididymitis include Brucella canis,
Escherichia coli,Proteus vulgaris,Pseudomonas mallei,
Staphylococcus species, Streptococcus species, Mycoptasma
species, Blastomyces species, and canine distemper
virus. Scrotal cestodiasis occurring in the dog has been
reported to cause scrotal swelling and testicular pain
Rhodotorula glutinis wasreported as a cause of bilateral
epididymitis in a 4-year-old Great Dane. Trauma and
autoimmune disease also may contribute to the devel-
opment of orchitis and epididymitis. Routes of entry
for infectious agents include retrograde movement up
the reproductive tract from the prostrate or urethra,
bacteremia, viremia, and direct entry by external
trauma or puncture wound. Orchitis is rare in the tom
but has been reported to occur after infections with
Mycobacterium species, Brucella species, feline infec
tious peritonitis virus, and other aerobic bacteria
introduced by traumatic injury, such as bite wounds.
470
Testicular andEpididymal Disorders
Noninfectious lymphocytic orchitis also has been
observed.
Autoimmunepathologic abnormalities may occur
after infections or trauma or may be idiopathic in origin.
Disruption of the blood-testis barrier created by Sertoli
cell tight junctions allows access to the previously
immunologically isolated spermatozoal antigens by the
immune system. Cell-mediated and humoral defense
mechanisms are setinto action against the spermato
genic tissue with formation of systemic antisperm anti-
bodies. Autoimmune orchitis also may be associated
with a more widespread disorder, such as lymphocytic
thyroiditis.
B.canis has a host range limited to domestic and
wild canids. It is a gram-negative, nonmotile coccobacil-
Ius.Incidencein theUnited States is reported torange
from 0.2%-9% of the population. The 0rganisms are
shed primarily in semen and urine but may also be
spread through saliva and nasal secretions. Respiratory
inhialation and ingestion (licking) are known to be the
primary routes of entry to the susceptible dog. Venereal
transmission can occurbetweeninfected stud dogs and
bitches. Human exposure to dogs actively shedding
organisms maylead to human infection (zoonosis)
Sperm granulomas consist of accumulations of sper-
matozoaandmacrophageswithintubules or the adja
cent interstitium ofefferent ductules or the epididymis.
They may begin as spermatozoa are extravasated into
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
471
interstitial tissues or as spcrmatoceles with secondary
macrophiage infiltration. They may be induced by infec
tion, trauma, or toxins but also may occur sponta
neolisly.
PhysicalExaminationFindings
Orchitis alone, epididymitis alone, or orchiepididymi-
tis may be present. The condition can be unilateral or
bilateral. The affected testes or epididymides are
painful and swollen during the acute phase of orchitis
in both dogs and cats. Fever may be present very earlyin
the hematogenous phase of an infectious process.
Hematologic changes may be noted during the acute
phase as well but usually are not abnormal by the time
the orchitis or epididymitis is clinically evident. When
the epididymis is affected, it too will have focal to dif-
fuse swelling that soon organizes and becomes local-
ized.As the uncontrolledinflammatory process
becomes chronic, the testis undergoes degeneration,
fibrosis,and atrophy. Chronic epididymitis usually is
associated with focal,firm swellings of thecauda,cor-
pus, or caput epididymis. Visual appraisal and palpa-
tion can indicate slight to moderate swelliny of the
affected testes or epididymides. Pain is likely to bc vari-
ably detected on palpation of the scrotal contents, and
thus reluctance or refusal by the dog or cat to allow
examination may be noted. Differential diagnoses
472
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
include inguinal and scrotal hernia, spermatic cord tor-
sion, testicular neoplasia, varicocele or hydrocele, and
spermgranuloma.
Dogs infected with B. canis may have a transient bac-
teremia or may have bacteremia for 6-60 months.
Episodic fever may be detected by careful observation
and monitoring but usually goes unobserved. Orchitis,
epididymitis, scrotal dermatitis, oligozoospermia, and
infertility all may be observed in affected dogs; epi-
didymitis by itself is observed more commonly. Uveitis,
glomerulonephritis, osteomyelitis, discospondylitis
meningitis, and pyogranulomatous dermatitis have all
been reported to occur in dogs infected with B. canis,
presumablysecondary tobacteremia
Diagnostic Tests and Resufts
Diagnostic tests beyond physical examination include
ultrasonography of the scrotum, testes, and epididymides;
semen collection for evaluation and culture; FNA of the
affected testes or epididymides; and testing for canine
brucellosis.
Orchitis does not have a characteristic pattern of
echogenicity recognizable by ultrasonography, but
testicular inflammation. Ultrasonography is most useful
in ruling out other differentials, such as torsion of the
spermaticcord.
Testicular andEpididymal Disorders
473
Semen can be collected from male dogs by manual
ejaculationfor evaluation and submission for cytology
and culture.Many dogs with orchitis or epididymitis
experience pain and will notejaculate.
If an ejaculate is obtained, seminal fluid can be sub
mitted for aerobic, anaerobic, and mycoplasma cultures,
both for diagnosis and to guide treatment. Growth of
more than 100,0o0 organisms per milliliter of a single
organism is significant. Semen culture does not localize
infection to the testes or epididymides; dogs with posi-
tive cultures should also be evaluated for prostate dis-
ease at some point (see Chapter 17).
FNA of the affected testes or epididymides allows
cytologic evaluation and submission of tissue for culture.
Dogs with acute orchitis or epididymitis tolerate FNA
without sedation. Presence of a large number of poly
morphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) is diagnostic. Tissue
can be submitted for aerobic, anaerobic, and mycoplasma
culture; any growth is significant. Sensitivity testing can
be used to guide antibiotic treatment.
Treatment
Complete resolution or cure of orchitis or epididymitis
is rare without removal of the affected tissue.Bilateral
Orchiectomy is the recommended treatment.Unilateral
castration, sparing the nonaffected testis, may be the
only hope of retaining fertility in affected male dogs that
474
Testicularand EpididymalDisorders
have great breeding value, but it is not recommended.
Antimicrobials alone rarely are effective in dogs but
should not be overlooked as part of the treatment regi
men. Aggressive broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy
administered to cats for 2-3 weeks has been successful in
resolvingtraumatic orchitis.After resolution of the
acute phase, degenerative change of the seminiferous
expected in most cases. Nonsteroidal antinflammatory
agents should be considered part of the palliative treat-
ment. Use of glucocorticoids in thc treatment of autoiml
mune orchitis has been described in other species but
not in the dog. Glucocorticoid therapy may itself sup-
press spermatogenesis.
Therapy with antimicrobials for B. canis infcc
tion has not proved to cffect long-term resolution.
Minocycline (25 mg/kg administered orally once daily
for 14 days) in combination with dihydrostreptomycin
(5 mg/kg administered intramuscularly twice a day for
7 days) or tetracycline (30 mg/kg administered orally
twice a day for 2l days) in combination with strepto-
mycin (20 mg/kg administered intramuscularly once
daily for 14 days) have been reported for treatment of
dogs infected with B. canis and may be useful for individ-
ually housed dogs as an adjunct to castration, to
decrease shedding, and to ameliorate the bacteremic
phase. In affected kennels, controlling the spread of the
organism requires quarantine, identification of the
Testicular andEpididymaf Disorders
475
index cases, culling of those animals dctcrmincd to be
infected, strict surveillanice for new cases, and scrologic
testing ofallincoming animals before their introduction
to the kennel.
Prognosis
Prognosis is good in dogs not infected with B. canis that
undergo bilateral orchiectomy. In animals treated by
unilateral orchiectomy or long-term antimicrobial ther-
apy, responsc to treatment will not he observed until al
least 60-62 days after resolution, the length of the sper-
matogenic cycle in dogs and cats. Careful palpation and
ultrasonographic evaluation of the remaining testis
should be performed to evaluate for atrophy or fibrosis.
The expccted response in the normal, nonaffected
remaining testis is a compensatory hypertrophy. This
may occur ovcr the 3-6 months following complete reso-
lution of the inflammatory condition.
Torsion of the Spermatic Cord
Definition and Pathogenesis
Torsion of the spermatic cord, oftcn crroneously called tes
ticular torsion, has been reported rarely in the dog. Rotation
around the vertical axis of the spermatic cord gcnerally
involves a neoplastic, abdominally retained testiclc. It has
476
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
been suggested that the intraabdominal site allows greater
movement of a large, neoplastic testicle than would the
scrotum. Sertoli cell tumors and seminomas often are diag
nosed in these cases.Intrascrotal spermatic cord torsion
also has been reported. Although congenital factors, physi
cal or sexual aggression, trauma, and neoplasia have been
implicated, pathogenesis in the dog remains unclear
Torsion of the spermatic cord must be considered in any
male dog with an acute abdomen prcsentation, particu-
larly in monorchid or cryptorchid patien ts.
Signaiment
Spermaticcord torsion seems tobeunrelated tosize,
age, or breed. Reported cases include dogs ranging in
size from Pekingese to Great Danes and in age from
5 months to 10 years. One report involved two crypt-
orchid dogs from the same litter.The boxer,Pekingese,
andAiredaleterriermaybepredisposedtospermatic
cord torsion because of the high incidence of crypt
orchidismin these breeds.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs reported include lethargy, anorexia, vom-
iting, signs of distress, stiffness of gait, and abdominal
discomfort. Signs that occasionally may be observed
include tenesmus, diarrhea or constipation,dysuria
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
477
anuria, hematuria, polyuria, polydipsia, vocalizations
such ashowlingoryelping,and trembling
Physical Examination Findings
General physical examination findings may include stiff-
ness of gait or unwillingness to move, abdominal pain,
either pyrexia or hypothermia, dehydration, and shock.
With torsion of an abdominally retained neoplastic
pain,symmetric alopecia,hyperpigmentation,gyneco
mastia, urethral bleeding, and pendulous prepuce may
be present. With an intrascrotal spermatic cord torsion,
an enlarged or painful testis, pitting edema of the scro-
tum, thickened
dspermatic cord,discoloration or
decreased temperature of the scrotum, and pain associ-
ated with palpation of the testes may be observed.
Diagnostic Tests and Results
Definitive diagnosis of torsion of the spermatic cord
diagnostictests should include a complete bloodcount
(CBC), serum chemistry profile, and urinalysis because a
definitive diagnosis of spermatic cord torsion necessitates
torsion of the spermatic cord include hyperalbuminemia,
leukocytosis with or without a left shift, anemia, increased
478
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
blood urea nitrogen, increased creatinine, and hyper-
phosphatemia. When Sertoli cell tumor is present, nonre-
generative anemia, leukopenia, or thrombocytopenia
related to estrogen toxicosis may occur.Urinalysis may
reveal presence of red blood cells, increased white blood
cells,proteinuria,and decreasedurinespecificgravity.
In cases of spermatic cord torsion in a cryptorchid
animal, an abdominal mass may or may not be visible
radiographically. Survey radiographs may reveal a cau
dal abdominal mass, enlarged iliac or sublumbar lymph
nodes, and prostatic enlargement. Thoracic radio-
graphs may be necessary to rule out metastatic lung dis-
ease when neoplasia is present.
Real-time (B-mode)and color-flow Doppler ultra
sound are very useful in the definitive diagnosis of
intrascrotal spermatic cord torsion. These imaging modal
ities, along with spectral Doppler ultrasound and radionu-
clide perfusion scanning, commonly are used to diagnose
spermatic cord torsion and evaluate resulting vascular
compromise in humans. Characteristic parenchymal
and color Doppler signal changes in the dog havc
been described. Ultrasonographic changes that may be
observed with torsion of an intrascrotal testis include
decreased echogcnicity of testicularparenchyma;hypere
choic,cranially displaced epididymis; enlarged spermatic
cord; reduction of the testis-to-epididyinis ratio; hypoe-
chogenicity characteristic of edena around the epi
didymis and testis; abnormal course of spermatic cord and
TesticularandEpididyma!Disorders
479
testicular blood vessels; and loss of color-flow Doppler sig-
nal from the spermatic cord (Figure 16-1). Intrascrotal
spermatic cord torsion must be differentiated from hema-
tocele,hydrocele, inguinal hernia,infectious and nonin-
fectious orchitis,epididymitis,varicocele,spermatocele,
and testicular neoplasia.The collective ultrasonographic
changes should aid the clinician in differentiating
intrascrotal spermatic cord torsion from other scrotal and
testicular abnormalities. Ultrasonography may be less use-
ful in diagnosis ofintraabdominal testis with torsion of the
spermaticcord.
Exploratory laparotomy observations of an intraab-
dominal testis affected by torsion may include varying
degrees of spermatic cord torsion; an enlarged, hemor-
rhagic, nodular, or neoplastic intraabdominal testis; or a
small, discolored, necrotic testis. Histopathologic find-
ings of affected testes that have been described include
infarction, venous congestion, hemorrhage, hemo-
siderosis,fibrosis,coagulation necrosis of tubular struc-
tures, Sertoli cell tumor, seminoma, sarcoma,teratoma,
embryonal carcinoma, and choriocarcinoma.
Treatment
Bilateral orchiectomy is the treatment of choice.
Excision of the affected testicle alone may be considered
in cases of intrascrotal spermatic cord torsion in a
valuable breeding dog. Unilaterally cryptorchid dogs
480
Testicularand Epididymal Disorders
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Pleaserefertotheprintedpublication
Figure 16-1.Ultrasonographic image of the right testis ofa
3-month-oldGermanshepherddogwithtorsionofthesper-
matic cord. The epididymis has increased echogenicity corn-
pared with the relatively hypoechoic testis.The anechoic areas
that radiate from the mediastinum reflect testicular infarction.
The white asterisks delineate the epididymis. (From Pinto CR,
PaccamontiDL,PartingtonB:JAmVetMedAssoc219:1343,
2001.)
TesticularandEpididymalDisorders
481
should not be used for breeding. Surgical correction of
generally is not recommended because spermatogenesis
lsuallyisirreversiblyreducedafterl-2hours of
ischemia. Even with surgical correction and return of
blood flow, hypoxia, infarction, and reperfusion injury
often result in cell death and testicular fibrosis and atro-
phy. Duration and degree of rotation determine the
extent of testicular damage. Therefore, when the owner
wants the dog to maintain two testicles for aesthetic rea-
sons, gross examination of the spermatic cord and testis
must be performed to decide whether surgical correc
tionisaviableoption.
Shock, renal dysfunction, and severe anemia 01
thrombocytopenia indicate a need for fluid therapy, diure
sis, or blood transfusion before surgery. Perioperative
antibiotics, administration of antinflammatory agents,
and pain control should be considered. Prostatic abnor-
malities (see Chapter l7) and metastasis of testicular
neoplasia may be discovered and addressed during
exploratorylaparotomy.
Prognosis
Prognosis is good after castration in cases of uncompli
cated spermatic cord torsion in cryptorchid animals.
Alopecia and other clinical signs related to a Sertoli cell
tumor should resolve in 2-6 weeks after castration.
482
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
Prognosis for life also is good after early diagnosis and cas-
tration in dogs with intrascrotal spermatic cord torsion.
Prognosis for future fertility in dogs treated with unilateral
castrationdependsontheextentofinvolvementofthe
contralateral testis. In one case the affected testis was
excised and sperm characteristics of the contralateral testis
were found to be within normal limits 10 months after sur
gery.Prognosis is guardedfordogs in shock orrenal failure
at the time of presentation, those with malignant testicular
neoplasiaandmetastasis,andthosewithabnormalities
associated with the prostate, such asprostatic abscessation.
Testicular Neoplasia
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Testicular neoplasia is common in dogs are rare in cats.
Its rate of occurrence is second only to skin neoplasia in
dogs.Neoplasia can occurin both descended and unde
scended testes, but the frequency is higher in crypt
orchid testes. There are three main types of testicular
neoplasia:Sertolicell tumor,seminoma,andinterstitial
(Leydig) cell tumor. The frequency is equal among the
tumor types in descended testes, However, in cryptorchid
testes,therateofoccurrenceoftumorsis60%forSertoli
celltumorsand40%forseminomas.Interstitialcell
tumors usually occur in descended testes. The mean age
ofdogs with testicular tumors is 10years,and certain
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
483
breeds,includingboxers,German shepherd dogs,poo
dles, and Shetland sheepdogs,are at higher risk.
The three main types of tumors all arise within the
testicular parenchyma.However, other tumors, such as
fibrosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, and embryonic carci-
noma, also can occur in the testis. Thcse tumor types are
rare.It is unknown why testicular tumors arise. Some
have speculated that in cryptorchid testcs, an alteration
in thermoregulation predisposes thetestis to neoplasia.
Sertoli cell tumors, as the name implies, arise from
the Sertoli cell (nurse cell) of the seminiferous tubule.
The normal function of this cell is to support the devel-
oping spermatogenic cells and secrete hormoncs for
feedback to the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. Most
Sertolicell tumors are slow-growingtumors thatarenon
invasive; however, up to 20% may be malignant and
spread to the local lymphatics and distant sites. These
tumorsusually arefirm,nodular, andpaleyellowtogray
Sertoli cell tumors cither are hormonally nonproductive
or secrete high concentrations of estrogen and inhibin,
producing clinical signs of feminization.
Seminomas arise from spermatogenic cells.These
are cells that normally wouldundergo developmentin
theseminiferoustubuletoformmaturespermatozoa.
These tumors also are slow growing and noninvasive. Up
to 10% may metastasize to local or distant sites. Most of
these tumors are hormonally silent and usually are soft
on palpation, gray to white, and lobulated.
484
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
Interstitial (Leydig) cell tumors arise from the cells
in the interstitial space surrounding the seminiferous
tubules. These cells usually provide the hormonal sup-
port for the seminiferous tubules and feedback to the
hypothalamus and pituitary gland. As with the other
tumors, interstitial cell tumors are slow to grow and are
noninvasive. Unlike the other two tumor types, intersti-
tial cell tumors usually are an incidental finding at the
time of necropsy and almost always are located in
descended testes. They usually are hormonally silent,
soft on palpation, and brown-orange on cross section.
PhysicalExaminationFindings
The owner may be unaware of any problem, and the vet-
erinarian may find the mass on routine yearly physical
examination or on examination for another problem. In
symptomatic animals the usual complaint is scrotal
enlargement. Scrotal enlargement may be the only find-
ing on physical examination.More thorough palpation
of the scrotum mayindicate that onetestis isenlarged
andlobulated and the other is either normal or atro
phied. The atrophy of the contralateral testis usually is
caused by pressure necrosis from the enlarged testis or
alteredhormonalfeedback
If the dog has cryptorchidism, there will be no exter-
nal testicular enlargement. The dog may present for other
systemic signs caused by a hormonally active tumor.
Testicular andEpididymal Disorders
485
Seventy percent of the tumors in cryptorchid testes are
hormonally active Sertoli cell tumors, which cause a male
increased estrogen production by the neoplastic Sertoli
cells,increased conversion oftestosterone to estrogen,or a
decrease in androgen production with normal estrogen
production. In healthy dogs, serum estrogen concentra-
n m sop u ad gh  ssa ae so
Sertoli cell tumors, serum estrogen concentrations can
range from 10-150 pg/ml. Clinical signs associated with
this syndrome include bilateral, nonpruritic alopecia;
be attraction ofother males to the affected dog,and galac
torrhea also may be observed.Ifbone marrowsuppression
lethargy, depression, inappetence, and vomiting. The dog
may have pale mucous membranes and petechiae.
Diagnostic Tests and Results
Diagnostic tests include ultrasonography of the scrotum,
testes, epididymides, and abdomenr; thoracic and abdomi-
nal radiography to assess for evidence of metastases; a CBC
and serum chemistry profile; and either aspiration or
biopsy of the mass. Ultrasonography of the affected testis,
using either a 5- or 7.5-mHz linear or sector probe, may
reveal a hyperechoic density, a hypoechoic density, or
486
TesticularandEpididymalDisorders
multiloculated cystic areas within the testis. Abdominal
ultrasonography may bc used to find a cryptorchid testicle
and evaluate it for presence of a mass noted in its
parenchyma. Once a mass is located, thoracic and abdom-
inal radiographs should be obtained to search for areas of
local and distant metastasis.If thereis suspicion of bone
marrow involvement, a CBC and chemistry panel should
be performed. The CBC may reflect a nonregenerative
anemia and leukopenia.
To determine the cause of the mass, either FNA,
core biopsy, incisional biopsy, or excisional biopsy must
be performed. Although FNA. works well for determin-
ing whether there is active spermatogenesis, it is not the
best method for diagnosing tumor types. Either a core
biopsy or incisional biopsy is preferred for the valuable
breeding dog. An excisional biopsy or orchiectomy is
preferred if the dog has cryptorchidism or if breeding is
notafuturepriority.
A core biopsy is performed with the animal under
either heavy sedation or general anesthesia. The dog's
prescrotal area should be prepared by using an aseptic
technique and the dog placed in dorsal recumbency. An
incision is made on the midline through the skin, and
the testis is pushed to the incision. The vaginal tunic is
incised over the testis, and the tunica albuginea is
incised. The mass is located by palpation, and a Tru-Cut
biopsy instrument (Cook Instruments, Bloomington,
Ill.) is used to obtain a sample. Once the sample is
TesticufarandEpididyma!Disorders
487
obtained, the tunics and the subcutaneous tissue are
closed asforaroutine orchiectomy.
An incisional biopsy is performed similar to the core
biopsy. When the tunica albuginea is incised, the tissue
that bulges out is shaved off by using a sterile double
edged razor. Routine closure is used. All biopsy samples
should be fixed before they are sent to the laboratory.
The preferred fixative to use is Bouin's fixative. It allows
for good cellular differentiation of the testicular tissue
and prevents seminiferous tubule shrinkage. The dilu-
tion should be the same as for formalin: l part tissue to
l0partsfixative.
One major drawback of performing thesebiopsies is
iatrogenic testicular damage. The blood-testis barrier is
disrupted when performing the biopsy, which may lead
to an immune-mediated orchitis, resulting in further tes
ticular destruction. Ifa blood vessel is punctured during
the surgical biopsy procedure, a large hematoma may
form, which can lead to pressure and thermal necrosis of
one orbothof thetestes.
Treatment and Prognosis
Bilateral orchiectomy is the treatment of choice. If the
dog is a valuable stud dog, unilateral orchiectomy can be
considered. However, if the dog has cryptorchidisin, both
testes should be removed.If there is no evidence of metas
tasis and the tumor is removed, the prognosis is good.
488
 Testicular and Epididymai Disorders
      s
with bone marrow suppression may need further treat-
ment, such as intravenous fluids, antibiotics, whole-blood
transfusions, and glucocorticoids, until the signs resolve. A
guarded prognosis is made for dogs with bone marrow
suppression; regeneration of the bone marrow may take
3-6 weeks after surgery, if regeneration occurs at all. If
metastases are found, the prognosis is also considered
guarded to grave and either chemotherapy or irradiation
therapy is instituted after surgery. Seminomas have been
shown to be radiosensitive and may respond better to irra-
diationtherapy thantochemotherapy.
Bibliography
Bird K, Rosenfield AT, Taylor KJ: Ultrasonography in tes
ticular torsion, Radiology 147:527,1983.
Bloom F: Retained testes in cats and dogs, Mod Vet Pract
43:60,1962.
Bogh IB, Baltsen M, Byskov AG et al: Testicular concentra-
tion of meiosis-activating sterol is associated with nor-
mal testicular descent, Theriogenology 55:983, 2001.
Cox VS, Wallace LJ. Jessen CR: An anatomic and genetic
study of canine cryptorchidism, Teratology 18:233,
1978.
Dunn ML, Foster WJ, Goddard KM: Cryptorchidism in
the dog: a clinical survey, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 4: 180,
1968.
Testicular and Epididyma! Disorders
489
Eilts BE, Pechman RD, Hedlund CS et al: Use of ultra-
sonography to diagnose Sertoli cell neoplasia and
cryptorchidism in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:533,
1988.
FeldmanEC,Nelson RW:Canineandfeline endocrinology
andreproduction,Philadelphia,1996,WBSaunders.
Freshman JL, Amann RP, Bowen RA et al: Clinical evalua-
tion of infertility in dogs, Comp Cont Ed 10:443, 1988.
Gebhardt K, Ellerbrock K, Pera I et al: Differential
expression of novel abundant and highly regional-
ized mRNAs of the canine epididymis,/ Reprod Fertil
116:391, 1999.
George F, Bassily N, Hess R: Intratubular spermatic gran-
ulomas of the canine efferent ductules, Toxicol
Pathol23:731, 1995.
George L, Duncan R, Carmichael LE: Semen examina-
tion in dogs with canine brucellosis, Am J Vet Res
40:1589, 1979.
Haynes HM, Pendergrass TW: Canine testicular tumors:
epidemiologic features of 4l0 dogs, Int J Cancer
18:482, 1976.
Hricak H, Lue T, Filly RA et al: Experimental study of the
sonographic diagnosis of testicular torsion, J
UltrasoundMed2:349,1983.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine and
feline theriogenology, Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders.
Kawakami E, Tsutsui T, Saito S et al: Changes in periph-
eral plasma luteinizing hormone and testosterone
490
Testicular and Epididymal Disorders
concentrations and semen quality in normal and
cryptorchid dogs during sexual maturation,Lab
AnimSci45:258.1995.
Kersten W, Molenaar GJ, Emmen JM et al: Bilateral crypt
orchidism in a dog with persistent cranial testis sus-
pensory ligaments and inverted gubernacula:report
of a casewithimplications forunderstandingnormal
and aberrant testis descent, JAnat 189:171, 1996.
Larsen RE: Testicular biopsy in the dog, Vet Clin North Am
7:747,1977.
Lopate C, Threlfall WR, Rosol TJ: Histopathologic and
gross effects of testicular biopsy in the dog.
Theriogenology32:585,1989.
Marshall LS,Oehlert ML, Haskins ME et al: Persistent
millerian duct symdrome in miniature schnauzers,
JAmVetMedAssoc181:798,1982.
McDonald RK, Walker M, Legendre AM et al:
Radiotherapy of metastatic seminoma in the dog,
VetIntMed2:103,1988.
McEnteeK: Reproductive pathology of domestic mammals,
New York, 1990,Academic Press.
Mevorach RA, Lerner RM, Greenspan BS et al: Color
Doppler ultrasound compared to a radionuclide
scanning of spermatic cord torsion in a canine
model, J Urol145:428, 1991.
Millis DL, Hauptman JG, Johnson CA: Cryptorchidism
and monorchism in cats: 25 cases (1980-1989), JAm
VetMedAssoc200:1128,1992.
TesticularandEpididyma!Disorders
491
Pena FJ, Anel L, Dominguez JC et al: Laparoscopic sur-
gery in a clinical case of seminoma in a cryptorchid
dog,Vet Rec142:671,1998.
Peters MA, deJong FH, Teerds KJ et al: Aging, testicula1
tumors and the pituitary-testis axis in dogs, J Endo
166:153,2000.
Pinto CR, Eilts BE, Paccamonti DL et al: Torsion of the
spermatic cord in a stallion, J Am Vet Med Assoc
213:205,1998.
Pinto CR, Paccamonti DL, Partington B: Torsion of the
spermatic cord in a dog, JAm Vet Med Assoc 219:1343,
2001.
Rhodes [D,Foley CW: Cryptorchidism and intersexual-
ity,VetClinNorthAm7:789,1977.
Romagnoli SE: Canine cryptorchidism, Vet Clin North Am
21:533, 1991.
Schoeb TR, Morton R: Scrotal and testicular changes in
canine brucellosis: a case report, J Am Vet Med Assoc
172:598, 1978.
Tarhan R, Erbay ME, Erdogan E et al: Effects of unilat-
eraltesticulartorsiononthebloodflowofcontralat
eral testis: an experimental study on dogs,Scand
JUrolNephrol34:229,2000.
Turner T: Torsion of the retained testicle in the dog.
SmallAnimPract11:436,1970.
Yates D, Heffernan M, Beynon R: Cryptorchidism in
cats, Vet Rec 149:220, 2001.
17
Prostatic Disorders
Augustine T. Peter and Wiiam R. Widmer
ATA GLANCE
● Benign prostatic hypertrophy/hyperplasia (BPH)
● BPH develops gradually, with prolonged exposure to
testosterone and its metabolite, dihydrotestosterone
(DHT). Virtually all middle-aged and older male
dogs have some degree of BPH. Most dogs are
asymptomatic.Clinical signs that may occurinclude
493
494
Prostatic Disorders
dripping of serosanguineous fluid from the penis
unassociated with urination, rectal tenesmus and
passage of ribbon-shaped feces, hemospermia,
and hematuria. On rectal examination the prostate
is symmetrically bilobed and the animal is not in
pain. Radiographs and ultrasound reveal a uni-
formly enlarged prostate. Culture of seminal fluid is
not significant. Castration is the treatment of
choice. Medical therapy is available for valuable
breeding dogs; the human
1 drug. finasteride
(Proscar, Merck, Rahway, Nj) can be given orally at a
dosage of 0.1-0.5 mg/kg once daily for 1-4 months.
·Prostatitis
·Prostate infection usuallyoccurs secondary to another
abnormalityof theprostate,withBPHbeingthemost
common. Diagnosis is by culture of ejaculated semen,
fluid collected by prostatic massage, or tissue collected
by fine-needle aspiration (FNA). Growth of more than
100,000 organisms per milliliter of fluid or any growth
from a tissue sample is considered significant.
Antibiotics that penetrate the prostate well include the
fluoroquinolones,trimethoprim/sulfonamide,and
chloramphenicol. Concurrent therapy for the under-
lying disorder hastens the effect of antibiotics.
+Prostatic and paraprostatic cysts
· Prostatic and paraprostatic cysts are benign cysts
that may be within or outside of the prostate itself.
Clinical signs usually are due to pressure of the large
ProstaticDisorders
495
cysts on the urethra or colon.Diagnosis is con
firmed with abdominal ultrasonography. 'The treat-
ment of choice is surgical resection with concurrent
castration.
· Prostatic neoplasia
· Prostatic neoplasia in dogs is invariably prostatic ade-
nocarcinoma, which often has metastasized by the
time of diagnosis of the primary tumor. Diagnosis is
confirmed with FNA or biopsy, preferably guided by
ultrasound. Treatment is palliative.
The prostate is an androgen-dependent retroperi
toneal organ and is the only major accessory sex gland in
the dog. It is bordered by the rectum dorsally and the
symphysis pubis and abdominal wall ventrally. It com-
pletely encircles the proximal portion of the urethra at
the trigone of the bladder. The bilobed prostate is sur-
rounded by a fibromuscular capsule and is divided by a
median raphe that is palpable on the dorsal surface per
rectum. With advancing age, as the prostate enlarges, it
assumes an abdominal position.
The prostate is made up of compound tubular alveo-
larglands thatradiatefromtheirurethral ductile open-
ings. The alveolar portion of the prostate contains
primary and secondary infoldings of secretory epithe-
lium that project into the alveolar lumen, and the alveoli
are separated by fibrous connective tissue. The prostate
is divided into lobules by smooth muscle fascicles in its
stroma. The prostatic artery and prostatic urethral veins
496
Prostatic Disorders
supply and drain blood from the prostate, respectively.
Lymph is drained to the iliac lymph nodes. The hypogas-
tric and pelvic nerves provide sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic innervation, respectively.
The prostate secretes fluid under the control of hor
monal factors (primarily DHT, a metabolite of testos-
terone) and stimulation by the parasympathetic nervous
system.Expulsion of the prostatic fluid into the urethra
is stimulatedby the sympathetic nervous system.
Prostatic fluid makes up the first and third fractions of
the canine ejaculate. It reduces the consistency of the
ejaculate and increases its volume and is also believed to
aid in spermatozoal transport. Secretion is continuous
in intact male dogs. It flows retrograde into the urinary
bladder or antegrade to the external urethral orifice.
The volume voided daily ranges from a few drops to sev
eral milliliters, depending on the size of the prostate. As
seen with ultrasonographic examination, a normal
prostate has a homogenous parenchyma (Figure 17-1)
and usuallyis of greater echogenicity thanmost
parenchymal organs.
A variety of prostatic disorders affect middle-aged
and older dogs. The overall incidence of canine prosta-
tic disease is 2.5% in male dogs (all ages) and 8% in male
dogs older than 10 years. With the exception of prostatic
neoplasia, which occurs with the same frequency in
intact and neutered animals, prostatic disease generally
ProstaticDisorders
497
Figure 17-1.Sagittal-view sonogram of a normal middle-
aged intactmale dog.Theprostatic parenchyma is homogenous
andofgreaterechogenicitythanmostparenchymalabdominal
organs.However, the echogenicity of theprostate varies accord-
ing to the age and the influence of testosterone (intact or
neutered). Centrally. the norrnal prostate conitains a hyper-
echoic zone surrounding the intraprostaticurethra.The exact
sonographic appearance depends onthe qualityof the sono-
graph, the ability of the sonographer, and the acoustic window.
498
ProstatlcDisorders
affects intact male dogs. Benign hyperplasia, prostatitis
and abscess, prostatic and paraprostatic cysts, and neo-
plasia are recognized as separate clinical entities. To ini
tiate proper treatment, it is essential that along with the
proper diagnosis of the condition, the pathogenesis of
these entities be understood. Of all of these conditions,
bacterial prostatitis should be a primary rule-out when
dealing with an infertile stud dog. Prostatic disease in
malecatsisextremelyuncommon.
Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy/Hyperplasia
Definition andPathogenesis
In BPH there is an increase in prostatic epithelial cell
size (hypertrophy) and number (hyperplasia), with the
latter being more marked. The pathophysiology of BPH
is not fully understood; however, the condition is
gested that increased responsiveness of the prostate to
testosterone and an altered androgen/estrogcn ratio
play a role. Testosterone serves as a prohormone for for-
mation of DHT, an active metabolite that mediates intra
cellular processes of androgen action. This metabolism
is under the influence of the inhibitable enzyme 5a
reductase. Two isoenzymes of 5o-reductase (types I and
I1) have been identified in dogs. Experimental data sug-
gest two phases in the development of the condition: an
Prostatic Disorders
499
early phase that is characterized by glandular hyperpla
sia and a late phase that shows a more complex morphol
ogy dominated by cystic hyperplasia. During the early
glandular phase, the concentration of DHT in serum is
high. Later, the tissue concentrations of DHT decrease.
The decreasing tissue concentrations seem to be coun-
terbalancedby anincreasein intranuclear androgen
receptors,possibly mediated by elevated estroge1 con-
centrations and other factors. The condition is not clas
sified as a neoplasm in dogs, whereas in the human it is
classified as abenignneoplasm.
Signaiment
This disorder affects nearly every intact male dog.
although not all dogs show clinical signs. This conditio1l
is common in older dogs, and the mean age at time of
diagnosis is about 8 years. However, the condition canl
begin to develop as early as 2.5 years of age.
HistoryandClinicalSigns
Most dogs with BPH do not have clinical signs, but some
have tenesmus, serous or hemorrhagic urethral dis-
charge, constipation, or hematuria. Occasionally,
        g
prostate is increased with hyperplasia, which leads to the
clinical signs of hemorrhagic urethral discharge and
500
Prostatic Disorders
hematuria. Usually, systemic signs of illness are not pres
ent and the affected dogs are alert, active, and afebrile.
Physical Examination Findings
Rectal examination reveals mild to moderate, symmet-
ric, and nonpainful prostatomegaly. The affected
prostate has a smooth contour and is freely movable.
There are no extrareproductive abnormalities.
Diagnostic Tests and Resufts
Either the results of urinalysis are normal or micro-
scopic hematuria is present. If a urethral discharge is
present, it is hemorrhagic or clear but not purulent.
Similarly, semen and samples of prostatic fluid may be
either normal or hemorrhagic. However, the volume of
the semen may be reduced; this occurs primarily
because of the reduced secretory function of the gland.
Results ofa complete blood count (CBC) and scrum
chemistry profiles are unremarkable, as are cytologic
and bacteriologic evaluation of prostatic fluid. A major
 protein in canine seminal plasma, canine secretory pro
static esterase, which is secreted by the prostate, is ele-
vated fourfold in dogs with BPH. Assays for this protein
are not available through all laboratories, nor is this test
routinely performed for diagnosis of BPH in clinical
practice.
ProstaticDisorders
501
Ultrasonographic examination of the prostate usu-
ally shows symmetric prostatomegaly, with variable
appearance of the prostatic parenchyma. Generally,
thereislossofthenormalhomogenousappearance
(Figure 17-2). Overall increased echotexture may be
present as a result of subgross cystic change, fibrosis, o1
increasedyascularity.Occasionally,small intraprostatic
cysts are identified. The ultrasonographic examination
can be used to estimate prostatic volume. This informa-
tionmaybeusefulindeterminingthedosageofdrugs
used in medical management of the condition; however,
further research is necessary to confirm this hypothesis.
Survey abdominal radiography reveals symmetric
ment)of the colon dorsally and urinarybladder cra
nially.Retrogradeurethrocystography
ymayreveal
urethroprostaticreflux and narrowing of theprostatic
urethra.This procedure also is beneficial if the prostate
is not readily visible on survey radiographis
For cytologic examination, prostatic cells can be col-
lected either via an ejaculate, prostatic massage, or nee-
dle aspiration or by obtaining a biopsy. The specimen
collected can be used to diagnose the cellular pattern
within the prostate and can be submitted for aerobic,
anaerobic, and mycoplasma cultures. The diagnostic
techniques described here are useful in diagnosing all
diseases of the prostate, including BPH, prostatitis, and
prostaticneoplasia
502
ProstaticDisorders
Figure 17-2. Benign prostatic hyperplasia. Sagittal-plane sono-
gramoftheprostateofan8-year-old intactmaleScottishterrier
with stranguria.Note the inhomogeneity of the prostatic
parenchyma typical of benign prostatic hyperplasia. There is
echotexture characterized by sonolucent and echoicregions with-
outcavitation ornodule formation.
ProstaticDisorders
503
In dogs with BPH, althoughi these methods may be
necessary for a definitive diagnosis, a presumptive clini-
cal diagnosis can be made in most cases based on the his
tory and physical examination findings. Cytologic
evaluation of prostatic aspirates may reveal normal
epithelium, even in the presence of disease.A normal
histologic specimen reveals dilated acini that are sur-
rounded by smooth muscle and fibrous connective tis-
sue with absence of inflammatory cells.
EJACULATE An ejaculate can be obtained by manual dig
ital manipulation of the prepuce and penis of a dog, with
or without the presence of a female dog in estrus. The
semen sample shouldbe collected ina sterilefunnel or
similar container (see Chapter 4). The semen under
goes cytologic examination and is submitted for aerobic,
anaerobic, and mycoplasma cultures. Another less com
monly used techinique involves gathering a urine sample
via cystocentesis and gathering a urethral sample before
collecting the ejaculate. To gathera urethral sample, the
clinician must retract the prepuce, exposing 2-4 cm of
glans penis, and clean it with cotton sponges soaked in a
1:10o0 dilution of aqueous Zephiiran (Sanofi, New York,
NY). The clinician then dries it with sterile sponges.A
sterile calcium alginate urethral swab on a flexible alu-
minum shaft (Calgiswab; Remel, Lenexa, Kan.) is
inserted into the urethra to a distance of approxi-
mately 5 cm, moved back and forth several times, and
504
Prostatic Disorders
withdrawn. The swab is separated from the shaft with
sterile scissors and dropped into a test tube containing
3 ml of sterile lactated Ringer's solution.
PROSTATIC MASSAGE The dog needs to be sedated
before beginning. The urinary bladder is catheterized,
emptied, and flushed several times with sterile saline.
The last flush, of 5-10 ml, is saved for comparison (pre-
prostatic massage sample). The urinary catheter is
retracted to the caudal pole of the prostate. The prostate
is gently massaged per rectum for 1-2 minutes (Figure
17-3) and then another 5 ml of sterile saline is injected
through the catheter. Material is repeatedly aspirated
into the catheter while it is slowly advanced into the uri
mitted for aerobic, anaerobic, and mycoplasma cultures.
The results from the preprostatic and postprostatic mas-
sage samples are compared with urinalysis. This will help
localize significant bacterial growth to the prostate, the
urethra, or the urinary bladder. The veterinarian should
be extremely careful not to massage too vigorously
because doing so might result in rupture of an abscess
and attendant complications (peritonitis and sepsis).
brush and obtain a sample directly from the prostatic
urethra after massaging the prostate. This method limits
contamination of the prostatic sample with material
ProstaticDisorders
505
Rightswere not granted to include this figure in electronicmedia
Pleaserefer totheprintedpublication.
Figure 17-3.Schematicdrawing depicting prostaticmassage.
The urinary catheter is passed to thelevel of the prostatic urethra.
(From Thrall MA, Olson PN, Freemyer FG: J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
21:95,1965.)
506
ProstaticDisorders
from the urethira or bladder. Urine and urethral samples
should be collected as described previously. The l-mm-
diameter brush is affixed to the end of a 90-mm wire
stalk housed within a plugged, double-sheathed 6-Fr
catheter. The tip of the catheter is positioned at the cau-
dal pole of the prostate, as determined by rectal palpa-
tion. The prostate is massaged per rectum for l minute,
and the inner catheter is advanced a distance of l cm
into the prostatic urethra and is moved back and forth a
few times. After the specimen is collected, the brush and
theinner catheter are retracted into the outer catheter
and the entire apparatus is withdrawn. The prostatic
fluid and cells in the inner catheter and adhering to the
brush, along with thc urine and urethral specimens, are
submitted for culture and cytologic examination.
FINE-NEEDLE ASPIRATION OF THE PROSTATE The
prostate needs tobe approached either percutaneously
via a perirectal or transabdominal route or transrectally
The aspiration is performed by using an aseptic tech-
nique and a long needle with a stylet, such as a spinal
needle.Instead of a spinal needle,a fine needle
(22 gauge or smaller) may be used. A biopsy nee-
dle (Tru-Cut Biopsy Needle; Baxter Healthcare Corp.,
Valencia, Calif.) also may be used. The advantage of use
of the biopsy needle is that more material can be
obtained for histopathologic examination. The disad-
vantages are that the procedure bears a relatively higher
ProstaticDisorders
507
risk of seeding the abdominal cavity with abnormal cells
or bacteria from a dog with an infected prostate and of
damage to other abdominal structures.
With the perirectal approach, the needle is guided
by rectal palpation. The dog needs to be sedated. The
perineal area is prepared as for sterile surgery. A gloved
finger is introduced into the rectum and the prostate
palpated. The spinal needle is introduced with the other
hand, alongside the rectum and into the prostate.
Aspiration is performed several times with a syringe.
With the transabdominal approach, the needle can
be placed by palpation or by ultrasound guidance.
Ultrasound guidance is preferred to minimize injury to
surrounding structures,including blood vessels,the
trigone of the bladder, and the colon. The dog necds to
be sedated. The prostate is visualized with ultrasound.
The area of the abdomen over the prostate is prepared
as for sterile surgery. A fine needle is introduced into the
prostate and aspiration performed several times with a
syringe.
Transrectal FNA of the prostate gland (Figure 17-4)
is performed with the Franzen transrectal needle guide
(Precision Dynamics Corp., Burbank, Calif.) and a 22-
gauge or smaller needle. Transrectal FNA may be per-
formed without sedation,unless the dog experiences
pain as a result of abdominal or rectal palpation. A ster-
ile surgical glove needs to be worn. The Franzen needle
guide is placed on the index finger of the hand used for
508
Prostatic Disorders
Figure 17-4. Transrectal fine-needle aspiration of the prostate
using a Franzen needle guide.(From Peter AT, SteinerJN, Adams
LG: Semin Vet Med Surg [Small Anim] 10:35, 1995.]
palpation. Another sterile glove is placed over the nee
dle guide. The area to be aspirated is palpated with the
gloved index finger and the prostate stabilized through
abdominal palpation with the other hand. An assistant
should advance the needle through the needle guide
 and into the prostate, under guidance by the person per
forming rectal palpation. Suction is then applied to
the fine needle, using a 12-ml syringe. The suction is
released, and the needle is withdrawn. The aspirated
ProstaticDisorders
509
sample is submitted for cytologic examination and cul-
ture. The procedure may be repeated to aspirate addi-
tional areas of the prostate or to obtain additional
samplesfordiagnostictesting
SURGICAL BIoPSY Surgical biopsy is the most invasive
means to obtain prostatic fluid and tissue samples. At
times, it is the only procedure that can provide a defini-
tive diagnosis. Because of the risks associated with percu
taneous techniques, surgical biopsy via laparotomy is a
preferred method for obtaining samples for histopatho
logicexamination.
Treatment and Prognosis
Generally, treatment of BPH is indicated only for
patients that have clinical signs of prostatic disease. The
treatment ofchoice for BPH is castration.Prostatic involution
begins soon after surgery, and within 7-l0 days a
decrease in prostatic size should be apparent with rectal
palpation or radiography. A 50% reduction in size
occurs in3weeks,and a70%reduction in size occurs
over 9 weeks. If the size of the prostatic does not
decrease, the diagnosis should be reconsidered and the
dog should be evaluated for other prostatic diseases.
Prognosis for recoveryis good in dogs after castration.
If the client is interested inusing the stud dog
for breeding, medical therapies exist. A variety of
510
Prostatic Disorders
pharmacologic agents have been used for medical
treatmentofBPHindogs.
PROGESTATIONAL COMPOUNDS Progestational com-
pounds are believed either to decrease prostatic andro-
gen receptor number, to inhibit DHT intracellular
receptors, or to inhibit 5o-reductase activity, reducing
the formation of DHT from testosterone. Some of these
compounds may exert their antiandrogenic influence
by inhibiting pituitary LH secretion or by blocking
androgen receptors. Therapy with megestrol acetate
(Ovaban; Schering, Kenilworth, NJ; 0.5 mg/kg adminis
teredorallyoncedailyfor4-8weeks)ormedroxyproges
terone acetate (3-4 mg/kg administered subcutaneously
no more than every 10 weeks) has been described. Four
resolution of clinical signs attributable to hyperplasia
with no decrease in production of spermatozoa. Use of
progestational compounds for prostate diseases in male
dogs is not approved in the United States. Some of these
compounds also may have negative effects onpancreatic
     p 
metabolism and reproductive behavior.
ANTlANDROGENS Antiandrogens are compounds that
can cause a dose-dependent decrease in prostate size
increased incidence and extent of prostatic atrophy, and
decreasedprostatic secretoryfunction.
ProstaticDisorders
511
Treatment with azasteroid analogs, sllch as linas
teride (Proscar; Merck, Rahway, NJ) at dosages of 0.1-0.5
mg/kg/day for 1-4 months, causes atrophy of both the
glandular and stromal compartments of the prostate,
with a subsequent decrease in prostatic weight and vol-
ume.Prostatic size decreases significantly by 4 weeks of
treatment and reaches maximum atrophy, a 33%-50%
reduction in pretreatment volume, by 6 weeks of treat-
ment. This compound is a synthetic steroid type II 50
reductase inhibitor and is used to treat BPH in huinans.
It is suggested that this agent can decrease intraprostatic
DHT concentrations and may cause a decrease in
serum DHT concentrations. Finasteride also can decrease
the secretoryfunction oftheprostate.The decreasein size
of the prostate in response to treatment is attributed to
apoptosisratherthannecrosis.
Treatment with finasteride does not affect testicular
weight, histomorphology, or daily production of sper-
matozoa. Libido and semen quality are not affected.
Treatment with finasteride has not becn associated with
any extrareproductive side effects.Despite its lack of
side effects,collection ofan ejaculate from the dogmay
be a problem at the peak of treatment as a result of
reduced prostatic secretion.Because the compound
does not have androgenic, estrogenic, and progesta
tional properties, it has not been demonstrated to be
associated with abnormal reproductive behavior.
Because it has not been tested for teratogenic effect, use
512
ProstatlcDisorders
in men who attempt to father children is not recom-
mended. In dogs, no pups with birth defects have been
reported born to siresreceiving finasteride at the time of
breeding. The drug is not approved for veterinary use
and further, the cost may be prohibitive.
Flutamide (5 mg/kg administered orally daily for
7 weeks) has been successfully used experimentally fo1
inhibit androgen receptors. It is suggested that the
decrease in size in response to the treatment is dosc
dependent. This compound may not interfere with
libido or sperm production; however, its use is prohib-
ited in the United States.
MISCELLANEOUs COMPOUNDS Other therapies described
for the treatment of BPH in dogs include estrogen
compounds,ketoconazole, certain nutritional supple
ments, smooth muscle relaxants, catecholamine recep-
tors blockers, and gossypol. Results have been mixed,
with complications reported in some cases. Therapy
with the herb saw palmetto is not effective in dogs.
Estrogens are purported to decrease prostatic size by
reducing the cellular mass of the prostate. However, thie
clinician should be cognizant of the side effects, which
include bone marrow suppression (e.g-, anemia, throm-
bocytopenia, leukopenia), squamous metaplasia of
prostate epithelium, and decreased secretory function
of the prostate. Other procedures that have been
ProstaticDisorders
513
suggested for the treatment of BPH include transurethral
collagenase injection, transurethral light treatment
after photosensitization, transurethral high-intensity
focused ultrasound, and rotoresect mechanical ablation
plus high frequency tissue coagulation.
Prostatitis:Acute and ChronicProstatitis
ProstaticAbscesses
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Bacterialinfection can lead to inflammatory disease of
the prostate gland. Acute bacterial prostatitis is charac-
terized by sudden inflammation of the prostate gland
frombacterialinfection.Acutebacterialprostatitis can
progress to a chronic form. Abscessation is thought to
result from severe or chronic infection of prostatic tis-
sue. Abscessation also can result from infection of intra-
parenchymal or extraparenchymal prostatic cysts.
Abscesses can become very large and may rupture, lead-
ing to peritonitis.
The prostate is protected against infection by intrin
sic and extrinsic mechanisms. An antibacterial sub
stance, prostatic antibacterial factor, is secreted by the
prostate. The prostate is infected most commonly by
bacteria ascending through the prostatic ducts and to a
lesser extent via the hematogenous route. Disorders of
the urethra (e.g., urolithiasis, strictures, neoplasia) or
514
ProstaticDisorders
prostate (e.g-, cysts, squamous metaplasia, neoplasia)
may predispose to the development of prostatitis. BPH
often can lead to or predispose the gland to bacterial
prostatitis. Escherichia coli is the most common infectious
agent cultured from prostatic fluid or tissue of dogs with
bacterial prostatitis, but other gram-negative and gram-
positive bacteria have been incriminated. Infection with
Brucella canis is rather uncommon, and fungal prostatitis
rare. The role of mycoplasma in the pathogenesis of pro-
statitis is unknown.
Signaiment
Infection of the prostate is common in dogs. The inci-
dence is reported to be 18.6%. Acute prostatitis is identi-
fied much less frequently than chronic prostatitis.
Sexually intact male dogs older than 9 years are most
often affected. There is no known breed predisposition.
History and Clinicaf Signs
Dogs with acute prostatitis often have systemic clinical
signs, such as anorexia, depression, vomiting, fever, gait
abnormalities, and caudal abdominal pain. Dripping of
fluid from the prepuce may be noted. Acute prostati-
tis may be associated with signs of systemic illness,
decreased libido as a result of localized inflammation,
ProstaticDisorders
515
andfever-induced impairment of spermatogenesis.
Concurrent occlusion of the ductus deferens, hemo
spermia, orchiepididymitis, and immune-mediated
orchitis are other complications affecting the reproduc
tivesystem.
Chronic prostatitis may be subclinical, and the case
may present for a recurrent urinary tract infection, con-
stant or intermittent urethral discharge, poor semen
quality, or infertility. Although inflammation is prcsent
in chronic prostatitis, it is not sevcre cnough to produce
systemicsymptoms.
If prostatic abscesses become very large, the dog
mayhavetenesmus ordysuria.Incursion ofthieurethra
can lead topartial urethral obstruction, with a chroni-
cally distended bladder, eventual detrusor dysfunction,
and overflow urinary incontinence. Generalized peri-
tonitis resulting from rupture of an abscess results in
lethargy, fever, pain, and vomiting. Evidence of shock
(e.g., tachycardia, pale mucous membranes, dclayed
capillary refill, weak pulse) may be noted in severc cases.
In most cases abdominal pain is present, and in some
cases icterus may be present as a result of sepsis or endo-
toxemia.
Physicaf Examination Findings
In dogs with acute prostatitis, findings on rectal palpa-
tion are variable because the acuteness of the condition
516
ProstaticDisorders
often does not allow time for changes in size and struc-
ture of the prostate. However, if there is a concurrent pro
static disease, such as BPH or prostatic abscessation,the
prostate may be enlarged and the dogs react with painn
when palpation of the prostate per rectum is performed.
In chronic bacterial prostatitis, findings on rectal
palpation are variable depending on the degree of fibro
sis secondary to chronic inflammation.Rectal palpation
usually does not elicit signs of pain. The gland may vary
in symmetry and consistency. Areas of infection may be
focal, multifocal, or diffuse. In cases of prostatic absces-
sation, the prostate usually is enlarged and asymmetric
andhasavariableconsistency.
DiagnosticTestsandResufts
A clinical diagnosis usually is made based on the history,
physical examination findings, laboratory evaluation,
and responise to treatment. Growth of significant num-
bers of bacteria (more than 10o,000 bacteria/ml) from
prostatic fluid or tissue must be present for a diagnosis of
prostatic infection to be made.
In acute prostatitis, the CBC may show neutrophilia
with a left shift. Serum chemistries may be normal or
changes may be observed if the dog is dehydrated or has
renal insufficiency or additional contemporary diseases.
Hepatic disease may occur secondary to septicemia, and
hepatic enzymes may be increased. Urinalysis often
ProstaticDisorders
517
reveals pyuria, bacteriuria, and proteinuria.Urine col-
lected by cystocentesis is submitted for bacterial culture
and sensitivity tests. Prostatic fluid may be collected by
manual ejaculation, but the dog may be experiencing
too much pain to ejaculate. Prostatic massage may be
associated with severe complications, such as septicemia.
Percutaneous perianal small-needle biopsy and unguided
percutaneous small-needle aspiration are not recom
tis. Ultrasound-guided FNA often is used to obtain a
sample for culture and cytologic examination. Culture
results of prostatic fluid and tissue obtained by this
method accurately indicate the presence or absence of
infection in the prostate. Despite its cost and accessibil-
ity, this technique has become the diagnostic method of
choice for obtaining prostatic fluid and tissue speci-
mens. Formation of a septic tract through the abdomen
maybe acomplication.
Spermiograms reveal a decrease in percentage of
morphologically norrmal spermatozoa, with increases in
primary and secondary abnormalities. These changes
are attributed to perturbation in the seminal fluid rather
than changes at the tissue level of the testis. The influ-
ence of acute prostatitis on the secretory function of the
gland is unknown, but it is believed that prostatitis is
associatedwith decreasedsecretoryfunction
In dogs with chronic prostatitis, results of the CBC
and serum chemistries usually are unremarkable.
518
ProstaticDisorders
Hematuria, pyuria, and bacteriuria often are revealed
with urinalysis. Prostatic fluid and urine should be sub-
mitted for cytologic examination and culture. Culture of
more than 100,000 organisms/ml of prostatic fluid
obtained by ejaculation indicates prostatic infection.
Results of imaging techniques are often nonspecific and
show asymmetry, focal or diffuse hyperechogenicity, 0r
hypoechoic regions ifabscessation is present.
With prostatic abscessation, a neutrophilic leukocy-
tosiswithorwithoutaleftshiftoftenis observed,similar
to that seen with acute prostatitis. Putative diagnosis of a
prostatic abscess may be made by ultrasonography, but
definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of purulent
fluid within the cystic space visualized. This can be
achieved with FNA. or exploratory celiotomy. The latter
procedure is preferred because it allows both diagnosis
and treatment via surgical drainage of the abscess. It is
recommended that a fluid from within the abscess and
prostatic tissue be obtained during this procedure for
cytologic examination and culture.
Treatment and Prognosis
In dogs with acute prostatitis, intravenous fluid administra-
tion often is necessary to correct hydration deficits at the
time of presentation. Parenteral antimicrobial drugs
should be administered for 48-72 hours.If the patient's
ProstaticDisorders
519
condition is stable, oral antimicrobial treatment is indi-
cated. An antimicrobial agent, chosen based on cilture
and sensitivity testing, should be administered for 46
weeks. Because the blood-prostatic barrier usually is not
intact in dogs with acute bacterial prostatitis, the choice of
the antimicrobial agent should be guided by the results of
the antibiotic sensitivity testing.Antibiotic agents with
good prostatic penetration are preferred because of
improved penetration when the blood-prostatic barrier is
reestablished. The normal pH of the prostatic fluid is
acidic and remains acidic in prostatic infection. For this
reason, a basic antibiotic (high pKa) is preferred. This way
the antibiotic can be ionized and trapped in the prostatic
fluid. Furthermore, the antibiotic should have high lipid
solubility and low binding to plasma proteins. Antibiotics
that fit this description include trimethoprim/sulfon-
amide, chloramphenicol,erythromycin, clindamycin, and
the fluoroquinolones. The first two antibiotics are ade-
isims. The fluoroquinolones are also known for their
zwitterionic properties. Because antibiotics with these
prostate regardless of intraprostatic and periprostatic pH.
Adverse reactions must be considered when choosing an
antibiotic for long-term therapy of recurring bacterial pro
statitis. Castration'may improve efficacy of treatment and
should be considered, especially in dogs with recurrent
signs ofprostatitis.
520
ProstaticDisorders
Most dogs appear to respond rapidly to antimicro-
bial treatment; however, long-term prognosis is
unknown. Chronic prostatitis that is difficult to eradi-
cate may develop in some dogs. In other dogs, prostatic.
abscess may develop as a consequence of acute prostati-
tis. It is suggested that castration may prevent acute pro-
statitis from becoming chronic, but much work is
needed to confirm such a hypothesis.
Dogs with chronic prostatitis must be treated with an
antimicrobial drug that is capable of penetrating the
intact prostatic capsule, such as those described earlier.
Treatment for 4-6 weeks is recommended, with prostatic
fluid or tissue culture performed l week and again
4 weeks after therapy is concluded to ensure resolution
of infection. Castration may hasten resolution of chronic
prostatitis, most likely by causing resolution of underly-
ing BPH. Concurrent treatment with antibiotics and
finasteride in breeding dogs may be beneficial (see
Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy/Hyperplasia, Treatment
andPrognosis).
Prostatic abscesses are difficult to treat. Prognosis is
poor, and the survival rate is only 50%. Surgical drainage
is currently the treatment of choice for prostatic
abscesses. Needle aspiration, insertion of a drain (tube
or Penrose drain), or marsupialization are some of the
ways an abscess can be drained. Successful ultrasound-
guided aspiration may be associated with a better prog-
nosis. Postprocedural complications, such as septic
Prostatic Disorders
521
shock, can be serious problems. Two issues are impor-
tant postsurgically: Suitable antibiotic treatment and
castration of the animal are required to prevent thc
recurrence of the abscess, and culture specimens should
be obtained 1 week and again 4 weeks after therapy is
concluded to ensure resolution ofinfection.
Prostatic and Paraprostatic Cyst
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Cysts are cavitating lesions that have a distinct wall (may
be secretory in nature) and contain turbid fluid. Two
types of prostatic cysts are recognized. Retention cysts
are believed to result from changes to acini in response
to estrogens.Pronounced cystic hyperplastic changes
also may result in prostatic retention cysts.Paraprostatic
cysts are fluid-filled structures located adjacent to the
prostate. Many consider paraprostatic cysts dilated rem-
nants of the uterus masculinus. However, the cause of
paraprostatic cysts is debatable because histologic evalu
ation has not confirmed their origination from embry
ologic structures.
Signaiment
Approximately 5% of dogs with prostatic disease
have paraprostatic cysts. Paraprostatic cysts may be more
522
Prostatic Disorders
common in medium- to large-breed dogs older than 8
years. There seems to be no breed predisposition. Intact
males may be affected more than castrated males.
History and Clinical Signs
Prostatic and paraprostatic cysts often do not cause clini-
cal signs until their size is sufficient to impinge on the
colon or urethra or until they undergo abscessation.
Clinical signs commonly reported are tenes: 1s,
lethargy, anorexia, and dysuria. In certain cases cysts canl
be connected to the urethra,in which case serosan-
guineous urethral discharge may be present and
changes in prostatic fluid may be apparent.
Physical Examination Findings
Physical examination usually is unremarkable in these
cases. In some cases a caudal abdominal mass may be pal-
pable on rectal examination or abdominal palpation. If
the cyst extends caudally, it may cause perineal swelling.
In most cases prostatomegaly is the only finding on rec
tal palpation; a soft fluctuant mass also may be palpable
Diagnostic Tests and Results
Laboratory tests may not help in diagnosing these condi-
tions. Survey radiographs may show a second bladder
Prostatic Disorders
523
like structure, and in very rare cases calcified walls
(intramural mineralization) of the cyst may be obscrved.
Contrast urethrocystography may reveal asymmetric
enlargement of the prostate gland and a narrowed ure-
thral lumen, and urethroprostatic reflux may be
increased, although there is no communication with the
cyst. In addition, contrast cystography helps differenti-
ate the urinary bladder from a suspected paraprostatic
cyst. Prostatic and paraprostatic cysts can be confused
with prostatomegaly resulting from BPH, bacterial pros
tatitis, and neoplasia occurring at the time of survey radi-
ography.
Ultrasoundisveryusefulbecauseofits abilitytosep-
arate solid versus cystic lesions. Ultrasonography reveals
an anechoic area with cystic change associated withi thie
prostate. In certain cases a macroscopic cyst may occur
along with BPH (Figure 17-5). Prostatic fluid may have a
high protein concentration and low numbers of white
blood cells and usually is sterile.Aspiration of suspected
cysts could be dangerous because a prostatic abscess may
have a similar clinical presentation.
TreatmentandPrognosis
No medical therapy is available. Prostatic and parapros-
tatic cysts should be drained surgically by excision or
marsupialization. Simple drainage with ultrasound guid-
ance has been described but may allow recurrence.
524
ProstaticDisorders
Figure 17-5.Benign prostatichyperplasia and intrapros
taticcyst.Transverse-plane sonogramofa 7-year-old
intact mixed-breedmale dog withpalpable prostatic
enlargement.Theechotexture ishomogeneousanda
well-defined cyst(arrow)containing anechoicfluid can be
seen in the right lobe of the prostate. Cystlike change also
canbe seen with prostatic abscess, but the fluid within the
cavitationusuallyisechogenic,the wallsarelesswell-
defined,andtheclinicalpresentationdiffersfromthatof
benignprostatichyperplasia.
Prostatic Disorders
525
Tacking of the residual cyst with omentum may help pre-
vent recurrence. Castration also is recommended in
dogs diagnosed as having cystic prostatic disease.
Prostatic Neoplasia
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Prostatic neoplasia is uncontrolled, disorganized prolifera
tion of prostatic tissue, most often of epithelial cells. The
aging prostate gland is subject to neoplastic transforma-
tion, most commonly adenocarcinoma. It is believed that
adenocarcinoma occurs after the initial neoplastic condi-
tion ofprostatic intraepithelial neoplasia.Prostatic neo-
plasmsotherthanadenocarcinomathathavebeen
reported are transitional cell carcinoma, undifferenti-
ated carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and metastatic
lesions from other primary tumors (lymphosarcoma,
squamous cell carcinoma, and hemangiosarcoma). All of
these tumors are maligmant.
The cause of prostatic neoplasia is unknown.Al-
though it may be hormonally related, it does not appear to
exclusively involve testicular hormones. The tumors are
locally invasive and may cause ureteral or urethral obstruc-
tion. Invasion through the prostatic capsule into sur-
rounding pelvic musculature may occur. Pulmonary
metastases may or may not be influenced by thelevel of cir-
culating androgens (presence or absence of testicles).
526
Prostatic Disorders
Signaiment
On the basis of necropsy studies, prevalence of prostatic
neoplasia ranges from 0.29%-0.6% and accounts for
3.5%-15% of dogs with prostatic disease. It occurs both
in intact and neutered dogs. Hence, castration does not
have a sparing effect. Affected animals usually are older
dogs (reported mean age, 10 years). There is no brccd
predilection, although most dogs with prostatic neopla
sia are medium to large breeds.
History and Chinicaf Signs
The most common clinical signs in dogs with prostatic
adenocarcinoma are weight loss, inappetence, rear limb
lameness, and tenesmus. Lumbar pain, stranguria
polyuria/polydipsia, and dysuria/hernaturia/pyuria are
other commonly observed signs.Systemic signs may
include depression, cachexia, and pyrexia. Dogs with
metastases to bone have significantly greater occurrence
of weight loss, emaciation, and lumbar pain. Secondary
bacterial infection of the gland results in clinical signs of
bacterialprostatitis asdiscussedearlier.
Physicaf Examination Findings
The prostate usually is asymmetrically enlarged, firm,
and painful and often has nodular areas revealed on rec-
tal palpation. Neutered dogs should have a palpably
ProstaticDisorders
527
small prostate gland, so a finding of even mild prostatic
enlargementinaneutereddogshouldpromptsuspi
cion of neoplasia. In some dogs with prostatic neoplasia,
the prostate gland may be attached to surrounding tis
sues.
Diagnostic Tests and Results
History and physical examination findings in cases of
neoplasia of the prostate can mimic either chronic pros-
tatic infection or BPH. They can be differentiated from
neoplasia by response to castration and presence of con
current infections; BPH resolves after castration,
whereas prostatic size is unchanged after castration in
dogs with prostatic neoplasia and chronic prostatic
infection often results in chronic or recurrent urinary
tract infection,less commonly associated with prostatic
adenocarcinoma.The marked prostatomegaly ofpros-
tatic abscessation and paraprostatic cysts also must be
distinguished from prostatic neoplasia.
In dogs with prostatic adenocarcinoma, a CBC may
reveal nonregenerative anemia,neutrophilicleukocyto
sis with or without a left shift, or monocytosis. Serum
chemistries may show increased activity of hepatic
cnzymes, especially alkaline phosphatase, and hypoalbu
minemia. Half of the affected population of dogs may
have an increase in serum alkaline phosphatase.
Obstruction of the urethra with or without bilateral
528
ProstatlcDisorders
ureteral obstruction may result in azotemia. Prostatic
fluid may contain neoplastic cells, but FNA or histo-
pathologic examination of biopsy specimens often is
necessary to confirm the diagnosis.Although specific
tumor markers in serum are used for diagnosis of pros-
tatic neoplasia in humans, they are not helpful in diag-
nosis of canine prostatic adenocarcinoma.
Radiographs often show only prostatomegaly, but
contour or intraprostatic mineralization (Figure 17-6).
Focal or multifocal hyperechoic areas in the parenchyma
withloss ofnormal architecture are discernible on ultra
sonographs. In addition, ultrasonographic examination
can detect asymmetry and irregularity of the prostatic
contour. There may be poorly defined hyperechoic foci
be visible (Figure 17-7). Cavitary lesions may appear;
these may represent infarction, necrosis, hemorrhage,
or edema. Distention retrograde urethrocystography
may reveal a distorted, narrow, and in certain instances,
ruptured pelvic urethra. These changes are accompa-
niedbyperiurethral asymmetry.
If a diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma is made,
the disease must be staged. Prostatic adenocarcinoma
often metastasizes to the external and internal iliac
lymph nodes, the lumbar vertebrae, and the lungs.
Valuable staging tools include palpation ofiliac lymph
ProstaticDisorders
529
Figure 17-6.Prostatic carcinoma.Lateral radiographicprojec-
tion of a 10-year-old intact male coonhound with hematuria. The
enlarged prostate is ill defined, but there is recognizable mineral-
ization (arrow) within the prostatic shadow.
530
ProstaticDisorders
Figure 17-7. Prostatic carcinoma. Sagittal-view sonogram
of the animal described in Figure 17-6 showing the prostate
gland and part ofthe urinary bladder (left). The prostatic echo
texture is sonolucent (considered hypoechoiccompared with
normal prostate), and the mineralization (arrow) within the
prostate is causing specular reflection and acoustic shadowing.
ProstaticDisorders
531
nodes on rectal examination, survey radiographs of the
lumbar region, three-view thoracic radiographs (ven-
trodorsal [VD], left lateral, and right lateral), and
nuclear bone scans.Even if thoracic radiographs show
no evidence of metastasis, there is a 40% chance that
metastases are present because micrometastatic lesions
that go undetected in dogs with prostatic adenocarci
noma may be present.
TreatmentandPrognosis
Treatment options for prostatic adenocarcinoma are lim
ited. If there is no evidence of metastatic disease, local
therapy (radiation) can be considered. Unfortunately,
the neoplasm is not responsive to hormonal therapy.
Because prostatectomy results in high rates of morbidity
and failure, it is not recommended. Furthermore, uri-
nary incontinence is a common complication after sur-
gery. External-beam radiation and chemotherapy have
limited success. In certain cases this treatment is
reported to shrink the tumor with relief of urinary out-
flow and obstruction.The life span of the dog can be
extended by a few months.
Prognosis for dogs with prostatic neoplasia is grave.
Most dogs either die as a result of complications of the
cancer or are euthanized shortly after diagnosis. Patients
with no evidence of metastasis may have longer survival
times.
532
Prostatlc Dlsorders
Bibliography
Bamberg-Thalen B, Linde-Forsberg C: Treatment of
canine benign prostatic hyperplasia with medroxy-
progesterone acetate,JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 29:221,
1993.
Barsanti JA: Diseases of the prostate gland. Proceedings of
the Society for Theriogenology Male Reproduction
Symposium, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 1997.
Barsanti JA, Finco DR: Canine bacterial prostatitis, Vet
Clin North Am 9:679, 1979.
Barsanti JA, Finco DR: Canine prostatic diseases, Vet Chin
North Am 16:587, 1986.
Barsanti JA, Finco DR, Mahaffey MM et al: Effects of an
extract of Serenoa repens on dogs with hyperplasia of
the prostate gland, Am J Vet Res 61:880, 2000.
Bell FW, Klausner JS, Hayden DW et al: Evaluation of
serum and seminal plasma markers in the diagnosis of
canineprostaticdisorders,JVetIntMed9:149,1995.
Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Klausner JS et al: Canine
prostatic disease: comparison of ultrasonographic
appearance with morphological and microbiologi-
cal findings: 30 cases (1981-1985), J Am Vet Med A.ssoc
190:1027, 1987.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Prostatitis. In Feldman EC,
Nelson RW (eds): Canine and feline endocrinology and
reproduction,Philadelphia,1996,WBSaunders.
Forrester SD, Purswell BJ: Diseases of the prostate.
In Leib MS, Monroe WE (eds): Practical small
Prostatic Disorders
533
animal internal medicine, Philadelphia, 1997,WB
Saunders.
Johnson SD, Kamolpatana K, Root Kustritz MV et al:
Prostatic disorders in the dog, Anim Reprod Sci 60-
61:405,2000
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN: Canine
and feline theriogenology,Philadelphia,2001,WB
Saunders.
Kamolpatana K, Johnston SD: Effect of finasteride on
serum dihydrotestosterone andtestosteroneinthe
dog. Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology,
Kansas City, Mo, 1996.
Kamolpatana K, Johnston
GR,  Johnston
SD:
Determination of canine prostatic volume using
transabdominal   ultrasonography,   Vet  Radiol
Ultrasmund41:73,2000.
Klausner JS, Osborne CA: Management of canine bacte-
rial prostatitis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:292, 1983.
Ling GV: Diagnosis and medical management of
prostate infections in dogs. Proceedings of the
Society for Theriogenology, Toronto,Ontario,
Canada, 1990.
Olson PE: Disorders of the canine prostate gland.
Proceedings of the Society for Theriogenology,
Denver, 1984.
Olson PN, Wright RH, Thrall MA: Disorders of the
canine prostate gland: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
medical therapy, Comp Cont Ed 9:613, 1987.
534
Prostatic Disorders
Peter AT, Steiner JM, Adams LG: Diagnosis and mcdical
management ofprostate disease in the dog.Semin
Vet Med Surg (SmallAnim) 10:35, 1995.
Root Kustritz MV: Medical management of canine pros
tatic disease. Proceedings of the Society for
Theriogenology, Baltimore, 1998.
Sirinarumitr K, Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV: Effects
of finasteride on size of prostate gland and semen
quality in dogs with benign prostatic hypertrophy,
I Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1275, 2001.
Thrall MA, Olson PN: Diagnosis of canine prostatic dis-
ease, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:95, 1985.
18
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
MatthewReevesandPhilipThomas
ATA GLANCE
·Persistent penilefrenulum is lack of dissolution of tissue
attaching the penile and preputial mucosa. Diagnosis is
made based on visual inspection. Treatment is surgical
transection.
535
536
Dlsorders of the Penis and Prepuce
·Hypospadias is failure of the urethral closure on the
ventrum,anywhere alongthelength ofthepenileure
thra. Diagnosis is made based on visual inspection.
Treatment is surgical closure of the cleft or penile
amputation and urethrostomy.
· Penile trauma may be associated with lacerations or
fracture of the os penis. Diagnosis is made based on
visual inspection or radiography. Treatment of lacera-
tions is as for any skin wound, allowing for the fact that
excessive hemorrhiage may occur if the cavernous
spaces ofthepenis areinvaded.Fractures of the os
penismayhealspontaneouslybutrequirestabilization
ifthefractureisdisplacedorifurethraldamageor
compression is present.
 Priapism is persistent erection. Causes include neo-
plasiaorthromboemboliblockingvenous outflow
and neurologic disease. Diagnosis is made based on
visual inspection. Treat the underlying cause, if possi-
ble. Penile amputation and urethrostomy may be
necessary.
·Balanoposthitis isinflammationof the penile and
preputial mucosa as aresult ofviral orbacterialinfec-
tion or contact irritants,or it may occur as a compo-
nent of atopic dermatitis.Diagnosis is made based on
visual inspection and culture; moderate to heavy
growth of a single organism is significant. Treat the
underlying cause, if possible
Disorders ofthe PenisandPrepuce
LES
· Paraphimosis is inability of the animal to retract the
breeding or after licking of the extended penis in
intact or castrated male dogs. Diagnosis is made based
on visual inspection. Treat by lubricating thc pcnis
and replacing it within the prepuce.
· Urethral prolapse is protrusion of urethral tissue from
the external urethral orifice.The classic presentation
is a reddened mass of tissue, as of a “red pea."
Diagnosis is made based on visual inspection. Surgical
resectionis the treatmentof choice.
·Penile neoplasia is uncommon.The most common
tumor types reported are squamous cell carcinoma
and transmissible venereal tumor. Surgical resection is
thetreatmentofchoiceforsquamouscellcarcinoma.
Transmissible venereal tumor is best treated with vin
cristine.
Persistent Penile Frenulum
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Persistent penile frenulum is caused by a failure of
separation of the preputial mucosa from the glans
penis (the balanopreputial fold). This androgen-
dependent separation normally occurs at birth or
within the first few months of life. The penile
538
Dlsorders of the Penis and Prepuce
frenulum is an avascular, fibrous membrane of varying
thickness that joins the ventral midline of the glans
penis to the prepuce.
History and Clinical Signs
The frenulum prevents full extrusion of the penis and
can lead to the following conditions.
· Urinary retention (and recurrent balanoposthitis)
·Urine scald dermatitis
·Refusal orinability to mate
· Pain or hemorrhage with attempts to extrude the
penis
·Ventral or lateral deviation of the penis (phallo
campsis)
Physical Examination and Diagnosis
Physical examination findings are diagnostic.
Treatment
Treatment requires surgical excision or sectioning of
the frenulum. This can be performed with the animal
under local anesthesia or under sedation and has
a good prognosis. A heritable nature has been
established.
DisordersofthePenisandPrepuce
539
Hypospadias
DefinitionandPathogenesis
Hypospadias is a ventral opening in the penile urethra
resulting from a defect in urethral closure. Urethral
defects are classified as perineal, scrotal, penile, or glan
dular depending on their anatomic locations, and they
commonly occur in the perineal region. Closure of the
urethra normally occurs during fetal development,
under the influence of dihydrotestosterone. Hypospadias
has been induced experimentally in fetuses by adminis
nant dam. Hypospadias also can be attributed to
androgen receptor defects and may be associated with
other urogenital tract anomalies and intersex (see
Chapter l).
History and ChinicafSigns
On physical examination, hypospadias may be any of the
following:
· An incidental finding
·Associated with urinaryincontinence
·Accompanied by abnormalexternalgenitalia or
othercongenitalanomalies
· Accompanied by urinary tract infections and urine
scald dermatitis
540
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
Physical Examination andDiagnosis
Physical examination findings are diagnostic.
Treatment
Surgical urethral reconstruction may be technically
demanding but can be curative. Distal hypospadias
(glandular) may respond to primary repair. Perineal
dures for rostrally located lesions.
Diphallus
Definition and Pathogenesis
Diphallus is duplication of the penis. It rarely occurs in
the dog. The cause has not been determined.
Chinicaf Signs and Diagnosis
Clinical examination is diagnostic. The reported cases
have been accompanied by other abnormalities of the
urinary and genital tract, including other duplications.
Penile Hypoplasia
Definition and Pathogenesis
Penile hypoplasia is a smaller-than-normal penis. It is
a rare condition occurring as part of a complex of
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
541
abnormalities in female pseudohermaphrodite dogs
An "infantile" penis has been described as a congenital
condition but may be acquired in dogs castrated at 7
weeks of age.
History and Clinical Signs
the prepuce,or may be accompanied by cryptorchidism.
Physicaf Examination and Diagnosis
Physical examination findings are diagnostic
Treatment
Treatment may not be necessary. Preputial reconstruc-
tion has been described. Penile amputation and ure-
throstomy might be considered a salvage procedure in
symptomatic animals.
Penile Trauma
Definition and Pathogenesis
Trauma to the penis occurs as a result of mating, fight-
ing, and racing, as well as being involved in road traffic
accidents. A fractured os penis may be immediately
542
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
apparent but more commonly is an incidental finding or
is discovered as the primary cause of urethral obstruc
tion secondary to callous formation at the fracture site.
History and Chinicai Signs
Clinical signis vary depending on the nature and extent
of the injury. Mild trauma can cause bruising, swelling.
and lacerations to the penis, accompanied by hemor-
rhage and pain. Dogs with fractures of the os penis o1
urethral obstruction may present with stranguria.
dysuria, and systemic signs. Long-standing injuries may
be noted only as inability or reluctance to mate or penile
deviation.
PhysicafExamination
Ageneral and specificreproductive tract examination is
indicated,including bladder palpation, neurologic
examination, musculoskeletal examination, and a
detailed examination of the prepuce and penis for phys
ical injury.
DiagnosticTests
If obstruction of the urinary outflow tract is suspected,
serum biochemistry and urinalysis are indicated to
assess for postrenal azotemia. Abdominal and penile
DisordersofthePenisandPrepuce
543
ultrasound (including dynamic ultrasound of the pas-
sage of a urethra catheter) is useful in assessing urethral
integrity. Radiography is necessary to evaluate fractures
of the os penis. Contrast radiography (retrograde ure-
thrography) permits assessment of urethral integrity.
Treatment
Skin wounds should be cleaned and debrided.Absorbable
suture material should be used to repair lacerations.
Topical or systemic antimicrobials may be useful in pre-
ventingsecondaryinfections.
During healing the penis should be extruded from the
prepuce at least twice daily, both to assess wound healing
and to prevent the formations of adhesions between the
penis and prepuce. Sexlal arousal should be avoided dur-
ing the repair process because erection may lead to bleed-
ing and wound dehiscence. Male dogs must be housed
away from estrous bitches. If wounds fail to heal because of
frequent erections, castration may be necessary.
Urinary outflow obstruction secondary tourethral
damage necessitates bladder decompression either by
cystocentesis,an indwelling catheter, or temporary ure-
throstomy. Urethral lacerations may require primary
surgical closure.
Surgical stabilization isrecommended for displaced
fractures to the os penis or for sites at which urethral danl-
age has occurred. This can be achieved using orthopedic
544  Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
wires or a small bone plate. Nondisplaced fractures not
associated with urethral damage generally heal well, with
the penis providing support for fracture healing.
Prognosis
Wound healing may lead to callous formation and sec-
ondary urethral obstruction.Permanent urethrostomy
or penile amputation may be necessary as a salvage
procedure.
Priapism
Definition andPathogenesis
Priapism is an erection that persists without scxual stim
ulation. Priapism can be the result of hemodynamic or
neurologic disturbances that cause occlusion of the
venous outflow tracts, such as thromboembolism and
neoplasia. Sludging of erythrocytes and thrombosis
leads to ischemia and necrosis. Priapism predisposes the
penis to secondary damage, and exposed mucosal sur-
faces may become dry and fissured.
History and Clinical Signs
Clinical signs vary depending on cause, chronicity, and
severity of secondary trauma. Ischemic damage to the
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
545
penis initially is painful before the penis becomes edem-
atous, congested, and swollen. Self-mutilation1 may then
occur.
Physicaf Examination and Diagnosis
A complete physical examination followed by a close
examination of the entire penis and prepuce are diag
nostic. Establishing a primary cause may be difficult.
Hematology and biochemistry, coagulation profiles,
complete examination of the genital and urinary tracts,
abdominal ultrasound, spinal radiographs, and myelo-
graphs are useful in identifying specific causes.
Treatment
Treatment should be directed at both the primary cause
anid the lesion.
●If the primary cause can be determined, it should be
addressedrapidly.
· The penis should be moistened, the penile surface
cleaned, and specific penile injuries treated as nec-
essary before replacement of the penis in the pre-
removing clots from the cavernous spaces via inci-
sion into the cavernous spaces of the bulbus glandis
and the pars longa glandis and manual expression
We have attempted to flush clots from the cavernous
546
Disorders of the Penls and Prepuce
spacesusingheparin-containingsolutionswithout
success. Penile amputation may be necessary in
refractory cases or when secondary damage to the
penis is severe.
Prognosis
Irreversible changes occur rapidly. If penile amputation
and urethrostomy must be performed, prognosis for the
animal'slife usually isgood.
Balanitis, Posthitis, and Balanoposthitis
Definition andPathogenesis
Balanitis and posthitis are, respectively, inflammation of
the glans penis and the prepuce. Balanoposthitis is
inflammation of the penis and prepuce. Organisms iso
lated generally are normal inhabitants of the prepuce.
Other etiologic factors include preputial foreign bodies,
neoplasia,urinary incontinence, and allergic dermatitis
in atopic animals.
Microorganisms isolated from animals with bal-
anoposthitis include the following:
·Bacteria, commonly including Escherichia coli,which
are normal flora
· Mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas, which are common
isolates of the prepuce in unaffected dogs, although
DisordersofthePenis andPrepuce
547
mycoplasmas are more commonly recovered from
affected dogs than from healthy dogs
· Viruses, including herpesvirus and calicivirus, both
of which are associated with vesicular lesions
Signaiment
Balanoposthitis is a common finding in dogs and is rare in
cats. Both prepuberal dogs and adult dogs are affected.
History andChinicafSigns
Dogs have excessive purulent, occasionally sanguineous,
preputial discharge. The discharge varies in both vol-
ume and degree of purulence.Balanoposthitis usually
causes no systemic signs but occasionally may be associ-
ated with excessive penile grooming.Examination of the
penile skin and preputial mucosa may reveal scant to
copious purulent material overlying mucosa that may be
normal, erythematous, or ulcerated. Lymphoid follicles
may be grossly visible in chronic disease, and vesicles
may be present in dogs with viral-induced disease.
Healthy, intact male dogs secrete prostatic fluid con-
tinuously, which drains into the urinary bladder and
down the urethra, forming a mass of mucoid,yellow-
green discharge at the preputial orifice. This normal
occurrence should not be associated with inflanmation
of penile and preputial mucosal surfaces.
548
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
Physical Examination and Diagnostic Tests
Physical examination of the penis and prepuce usually
is diagnostic. It is important to rule out underlying
causes, such as foreign bodies, neoplasia, ulcerative or
inflammatory lesions, and congenital anomalies.
Sedation or general anesthesia may be necessary for
complete extrusion of the penis to be performed.
Bacterial and mycoplasma cultures may be performed,
but the results may not be meaningful. Herpesvirus
induces a short-lived and poor humeral response, pre-
cluding serologic testing as a worthwhile diagnostic
test; serologic results positive for herpesvirus are spe-
cificbut not sensitive.
Treatment
Treatmentis
S conservative, involving preputial
lavage with sterile saline, weak antiseptic solutions
(e.g., chlorhexidine, aqueous iodine), or topical
antibiotics, as indicated by culture and sensitivity.
Topical antibiotics should be used cautiously to avoid
the risk of antibiotic resistance.The benefit of sys
temic antibiotics remains controversial, although
enrofloxacin may be indicated if mycoplasmal infec
tion is implicated as a primary cause of disease.
Allergic dermatitis should be approached with all
appropriate diagnostic and treatment plan for the
skin.
Disordersof the Penis and Prepuce
549
Prognosis
Prognosis is good for cases in which an underlying cause
is found and can be treated. If an underlying cause is not
found, symptomatic therapy may be attempted but
preputial discharge commonly recurs in days to weeks
after treatment. Preputial discharge in prepuberal dogs
generally resolves to some extent without treatment.
Phimosis
Definition andPathogenesis
Phimosis is the failure of the penis to be exteriorized from
theprepuce.This may occurbecause of stenosis of the
preputial opening. Congenital and acquired causes have
been identified. Acquired causes include trauma, cicatri-
cial constriction, preputial inflammation, preputial infec-
tion, and neoplasia. Preputial hairs entangling the
preputial opening are the most common cause of phimo
sis in longhaired cats. A congenital abnormality of the
Boston terrier, resulting in phimosis. It may be accompa
History and Clinical Signs
Congenital causes of phimosis are detected in young ani
mals and generally are associated with dribhling of urine
550
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
from the prepuce. In severe cases complete urine out-
flow obstruction is possible. Presentations in older ani-
mals generally are associated with an inability to
copulate or pain during erection.
Physicaf Examination and Diagnostic Tests
Physical examination is diagnostic. The penis may be
either painful or unable to be exteriorized.
TreatmentandPrognosis
Corrective surgery involves increasing the diameter of
the preputial orifice dorsally or ventrally. Corrective sur-
gery generally is curative.
Paraphimosis
Definition and Pathogenesis
Paraphimosis is the condition in which the nonerect
penis is unable to retract completely into the prepuce.
Venous outflow from the penis is obstructed, and
ischemic injury and secondary trauma follow. Throm-
boembolism of the cavernous spaces may occur. Causes
include primary preputial disorders, primary penile dis-
eases, and extrareproductive tract disease.
Disorders ofthePenis and Prepuce
551
·Penile:entrapment after normal erection,trauma,
neoplasia, or fractured os penis leading to penile
swelling
· Preputial: after coitus or erection when the prepuce
folds on itself narrowing the preputial orifice,
preputial foreign body, preputial hair rings (espe-
cially in longhaired cats)
·Extrareproductive:neurologic disease affecting the
parasympathetic nervous system or the hypogastric
nerve
Signaiment
Paraphimosis occurs coinmonly in dogs and is rare in
cats.
History and Clinicaf Signs
Paraphimosis commonly occurs after periods of sexual
excitement. Clinical signs depend on the duration of
the injury because the likelihood of ischemic damage
and secondary injury increases with time. The appear
ance of the penis varies from normal to congested and
edematous. If the duration is prolongcd, the penis
becomes dry and excoriated. In severe cases the
penis may become necrotic. Urethral integrity usually
is maintained.
552
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
Physicaf Examination and Diagnosis
Visual inspection of the penis generally is diagnostic but
may require sedation or general anesthesia.
Treatment
CONSERVATIVE Therapy is aimed at replacing the penis
within the prepuce, thereby restoring its circulation.
This usually is accomplished by rmanual reduction. The
prepuce is gently retracted to facilitate unfolding of
the prepuce to return it to its normal configuration. The
prepuce can then be replaced to cover the surface of
the penis with water-soluble lubricant. Gentle pressure
dure may require sedation or general anesthesia. If
the penis has been damaged, its surface may need to be
lavaged, wounds debrided, and antibiotics applied as
necessary.
SURGIcAL Surgery may be necessary to enlarge the
preputial orifice, allowing the penis to be reduced. This
can be achieved by making a ventral midline incision in
the prepuce, replacing the penis, and closing the inci-
sion in separate layers. A temporary suture can be placed
at the preputial orifice for 24 hours to reduce the likeli-
hood of recurrence until swelling in the penis has sub-
sided. Severe damage may necessitate complete or
partial penile amputation and perineal urethrostomy.
DisordersofthePenisandPrepuce
553
Prognosis
Paraphimosis commonly recurs after periods of sexual
excitementinintact animals.Topreventrecurrence,
efforts should be directed at reducing sexual activity or
excitement. Castration is effective.Pharmacologic man
agement with antiandrogenic compounds is less effec-
tive and may be associated with side effects.
Urethral Eversion/Prolapse
Definition and Pathogenesis
Prolapseof theurethra ischaracterized by appearance
of a 1- to 5-mm mass of urethral mucosa, which has
everted through the urethral meatus. The prolapse may
appear or increase in size with erection,
Signaiment
A familial inheritance is reported in English bulldogs
and Boston terriers.Affected animals are commonly
younger than 2 years.
History and Clinical Signs
Urethral eversion usually is associated with significant
hemorrhage that occurs intermittently in association
with sexual excitement.
554[
 Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
Treatment
CoNSERVATIVE Conservative treatment relies on reduc
ing levels of sexual excitement and sexual activity. This
may involve tranquilization and isolation of male dogs
from bitches in heat or castration, which usually is associ-
ated with disappointing results.
SURGICAL Surgical resolution requires excision of the
prolapse and suturing healthyurethral mucosa to penile
skin. Care must be taken to avoid puncturing the corpus
spongiosum.Castration should be considered at thc
time of surgery to reduce future sexual activity and
excitement. Surgical treatment failure, with necessity of
repeating surgical procedures, is not uncommon.
Prognosis
Relapse is common in intact dogs, although there are
reports of successful breeding after surgical correction.
Penile Neoplasia: General Information
Definition and Pathogenesis
Neoplasia of the penis is rare in dogs and cats. Various
tumor types occur. The most common neoplasms are
transmissible venereal tumors (TVTs) and squamous
cell carcinomas. Other neoplasms affecting the penis
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
555
include carcinomas, chondrosarcomas of the os penis,
plasma cell tumors, and mast cell tumors.
History and Clinical Signs
Mass lesions may protrude from the preputial opening-
Penile neoplasms may be associated with pain at mating.
preputial discharge, and hemorrhage.
TreatmentandPrognosis
Treatment and prognosis depend on the cell type and
grade and evidence of metastasis. Surgical excisional
biopsy and histopathologic examination are indicated.
Transmissible Venereal Tumors
Definition and Pathogenesis
TVTs originate from mucosal cells and occur as friable
mass lesions on mucous membranes,particularly of the
penis. The cause is unknown. The neoplastic cells do n1ot
appear to be canine in origin,containing only 59 ± 5 chro
mosomes, compared with the 78 chromosomes in healthy
canine cells. A viral cause has been proposed but as yet is
notidentified. Transmission occurs by seeding of neoplas
tic cells during coitus. Sniffing or muzzling the neoplastic
lesions may cause spread to other mucosal surfaces.
556 Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
TVTs seem to have an incubation period of 5-6
weeks. TVTs have no direct effect on fertility but may
physically impede copulation.
History and Clinical Signs
Dogs generally are presented because owners have
noticed penile mass lesions protruding from the pre-
puce or a bloody preputial discharge.
Physicaf Examination
Examination of the penis generally reveals pink, nodu
lar lesions, which vary in size and number. Large lesions
often have a cauliflower appearance. The masses gener-
ally are friable, can have an ulcerated surface, and may
bleed easily. Some appear pedunculated. In the absence
of infection, the masses are not painful.
DiagnosticTests
Diagnosis is based on physical examination findings and
biopsy.
Treatment
Spontaneous regression may occur within months of diag
nosis. Surgical excision, amputation, chemotherapy, and
DisordersofthePenisandPrepuce
557
radiotherapy have been used in the treatment of TVTs.
Tumors are likely to recur in approximately 50% of cases
regardless of treatment. Vincristine (0.5-0.7 mg/M2
administered intravenously once every l4 days for three
treatments or for at least one treatmentbeyondresolution
of clinical signs) has perhaps shown most potential, induc-
ingremissionin more than90%ofcases without relapse.
Prognosis
Tumor metastasis is considered rare but has been
reported to occur in abdominal and thoracic viscera, the
brain,and the eye.
Other Acguired Disorders of the Penis
Definition and Pathogenesis
Vesicles, ulcers, and lymphoid follicle hyperplasia also
occur on the penis. The cause of penile vesicles has not
been determined. Herpesvirus has been implicated but
notisolatedfrom thevesicles.Ulcers areuncommon
and generally associated with infection. Hyperplasia of
lymphoid follicles at the base of the glans (where large
numbers of small 1- to 2-mm nodules may appear) is of
unknown significance and does not appear to be associ-
ated with clinical disease or to be transmissible. Viral
causes have been proposed but not yet demonstrated.
558
Disorders of the Penis and Prepuce
History and Clinicaf Signs
Lesions may be associated with preputial discharge 0r
excessive grooming of the penis or may be noticed as
mass lesions protruding from the preputial orifice.
DiagnosticTests
Definitive diagnosis is based on biopsy. Exfoliative cytol
ogy and bacterial and fungal cultures are sometimes
necessary.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the lesion present. Wart lesions
generally resolve spontaneously after biopsy.
Bibliography
England GC:Allen's fertility and obstetrics in the dog.
Oxford, 1998, Blackwell Science.
Roberts SJ: Veterinary obstetrics and genital diseases,
Woodstock,1986,SJRoberts.
Root Kustritz MV: Disorders of the canine penis, Vet Clin
NorthAm31:247,2001.
Disordersof thePenis and Prepuce
559
Thomas P: Canine theriogenology. Presented at the
Sunshine Coast AVA Annual Divisional Conference,
Sunshine Coast,Australia, 1998.
Verstegen JP: Conditions of the male. In Simpson G,
England G, Harvey M (eds): Manual of small animal
reproduction and neonatology, Cheltenham, England.
1998,British Small AnimalVeterinaryAssociation.
19
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
Margaret V. Root Kustritz
ATA GLANCE
· Infertility in dogs
·Improper timing of breeding is the most common cause
of apparent infertility in dogs. Measure progesterone in
serum to optimize breeding timing (see Chapter 2).
● Subclinical uterine infection may occur. Collect a
specimen for culture from the anterior vagina,
561
562
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
using a guarded swab, earlyin proestrus. Moderate
to heavy growth of a single organism is significant.
Treat with an appropriate antibiotic, based on cul-
ture and sensitivity testing,for 2-4 weeks.
·Brucellosis is associated with infertility in bitches
anddogs.Regularserologictestingisrecom-
mended in all breeding animals (see Chapter 7).
·Hypothyroidism is associated with irregular cycles in
the bitch and poor semen quality in the male dog.
Concurrent measurement of free thyroxine (T4) by
dialysis and of canine thyroid-stimulating hormone
(cTSH) in serum is the diagnostic scheme of choice.
Appropriatesupplementationofhypothyroidani-
tility. Hypothyroidism may be hereditary.
· Abnormal semen quality may be associated with
apprehension at the time of breeding or semen
collection, prostate disease (see Chapter 17), tes
ticular disorders (see Chapter l6), brucellosis (see
Chapter 7),or hypothyroidism.
·Infertilityincats
· Queens are seasonally polyestrous. If the environ-
ment is such that the queen is not exposed to at least
10 hours of light daily, she may not cycle.
· A queen should be brought to the tom's environl-
ment. Copulation must take place at least four times
during estrus to reliably induce ovulation. Serum
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
563
progesterone concentration greater than 2 ng ml
after the queen goes out of behavioral estrus is
indicative of ovulation having occurred.
· Viral causes of pregnancy loss in the queen include
feline leukemia, feline infectious peritonitis,
feline herpesvirus (rhinotracheitis), and pan-
leukopenia. Toxoplasmosis and bacterial infec-
tions are uncommon causes of pregnancy loss in
queens.
·Semen evaluation in tom cats is challenging; cysto
centesis after copulation is a noninvasive technique
that allows assessment for spermatogenesis but not
evaluation of semen quality. Electroejaculation can
be performed in anesthetized tom cats.
Infertility in the Dog
1. The bitch is cycling. (Proceed to 2.)
1'. The bitch has never cycled.
· Primary anestrus is lack of estrous activity in a
bitch by 24 months of age.
· Causes include the following:
Husbandry: Bitches that are malnourished or
that are under stress because of heavy work
or show schedules may not cycle. Housing
with cycling bitches may stimulate estrous
activity in anestrous bitches.
564
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
Previousovariohysterectomy:Previous ovariohys
terectomy may be diagnosed based on
history, palpation or observation of an
ovariohysterectomy scar at the ventral
abdominal midline, or exploratory laparo-
tomy. In spayed bitches, serum concentra-
tions of the gonadotropins,luteinizing
hormone(L.H) and follicle-stimulating hor-
mone (FSH),are elevated because oflack of
negative feedback from the absent ovary to
the anterior pituitary. Elevated LH concen-
tration in blood may be identified in bitches
with an in-house LH assay (Status-LH;
Synbiotics, San Diego, Calif.). Measure-
ment of serum estradiol 60-90 minutes after
administration ofgonadotropin-releasing
hormone(GnRH)or humanchorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) has been described;
concentrationsbelow the sensitivity of the
assay used may be indicative of previous
ovariohysterectomyin thatbitch.
Silentheat:Silentheatisfolliculardevelop
ment and ovulation in the absence of physi
cal signs of heat, such as vuilvar swelling and
exudation of serosanguineous vaginal dis-
charge. Diagnosis requires weekly assess-
ment of vaginal cytology and monthly
measurement of serum progesterone con-
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
565
centration, with serum progesterone con-
centration greater than 2 ng/ml indicating
ovarian activity. Dogs bred appropriately
during a silent heat are fertile.
Hermaphroditism (see Chapter 1):Abnor-
malities of scxual differentiation described
indogs include true hermaphroditism
(presence of ovarian and testicular tissue),
male pseudohermaphroditism (presence
of testes and female or ambiguous external
genitalia), and female pseudohermaphro
ditism (presence of ovaries and male or
ambiguous external genitalia). Diagnosis of
abnormalitiesofsexualdifferentiationusu-
ally requires exploratory laparotomy and
histopathologic examination of excised
gonadal tissue. Karyotyping also may be
necessary.
Hypothyroidism: Hypothyroidism has been
associated with primary anestrus, irregular
interestrous intervals, low litter size, and
general infertility. Poor semen quality has
been described as occurring in hypothyroid
male dogs, perhaps because of concurrent
autoimmune thyroiditis and orchitis. Extra-
reproductive signs of hypothyroidism, such
as lethargy, weight loss, and bilaterally sym-
metric alopecia of the trunk, may or may
566
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
not be present. Hypothyroidism is consid
ered a familial disorder.Predisposed breeds
include the golden retriever, Dobermian
pinscher, dachshund, Shetland sheepdog,
Irish setter, Pomeranian, miniature schnau-
zer, and American cocker spaniel. The cur-
rent preferred method of diagnosis is with
concurrentmeasurement ofserum cTSH
and free T, by dialysis. In hypothyroid dogs.
cTSH is elevated and free T is decreased.
Measurement of total T4 in serum alone is
not diagnostic because many extraneous
factors cause artifactual decreases in total
T4. Dogs with hypothyroidism are treated by
supplementation with T4at a dosage of
0.01-0.02 mg/kg administered orally twice a
day. Serum thyroid hormones should be
reevaluated every 6 months while dogs are
receiving supplementary T4. Although sup
plementation with T4 may effect a return to
normal reproductive function,the heri-
tability of the disorder should be remem-
bered when considering use of the animal
forbreeding.
Systemic disease:Systemic conditions,such as
hyperadrenocorticism or diabetes mellitus,
may affectreproductive function.A com-
plete physical examination, complete blood
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
567
count, serum chemistry profile, and urinal-
ysis should be evaluated in animals pre-
sented for infertility.
2. The interestrous interval is normal in length
(Proceed to 3.)
2'. The interestrous interval is abnormally long
(longer than 12months).
· Breed: Some breeds normally cycle less fre-
quently than the average interestrous interval
of every 7 months. These breeds include the
basenji, dingo, and wolf-dog hybrids, all of
which cycle yearly.
·Hypothyroidism: See 1'
2". The interestrous interval is abnormally short.
· Breed: Some breeds normally cycle more fre
quently than the average interestrous interval
ofevery 7 months. These breeds include the
German shepherd dog,rottweiler, and basset
hound.
Splitheat:Split heatis defined as proestrous
activity for l-2 weeks, followed by anl anestrous
period averaging l month in duration before
normal ovulatory estrus occurs. Diagnosis
requires measurement of progesterone in
serum during the intermediary anestrous
period (serum progesterone concentration
less than 2 ng/ml indicates that ovulation has
not occurred) and after the second period of
568
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
estrous activity (serum progesterone concen-
tration greater than 2 ng/ml indicates that
ovulation has occurred). Split heat is not asso-
ciated with infertility unless the bitch is
forcibly bred during the anovulatory portion
ofthe split heat.
·Uterine disease (see Chapter 12): Bitches with
cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH) or sub
clinical uterine infection may more readily
release prostaglandin from the endometrium,
prematurely lysing the corpora lutea and
increasing cycle frequency. CEH may be visi-
ble ultrasonographically as a fluffy thickening
of the uterine wall. Because of the relative
inaccessibility of the canine uterus,uterine
infection usually is best diagnosed by anterior
vaginal culture in estrous bitches.
2"".The bitch is in persistent estrus.
· Ovarian cyst (see Chapter 1l): Ovarian cystic
disease in the bitch usually is caused by lack of
ovulation of a cystic follicle. Persistent estro-
gen secretion is manifested clinically as per-
sistent estrus. Although the presence of
persistently elevated serum estrogen concen-
trations is diagnostic, estrogen assay is difficult
and may not be available. Identification of
cornified vaginal epithelial cells for 6 weeks
or longer also is diagnostic of persistently
InfertilityintheDogandCat
569
elevated serum estrogen concentrations.
Ovarian follicular cysts may be visible with
transabdominal ultrasound but often are diffi-
cult to see. Response to treatment with GnRH
(50 μg administered intramuscularly) or hCG
(1000 HU, half of which is administered intra-
muscularly and half of which is administered
intravenously) may be diagnostic.
·Granulosa cell tumor(see Chapter ll):Fun-
ctional granulosa cell tumors of the ovary may
be manifested clinically as persistent estrus. A
granulosa cell tumor may be palpable as a
mass in the cranial abdomen or may be visible
onsurveyradiographs orwithtransabdominal
ultrasound. Ovariohysterectomy is the treat-
mentofchoice.
3. Normal copulation occurs. (Proceed to 5.)
3'. Normal copulation does not occur. (Proceed to
4.)
4. The male shows normal breeding behavior, but
the bitch does not allow copulation.
· Behavior: Dominant bitches may not allow
male dogs to mount and achieve intromission.
The problem is best circumvented by artificial
insemination (see Chapter 3).
·Congenital vaginal abnormalities (see Chapter
13): The congenital vaginal anomalies most
often described as occurring in the dog are
570
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
vaginalsepta ofvaryinglengths and circumfer
ential vaginal strictures. Most develop just cra-
nial to the urethral papilla and are therefore
palpable on digital vaginal examination and
may be observed with almost any size vagino
scope. Depending on the extent of the anom
aly, surgical repair may be attempted or the
problem circumvented with artificialinsemi-
nation and possible cesarean section; vaginal
anomalies may relax sufficiently under the
influence of the hormone relaxinlate ingesta
tion to permit spontaneous whelping.
●Vaginal fold prolapse (see Chapter 13): Vaginal
fold prolapse is protrusion of edematous vagi-
nal tissue through the vulvar lips. This is an
estrogen-mediated phenomenon that subsides
when serum estrogen concentrations decline
and that often recurs during subsequent heat
cycles. Bitches with vaginal prolapse usually
must be bred by artificial insemination because
male dogs mount but have difficulty achieving
intromission of the penis in the presence of thc
prolapsed vaginal tissue. Vaginal prolapse may
redevelop near the time of parturition and may
or may not cause dystocia.
4'. The bitch shows normal breeding behavior, but
the male does not mount or achieve intromis-
sion andejaculation.
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
571
●Behavior: Submissive male dogs may be hesi-
tant to breed a dominant bitch. Similarly, a
male dog may be hesitant to approach a bitch
that has been aggressive toward him, as may
occur if the bitch is presented to the male too
early in her season. Male dogs that consistently
have been disciplined for showing breeding
behavior at inappropriate times may inadver-
tently have been trained not to show such
behavior.
·Pain:Male dogs with prostate disease (see
Chapter 17) or pain of the spine or rear limbs
may be unable or unwilling to mount the bitch
and ejaculate. Complete physical and neuro-
logicexaminations and aworkupforprostate
disease, including semen cultures and imag-
ing with possible aspirate or biopsy of the
prostate, may be needed to localize the source
ofpain,
·Poor libido: Libido is variable in male dogs, and
those with poor libido are difficult to manage
clinically. Ejaculation may be effected by
administration of GnRH (1-2 μg/kg subcuta-
neously 2-3 hours before attempted breed-
ing). GnRH causes release of endogenous
LH, which stimulates release of testosterone.
This technique for enhancing reproductive
performance should not be used routinely in
572
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
valuable stud dogs because persistent stimula-
tion of testosterone release may lead to a
decrease in the normal, pulsatile spontaneous
release of testosterone,which is necessary for
maintenance of spermatogenesis.
5. The bitch conceives after copulation.* (Proceed
to 6.)
5'. The bitch does not conceive after copulation.*
(Proceed to 7.)
6. Pregnancy is maintained.
6'. Pregnancy is not maintained.
· Infectious causes of pregnancy loss include
the following (see Chapter 7):
Herpesvirus:Canine herpesvirus causes fetal
death and is manifested as pregnancy loss
late in gestation,stillbirths, and earlyneona
tal death. Dogs infected in the last 3 weeks of
gestation or during the first 3 weeks of life
are most likely to show clinical signs. Bitches
infected before or after the last 3 weeks of
pregnancy usually are asymptomatic. Most
bitches lose at most one litter to canine
herpesvirus, apparently creating enough
*Dogs do not produce any hormone unique to pregnancy, precluding preg-
nancy diagnosis early in gestation. Therefore lack of conception cannot be dif-
ferentiated from early embryonic death. Conception is proved by positive
pregnancy diagnosis(see Chapter 8).
InfertilityintheDogandCat
573
memory cells to permit an appropriate
immune response if reexposure occurs. The
virus is weakly antigenic, so titers are likely
to be elevated in bitches only at the time of
pregnancy loss. No vaccine is commercially
available.
Canine brucellosis:Brucella canis infection is
characterized by late gestation pregnancy
loss. Puppies born live to infected bitches
may have low birth weight and poor weight
gain. Infected bitches also may have chronic
vaginal discharge. Male dogs infected with
B. canis show epididymitis and a decline in
semen quality. Both male and female dogs
with brucellosis may be asymptomatic.
Brucellosis testing usually is done with serol-
ogy. Agglutination tests are good screening
tests because they are sensitive,virtually
never yielding a false-negative result. Both
tube agglutination tests, which yield a titer,
and slide or card agglutination tests,which
yield a yes or no response,are available.
Agglutination tests are not specific,how-
ever, so a positive result on an agglutination
test always should be reevaluated with the
agar gel immunodiffusion test available at
Cornell University. B. canis is not curable
in dogs, but titers can be decreased and
574
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
shedding of organisms reduced with antibi-
otic therapy and neutering of the infected
animal.
Subclinical uterine infection: Aerobic bacteria
and mycoplasma that are part of the normal
vaginal flora have been implicated in preg-
nancy loss in dogs. Diagnosis requires cul-
ture of vaginal discharge from the bitch and
stomach content or organ tissue from an
abortedfetus.
· Noninfectious causes of pregnancy loss include
the following:
Hypoluteoidism: Hypoluteoidism is inadequate
progesterone secretion from luteal tissue
during pregnancy. Insufficiency of corpora
lutea may predispose the bitch to premature
fall too early in gestation. Serum proges-
terone concentration must be greater than
2 ng/ml to support pregnancy. Routine sup-
plementation with progestogens is not rec-
ommended during pregnancy because
excessive progesterone may masculinize
female fetuses and prevent expulsion of
nonviable fetuses. If serum progesterone
concentrations are documented to decrease
too early in gestation, supplementation
may be instituted with progesterone in oil
Infertilityin the Dog and Cat
575
(2 mg/kg administered intramuscularly
every 3 days) or ally-trenbolone (Regumate;
Hoechst-Roussell, Kansas City, Mo.; 0.088
mg/kg administered orally once daily) to 10
later than 6l days after ovulation. Serum
progesterone concentrations must decline
before labor is initiated in bitches; mainte
nance of pregnancy beyond 65 days after
ovulation by artificial supplementation with
progesterone causes fetal death.
7. Semen quality is normal. (Proceed to 8.)
7'. Semen quality is not normal. (Proceed to 9.)
8.In a bitch with no reproductive tract disease bred
to a male with normal semen quality in which
pregnancy does not occur, poor breeding man-
agement is the most likely problem. Improper tim
ingof breeding is themost common cause of apparent
infertility in dogs. Breeding management is opti
mized with measurement of progesterone in
serum to pinpoint ovulation time within the
576
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
nancy. Male dogs with abnormal motility or
morphology of spermatozoa and a high total
number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate may
still be capable of effecting pregnancy. For
example, a male with 1 billion spermatozoa in
hisejaculate,only50%of which aremorpholog
ically normal, still has 500 × 106 morphologi-
cally normal spermatozoa, which is well above
the 250 × 106 required. Optimization of concep-
tion rate by breeding 2 days after ovulation, as
assessed by serial measurement of serum pro-
gesterone concentrations, is strongly recom-
mended when using a subfertile male dog.
9'. Semen quality is insufficient to effect pregnancy.
● Normal semen quality is defined as 300 million to
2 billion spermatozoa in the ejaculate, with
more than 70% of the spermatozoa exhibiting
progressive motility and more than 80% of the
spermatozoa being normal in morphology.
Azoospermiais absenceof spermatozoainthe
ejaculate.Causes may be pretesticular, testicu-
lar, or posttesticular.
.Pretesticularcauses
include apprehension at the time of semen
collection or breeding; administration of
drugs that impair spermatogenesis, such as
high dosages of glucocorticoids or antineo-
plastic agents; hypothyroidism (see 1'); and
Infertilityin the Dog and Cat
577
inguinal or scrotal hernia, Diagnosis ofincom-
plete ejaculation as a result of apprehcnsion
may be made based on measurement of alka-
line phosphatase in seminal fluid. Alkaline
phosphatase in semen arises from the cauda
epididymis; concentrations of1ess than 5000
IU/L in seminal fluid suggest that no fluid
from the epididymis is present in the seminal
fluid. Measurement of alkaline phosphatase
in seminal fluid cannot differentiate incom-
plete ejaculation from obstructive causes of
azoospermia. Testicular causes include inter-
sex states; bilateral cryptorchidism; any ther
mal orphysical insult to the testicular tissue,
such as high fever or trauma occurring during
the 2 months or more preceding lack of sper-
matozoa in the ejaculate; and testicular neo-
plasia (see Chapter 16).Posttesticular causes
include sources of epididymal occlusion,
such as spermatocele or sperm granulomas.
Epididymal occlusion may be visualized dur-
ing scrotal ultrasonography.
· Oligozoospermia is presence of fewer than
300 million spermatozoa in the ejaculate.
Apparent oligozoospermia may occur in dogs
with retrograde ejaculation, which is move-
ment of spermatozoa into the urinary bladder
during ejaculation instead of through the
578
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
penile urethra. The cause of retrograde ejacu-
lation in dogs is unknown. Diagnosis is made
based on a collection of urine by cystocentesis
after ejaculation,with demonstration of an
abnormally large number of spermatozoa in
the urine sediment. Antegrade ejaculation
can be effected by administration of the
sympathomimetic drug, pseudoephedrine
(45 mg/kg administered orally 1 and 3 hours
before breeding). Teratozoospermia is pres
ence ofless than 80% morphologically normal
spermatozoa in the ejaculate. Asthenozoos-
permia is presence of less than 70% progres-
sively motile spermatozoa in the ejaculate
asthenozoospermia often occur concurrently
Causes include infection of the reproductive
tract, localized either in the prostate (see
Chapter 17) or testes (see Chapter 16) and
including canine brucellosis (see 6′), testicu-
lar neoplasia (see Chapter 16), and hypothy
roidism (see l').
10. A diagnosis of idiopathic infertility must be
made.
Infertility in the Cat
1. The queen is cycling normally. (Proceed to 2.)
1'. The queen is not cycling.
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
579
Causes for lack of estrous cycling in queens
include thefollowing:
·Sexualimmaturity:Queens go throughpuberty
at 5-10 months of age, with longhaired breeds
entering puberty later than shorthaired
breeds. Cats will not enter puberty during the
seasonal anestrus, from mid-October through
December at temperate latitudes.
·Previous ovariohysterectomy:Previous ovariohys-
terectomy may be determined based on history.
palpation or observationofanovariohysterec
tomy scar at the ventral abdominal midline, or
exploratory laparotomy. In spayed bitches,
serum concentrations of the gonadotropins LH
and FSH areelevated because oflack of negative
feedback from the absent ovary to the anterior
pituitary. There are no commercially available
assays for feline LH and FSH.
·Inadequate environmental stimuli: Cats housed
with 10 hours or more of continuous light
daily cycle year round. Those housed with
minimal lighting may enter a prolonged
anestrus. Queens housed with or exposed to a
tom may be more likely to show signs of estrus
or may be more visible to the owner when in
estrus because of the change in behavior of
the tom.
·Systemic illness ofthe queen:Queens that have a
systemic disease, such as diabetes mellitus, or a
580
Infertility In the Dog and Cat
chronic complaint, such as vomiting, may be
less likely to cycle. Similarly, medications the
cat has received in the past, such as those used
for estrus suppression and pregnancy termi-
nation, may have affected her fertility (see
Chapter 5). Lack of cycling has been reported
to occur in cats with feline leukemia virus.
· Silent heat: Apparent lack of cycling may occur
in queens with silent heat. Silent heat is
defined as normal ovarian follicular develop
ment inthe absence of estrousbehaviors.
Silent heat may be more common in cats low
in the social hierarchy. Collection of weekly
vaginal cytology specimens permits assess-
ment of the cornification of vaginal epithelial
cells associated with estrus. Queens diagnosed
in estrus by cytology stand for breeding and
arefertile.
·Chromosome abnormalities:True lack of cycling
has been reported in cats with karyotypic
abnormalities (38,XO) and in male pseudo
hermaphrodites(retained testes andfemale
external genitalia) (see Chapter 1).
· Miscellaneous causes: Older queens may cycle
less frequently. Lack of cycling after ovulation
induction without conception (false preg-
nancy; see Chapter 2) and while nursing (lac-
tational anestrus) is normal in cats.
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
581
2. Normal copulation is occurring. (Proceed to 3.)
2'. Normal copulation is not occurring. (Proceed
to 4.)
3. The male mounts and achieves intromission.
(Proceed to 5.)
3'. The male cannot mount and achieve intromis
sion.
Causes for inability to mount and achieve
intromission include the following:
·Presence of a penile hair ring: Hair is compacted
at the base of the penis. This is easily diag
nosed via inspection and usually is easily
removed.
·Apprehension:Tom cats should be bred in their
home territory and may benefit from socializa
tion with the queen in the days before breed-
ing.
·Physical causes of poor libido and inability to
mount: Causes include pain of the spine or rear
limbs, malnutrition, and obesity.
4.The queen allows the male to mount. (Proceed
to 3.)
4'. The queen will not allow the male to mount.
A vaginal cytology specimen should be evaluated
to determine whether the queen is in estrus, with
cornification ofvaginal epithelial cellsindicative
of elevated serum estrogen concentrations and
presence of an ovarian follicle.
582
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
5. The queen is induced to ovulate (evidenced by
elevation in serum progesterone concentralion
to greater than 2 ng/ml by 7 days after breed-
ing). (Proceed to 6.)
5'. The gueen is not induced to ovulate.
The amount of LH released depends on the
number of copulations and the time during the
estrous cycle when copulation occurs.Less than
50% of queens bred only once ovulate. More
than four copulations during a given estrus are
required to ensure LH release adequate for ovu
lation. Queens that cannot be induced to ovulate
by copulation may be treated with GnRH (25 μg
administered intramuscularly 12-24 hours after
breeding). Physical stimulation of the vagina
with a cotton-tipped swab or glass rod does not
reliably induce ovulation in queens.
6. The queen conceives after copulation.* (Pro-
ceed to 7.)
6'. The queen does not conceive after copulation.*
(Proceed to 8.)
diagnosis early in gestation. Therefore lack of conception cannot be differen.ti-
ated from early embryonic death. Conception is assumed to have occurred if the:
queen was bred an adequate number of tirnes by a known ferile tom.
infertilityin theDogand Cat
583
7. Pregnancy loss occurs after conception.
· Loss of pregnancy near midgestation may not
be clinically evident because the queen may
resorb the fetal tissues.Abortion after midges
tation usually is accompanied by discharge of
fluid or fetal tissues from the vulva, although
the occasional queen will resorb late in gesta
tion withno clinical signs ofpregnancy loss.
+ Causes of pregnancy loss in the cat include the
following:
Lutealinsufficiency:Feline abortion may be
caused by abnormally low serun proges-
terone concentrations.Insufficiency of the
corporalutea orpossibleplacentalsources
to premature labor because serum proges-
terone concentrations fall too early in gesta-
tion. Serum progesteronc concentralions
must be greater than 2 ng/ml to support
pregnancy. Routine supplementation with
progestogens is not recommended during
may masculinize female fetuses, prevent
expulsion of nonviable fetuses,and induce
diabetes mellitus and mammary abnormali-
ties. If serum progesterone concentrations
are documented to decline too quickly
during gestation, supplementation with
584
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
megestrol acetate (Ovaban; Schering-
Plough, Kenilworth, NJ; 2.5 1ng adminis-
tered orally every other day through day 55
of pregnancy) can be attempted.
Bacterial infection: Bacterial infection of the
uterus and subsequent pregnancy loss is
uncommon in healthy cats housed in a
clean environment. Cats aborting because
ofintrauterine infection with Escherichia coli,
Staphylococcus species, and Streptococcus
species usually have anorexia; depression;
fever; straining: and fetid, yellow-brown
vaginal discharge. A sample of the vaginal
discharge should be collected for culture
and sensitivity, and empirical treatment with
amoxicillin (20 mg/kg administered orally
twice a day) should be instituted pending
culture results. Radiography or ultrasonog-
raphy may be necessary to ensure complete
expulsion of uterine contents.Bacterial
abortion may occur in cats infected with
felineleukemiavirus (FeLV) secondary to
viral immunosuppression.
Protozoal infection: Toxoplasmosis is a protozoal
cause of abortion in the queen. Although
most queens infected with toxoplasmosis are
asymptomatic carriers, those that become
systemically ill may abort and may show dys
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
585
pnea, lethargy, diarrhea, lymphadenopathy,
and central nervous system disturbanice.
Abortion occurs secondary to debilitating
disease of the queen. Toxoplasmosis is an
uncommon cause offeline abortion.
Viral infection: Viralinfections that may
cause abortion in queens include feline
herpesvirus (FHV; rhinotracheitis), pan-
leukopenia, feline infectious peritonitis
(FIP),and FeLV. Abortion secondary to
FHV usually occurs at 5-6 weeks of gestation
and is most likely a nonspecific reaction to
the upper respiratory infection induced
because the virus has not been demon-
strated in aborted placental or fetal tissues in
cats inoculated with FHV. This virus is easily
controlled with vaccination. Cats entering
the cattery from outside should be vacci-
nated well before entry. The intranasal vac
cine can safely be used in kittens as young as
3 weeks. Panleukopenia infection can cause
abortion, stillbirths, and cerebellar hypopla-
sia in kittens infected in utero, with or with-
out classic gastrointestinal signs in the
queen.The organism is shed in all body
secretions from infected animals but is easily
killed by bleach. Vaccination of all animals in
the cattery and any animals entering the
586
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
cattery should be required.Pregnant queens
should not be vaccinated with the modified
live virus vaccine.Abortion resulting from
infection with FIP occurs late in gestation
and oftenis associatedwith prolongedvagi
nal bleeding. The disease is difficult to diag
nose with serologic testing because titers of
the coronavirus causing FIP areindistin
guishable from those of the nonpathogenic
enteric coronavirus. Control involves good
hygiene and avoiding use of communal feed-
ing dishes. Inbreeding increases susceptibil-
ity to infection with FIP; removal of adults
that sire offspring that become infected may
be warranted in problem catteries. FeLV
has been reported to cause abortion from
3 weeks of pregnancy to term. Because FeLV
requires intimate contact between animals
for spread, testing and removal of infected
animals constitute an effective method of
control.
8.The male has normal semen quality. (Proceed
to9.)
8'.The male does nothave normal semen quality
· Semen quality is difficult to assess in cats
because of difficultyin obtaining a semen sam
ple. Gross evaluation of semen quality may be
attempted by collecting a vaginal cytology
InfertilityintheDogandCat
587
specimen from the queen immediately after
breeding.Retrograde ejaculation,movement
ofspermatozoainto the urinarybladder dur
ing ejaculation, occurs in normal toms.
Collection of a urine sample by cystocentesis
immediately after breeding,with centrifuga
tion and examination of the sediment, also
may allow gross evaluation of semen quality.
Electroejaculation also may be performed;
this requires general anesthesia and use of spe-
cializedequipment.
· Causes for abnormal semen quality in tom cats
includethefollowing:
Karyotype abmormalities (calico and tortoiseshell
male cats): Calico (black, white, and orange)
and tortoiseshell (black and orange or gray
andcream)male cats oftenare infertile.
White coat coloris carried on an autosome.
The gene for black or orange coat color is
carried on the X chromosome. Normal male
cats, which have a single X chromosome, can
exhibit eitherblack or orange, but not both.
Calico and tortoiseshell male cats must have
two X chromosomes, suggesting either
triploidy (39,XXY) or mosaicism/chimerism
(XX/XY,XY/XY,XXY/XY).Azoospermia
(absence of spermatozoa in the ejaculate)
often accompanies this abnormal karyotype.
588
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
Testicularatrophy:Poor semen qualitymay be
caused by malnutrition, hypervitaminosis A,
elevated testicular or intrascrotal tempera-
ture secondary tofever or scrotal trauma, or
advancingage.
9. A diagnosis of idiopathic infertility must be
made.
Bibliography: Canine Infertility
Arbeiter K: Anovulatory ovarian cycles in dogs, J Reprod
FertilSuppl47:453,1993.
Bouchard GF, Solorzano N, Concannon Pw et al:
Determination of ovulation time in bitches based on
teasing, vaginal cytology and ELISA for proges-
terone, Theriogenology135:603,1991.
Eilts BE: Pregnancy maintenance in the bitch using
Regumate. Proceedings of the Society for Therio-
genology, San Antonio, Tx, 1992.
Ellington JE: Diagnosis, treatment, and management of
poor fertility in the stud dog, Semin Vet Med Surg9:46,
1994.
England GC: Ultrasonographic diagnosis of nonpalpa
ble Sertoli cell tumours in infertile dogs, J Small
Anim Pract36:476, 1995.
Evermann JF: Diagnosis of canine herpetic infections.
In Kirk RW (ed): Current veterinary therapy X,
Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
589
Fontbonne A, Siliart B, Badinand F: Hormonal findings
in dogs and bitches showing reproductive disorders,
JReprodFertilSuppl47:553,1993
Frenette G, Dube JY, Tremblay RR: Origin of alkaline
phosphatase of canine seminal plasma, Arch Androt
16:235,1986.
Freshman JL: Clinical approach to infertility in the
cycling bitch, Vet Clin North Am 21:427, 1991.
Hashimoto A, Hirai K, Yamaguchi T et al: Experimental
transplacental infection of pregnant dogs with
canine herpesvirus, Am J Vet Res 43:844, 1982.
Jeffcoate LA: Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone chal-
lenge to test for the presence of ovaries in the bitch,
ReprodFertilSuppl47:536,1993.
Jeffcoate IA: Identification of spayed bitches, Vet Rec
129:58, 1991.
Jeffcoate IA, McBride M, Harvey MJ et al: Measurement
of plasma oestradiol after an injection of a
gonadotrophin as a test for neutered bitches, Vet Rec
146:599, 2000.
Johnson CA: Reproductive manifestations of thyroid dis-
ease,Vet ClinNorth Am24:509,1994.
Johnson CA, Grace JA, Probst MR: Effects of maternal ill-
ness on perinatal health,Vet Clin North Am 16:555,
1987.
Johnson CA, Nachreiner RF, Mullaney TP et al:
Reproductive manifestations of hypothyroidism,
CaninePract22:29,1997.
590
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
Johnson CA, Walker RD: Clinical signs and diagnosis
ofBrucellacanisinfection,CompContEd14:763,
1992.
 Johnston SD: Clinical approach to infertility in bitches
with primary anestrus, Vet Clin North Am 2l:421,
1991.
Johnston SD: Vaginal prolapse. In Kirk RW (ed): Current
veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
Johnston SD, Buoen LC, Weber AF et al: X trisomy in an
Airedalebitchwith ovarian dysplasia andprimary
anestrus,Theriogenology24:597,1985.
Johnston SD, Root MV: Serum progesterone timing of
ovulation in the bitch.Proceedings of the Society for
Theriogenology, San Antonio, Tx, 1995.
Kemppainen RJ: Effects of prednisone on thyroid and
gonadal endocrine function in dogs, J Endocrinol
96:293, 1983.
Krawiec DR, Heflin D: Study of prostatic disease in dogs:
177 cases (1981-1986), J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1119,
1992.
Kyles AE, Vaden S, Hardie EM et al: Vestibulovaginal
stenosis in dogs: 18 cases (1987-1995), / Am Vet Med
Assoc209:1889,1996.
Manning PJ: Thyroid gland and arterial lesions of bea-
gles with familial hypothyroidism and hyperlipopro
teinemia, Am / Vet Res 40:820, 1979.
Mickelsen WD, Memon MA, Anderson PB et al: The rela-
Infertilityin theDogandCat
591
litter size following artificial insemination in the
bitch,Theriogenology 39:553,1993.
Nachireiner RF, Refsal KR: The Michigan State University
thyroid function profile, Canine Pract22:45, 1997.
Nesbitt GH, Izzo J, Peterson L et al: Canine hypothy
roidism:aretrospective study of108cases,JAmVet
Med Assoc 177:1117, 1980.
Nichols R: Update: diagnostic testing for canine
hypothyroidism. Proceedings of the American
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Forum,
Lake Buena Vista, Fl, 1997.
Oettle EE, Soley JT: Sperm abnormalities in the dog: a
light and electron microscopic study, Vet Med Rev
59:28,1988.
Olson PN, Mulnix JA,Nett TM: Concentrations of
luteinizinghormone and follicle-stimulating hor-
mone in the serum or sexually intact and neutered
dogs,AmVetRes53:762,1992.
Olson PN, Schultheiss P, Seim HB: Clinical and labora-
tory findings associated with actual or suspected
azoospermia in dogs:18 cases (1979-1990),JAm Vet
Med Assoc 201:478,1992.
Olson PN, Seim HB, Park RD et al: Female pseudoher-
maphroditism in three sibling greyhounds, JAm Vet
MedAssoc194:1747,1989.
Olson PN, Wrigley RH, Husted PW et al: Persistent estrus
in the bitch, In Ettinger SJ (ed): Textbook of veterinary
internalmedicine,Philadelphia,1989,WBSaunders.
592
Infertillty In the Dog and Cat
Panciera DL: Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases (1987-
1992),JAmVet Med Assoc204:761,1994.
Perkins NR, Thomas PG: Infertility in the bitch with nor-
mal oestrus cycles, Aust Vet Pract 23:77,1993.
Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R: Measurement of
serum total thyroxine, triiodothyronine,free thy
roxine, and thyrotropin concentrations for diagno
sis of hypothyroidism in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
211:1396,1997.
Post K, Barth AD, Kiefer UT et al: Retrograde ejacula-
tion in a Shetland sheepdog, Can VetJ33:53,1992.
Purswell BJ: Pharmaceuticals used in canine reproduc
tion,Semin Vet Med Surg9:54,1994.
Ramsey I,HerrtageM:Distinguishing normal,sick,and
rotropin concentrations,CaninePract22:43,1997.
Reimers TJ: Endocrine testing for infertility in the bitch.
In Kirk RW(ed):Current veterinary therapy Vlfll,
Philadelphia, 1983, WB Saunders.
Rogers AL, Templeton JW, Stewart AP: Preliminary
observations of estrous cycles in large, colony raised
laboratory dogs, Lab Anim Care 26:1133, 1970.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Johnston GR: Vaginal septa in
dogs: 15 cases (1983-1992),J Am Vet Med Assoc
206:56,1995.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN: Concurrent retro-
grade ejaculation and hypothyroidism in a dog: case
report, Theriogenology 41:593, 1994.
InfertilityintheDogandCat
593
Rosychuk R: Management of hypothyroidism. In Kirk RW
(ed): Current veterinary therapy VIll, Philadelphia, 1983,
WB Saunders.
SokolowskiJH: The effects of ovariectomy on pregnancy
maintenance in the bitch,LabAnim Sci21:696,1971.
Sokolowski JH, Stover DG, VanRavenswaay F: Seasonal
incidence of estrous and interestrous interval for
bitches of seven breeds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 171:271,
1977.
Thacker EL: Etiology of adult-onset canine autoimmune
hypothyroidism,CaninePract22:12,1997.
Tsutsui T: Effects of ovariectomy and progesterone trcat-
ment on the maintenance of pregnancy in bitches,
NipponJuigakuZasshi45:47,1983.
Wykes PM, Soderberg SF: Congenital abnormalities of
the canine vagina and vulva,J Am Anim Hosp Assod
19:995,1983.
Bibliography: Feline Infertility
Boomsma RA, Mavrogianis PA, Verhage HG: Changes in
endometrial and placental protein synthesis and
nancy in the cat, Biol Reprod 44:345, 1991.
Chakraborty PK, Wildt DE, Seager SW: Serum luteiniz-
ing hormone and ovulatory response to luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone in the estrous and
anestrous domesticcat,LabAnim29:338,1979
594
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
Cline EM, Jennings LL, Sojka NJ: Analysis of the feline
vaginal epithelial cycle, Feline Pract 10:47, 1980.
Concannon P, Hodgson B, Lein D: Reflex LH release in
estrouscatsfollowingsingleandmultiplecopula
tion,Biol Reprod 23:111,1980.
Dawson AB: Early estrus in the cat following increased
illumination,Endocrinology 28:907,1941.
Dieter JA, Stewart DR, Haggarty MA et al: Pregnancy fail
ure in cats associated with long-term dietary taurine
insufficiency, J Reprod Fertil Suppl47:457, 1993.
Dow C: The cystic hyperplasia-pyometra complex in the
cat,VetRec74:141,1962
England GC: Pregnancy diagnosis, abnormalities of
pregnancy and pregnancy termination. In Simpson
GM, England GC, Harvey M (eds): BSAVA manual
ofsmallanimalreproductionandneonatology,
Cheltenham, England, 1998, British Small Animal
VeterinaryAssociation.
Goodrowe KL, Howard JG, Schmidt PM et al:
Reproductive biology of the domestic cat with spe-
cial reference to endocrinology, sperm function and
in vitro fertilization,JReprodFertilSuppl39:73,1989.
Herron MA: Infertility from noninfectious causes. In
MorrowDA(ed):Currenttherapy in theriogenology,
Philadelphia,1986,WBSaunders.
Hunter Banks D, Stabenfeldt G: Luteinizing hormone
releasein thecatinresponsetocoitus onconsecu-
tivedaysofestrus,BiolReprod26:603,1982
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
595
Hurni H: Daylength and breeding in the domestic cat,
LabAnim15:229,1981
Jemmett JE, Evans JM: A survey of sexual behavior and
reproduction in female cats, J Small Anim Pract
18:31, 1977.
Johnson LM, Gay VL: Luteinizing hormone in the cat. I1.
Mating-induced secretion, Endocrinology 109:247,
1981.
Johnston SD: Premature gonadal failure in female dogs
and cats,JReprodFertil Suppl39:65,1989.
 Johnston SD, Root MV: Managing infertility in purebred
catteries. In August JR (ed): Consultations in feline
internal medicine, Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders.
Keenan LR: The infertile male. In Simpson GM,
England GC, Harvey M (eds): BSAVA manual of small
animal reproduction and neonatology, Cheltenham,
England, 1998, British Small Animal Veterinary
Association.
Lawler DF: Diagnosis and treatment of inflammatory
uterine disease in cats, Vet Med August:750, 1998.
Lawler DF, Evans RH: Strategies for controlling viral
infections in feline populations. In August JR (ed):
Consultations infeline internal medicine,Philadelphia,
1997,WBSaunders.
Leyva H, Madley T, Stabenfeldt GH: Effect of light
prolactin secretion in the domestic cat, J Reprod
FertilSuppl39:125,1989.
596
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
McKinney HR: A study of toxoplasma infections in cats,
Vet MedSmallAnim Clin68:493,1973.
Michel B: Induction of oestrus in cats by photoperiodic
manipulations and social stimuli,LabArim27:278,
1993.
Petrak M, Carpenter J: Feline toxoplasmosis,J Am Vet
Med Assoc 146:728, 1965.
Potter K, Hancock DH, Gallina AM: Clinical and patho
logic features of endometrial hyperplasia, pyome
tra, and endometritis in cats: 79 cases (1980-1985), J
AmVet Med Assoc198:1427,1991.
Povey RC: Reproduction in the pedigree female cat: a
survey ofbreeders, Can Vet /19:207,1978.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN: Estrous length, preg-
nancy rate, gestation and parturition lengths, litter
size,and juvenile mortality in the domestic cat,JAm
AnimHosp Assoc31:429,1995.
Roth TL, Munson L, Swanson WF et al: Histological
characteristics of the uterine endometrium and cor
pus luteum during early embryogenesis and the
relationship to embryonic mortality in the domestic
cat,BiolReprod53:1012,1995.
Sanchez B, Pizarro M, Garcia P et al: Histological study
of Leydig cells in the cat from birth to sexual matu-
rity, J Reprod Fertil Suppl47:349, 1993.
Sanchez B, Pizarro M, Garcia P et al: Postnatal develop-
ment of seminiferous tubules in the cat, J Reprod
FertilSuppl47:343,1993.
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
597
Scott PP: Cats.In HafezES (ed):Reproduction and breed
ingtechniquesforlaboratory animals,Philadelphia
1970, Lea &Febiger.
Scott PP, Lloyd-Jacobs MA: Reduction in the anestrus
period of laboratory cats by increasing illumination,
Nature184:2022,1959.
Shille VM, Munro C, Walker Farmer S et al: Ovarian and
endocrine responses in the cat after coitus, J Reprod
Ferti/68:29,1983.
Sturman JA: Effects of taurine on feline reproduction,
Vet Tech 13:166, 1992.
Swanson WF, Roth TL, Brown JL et al: Relationship of
circulating steroid hormones, luteal luteinizing
hormone receptor and progesterone concentra-
tion, and embryonic mortality during early
embryogenesis in the domestic cat, Biol Reprod
53:1022,1995.
Thomas TN, Hall JA: Infertility in the bitch and queen,
KalKanForumSpring:4,1986.
Troy GC, Herron MA: Infectious causes of infertility,
abortion and stillbirths in cats.In MorrowDA (ed):
Current therapy in theriogenology,Philadelphia,1986,
WBSaunders.
Umstead JA: Infertility in the male dog and cat, Kal Kan
Forum Summer:4, 1986.
Verstegen JP: Pharmacological control of reproduction
in the cat. In Simpson GM, England GC, Harvey M
(eds):BSAVAmanualofsmall animal reproduction and
598
Infertility in the Dog and Cat
neonatology, Cheltenham, England, 1998, British
Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Verstegen JP, Silva LD, Onclin K et al: Echocardio-
graphic study of heart rate in dog and cat fetuses in
utero,JReprodFertilSuppl47:175,1993.
Wildt DE, Seager SW, Chakraborty PK: Effect of copula
tory stimuli on incidence of ovulation and on serum
luteinizing hormone in the cat, Endocrinology
107:1212, 1980.
Wright PJ, Watts JR: The infertile female. In Simpson
GM, England GC, Harvey M (eds): BSAVA manual
ofsmall animal reproduction and neonatology
Cheltenham, England, 1998, British Small Animal
VeterinaryAssociation.
20
Emerging Technologies in Small
Animal Theriogenology
RichardFayrer-Hosken
ATAGLANCE
· Xenotransplantation is transfer of oocytes from one
species into a unique location, such as beneath the
kidney capsule, of another species. This technique
may prove useful in endangered species. It has not yet
599
600
Technologies in Small Animal Theriogenology
been performed in dogs; cat tissue has been trans-
ferred successfiully into mice.
·In vitro fertilization (IVF) is formation of a zygote by
coincubation of capacitated spermatozoa and a
mature oocyte outside of the body, with successful
penetration of one spermatozoon and development
of a viable conceptus. In the dog IVF and subsequent
embryo transferhaveresultedin,atmost,a 22-day
pregnancy. In the cat live kittens have been born after
IVF and embryo transfer.
·Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) is introduction of
onecapacitatedspermatozooninto thecytoplasm ofa
mature oocyte.No puppies have been produced with
ICSl, but several litters of kittens have been born.
·Embryo transferis placement of an embryo into a surro-
gatedaminwhichnormalgestation occurs.Embryos
canbe recovered byflushing the uterus ofabred bitch
or queen or by using theinvitrotechniquesdescribed
earlier.Limited success has been achieved with
embryo transferin dogs; success hasbeen greater in
cats.
·Cloningof cats has been successful, but cloning of dogs
has not yet been reported.
The emerging technologies of assisted reproduc
tion encompass a wide range of potential manipulations
to produce kittens or puppies from reproductively
compromised femalesor males.Although there are mul-
tiple reports of success with assisted reproductive
TechnologiesinSmallAnimalTheriogenology
601
technologies in farm animal and laboratory animal
species, gamete and embryo manipulation have been
less successful in cats, with an even worse reported suc.
cess rate in dogs. There are significant and inherent dif
ferences between the physiology of the canine and feline
species that probably explain the differences. However
it is my personal feeling that attainment of mastery of
the unrelenting portions of canine gamete physiology is
only a matter of time.
The goal of any of these technologies is to provide
an avenue for fertility salvage in the face of catastrophic
reproductive insufficiencies or damage. The argument
can be submitted that this is a valid and laudable
endeavor. However, I think it is important that wc never
lose sight of the fact that a significant amount of small
animal breeding involves strategies that lead to genetic
convergence
(inbreeding) rather than increased
genetic vigor (outcrossing). As advocates of the new
technologies, we must always strive to ensure the optimal
health of the animals involved.
OocytePhysiology
Oocyte Morphology
Canine and feline oocytcs have a dense cytoplasm
bound by a plasma membrane. The cytoplasm contains
the ucleus, or condensed chromosomes, and various
602
Technologies in Small Animal Theriogenology
organelles. While the oocyte is within the ovary, the
Golgi apparatus plays an important role in yolk synthesis
and formation of cortical granules. The cortical gran
ules are a key factor in preventing polyspermy after fer-
tilization. The presence of marginated cortical granules
along the plasma membrane also is an indication of cyto
plasmic maturity. Spindles of microtubules form during
somes.Surrounding cumulus cellsprovidenourishment
to the oocyte and also interact with oviductal cilia while
the egg is being transported through the uterine tube
after ovulation.
Morphologic changes of the canine oocyte during
different stages of the estrous cycle may vary with ability
of the canine oocyte to communicate with cumulus cells.
The gap junctions between the oocyte and cumulus
cells are involved in the regulation of oocyte meiotic dif-
ferentiation and maturation. Microinjection of 3%
Lucifer Yellow into canine oocytes collected during dif
ferent stages of the estrous cycle allowed evaluation of
cumulus-oocyte gap junction communications. Of the
oocytes collected during late proestrus, 89% (16 of
18 oocytes)exhibited functional cumulus-oocyte com-
munications through gap junctions. This was in contrast
to 0% (0 of 20 oocytes) for oocytes collected during
anestrus.
Oocytes collected from ovaries are graded on a scale
of l to 3, with grade 1 being darkly pigmented and
TechnologiesinSmallAnima!Theriogenology
603
completely surrounded by one or more layers of cumu-
lus cells (Figure 20-1); grade 2 being lightly pigmented
with incomplete layers of cumulus cells; and grade 3
being degenerate with pale color, abnormal shape, and
no attached cumulus cells.
Oocyte Maturation
IN VIVO MATURATlON For the two cycles of the meiotic
cell division of an oocyte, there are four phases:
prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.
Interphase is the time between cell cycles andis
when DNA replication occurs. Prophase of the first
meiotic division is divided into five stages:leptotene,
zygotene, pachytene, diplotene, and diakinesis. In most
species the oocyte reaches metaphase I1 (MI1) before
ovulation. However, this is not the case in the dog
and fox. Canidae ovulate a primary oocyte, which con-
tains an intact germinal vesicle and matures to a fertil-
izable secondary (MIl) oocyte while in the uterine
tube.
IN VITRO MATURATON Invitro maturation(IVM) of
oocytes involves collection of immature oocytes from
the ovary with subsequent culture to support matura-
tion until the oocyte reaches a state at which it can be
fertilized.A number of studies have been reported
describing maturation of canine oocytes collected
604
TechnologiesinSmallAnimal Theriogenology
Figure 20-1. Grade 1 canine oocyte at 100x magnification, with
a darkly pigmented cytoplasm completely surrounded by one or
more layers of cumulus cells.
TechnologiesinSmafiAnima!Theriogenology
605
from ovaries at different stages of the estrous
cycle. Media supplemented with estradiol, proges-
terone, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteiniz
ing hormone (LH), equine chorionic gonadotropin
L-cysteine, and arachidonic acid did not significantly
affect maturation rate of canine oocytes compared
with controls. Maturation rates for oocytes cultured in
any of several treatments with recombinant FSH were
statistically significant when describing success of IVM,
but very few MlI oocytes were obtained (Figure 20-2).
Superovulation, induction of ovulation of a larger
number of eggs than is usual for the species, has been
attempted in dogs and cats to optimize the number of
oocytes retrieved. Neither superovulation nor IVM
protocols have been very successful in dogs. In cats
IVM of oocytes has been shown to be very successful, as
have superovulationprotocols.
Xenotransplantation
Xenotransplantation might provide some glimmer of
hope in cases in which the female dog or cat is termi-
nally ill and it is imperative that oocytes are conserved.
This protocol involves the collection of ovarian cortex
with transplantation to a uniquelocation in another
species. Research to date has involved implantation of
oocytes from a reproductively desirable animal to
beneath the kidney capsule of another animal, where
606
Technologies in Small Animal Theriogenology
Figure 20-2. In vitro matured canine oocyte at the metaphase 1
stage,matured in TCM199 medium with recombinant follicle-
stirmulatinghormone.
the oocytes would be protected and potentially viable
after vascularization. No xenotransplantation of
canine ovarian tissue has been performed, but it has
been demonstrated that in the cat, xenografts to mice
can lead to follicle development.
TechnologiesinSmafiAnimalTheriogenology
209
Innovative Technologies
InVitroFertilization
For performance of IVF, spermatozoa are capacitated ir
vitro and added to MII oocytes. Under the appropriate
conditions a spermatozoon fertilizes an oocyte and pro
duces a viable embryo. In the dog success with IVF has
been limited. There is one report ofa 22-day pregnancy;
in that study bitches were induced to enter proestrus by
treatment with cabergoline (see Chapter 2). Oocytes
were retrieved from the dogs'ovaries by ovariohysterec-
tomy at the time of ovulation and cultured in vitro in
TCM199 medium containing 0.3% serum albumin fo1
24-78 hours. Capacitated spermatozoa were addcd to
the oocytes at 12 hours, and the two cell types were cocul-
tured for 48 hours. At that time, 2 of 90 oocytes had
developed to the two-cell stage of embryogenesis.
All embryos/oocytes were surgically transferred to
the uterine lumen of a bitch during early diestrus.
Ultrasonographic pregnancy evaluation was performed
20 days after embryo transfer; one conceptus was in the
proximal region of the uterine body, and two concepti
were in the left uterine horn. All concepti were consid-
ered to be undersized for their anticipated age. Ultra
sonographic examinationperformed2dayslater
showed that all the concepti were absent. In the cat IVF
and subsequent embryo transfer have resulted in the
birthoflivekittens.
608
Technologies in Small Animal Theriogenology
Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection
ICSI is introduction of one capacitated spermatozoon
into the cytoplasm of a mature oocyte. ICSI generally
has been successful in species other than the dog
and cat; it is a primary tool in human infertility treat-
ment.
Although some success has been achieved with
ICSI in the dog, no puppies have been produced by
this technology. Ovaries are obtained via ovariohys.
terectomy, sectioning the ovarian cortex, incubating
the tissue in an enzymatic solution containing collage
nase (500 IU/ml) and DNase (75 IU/ml), and filter-
ing to retrieve oocytes. The oocytes are graded, and
only grade 1 oocytes are placed in culture. The oocytes
are matured in TCM199 medium with penicillin, strep-
tomycin, FSH, LH, and fetal calf serum at 38° C with
5% carbon dioxide (CO,) and 100% humidity for
72 hours. In one study, 82 (38.5%) of 213 oocytes
reached the MII stage. These oocytes were injected
with spermatozoa; only 6 (7%) of 82 o0cytes injected
showed evidence of pronucleus formation, indicating
successfulfertilization.
ICSI in cats has proved to be far more successful,
with the production of several litters. Oocytes were
matured in vivo, retrieved from the uterus, fertilized as
described earlier, and cultured to the morula (l6 cell)
stage before embryo transfer.
TechnologlesinSmaliAnimalTheriogenology
609
Embryo Transfer
Embryo transfer is placement of an embryo into a surro
gate dam in which normal gestation occurs. Embryos
can be recovered by flushing the uterus of a bred bitch
or queen or by the in vitro techniques described earlier.
Surrogate dams are synchronized with the administra-
tion ofreproductive hormones, such that the embryos
are placed within their uterus in early diestrus, as would
occur naturally. Embryo transfer, using embryos created
either in vivo or in vitro, has been successful in the dog,
but with only a few live pups born to date. For the cat, as
with the other technologies described, greater success
has been reported. Kittens have been produced by
embryo transfer with embryos created either in vivo or
in vitro and by transfer either of fresh embryos or
embryos that had been frozen and thawed. Embryo
transfer is not yet a clinical reality for dogs and cats, but
work extrapolated from these species has been used in
endangered felid and canid species to good effect.
Cloning
To date, cloning of individuals has been successful in
sheep, cattle, goats, mice, pigs, and cats. No live cloned
puppies have been produced. In all cases cloning has been
an extremely inefficient process, with a 1%-4% success rate
despite a significant and focused volume of research.
610
Technologies in Small Animal Theriogenology
Which techniques can be practically achieved and
which techniques are not realistic for fertility salvage
and offspring production? In the dog semen freezing
(see Chapter 3) and standard embryo transfer have real-
istic expectations of success. However, IVF, xenotrans
plantation, freezing of oocytes,and cloning are not
realistic technologies. In the cat semen freezing, embryo
transfer, IVF, ICSI, and cloning are functional and realis-
tictechnologies.
Bibliography
Barber MR, Lee SM, Steffens WL et al: Immuno-
localization of zona pelhucida antigens in the ovar-
ian follicle of dogs, cats, horses and elephants,
Theriogenology 55:1705;2001.
Bogliolo L, Leoni G, Ledda S et al: Intracytoplasmic
sperm injection of in vitro matured oocytes of
domesticcatswithfrozen-thawedepididymal sper
matozoa,Theriogenology56:955,2001.
Bolamba D, Borden-Russ DK, Durrant BS: In vitro matu-
ration of domestic dog oocytes cultured in advanced
preantral and early antral follicles, Theriogenology
49:33,1998.
Durrant BS, Pratt NC, Russ KD et al: Isolation and char-
acterization of canine advanced preantral and early
antral follicles, Theriogenology 49:917, 1998.
TechnologlesinSmaliAnimalTheriogenology
611
England GC, Verstegen JP, Hewitt DA: Pregnancy follow-
ing in vitro fertilisation of canine oocytes,Vet Rec
148:20,2001.
Farstad W: Reproduction in foxes: current research and
future challenges, Anim Reprod Sci 53:35, 1998.
Fulton R,Durrant B,KeskintepeL etal:Assisted repro
ductive techniques for the treatment of canine
infertility, Soc Theriogenol Newsletter21:1,1998.
Gomez MC, Pope CE, Harris R et al: Births of kittens pro-
duced by intracytoplasmic sperm injection of
domestic cat oocytes matured in vitro, Reprod Fertil
Dev12:432,2000.
Goodrowe KL, Howard JG, Wildt DE: Conparison of
embryo recovery, embryo quality, oestradiol-17 beta
and progesterone profiles in domestic cats (Felis
catus) atnatural orinduced oestrus,J ReprodFertil
82:553,1988.
Goodrowe KL, Wall RJ, O'Brien SJ et al: Devclopmental
competence of domestic cat follicular oocytes after
fertilization in vitro, Biol Reprod 39:355, 1999.
Hewitt DA,England GC:The canine oocyte penetra
tion assay: its use as an indicator of dog spermato-
zoal performance in vitro,Anim Reprod Sci50:123
1998.
Kinney GM, Pennycock JW, Schriver MD et al: Surgical
collection and transfer of canine embryos, Biol
Reprod 20(suppl1):96A,1979(abstract).
612
Technologies in Small Animal Theriogenology
Kraemer D, Kinney G, Schriver M: Embryo transfer in
dogs and cats. Proceedings of the Embryo Transfer
and in Vitro World Conference, 1989.
Luvoni GC, Luciano AM, Modina S et al: Influence of
differentstages ofthe oestrouscycle on cumulus
oocyte communications in canine oocytes: effects
on the efficiency of in vitro maturation, J Reprod
Fertil Suppl57:141,2001.
Otoi T, Murakami M, Fujli M et al: Development of
canine oocytes matured and fertilised in vitro, Vet
Rec146:52,2000.
Pope CE, Johnson CA, McRae MA et al: Development of
embryos produced by intracytoplasmic sperm injec
tion of cat 0ocytes, Anim Reprod Sci 53:221, 1998.
Shin T, Kraemer D, Pryor J et al: A cat cloned by nuclear
transplantation,Nature723:10,2002.
Wilmut I, Schnieke AE, McWhir J et al: Viable offspring
derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells,
Nature385:810,1997.
Yamada S, Shimazu Y, Kawaji H et al: Maturation, fertil-
ization, and development of dog oocytes in vitro,
BiofReprod46:853,1992
Yamada S, Shimazu Y, Kawano Yet al: In vitro mafuration
and fertilization of preovulatory dog oocytes,
J Reprod Fertil Suppl47:227, 1993.
Index
A
Agenesis ofreproductive
Abdominal palpation
tract-cont'd
for cystic endometrial
history, 29
hyperplasia and
pathogenesis of, 28
pyometra,382
physical examination
in diagnosis of ovarian
findings, 29
neoplasia,357
prognosis,31
for ovarian neoplasia, 357
signalment, 28-29
for pregnancy
treatment of, 30
confirmation,212-213
Agglutination tests for canine
214f,215,228,261
brucellosis, 190
Acepromazine in pregnancy,
Aglepristone(RU534)for
428
pregnancy
Acyclovir for canine
termination,152
herpesvirus, 199
AI. SeeArtificialinsemination
Agalactia,441-442
(AI) (canine).
Agargelimmunodiffusion
AGID. See Agar gel
(AGID), 190-191
immunodiffusion
Agenesis of reproductive
(AGID).
tract, 28
Aminoglycoside antibiotics
clinical signs,29
for neonates, 316
diagnostic tests and results,
during pregnancy,
30
231
Page numbers followed by f indicate figures; L, tables; b, boxes.
613
614
xapul
Amoxicillin/clavulanate
Anoxia in neonates,290-291
for mastitis, 432
Antiandrogens for bcnign
for metritis, 371-372
prostatic hypertrophy/
for neonates, 317t
hyperplasia,510-512
Ampicillin
Artificial insemination (AI)
for cystic endometrial
(canine),61-63
hyperplasia and
chilled semen, 61-62, 75-76
pyometra,386
conception rate with,80
for neonates, 317t
equipmentand
Analgesics for galactostasis,
techniques,76-80
443
fresh semen, 61, 63-64
Androgens
conception rate with,68,
androgen-dependent
69t-73t, 7475
masculinization
vaginal insemination,
defects, 18-19
64-68,65f
hypospadias.See
frozen semen,62-63,80-81
Hypospadias.
conception rate with,
testicular feminization
90-92
syndromes.See
endoscopic transcervical
Testicular feminization
insemination, 87-90
syndromes.
equipment and
for estrus suppression,
techniques,81-84
133-136
intrauterine
for false pregnancy, 426-427
insemination
during pregnancy, 231-232
techniques, 84-90
for vaginitis, 409
surgical intrauterine
Anestrus, 35
insemination,84-86
of bitch, 44 45
transcervical
and ovarian cysts, 336
insemination with
of queen, 56-57
rigid catheter,86-87
Index
615
Atropine for neonatal
Benign prostatic
resuscitation,272
hypertrophy/
hyperplasia (BPH),
B
493-494, 498
Bacterial infection,
clinical signs, 499-500
200-202
diagnostic tests and results,
and feline pregnancy loss,
500-501,502f,503
584
ejaculate,503-504
BAER test. See Brainstem
fine needle aspiration
auditory evoked
of prostate, 506-509,
response (BAER) test.
508f
Balanitis, 546
prostatic massage,504,
clinical signs, 547
505f,506
diagnosis of, 548
surgical biopsy, 509
history, 547
history,499-500
pathogenesis of, 546-547
pathogenesis of,498-499
physical examination,
physical examinaton
548
findings, 500
prognosis,549
prognosis,509
treatment of, 548
signalment, 499
Balanoposthitis, 536, 546
treatment of, 509-510
clinical signs, 547
with antiandrogens,
diagnosis of,548
510-512
history, 547
other compounds,
pathogenesis of,546-547
512-513
physical examination,
with progestational
548
compounds,510
prognosis,549
Birth. SeeDystocia;
signalment,547
Parturition,
treatmentof,548
Birth weight, 293, 295-296
616
Index
Boldenone undecenoate for
BSE. See Breeding soundness
estrus suppression, 134
examination(BSE).
Bovine uterine infusion
pipettes,65
C
BPH. See Benign prostatic
Cabergoline
hypertrophy/
for anestrus shortening. 50
hyperplasia (BPH).
for false pregnancy, 427
Brainstein auditory evoked
for pregnancy
response (BAER) test,
termination, 150
287
cabergoline with
Breeding management. See
cloprostenol, 151
alsoEstrous cycle.
Calcium
ofbitch, 46-49, 121-122
for dystocia, 264
ofqueen,58
for eclampsia,276-277
Breeding soundness
serum concentrations in
examination(BSE),
eclampsia,275
97-98,99-100
Canine brucellosis,185
history, 100-101
bacterial isolation, 188-189
libido,104-105
and canine infertility,
physical examination,
573-574
101-104
clinical signs, 187
semen. SeeSemen.
control of, 194
Bromocriptine
diagnostic tests and results,
for anestrus shortening.50
188-192
for false pregnancy,
euthanasia for, 192
427-428
history, 187
for pregnancy
pathogenesis of, 185-186
termination, 149, 151
physical examination
Brucellosis. SeeCanine
findings,187-188
brucellosis.
prognosis,194-195
index
617
Canine brucellosiscont'd
Castration-cont'd
serological testing, 121,
for paraprostatic/prostatic
189-192
cysts, 525
signalment,187
for persistent mullerian
treatment of, 192-194
duct syndrome, 25
Canine distemper in
for prostatic neoplasia, 527
puppies,301
for prostatitis, 519,520
Canine herpesvirus (CHV),
for testicular feminization
195
syndrome,26
control of, 199-200
Cataracts in neonates,307
diagnostic tests and results,
Catecholaminereceptors
197-198
blockers for benign
history, 196-197
prostatic hypertrophy/
pathogenesis of, 195-196
hyperplasia,512
physical examination
Cefazolin for neonates, 317t
findings, 197
Cefotaxime for neonates,317t
prognosis,200
CEH. See Cystic endometrial
serologic testing,
hyperplasia (CEH)
197-198
and pyometra.
signalment,196
Cephalexin
treatment of, 199
for mastitis, 432
Cassou AI sheaths,65
for neonates, 317t
Castration.See also
Cephalosporin for
Orchiectomy.
septicemia with
for benign prostatic
hypoglycemia,299
hypertrophy/
Cesarean sections, 265-268
hyperplasia,509
Chemiluminescence assay,48
for contraception,447-448,
Chemotherapy
450-451
for mammary neoplasia,
for hypospadias, 26
440
618
Index
Chemotherapy-cont'd
Chromosomal sex
for ovarian neoplasia,360
disorders—cont'd
for prostatic neoplasia,531
treatment of, 12
for transmissible venereal
XO syndrome, 7-8
tumors,556
XXX syndrome, 8
for uterine neoplasia,390
XXY syndrome, 6-7
for vaginal neoplasia,417
CHV. See Canine herpesvirus
Chilled semen.SeeArtificial
(CHV).
insemination (AI)
Clavulanate.See Amoxicillin/
(canine),
clavulanate.
Chimerism, 8-10
Clindamycin for prostatitis,
Chloramphenicol
519
for mycoplasmal infection,
Cloning, 600, 609-610
205
Cloprostenolforpregnancy
for neonates, 316
termination, 148, 151
during pregnancy, 231
Coccidiosis in neonates,305
for prostatitis, 519
Colostrum,ingestion of
Chromosomal sex disorders, 6
in canine herpesvirus, 199
chimerism, 8-10
by orphan neonates,
clinical sigms, 10-11
318-319
diagnostic tests and results,
Colostrum, orphan
11-12
neonate's ingestion of,
and feline infertility, 580,
318-319
587
Complete blood count
history, 10-11
in benign prostatic
pathogenesis of,6-10
hypertrophy/
physical examination
hyperplasia,500
findings, 11
in canine brucellosis, 192
prognosis,12
in dystocia,262
signalment, 10
in neonates, 310,311t
Index
619
Complete blood count
Contraception-cont'd
cont'd
male
in prostatic neoplasia,
castration,447-448,
527
450-451
in prostatitis,516,517
estrogens,453
in testicular neoplasia,485,
GnRH agonists, 448,453
486
immunologic,448,454
Congenital vaginal
medical, 452-454
abnormalities and
progestogens,453
canine infertility,
prolactin, 453
569-570
surgical,450-452
Conjunctivitis in neonates,
testicular/epididymal
306-307
sclerosing agents, 448,
Contraception
452
female, 125-127
vasectomy,448,451-452
androgens, 133-136
Contrast cystourethrography
GnRH agonists, 137
for female pseudo-
gonadotropin-releasing
hermaphroditisin, 24
hormone agonists,
for persistent mullerian
136-137
duct syndrome, 25
immunocontraception,
Coombs' test, 192
138-139
Corticosteroids in
ovariectomy, 127-128
parturition,244-245
ovariohysterectomy,
C-reactive protein in
127-128
pregnancy,224-225,
progestogens,129-133
228
pseudopregnancy
Cryptorchidism, 457-458
(feline), induction of,
460
139-140
diagnostic tests and results
tubal ligation,129
465-466
620
Index
Cryptorchidism-cont'd
Cystic rete 0varii, 334-335. See
pathogenesis of,460-465
also Ovarian cysts.
proguosis,468
Cysts. See specific cysts.
treatnent of, 466-468
Cultures for canine
D
brucellosis, 188-189
Dermatophytosis, 303-304
Cyclophosphamide
Deslorelin acetate for estrus
for mammaryneoplasia,440
suppression,136
Cystic endometrial
Detirelix acetate forestrus
hyperplasia (CEH)
suppression,137
and pyometra,
Dexamethasonefor
368-369, 376
pregnancy
clinical signs, 379-380
termination, 1F
diagnostic tests and results,
Dextrose
382-384
for eclampsia with
differentiating pyometra
hypoglycemia,277
from metritis,376t
for septicemia with
history, 379-380
hypoglycemia,299
open versus closed cervix
Diarrhea in neonates,
pyometra, 380t
304
pathogenesis of,376379
Diestrus
physical examination
ofbitch, 43-44
findings, 380-381, 381f
of queen,56
prognosis,388
Diethylstilbestrol
signalment,379
for pregnancy
treatment of, 384-387
termination,145
Cystic epoophoron,334.See
for vaginitis, 408
also Ovarian cysts.
Dihydrotestosterone and
Cystic paroophoron, 334. See
sexual
alsoOvarian cysts.
development, 4
index
621
Dinoprost tromethamine for
Dystociacont'd
pregnancy termi-
neonatal resuscitation,
nation,147-148
269-273
Diphallus,540
surgical treatment of,
Diuretics for galactostasis, 443
265-268
Dopamine agonists
treatment of,262-268
for false pregnancy, 427
for pregnancy termi
E
nation, 149-151
Ecbolic agents
Doxapram for neonatal
for dystocia,263-265
resuscitation,271-272
for metritis, 372
Doxorubicin for mammary
for subinvolution of
neoplasia,440
placental sites,375
Doxycycline
Eclampsia, 275-278
for Hemobartonella felis i1
EDTA tubes for blood
neonates,306
samples, 309
with minocycline for
ELISA. See Enzyme-linked
canine brucellosis, 193
immunosorbent assay
"Dry dewars,” 83
(ELSLA).
Dysgenesis ofreproductive
Embryo transfer,
tract, 28-31
600,609
Dystocia,243-244,255-256
Embryonic development,
causes of,256-258,259f
210,211t
diagnostic criteria, 261-262
oocytematuration,603
historical criteria, 258,
605
260-261
oocyte morphology,
manipulative treatment of,
601-603,604f
263
Emerging technologies,
medical treatment of,
599-610
263-265
En bloc dissection, 440
622
Index
Enzyme-linked
Estradiol—cont'd
immunosorbent assay
for pregnancy
(ELISA), 191
termination, 145-146
in-house kits, 47-48
serum concentrations,
Epididynal sclerosing
345-346
agents,448,452
Estrogenic compounds
Epididymitis, 458-459, 469
for benign prostatic
diagnostic tests and results,
hypertrophy/
472-473
hyperplasia,512
pathogenesis of, 469-471
during pregnancy, 231-232
physical examination
for pregnancy termination,
findings,471-472
142, 145-147
prognosis,475
Estrogen(s)
treatment of,473-475
for false pregnancy, 426
Epinephrine for neonatal
in male contraception, 453
resuscitation,272
in parturition,246
Episioplasty for vaginitis, 409
serum concentrations,338
Epostaneforpregnancy
Estrous cycle
termination, 154
ofbitch,33-34,35,36f
Equine chorionic
anestrus, 44-45
gonadotropin for
diestrus, 43-44
induction offeline
estrus, 41, 42f, 43
estrus,57
hormonal events
Equine uterine infusion
during, 36f
pipettes,65
interestrous interval,
Erythromycin for prostatitis,
shortening of, 49-50
519
irregular interestrous
Estradiol
intervals, 50-52
and ovarian remnant
proestrus,36-37,38f,39,
syndrome,345-346
39f,40f
index
623
Estrous cyclecont'd
F
stages, 35-45
"Fading" puppies and kittens,
vaginal cytology
285
specimens,collection
False pregnancy. See
of,45
Pregnancy.
of queen,3435,52,53f
Fenbendazole to prevent
anestrus,56-57
hookworms in
diestrus,56
neonates, 305
estrus, 54-55
Fenprostalene for pregnancy
induction of estrus,
ternination, 148
57
Fetal developmenl, 210,
induction of ovulation,
211t
57-58
oocyte maturation, 603,
interestrous,55-56
605
potentialoutcome,53
oocyte morphology,
proestrus,52-54
601-603, 604f
stages,53-57
Fetal heartrate monitoring,
Estrus
253-255
ofbitch, 41, 42f, 43
Fibrinogen in pregnancy,
and ovarian cysts,337
224,225,228
persistent estrus and
Finasteride for benign
canine infertility,
prostatic hypertrophy/
568-569
hyperplasia, 511-512
ofqueen,5455
Fipronil to control fleas, 303
Estrus suppression
Flca control, 303
pharmacologic methods,
Fluid therapy
129-140
for dystocia, 265
surgical methods,
for neonates, 314-315
127-129
with diarrhea, 304
Eutocia.SeeParturition.
with septicemia,299
624
Index
Fluoroquinolone therapy
Glucose for neonatal
for canine brucellosis,
resuscitation,272
193
GnRH. See Gonadotropin
for neonates, 316
releasing hormone
for prostatitis, 519
(GnRH).
Flutamide for benign
Gonadal sex disorders,
prostatic hypertrophy/
12-16
hyperplasia,512
Gonadectomy
Folic acid for Toxoplasma
of cryptorchids,
gondi,306
466-467
Follicle-stimulating hormone
for gonadal sex disorders,
forinduction offeline
16
estrus,57
prepuberal, 165-167,
Follicular cysts, 333-334. See
179-180
also Ovarian cysts.
anesthetic consid-
Fresh semen. See Artificial
erations, 176
insemination (Al)
behavioral implications
(canine); Semen.
of, 174-176
Frozen semen. See Artificial
growth and,170
insemination (AI)
physical characteristics
(canine).
from, 173
for population control,
G
167-170
Galactostasis,442-443
surgical considerations,
Glucocorticoid therapy
176-179
for eclampsia,277
urethral function and,
for epididymitis, 474
171-172
for galactostasis, 443
weight and, 170-171
for orchitis, 474
Gonadorelin to induce
for vaginitis, 409
ovulation, 140
index
625
Gonadotropin-releasing
Herpesvirus. See Canine
hormone (GnRH)
herpesvirus (CHV).
agonists
and canine infertility,
for estrus suppression,
572-573
136-137
in puppies,284-285,300
for male contraception
Histopathologic
448,453
examinations
for cryptorchidism,468
for female pseudo-
for estrus suppression,
hermaphroditism, 24
136-137
for hypospadias, 25
for follicle cysts, 340
Hookworms in neonates.
immunization against, 139
305
to induce ovulation, 57
Human chorionic
for ovarian remnant
gonadotropin (hCG)
syndrome,351
for cryptorchidism, 468
Granulosa cell tumor and
for follicle cysts, 340
canine infertility,569
to induce luteinization in
Griseofulvin, 304
treatment ofovarian
cysts,340
H
to mduce ovulation, 57,
Haloperidol in pregnancy,
140
428
for ovarian remnant
hCG. See Human chorionic
syndrome,351
gonadotropin (hCG).
Husbandry and canine
Hemobartonella felis,
infertility,563
305-306
Hyperplasia
Hepatitis in puppies, 300-301
benign prostatic. See
Hermaphroditism
Benign prostatic
and canine infertility, 565
hypertrophy/
true hermaphrodites, 8-9
hyperplasia (BPH).
626
Index
Hyperplasia-cont'd
Hypothermia in neonates,
cystic endometrial. See
293
Cysticendometrial
Hypothyroidism
hyperplasia (CEH)
and canine infertility,
and pyometra.
565-566
vaginal. See Vaginal fold
and prolonged
prolapse.
interestrous intervals
Hypertrophy
or acyclicity,51-52
benign prostatic. See
Hysterectomy. See also
Benign prostatic
Ovariohysterectomy
hypertrophy/
(OHE).
hyperplasia (BPH).
for metritis, 372
manmary. See Mammary
for persistent mullerian
hypertrophy.
duct syndrome, 25
Hypocalcemia,
postparturient.See
1
Eclampsia,
ICSI. See Intracytoplasmic
Hypoluteoidism and canine
sperm injection
infertility, 574-575
(ICSI).
Hypospadias,19,22
Idiopathic infertility
clinical signs, 22
in canines,578
diagnostic tests and results.
in felines, 588
25
IFA. SeeIndirecl
penile disorders, 536,
fluorescent antigen
539-540
(IFA).
physical examination
Imidacloprid to control fleas,
findings,23
303
prognosis,27
Immunocontraception
signalment, 20
female, 138-139
treatment of, 26
male, 448,454
Index
627
In vitro fertilization (IVF),
Infectious diseases —cont'd
600,607
herpesvirus, 300
In vitro maturation,603,605
infectious canine hepatitis,
606f
300-301
In vivo maturation, 603
Infertility, 561-563
Indirectfluorescentantigen
in canines, 561-562
(IFA),191
bitch has never cycled,
Infectious diseases
563-567
ofbitch'sreproductive
bitch is cycling, 563
tract, 183-184
bitch is in persistent
bacterial infection,
estrus,568-569
200-202
breeding management
canine brucellosis. See
and,35
Canine brucellosis.
conception does not
canine herpesvirus. See
occur after copulation,
Canine herpesvirus
572
(CHV).
conception occurs after
mycoplasmal infection,
copulation,572
202-205
copulation does not
of reproductive tract,
occur normally, 569
183-184
copulation is not allowed
in kittens
by bitch, 569-570
feline infectious
copulation occurs
peritonitis,302
normally, 569
feline leukemia,302
idiopathicinfertility,578
panleukopenia,302
interestrous interval
upper respiratory
abnormally long, 567
infection,301-302
interestrous interval
in puppies
abnormally short,
canine distemper, 301
567-568
628
Index
Infertilitycont'd
Infertility—cont'd
interestrousinterval
ovulation is induced,
normal, 567
582
male does not mount or
ovulation is not induced,
achieve intromission
582
and ejaculation,
pregnancy is not
570-572
maintained,583-586
pregnancyis
queen allows male to
maintained,572
mount,581
pregnancy is not
queen does not allow
maintained,572-575
male to mount,
semen quality issues,
581-582
575-578
queen is cycling
in felines, 562-563
normally, 578
conception does not
queen is not cycling,
occur after copulation.
579-581
582
semen quality issues,
conception occurs after
586-588
copulation,582
and ovarian cysts, 336
copulation does not
Interestrous interval
occur normally, 581
of bitch
copulation occurs
and infertility, 567-568
normally, 581
irregular intervals, 50-52
idiopathic infertility, 588
shortening ofinterval,
male cannot mount and
49-50
achieve intromission,
prolonged intervals
581
and canine infertility, 567
male mounts and
and hypothyroidism,
achieves intromission,
51-52
581
of queen,55-56
Index
629
Intracytoplasmic sperm
Laparotomycont'd
injection (ICSI), 600,
in ovarian remnaut
608
symdrome,348-350
Isoerythrolysis in kittens,
for spermatic cord torsion,
296-297,298t
477.479
IVF. See In vitro fertilization
Leukemia in kittens, 302
(IVF).
Levonorgestrel for estrus
suppression,131
K
Limping kitten syndrome,
Karyotypes
302
abnormal. See
Lufenuron to controlfleas,
Chromosomal sex
303
disorders.
Lumpectomy, 440
normal, 1
Luteal insufficiency and
Ketoconazole for benign
feline pregnancy loss,
prostatic hypertrophy/
583-584
hyperplasia, 512
Luteinizing hormone in
Kittens. See Neonates.
pregnancy,207,
Klinefelter's syndrome, 6-7
209-210
Luteolytic agents
L
for diestrus shortening,
Labor. See Parturition.
49
Laparoscopy
for pregnancy
for ovarian cysts, 339
termination,147-149
for ovarian neoplasia,
358
M
Laparotomy
Malereproductive
for ovarian cysts, 339
physiology,448-450
for ovarian neoplasia,
Mammary disorders,421-423
358
agalactia.SeeAgalactia
630
Index
Mammary disorderscont'd
Mammary neoplasia——cont'd
false pregnancy. See
signalment,438
Pregnancy.
treatment of, 440-441
galactostasis,442-443
Mastectomy, 440
hypertrophy. See Mammary
Mastitis,422,428
hypertrophy.
clinical signs, 429
mastitis. See Mastitis.
diagnostic tests and results,
tumors. See Mainmary
430
neoplasia.
pathogenesisof,428-429
Mammary hypertrophy, 422
physical examination
433
findings,429-430
clinical signs, 433-434
prognosis,432
diagnostic tests and results,
signalment,429
434435
treatment of,430-432
history, 433
Medroxyprogesterone acetate
pathogenesis of,433
for estrus suppression, 131
physical examination
for ovarian remnant
findings, 434
syndrome,350
prognosis,436
Megestrol acetate
treatment of, 435
for benign prostatic
Mammary neoplasia,
hypertrophy/
422-423,436
hyperplasia,510
clinical signs, 438
for estrus suppression, 130
diagnostic tests and results,
for false pregnancy, 427
439
for ovarianremnant
history, 438
syndrome,350
pathogenesis of,436-437
Methotrexate for mammary
physical examinatio11
neoplasia,440
findings, 439
Methyltestosterone for estrus
prognosis, 441
suppression,135-136
Index
631
Metritis,367-368,370
Mullerian-inhibiting
chinical signs, 370
substance
diagnostic tests and results,
and gonadal sex disorders,
371
13
differentiating pyometra
and sexual development, 4
from metritis, 376t
Mycoplasmal infection,
physical examination
202-205
findings, 370-371
prognosis,371-373
N
signalment, 370
Naloxone for neonatal
treatmentof,371-373
resuscitation,272
Metronidazole forcoccidiosis
Nandrolone lauratc for
in neonates, 305
“swimmer"neonates,
Mibolerone
308
for estrus supprcssion,
Neonates, 283-285
133-134
abdominal cavities of,
for ovarian remnant
289-290
syndrome,350
anoxia,290-291
Mifepristone
antibiotic therapy, 316-317
for cystic endometrial
behavior of, 286
hyperplasia and
birth weight, 293, 295-296
pyometra,385
canine herpesvirus, 284-285
for pregnancy
cataracts,307
termination, 152
cataracts in,307
Minocycline
common disorders of,
with dihydrostreptomycin
284-285,290-308
for orchitis/
complete blood count,
epididymitis, 474
310,31lt
with doxycycline for
congenital defects,284,
canine brucellosis, 193
291-292
632
xapui
Neonates--cont'd
Neonatescont'd
conjunctivitis in,306-307
blood count, 310,31lt
dermatological disorders,
sample collection,
303-304
308-309
ears, 286
serum chemistry
eyes, 286-287
profile,310,312,
"fading” puppies and
312t-313t
kittens, 285,292-293
urinalysis of, 313
fluid therapy, 314315
ophthalmia neonatorum,
gastrointestinal
306-307
disorders/parasites,
oral cavities, 289
304-306
orphans. See Orphan
growth rate, poor, 296
neonates.
hair coat, 287
physical exanination of,
hydration status, 287-288
283-284,285-290
hypothermia,293
rectal temperature of,
infectious diseases
285-286
kittens, 301-302
resuscitation of, 269-273,
puppies,300-301
313-314
isoerythrolysis,284
septicemia,284,
mortalityrate of,290
297-299
musculoskeletal system,
serum chemistry profile,
288-289
310,312,312t-313t
neonatal isoerythrolysis
signs of illness in, 290
(kittens),296-297,298t
skin,287
neurologic disorders, 306,
"swimmer,”"308
307b
systemic disorders
neurologic system,288
anoxia,290-291
normal laboratoryvalues
congenital defects, 284,
in complete
291-292
index
633
Neonatescont'd
Neutering.SeeGonadectomy,
pue saiddnd Supe,
prepuberal,
kittens,285,292-293
"New Zealand" transcervical
hypothermia,293
insemination method,
low birth weight,293,
87-90
295-296
Nitenpyram to control fleas,
neonatalisoerythrolysis
303
(kittens), 296-297, 298t
Nonsteroidal
poor growth rate,296
antinflammatory
septicemia,284,297-299
agents for
thoracic cavityof,289
orchitis/epididymitis,
treatmentof,313-317
474
urinalysis of, 313
Norethindrone for estrus
vaginitis in, 407-408
suppression, 131
Neoplasia
Norwegian AI catheter, 65f,
mammary. See Mammary
86
neoplasia.
Nutrition
ovarian. See Ovarian
for benign prostatic
neoplasia.
hypertrophy/
penile,554555
hyperplasia, 512
prostatic. See Prostatic
of pregnant bitch, 229-230
neoplasia.
of pregnant queen,
testicular. See Testicular
230-231
neoplasia.
transmissible venereal
0
tumors,555-557
OHE.See
uterine. SeeUterine
Ovariohysterectomy
neoplasia.
(OHE).
vaginal. SeeVaginal
Oligozoospermia and canine
neoplasia.
infertility, 577-578
634
xapul
Oocyte maturation, 603, 605
Orphan neonates—cont'd
Oocyte morphology, 601-603,
feeding of, 285, 317,
604f
321-323
Orchiectomy
weaning,323-324
for cryptorchidisn,
ORS. See Ovarian remnant
467-468
syndrome (ORS).
for epididymitis, 473
Osiris pipettes, 65-66, 65f
for orchitis, 473
Ovarian cysts, 331-333
for spermatic cord torsion,
and canine infertility,
479,481
568-569
for testicular neoplasia.
clinical signs, 336-337
487
diagnostic tests and results,
Orchitis,458-459,469
338-339
diagnostic tests and results
history, 336-337
472-473
pathogenesisof,333-335
pathogenesis of, 469-471
physical examination
physical examination
findings, 337-338
findings,471-472
prognosis,341
prognosis, 475
signalment,335-336
treatment of, 473-475
treatment of,339-340
Orphan neonates, 317
Ovarian disorders, 331-333
body temperature,
cysts. See Ovarian cysts.
maintenance of,318
ORS. See Ovarian remnant
body weight, 319
syndrome (ORS).
colostrum, ingestion of,
tumors. See Ovarian
318-319
neoplasia.
dietary requirements of,
Ovarianneoplasia,333,352
319-321
clinical signs, 355-356
emergencyhomemade
diagnostic tests and results,
milk replacers for,321t
356-360,358f,359f
index
635
Ovarian neoplasiacont'd
Ovariectomy,127-128
epithelial tumors,353
for contraception, 127-128
germ cell tumors, 354
for mammary
history, 355-356
hypertrophy, 435
mesenchymal tumors,
for ovarian cysts,339-340
354-355
for vaginal fold prolapse,
pathogenesis of, 352-353
414
physical examination
Ovariohysterectomy (OHE)
findings, 356
for contraception,
progn0sis,360-361
127-128
sex cord-gonadostromal
with C-section, 265
tumors,353-354
for cysic endometrial
signalment, 355
hyperplasia and
treatment of, 360
pyometra,384385
Ovarian remnant syndrome
for estrus suppression,
（ORS),332-333,341
127-128
clinical signs, 343-344
for female pseudo-
diagnostic tests and results,
hermaphroditism, 25
345-348
for gonadal sex disorders,
history,343-344
16
manipulative treatmerit of,
and infertility
350-351
canine,564
medical treatment of,350
feline,579
pathogenesis of,341-343
formammary
physical examination
hypertrophy,435
findings, 344
fo1 mammary neoplasia,
prognosis,351-352
440
signalment,343
for metritis, 372
surgical removal of
for ovarian cysts, 339
remnant, 348-350
for ovarian neoplasia, 360
636
Index
Ovariohysterectomy
Parturition---cont'd
(OHE)-—cont'd
fetal heart rate
for pregnancy
monitoring, 253-255
termination,141-142
labor, 250-255
for subinvolution of
onset of,248-249
placental sites,375
periparturient disorders
for uterine neoplasia, 390
care of postpartum
forvaginalfoldprolapse,
bitch,273-275
414
eclampsia. See
for vaginalneoplasia,417
Eclampsia.
Ovulation. See also Estrous
predicting,233
cycle.
tocodynamometry,
failure,51
252-253
induction of, 57-58, 140,
Penicillin for septicemia with
582
hypoglycemia, 299
Oxygen therapy for
Penile amputation for
septicemia with
hypospadias, 26
hypoglycemia, 299
Penile hypoplasia, 540-541
Oxytocin
Penile neoplasia, 537,
for dystocia, 264
554555
for metritis, 372
Penile trauma, 536, 541
in parturition, 246-247
clinical signs,542
diagnostic tests,542-543
P
history, 542
Paraphimosis,537,500-552
pathogenesis of,541-542
Paraprostatic cysts, 494-495,
physical examination,542
521-523,524f
prognosis,544
Parturition, 241-243
treatmentof,543-544
dystocia. See Dystocia.
Penile ulcers, 557-558
endocrinology of,244-247
Penile vesicles, 557-558
Index
637
Penis/prepuce disorders,
Periparturient disorders
535-537
care of postpartum bitch,
balanitis. See Balanitis.
273-275
balanoposthitis.See
eclampsia. See
Balanoposthitis.
Eclampsia.
diphallus, 540
Peritonitis in kittens,
hypospadias,536,539540
302
lymphoid follicle
Persistent mullerian duct
hyperplasia,557-558
syndrome (PMDS),
paraphimosis.See
17-18
Paraphimosis.
clinical signs, 21
penile hypoplasia, 540-541
diagnostic tests and results,
penile neoplasia, 537,
24-25
554-555
history, 21
penile trauma. See Penile
physical examination
trauma.
findings, 22-23
persistent penile
prognosis,27
frenulum,535,537-538
signalment,20
phenotypic males, 11
treatmentof,25-26
phimosis,549-550
Persistent penile
posthitis. See Posthitis.
frenulum,
priapism. See Priapism.
535,537-538
transmissible venereal
Phenothiazine for dystocia,
tumors, 555-557
265
ulcers, 557-558
Phenotypic sex disorders,
urethral
16-17
eversion/prolapse,
female pseudo-
537,553-554
hermaphroditism.See
vesicles, 557-558
Pseudo-
XX males, 15
hermaphroditism.
638
Index
Phenotypic sex disorders
Pregnancy-cont'd
cont'd
acute phase protcins in,
male pseudo-
224-225,228
hermaphroditism. See
behavioral changes in, 212
Hypospadias;
care during.228-233
Persistent mullerian
diabetic bitches,233
duct syndrome
diagnosis of, 210
(PMDS); Testicular
abdominal palpation,
feminization
212-213, 214f,215,228
syndromes.
acute phase protein
pathogenesis of, 17
changes,224-225,228
Phimosis,549-550
hematologic changes,
Placental sites, subinvolution
225-226
of.SeeSubinvolution of
hormonal, 226-227
placental sites.
withradiography,
PMDS. See Persistent
215-217,216f, 228
mullerian duct
with ultrasonography,
syndrome (PMDS).
217-224,227
Population control,
digital vaginal
167-170
examination,261,262
Posthitis, 546-549
drug use during
Postparturient
incompatible drugs,
hypocalcemia. See
231-232
Eclampsia.
teratogenicity of, 292,
Potassium chloride for
294t-295t
septicemia with
dystocia. See Dystocia.
hypoglycemia, 299
ermbryo transfer,600,609
Pregnancy, 207-210
external examination,212
abdominal palpation,
false,421-422
212-213,214f,215,228
clinical signs, 424425
index
639
Pregnancy—cont'd
Preguancy—con1'd
definition of,423
in canines, 572-575
diagnostic tests and
in felines,583-586
results, 425-426
monitoring,232-233
history, 424-425
nutrition during
pathogenesis of, 423-424
of bitch, 229-230
physical examination
of queen, 230-231
findings, 425
parturition. See
prognosis,428
Parturition.
signalment,424
physical examinations
treatment of, 426-428
during,232
fetal development,
prevention of. See
chronology of,210,
Contraceptionl.
211t
radiographic diagnosis
hematologic changes in,
of, 215-217,216f,
225-226
228
high-risk pregnancies, 232
termination of,126-127
hormonal diagnosis of,
definition of, 140
226-227
dexamethasone, 153
infertility. SeeInfertility.
dopanine agonists,
intracytoplasmic sperm
149-150
injection, 600, 608
doparnine agonists with
loss of
PGF2
Color Plate 1 Endoscopic view of vaginal mucosal folds
during proestrus. The folds are edematous. moist, and pink. The
progesterone concentration of thisbitch wasless than 1ng/ml.
Color Plate 2  Vaginal cytologic result showing parabasal
cells. They are round cells with a large nucleus and a smaill
amountofcytoplasm.
ColorPlate3Intermediatecells(thinblackarrows)and
superficial cells(thick black arrows) seen on vaginal cytologic
examination. Intermediate cells have more irregular borders
than do parabasal cells, and they have a smaller nucleus and
larger cytoplasm. Cornified superficial cells are dead vaginal
epithelial cells. They have sharp, angular borders and conitain
a small, pyknotic nucleus or no visible nucleus.
ColorPlate 4Endoscopicview of thevagina of a bitch in
estrus. The vaginal vault is crenulated. The serum progesterone
of thisbitchwas3.8ng/rml.