Copyrighted
terial
SMALLANIMALECGS
anintroductoryguide
SECOND EDITION
Blackwell
MikeMartin
Publishing
Small Animal ECGs
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://iahc.laobao.com
Dedication
To my family: my wife Mary
and our three sons, David, Dennis and Sean
Small Animal ECGs
An introductory guide
Second Edition
Mike Martin
Blackwell
Publishing
 2000, 2007 Mike Martin
Second Edition published 2007 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Blackwell Publishing editorial offices:
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road,
ISBN: 978-1-4051-4160-4
Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel: +44 (0)1865 776868
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Blackwell Publishing Professional, 2121 State Avenue,
Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
Martin, Mike W. S.
Tel: +1 515 292 0140
Small animal ECGs : an introductory guide / Mike Martin. - 2nd ed.
Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd, 550 Swanston Street,
: d
Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Tel: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-4160-4 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-4051-4160-3 (pbk. : alk. paper)
The right of the Author to be identifed as the Author of this Work has
1. Veterinary electrocardiography. I. Title.
been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents
[DNLM: 1. Electrocardiography-veterinary.
2. Animals, Domestic.
Act 1988.
SF 811 M382s 2007]
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
Set in 10/12pt Minion
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
by aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed and bound in Singapore
without the prior permission of the publisher.
by Fabulous Printers Pte Ltd.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often
The publisher's policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate
caimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this
book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
a sustainable forestrypolicy, and that has beenmanufactured from pulp
processed using acid-free and elementary chlorine-free practices.
trademarks of their respective owners. The Publisher is not associated
 Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text paper and cover board
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
For further information on Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the
wderstanding that the Publisher is not engaged jn rendering
www.blackwellpublishing.com
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Lo
Contents
Preface to second edition
X
Preface to first edition
xi
About the author
xii
Acknowledgements
xii
Part 1:
Understanding the electricity of the heart and how
it produces an EcG complex
1
1
What is an ECG?
2
The electricity of the heart
4
Formation of the normal P-QRS-T complex
4
Nomenclature of the QRS complex
8
3
Rhythms of sinus origin
9
 Sinus rhythm
9
Sinus arrhythmia
9
Sinus tachycardia
10
Sinus bradycardia
11
Part 2:
Abnormalelectricityof theheart
13
4
Recognising and understanding ectopia
15
First identify the morphology of the normal QRS complex
15
The morphology of an ectopic ventricular depolarisation
15
The morphology of an ectopic supraventricular depolarisation
18
V
ide
5
Arrhythmias associated with ectopia
23
n5
Ventricular premature complexes
23
Supraventricular premature complexes
30
ictory
Escape rhythms
31
AV dissociation
34
Introdue
Fibrillation
34
Abnormalities in the conduction system
40
Sinus arrest and block
40
Sick sinus syndrome
40
Atrial standstill
42
EC
Heart block
43
IAnimal
Changes in the P-QRS-T morphology
48
Wandering pacemaker
48
Small
Changes associated with chamber enlargement
48
Left atrial enlargement
49
Right atrial enlargement
49
 Left ventricular enlargement
50
Right ventricular enlargement
50
Abnormal mean electrical axis (MEA)
50
Low-voltage QRS complexes
51
Electrical alternans
52
Notching in the R wave
52
Q-T interval abnormalities
53
S-T segment abnormalities
53
Abnormalities of the T wave
53
Hyperkalaemia
55
vi
Part 3:
More advanced electrocardiography
57
Understanding the ECG limb lead systems
59
D
The six ECG limb leads
ents
59
9
Mean electrical axis explained
61
How to calculate the mean electrical axis
62
10
 Intraventricular conduction defects
64
Right bundle branch block
64
Left bundle branch block
65
Left anterior fascicular block
67
Intermittent ventricular aberrancy
69
11
Some additional arrhythmias
70
Ventricular pre-excitation
70
Atrial flutter
70
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
71
Part 4:
Management and treatment ofarrhythmias
73
12
Management of arrhythmias
75
Does the arrhythmia suggest the presence of an underlying condition?
75
Is the arrhythmia of primary clinical significance?
76
13
Treatment of arrhythmias
78
Bradyarrhythmias
78
Tachyarrhythmias
81
vil
ide
14
Pacemakers
88
 Indications
88
Contraindications
88
ictory
Disadvantages
88
Complications
88
Introduc
Prior diagnostics
89
Equipment
89
Types of permanent pacemakers
89
Techniques of implantation
90
Pacemaker follow-up
90
8
Hazards
06
IAnimall
Part 5:
 Recording and interpreting ECGs
91
15
Approach to interpretation of the ECG recording
93
Small
To calculate the heart rate (given as beats per minute)
93
Determine the rhythm
93
Measure the complex amplitudes and intervals
94
16
Artifacts
96
Electrical interference
96
 Muscle tremor artifact
97
Movement artifact
97
Incorrectly placed electrodes
100
17
Recording an ECG
102
The connectors (electrodes)
102
Making the connection
102
Where to place the electrodes
103
Isolating the electrodes
104
How to position the ECG cables
104
Positioning the animal
104
Setting up and preparing the ECG machine
109
Recording an ECG - a suggested routine
111
vili
18
Choosing an ECG recorder
114
Quality
114
Continuous recording
114
ents
Ease of use
114
Automatic labelling
114
Automatic vs. ma nual recording mode
114
Interpretative software
115
Multichannel vs. single channel
116
 Precordial chest leads
117
Calibration settings
117
Automatic centring vs. manual control
117
Internal battery
117
Jack plug lead fitting
117
Monitor screen
118
Thermal paper vs. ink paper
118
New vs. second-hand
118
 Summary of features to look for in an ECG recorder
118
Further reading
119
Index
120
ix
Guide
Preface to second edition
ictory
np
An Introc
This edition has been significantly changed and updated, I hope for
This edition contains more than fifty new ECG tracings, gradually
the better. It is still aimed at the beginner, be they a veterinary student
gathered over the years. It is hoped that these will add greatly to the
or graduate, veterinary nurse or technician. It is intended as an intro-
book, providing illustrations to match the text. There are new chap-
ECGs
duction, providing a fairly easy book to read and learn about electro-
cardiography, prior to embarking on the more established textbooks
Animal
an ECG recorder.
listed in the Further Reading list.
The positive feedback to the 1st edition was very gratifying and is
In continuing to lecture widely on ECGs, I found that the sequence
always a pleasure to receive. I hope that this new edition has at least
Small,
 a o o a  pn   sm n I m 
e e no ysim I aq uaa Aadou oda po kena un
edition). So in this 2nd edition, I have re-arranged the sequence to
match my lecture course. I hope this works. I believe it should but,
will continue to evolve with time and experience.
importantly, it should make reading and learning about ECGs much
easier and more logical. Hopefully, it will help the reader to overcome
Mike Martin
any psychological fear and apprehension about understanding, in-
terpreting and making good use of ECGs, and spread the use of ECGs
more widely.
X
Preface to first edition
Preface to first edition
The aim of this guide is to provide an introduction to electrocar-
to read. I think that anyone who is new to ECGs will find reading it
diography for anyone embarking on this subject. It has been written
from the beginning the easiest way to grasp the concepts of electro-
in such a way (I hope) that it is easy to understand. In part, it has
cardiography. In trying to keep this book as an introductory guide, I
been adapted and developed from frequent lecturing on this topic
have (deliberately) not provided a comprehensive list ofarrhythmias.
and feedback by audience interaction. This has resulted in a method
 In doing so I have had to decide which rhythm disturbances to leave
of teaching electrocardiography that appears to have succeeded in
out and which to keep in. This has been a difficult task! On balance
providing the basis for understanding. Whether this transfers to a
I suspect even more rhythm disturbances and abnormalities should
book remains to be seen, but I have deliberately used a number of
have been left out, such as intraventricular conduction disturbances.
diagrams to illustrate the points being made. Once this book has been
However, as these are occasionally seen in practice, I have therefore
read, the reader hopefully will be enthused and enlightened enough
 included them, although at the very end of the book!
to proceed to more advanced ECG textbooks - a further reading list
 Having said all that, I hope you, the reader, will find this an enjoy-
is given at the end. This book should not be used as a reference guide, able and easy read, whilst also educational.
but simply a stepping stone to such texts.
The book has been written in the expectation that the reader will
Mike Martin
xi
ide
n5
About the author
ictory
Introdue
Mike Martin qualified from University College Dublin in 1986. He
 and well recognised cardiologist, having produced a number ofpubli-
An
worked for two years in mixed practice and four years at the Royal
 cations and is a frequently invited speaker at meetings. He has been an
(Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, as
examiner for the RCVS Certificate and Diploma, and he has been past
S5
a Housephysician and a Resident in Veterinary Cardiology, during
Honorary Secretary and Chairman of the Veterinary Cardiovascular
EC
which time he gained the Certificate and Diploma in Veterinary Car-
Society. He is a recipient of the BSAVA's Dunkin Award (1993) and
Animal
diology and then RCVS Specialist status in Veterinary Cardiology in
Melton Award (2000). He is co-author ofthe book Notes on Cardiores-
1995, which has been renewed every five years since.
piratory Diseases of the Dog and Cat (2nd edition), also published by
Mike runs his own private referral practice, the Veterinary Car-
Blackwell Publishing.
Small.
diorespiratory Centre, in Kenilworth, Warwickshire. He is an active
xii
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all those who have assisted in production of this
book, from both those in the audience during lectures who provided
feedback and my colleagues, peers and friends.
xili
PART 1
Understanding the electricity of the heart and how it produces an
ECG complex
What is an ECG?
1 . What is an EcG?
An electrocardiograph (ECG), in its simplest form, is a voltmeter
(or galvanometer) that records the changing electrical activity in the
heart by means of positive and negative electrodes (Fig. 1.1). Elec-
differences.
While a positive (+ve) and negative ( -ve) electrode can be placed.
almost anywhere on, or in, the body to record electrical changes, one
ofthe most common and simplest methods is to place these electrodes
on the limbs of the animal - referred to as a body surface limb
on the chest (precordial chest ECG recording - commonly used in
humans) or inside the cardiac chambers (used in electrophysiological
studies). This book is confined to the limb ECG recording, which is 
Figure l.1 An ECG records the “heart's electricity.
the method most commonly used in veterinary medicine.
3
Guide
2 · The electricity of the heart
ctory
Introdue
For the heart to function efficiently as a ^circulatory pump' it must
passes through the AV ring ( from the atria intothe ventricles) through
An
have a coordinated contraction, the two atria contracting and passing
a narrow pathway called the bundle of His. This then divides in the
blood intothe two ventricles, followed by contraction ofthe ventricles
ventricular septum into left and right bundle branches ( going to the
SD
that push blood out of the heart and into the aorta and pulmonary
left and right ventricles). The left bundle branch divides further into
EC
artery, i.e. there must be a coordinated atrioventricular contraction.
anterior and posterior fascicles. The conduction tissue spreads into
I Animal
 In order for the cardiac muscle cells to contract, they must first receive
the myocardium as very fine branches called Purkinje fibres.
an electrical stimulus. It is this electrical activity that is detected by
Small.
an ECG.
The electrical stimulus must first depolarise the two atria. Then,
after an appropriate time interval, stimulate the two ventricles. The
heart must then repolarise (and ^refill') in time for the next stimulus
SA node
and contraction. Additionally, it must repeatedly do so, increasing in
RA
LA
rate with an increase in demand and conversely, slowing at rest.
AVring
AV node
Bundle
Left
Formation of the normal P-QRs-T complex
of His
bundle
branch
All cells within the heart have the potential to generate their own
Anterior
electrical activity, however the sinoatrial (SA) node is the fastest part
fascicle
of the electrical circuit to do so and is therefore the ^rate controller,
Right
Posterior
termed the pacemaker. The rate of the SA node is influenced by the
bundle
branch
fascicle
balance in autonomic tone, i.e. the sympathetic (increases rate) and
parasympathetic (decreases rate) systems.
Purkinje
fibres
The electrical discharge for each cardiac cycle (Fig. 2.1) starts in the
SA node. Depolarisation spreads through the atrial muscle cels. The
depolarisation wave then spreads through the atrioventricular (AV)
Figure 2.1 Illustration of the heart's electrical circuit. SA - sinoatrial; AV - atrioven-
4
node, but it does so relatively slower, creating a delay. Conduction
tricular; RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium.
Formation of the P wave
The SA node is therefore the start of the electrical depolarisation
The electricity
wave. This depolarisation wave spreads through the atria (somewhat
like the ripples in water created by dropping a stone into it). As the
parts of the atria nearest the SA node are depolarised (Fig. 2.2), this
creates an electrical potential difference between depolarised atria
 and parts not yet depolarised (i.e. still in a resting state).
SAN
ofthe
If negative (—ve) and positive (+ve) electrodes were placed ap-
LA
proximately in line with those as shown on the diagram (Fig. 2.2),
then this would result in the voltmeter (i.e. the ECG machine) de-
heart
AVN
tecting the depolarisation wave travelling from the SA node, across
the atria, in the general direction of the +ve electrode. On the ECG
recording, all positive deflections are displayed as an upward (i.e.
positive) deflection on the ECG paper, and negative deflections are
displayed downwards. The atrial depolarisation wave therefore cre-
RV
LV
ates an upward excursion of the stylus on the ECG paper.
When the whole of the atria become depolarised then there is no
to its idle position - referred to as the baseline. The brief upward
deflection of the stylus on the ECG paper creates the P wave, rep-
resenting atrial electrical activity (Fig. 2.3). The muscle mass of the
atria is fairly small and thus the electrical changes associated with
depolarisation are also small.
The P-R interval
During the course of atrial depolarisation, the depolarisation wave
also depolarises the AV node. The speed with which the electrical
Figure 2.2 Illustration of partial depolarisation of the atria and formation of the
depolarisation wave travels through the AV node is deliberately slow
P wave. The shaded area represents depolarised myocardial cells; the arrows repre-
so that ventricular contraction will be correctly coordinated following
sent the direction in which the depolarisation wave is travelling. RA - right atrium;
atrial contraction. Once the depolarisation wave passes through the
LA - left atrium; RV - right ventricle; LV - left ventricle; SAN - sinoatrial node;
AV node, it travels very rapidly through the specialised conduction
AVN-atrioventricular node.
5
n5
ictory
Introdu
LA
An
ECGS
Arimal
SmallA
Figure 2.3 Illustration of complete depolarisation of the atria and formation of the
Figure 2.4 Illustration of depolarisation of the ventricular septum and formation of
P wave. RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium; RV - right ventricle; LV - left ventricle.
the Q wave. RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium; RV - right ventricle; LV - left ventricle.
tissues ofthe ventricles, i.e. the bundle of His, the left and right bundle
branches and Purkinje fibres.
away from the+veelectrode (Fig. 2.4). This createsa small downward,
or negative, deflection on the ECG paper - termed the Q wave.
The formation of the QRS complex
The R wave
Then the bulk of the ventricular myocardium is depolarised. This
The Q waves
creates a depolarisation wave that travels towards the +ve electrode
Initially the first part of the ventricles to depolarise is the ventricular
(Fig. 2.5). As it is a large mass of muscle tissue, it usually creates a
septum, with a small depolarisation wave that travels in a direction
large deflection - this is termed the R wave.
6
N
The electricity of the heart
RA
LA
RA
LA
Figure 2.5 Illustration of depolarisation of the bulk of the ventricular myocardium
S
and formation of the R wave. RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium; RV - right ventricle;
Figure 2.6 Illustration of depolarisation of the basilar portions of the ventricles and
LV - left ventricle.
formation of the S wave. RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium; RV - right ventricle; LV
- left ventricle.
The S wave
 Following depolarisation of the majority of the ventricles, the only
While the different parts of the QRS waveform can be identified,
 e s s sd  ae sd an
it is often easier to think of the whole ventricular depolarisation
wave that travels away from the +ve electrode and is a small mass of
waveform as the QRS complex. This will avoid any confusion over
tissue (Fig. 2.6). Thus, this creates a small negative deflection on the
the correct and proper naming of the different parts of the QRS
ECG paper - the S wave.
complex.
ide
n5
Nomenclature of the QRS complex
ctory
The different parts of the QRS complex are strictly and arbitrarily
labelled as follows.
Introdue
· The first downward deflection is called the Q wave; it always pre-
RA
LA
cedes the R wave.
An
·Any upward deflection is called the R wave; it may or may not be
preceded by a Q wave.
ECGs
· Any downward deflection after an R wave is called an S wave,
regardless of whether there is a Q wave or not.
Animal
Having explained this, it is much easier to think of the ^QRS com-
RV
plex’ as a whole, rather than to try to recognise its individual
Small.
parts.
The T wave
Following complete depolarisation (and contraction) of the ventri-
cles they then repolarise in time for the next stimulus. This phase
of repolarisation creates a potential difference across the ventricular
myocardium, until it is completely repolarised. This results in a de-
flection from the baseline - termed the T wave (Fig. 2.7).
The T wave in dogs and cats is very variable, it can be negative or
 positive or even biphasic (i.e. a bit of both). This is because repolari-
Figure 2.7 Illustration of complete depolarisation and repolarisation of the ventricles
sation of the myocardium in small animals is a litle random, unlike
and completion of the P-QRS-T complex. RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium; RV -
right ventricle; LV - left ventricle.
in humans, for example, in which repolarisation is very organised
and always results in a positive T wave. Thus, the diagnostic value
obtainable from abnormalities in the T wave of small animals is very
The repolarisation wave of the atria (Ta) is rarely recognised on a
limited, unlike the very useful features ofabnormal T waveforms seen
surface ECG, as it is very small and is usually hidden within the QRS
in humans.
complex.
8
3
Rhythms
3 · Rhythms of sinus origin
6
f sinus
The formation ofthe normal ECG complex has been explained in the
Sinus arrhythmia
preceding chapter; this normal complex is termed a sinus complex.
The stimulus originates from the SA node, but the rate varies
origin
A sequence of beats originating from the SA node will form a sinus
(increases and decreases) regularly. This is a normal and common
rhythm. Four common sinus rhythms are described below
rhythm in dogs. It is associated with an increase in parasympathetic
activity (i.e. vagal tone) on the SA node. There is commonly a regular
Sinus rhythm
slows down) and it is therefore often called respiratory sinusarrhyth-
The stimulus originates regularly at a constant rate from the SA node
mia. Since sinus arrhythmia is an indicator of increased parasympa
(dominant pacemaker) depolarising the atria and ventricles normally
thetic tone, conversely, it is also an indicator of reduced sympathetic
producing a coordinated atrioventricular contraction. This is a nor-
tone. In dogs with heart failure one of the compensatory responses is
mal rhythm.
 an increase in sympathetic tone and therefore normal sinus arrhyth-
mia is often lost and a sinus tachycardia develops. Sinus arrhythmia
is uncommon in the cat and it might be seen in association with
ECG characteristics
dyspnoea.
There is a normal P wave followed by normal QRS-T waves. The
 n u um si a a pue (so) ran si 
ECG characteristics
and breed (Fig. 3.1).
There is a normal P wave followed by normal QRS-T waves. The
The size of the ECG complexes are typically small in cats (Fig. 3.2).
rhythm varies in rate; this is often associated with respiration
Obtaining an artifact-free tracing is therefore important (in cats) in
(Fig. 3.3). The rhythm can sometimes be described as being regu-
order to identify clearly the ECG complexes.
larly irregular, i.e. the variation in rate is fairly regular. The rate is
within normal for age and breed.
Clinical findings
Clinical findings
There are regular heart sounds on auscultation (i.e. lubb dub) with
paa1q ae og reou s! 1eui aiei e 1e pue jeaq leau yoea ioj ssnd e
The heart rhythm varies with some regularity - increasing and de-
and species.
creasing in rate, and there is a pulse for every heart beat.
6
-An Introductory Guide
Small Animal ECGs-
125mm/s10mm/mV
Figure 3.1 ECG from a dog showing a normal sinus rhythm at a rate of 140/min (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
ORS
Figure 3.2 ECG from a cat showing a normal sinus rhythm at a rate of 220/min (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Sinus tachycardia
ECG characteristics
The SA node generates an impulse and depolarisation at a rate that
There is a normal sinus rhythm but at a faster rate than normal
is faster than normal.
(Fig. 3.4).
10
Rhythms of sinus origin
Figure 3.3 ECG from a dog showing a normal respiratory sinus arrhythmia at a rate of 110/min (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Figure 3.4 ECG from 13-year-old Cavalier King Charles spaniel dog in heart failure due to mitral valve disease. There is a sinus tachycardia at 180/min (25 mm/sec and
10 mm/mV).
Clinical findings
Sinus bradycardia
The heart rate is faster than normal for age and breed with a pulse for
The SA node generates an impulse and depolarisation slower than
every heart beat (although with very fast rates the pulse may become
normal. This can be a normal feature in some giant-breed dogs and
weaker).
in athletically fit dogs.
11
Small Animal ECGs- An Introductory Guide
[a]
Figure 3.5 (a) ECG from a dog showing a sinus bradycardia at 65/min (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
(b)
25mm
HDM
MA
Figure 3.5 (b) ECG from a cat following sedation, showing a sinus bradycardia at 1l0/min (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
ECGcharacteristics
Clinicalfindings
There is a normal sinus rhythm but at a slower rate than norma
The heart rate is slower than normal for age and breed, with a pulse
(Fig. 3.5).
for every heart beat.
12
PART 2
Abnormal electricity of the heart
13
4 · Recognising and understanding ectopia
Recognising
Arrhythmia and dysrhythmia are synonymous terms, meaning an
abnormality. When the QRS-T complex is different from the normal
and
abnormal rhythm. Arrhythmias include abnormalities in rate, ab-
sinus complex, depolarisation has (almost certainly) not arisen via the
understanding
normalities associated with ectopia and those associated with ab-
AV node (which would have produced a normal QRS shape) but from
normalities in conduction. Arrhythmias that are essentially slow are
 an ectopic location in the ventricles. Additionally these ventricular
referred to as bradyarrhythmias, and those that are fast as tachy-
arrhythmias.
by coincidence).
From Fig. 4.la it can be seen that the direction of ventricular de-
First identify the morphology of the normal QRS
polarisation is different from the direction that would have occurred
ectopia
complex
from depolarisation arising from the AV node (cf. Figs 2.4-2.6). In
this example the ventricular ectopic depolarisation wave is away from
Chapter 2 explained the formation of a normal sinus complex. It
the +ve electrode and is therefore displayed on the ECG paper as
is important when examining an ECG tracing to identify (from the
below the baseline, i.e. the QRS complex is negative (Figs 4.1b, c).
ECG recording) the normal sinus complex for that animal. Note
Secondly, because conduction has not travelled through the normal
the shape of the ventricular depolarisation and repolarisation waves,
(therefore fast) electrical conduction tissue (it has depolarised the
ie. the QRS complex and T wave. To produce this shape of QRS
ventricular muscle ma ss from ^cell to cell') the time it takes to depo-
and T, depolarisation of the ventricles has occurred by conduction
larise the ventricles is prolonged. Thus, not only is the QRS complex
from (or through) the AV node, i.e. ventricular depolarisation has
of the ventricular ectopic different in shape, but it is also prolonged
been initiated from the AV node (see Chapter 2). It is of paramount
(it takes a longer time). Quite often the T wave following the QRS
   e a an  a   i 
 complex of a ventricular ectopic is large and opposite in direction to
of QRS complexes, to determine which shape represents conduction
the QRS.
that has arisen (correctly) via the AV node.
Ventricular ectopic complexes can arise from any part of the ven-
tricles and thus the direction in which they depolarise the ventricles
The morphology of an ectopicventricular
is variable. To put it another way, since the direction in which the
depolarisation
depolarisation wave travels in relation to the +ve electrode is vari-
Any QRS-T complex, therefore, that is of a different shape (from
 able, the shape and magnitude of the QRS complex of a ventricular
 complex will also be variable (Fig. 4.2a).
15
Guide
(a)
Key points
 First identify the morphology of the normal QRS complex for
ctorv
the animal.
The QRS of a ventricular ectopic complex is different from the
AnIntrodu
LA
QRS complex of one that has arisen from the AV node.
Ventricular ectopic complexes are not associated with a pre-
ceding P wave (except by coincidence).
ECGS
Animal
V
SmallA
QRS
Ectopic
focus
Figure 4.l (a) Diagram illustrating an ectopic focus with the spreading out of the
depolarisation wave (left), and the formation of a QRS-T complex (right) associated
with the ventricular ectopic. RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium; RV - right ventricle;
LV - left ventricle.
The important point is that the QRS of a ventricular ectopic com-
plex is different from the QRS complex of one that has arisen from
the AV node and travelled normally down the electrical conducting
tissue to the ventricles (Fig. 4.2b, c).
A ventricular ectopic complex can occur quickly (or early) and
is therefore termed a ventricular premature complex (VPC). If a
Figure 4.1 (b, c) ECGs from dogs each showing one VPC in which the QRS morphol-
ventricular ectopic occurs after a pause (or with delay) then it is
ogy has a negative morphology with an opposite and positive T wave morphology
referred to as a ventricular escape complex (Fig. 4.3).
(25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
16
Re
ecognising
1and
understanding
a
QRS
QRS
ectopi
QRS
QRS
Figure 4.2 (a) Illustration of a normal complex (frst complex), followed by four
examples of QRS-T complexes with an abnormal morphology due to ventricular ec-
topic depolarisations. It is paramount to identify the morphology of the QRS complex
associated with a sinus complex (frst complex). Any QRS complexes of a different
morphology (for that animal) must arise from an ectopic ventricular focus.
25mm/s10mm/mV
Figure 4.2 (b, c) ECGs from dogs each showing one VPC in which the QRS morphol-
ogy is not negative (cf. Fig. 4.1), but of differing morphologies. The fact that they are
different from the morphology of the normal sinus QRS complexes is important in 
recognising that they are ventricular in origin, as well as being premature (25 mm/sec
and 10 mm/mV).
17
Guide
ictory
Introdue
An
ECGs
Premature
Escape
Small Animal
Figure4.3 Illustration of (1) a ventricular premature complex (the double-headed arrow indicates the timing of when the next normal sinus complex would have occurred) and
(2) a ventricular escape beat that occurred following a pause in the rhythm.
Whether an ectopic arose from the atria (atrial premature com-
The morphology of an ectopic supraventricular
plex) or the AV node (referred to as a junctional or nodal premature
depolarisation
T sn s   d    x
studying advanced ECGs. Additionally, in small animals it does not
Any ectopic stimuli arising above the ventricles are referred to as
 often affect the management or treatment in the vast majority of
supraventricular (Fig. 4.4). These can be divided into two categories:
cases. Therefore, distinguishing between atrial and junctional prema-
(1) those occurring in atrial muscle mass (atrial ectopics) and (2)
ture complexes will not be discussed in this book, but will be referred
those arising from within the AV node (junctional or nodal ectopics).
to by the broader term of supraventricular premature complexes
No matter where supraventricular ectopics arise, they must travel
(SVPCs).
down the normal His-Purkinje tissue and depolarise the ventricles
as normal. Thus, the morphology of the QRS complex associated
Key points
with a supraventricular ectopic is normal, i.e. the same as the QRS
complex for a sinus complex. This means that the identification of
 The morphology of the QRS complex associated with a
 a supraventricular ectopic can be diffcult. In the vast majority of
supraventricular ectopic is the same as a normal sinus complex.
 It is primarily recognised by its premature timing.
cases however, it occurs as a premature beat, and so it is primarily
recognised by its premature timing (Fig. 4.5a, b).
Terminology
The electrocardiographic interpretation of arrhythmias due to ec-
1 Except when there is aberrant conduction, see Chapter 10. However this is not
topia requires an understanding of the terminology used. If this is
18
common.
 accomplished, interpretation becomes relatively easy.
ther: (a) atrial (originating in the atria) or (b) junctional or nodal
(originating in the AV node or bundle of His).
SAN
Recognisi
Supra-
(2) Timing. Ectopic complexes that occur before the next normal
RA
LA
ventricular
complex would have been due are termed premature, and
those that occur following a pause such as a period of sinus
AVN
JPC
arrest or in complete heart block are termed escape complexes
ing
(Fig. 4.3).
and
(3)  Morphology. If all the ectopics in a tracing have a similar mor-
pue on se on panai ane Aaun iao yoea on konod
understandi
those in which there are different shapes are termed multiform
RV
LV
VPC
VPC
Ventricular
(Fig. 4.6).
(4) Number of ectopics. Premature ectopic complexes may occur
singly, in pairs (Fig. 4.7), or in runs of three or more; the latter
is referred to as a tachycardia. A tachycardia may be contin-
uous, termed persistent or sustained, or intermittent, termed
D
VPC
paroxysmal.
(5) Frequency. The number of premature ectopic complexes in a
Figure 4.4 Illustration of the origin of supraventricular and ventricular ectopic com-
 tracing may vary from occasional to very frequent. When there
plexes. SAN - sinoatrial node; AVN - atrioventricular node; APC - atrial premature
complex; IPC - junctional premature complex; VPC - ventricular premature complex;
is a set ratio such as one sinus complex to one ectopic complex
RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium; RV - right ventricle; LV - left ventricle.
it is termed bigeminy (Fig. 4.8) and one ectopic to two sinus
complexes is termed trigeminy.
The term ^beat' implies that there has been an actual contraction.
In ‘ECG-speak' it is better to use the term complex or depolarisation
to describe waveforms on the electrocardiograph.
 Ectopic complexes may be classifed by the following:
(1) Site of origin (Fig. 4.4). They are either ventricular or supraven-
tricular. Supraventricular ectopics may be subclassified into ei-
19
Guide
(a)
AnIntroductory
QRS
QRS
QRS
QRS
QRS
QRS
ECGs
Figure 4.5 (a) Illustration of a supraventricular premature complex (fifth beat).
AnimaE
SmallA
化
125mm/=.10mm/m0
Figure 4.5 (b) ECG from a dog showing a supraventricular premature complex (arrowed). Note that the recognition is by its prematurity, as its QRS and T morphology is the
same as a normal sinus complex (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
20
Recognising and understanding ectopia
I25mm/s10mm/mV
Figure 4.6 ECG from a dog showing two VPCs of differing morphologies: the frst with a positive QRS and the second with a negative QRS. These VPCs are very likely to have
arisen from different foci in the ventricles. This ECG tracing is described as having multimorphic VPCs (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Figure 4.7 ECG with ventricular premature complexes (arrows), singly and in pairs. From a German Shepherd dog with a splenic mass (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
21
Small Animal ECGs- An Introductory Guide
Figure 4.8 (a) ECG with ventricular premature complexes that alternate with normal sinus complexes; this is termed ventricular bigeminy. From a 13-year-old Standard Poodle
with mitral valve disease (25 mm/sec and 5 mm/m V)
Figure 4.8 (b) ECG from a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy showing a ventricular bigeminy (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
22
5 · Arrhythmias associated with ectopia
Arrhythmias
'Ectopia? literally means in an abnormal place? In reference to the
ventricular myocardium. Depolarisation therefore occurs in an ab-
associated
heart this means outside the SA node, the dominant pacemaker. Ec-1
normal direction through the myocardium and the impulse conducts
topic beats arise as a result of various mechanisms due to a number
from cell to cell (not within the conduction tissue) as described in
of causes (see Chapter 12).
the preceding chapter.
with e
Ventricular premature complexes
ECG characteristics
ectopia
Ventricular premature complexes (VpCs) are a common finding in
 The QRS complex morphology is abnormal, i.e. unlike a QRS that
dogs and cats. VPCs arise from an ectopic focus or foci within the
would have arisen via the AV node. It is usually:
Figure 5.l ECG from a 10-year-old Springer spaniel showing a single VPC. Note the P wave within the ST segment (arrowed). However this normal sinus depolarisation arrived
when the ventricles were still refractory (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
23
Guide
ctorv
AnIntrodu
Figure 5.2 ECG from a 10-year-old Labrador dog with a single ventricular premature complex (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Small Animal ECGs
·abnormal (bizarre) in shape;
· the T wave of a VPC is often large and opposite in direction to the
wide (prolonged), typically by ~50%;
QRS.
Figures 5.1-5.3 show examples of single VPCs in dogs and Fig. 5.4
shows an example in a cat. Additionally a VPC is not associated with a
preceding P wave (except by coincidence). Since a VPC occurs prema-
turely, a normal atrial depolarisation (i.e. a P wave) arriving at the AV
node will meet ventricles that are refractory (Figs 5.1 and 5.3), thus
the P wave is usually hidden by the ventricular premature complex.
Occasionally a normal sinus complex QRS will occur at the same
time as an ectopic VPC, resulting in fusion of the two wavefronts.
This is seen on an ECG as a change in QRS & T morphology from
the normal sinus QRS & T and the QRS & T of the VPC. Usually the
combination tends to neutralise the deflections and the QRS is much
smaller in comparison (Figs 5.5a, b).
When a VPC is so premature that it is superimposed on the T
wave of the preceding complex (sinus or ectopic), i.e. the ventricles
 preceding contraction, this is termed R-on-T (Fig. 5.6).
A run of three or more VPCs is termed a ventricular tachy-
Figure 5.3 ECG from a Boxer with right ventricular arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
cardia (VT) (Figs 5.7a, b, c). In the vast majority of cases VT is
showing a single VPC with a positive QRS morphology. (Note the P wave, arrowed, just
preceding the QRS complex with a very short P-R interval. However the VPC occurred
fairly uniform and regular, however occasionally it can be multiform
before the normal sinus deplorisation.) (Leads 2 and 3, 25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
(Fig. 5.8).
24
Arrhythmias associated with ectopia
a
Figure 5.4 ECGs from two cats each showing a VPC, but of differing morphologies: (a) has a negative QRS morphology and (b) has two positive QRS morphology VPCs
(25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
25
Small Animal ECGs - An Introductory Gu ide
/PC
VPC
of a normal QRS complex and a VPC - this is termed a fusion complex. (a) is from a German Shepherd dog with a splenic mass (Leads 2 and 3, 25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV) and
26
(b) is from a 6-year-old domestic short-haired cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (25 mm/sec and 20 mm/m V).
5·
Arrhythmias associated with ectopia
R-On-T
Figure 5.6 ECG from a dog showing a two ventricular premature complex (VPC) occurring very quickly, such that the QRS complex of the second is virtually superimposed on
the T wave of the previous VPC (arrowed) - this is termed R-on-T (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
27
Small Animal ECGs-AnIntroductoryGuide
(a)
Figure 5.7 (a) ECG showing a paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia (arrows) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
QRS
QRS
QRS
(b)
Figure 5.7 (b) ECG showing a ventricular tachycardia (VT) at 200/min with a negative QRS morphology. There is one normal sinus complex (arrowed). From a 10-year-old
28
Labrador with liver neoplasia (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/m V).
QRS
QRS
Arrhythmias
associatedwithectopia
7507
T
(c)
Figure 5.7 (c) ECG from a dog showing the start of a sustained VT, with a positive QRS morphology, preceded by a sinus rhythm and a single VPC (25 mm/sec and 20 mm/mV)
(Auu nl pue sasm ns) lA oydronu e hugmoys aan ssny yoef Pio-reak-l e oy og (e) s'g ana
29
Guide
AnIntroductory
ECGs
Figure 5.8 (b) ECG from a 10 year old Labrador showing a multimorphic VT (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Small Animall
Clinical findings
normally producing a normal-shaped QRS complex with a normal
duration.
Occasional premature beats will sound like a tripping in the rhythm?.
Depending upon how early the beat occurs - the ^extra’ premature
beat may be heard or it might be ^silent' (and sound like a brief pause
ECG characteristics
in the rhythm). There will be little or no pulse associated with the
premature beat (ie. a pulse deficit). If the premature beats are more
QRS-T complexes, which have a normal morphology, are seen to
frequent, the tripping in the rhythm will start to make the heart
occur prematurely (Fig. 5.9). The ECG features are:
rhythm sound more irregular. With very frequent premature beats,
the heart rhythm can sound quite chaotic, and with a pulse deficit for
each premature beat, the pulse rate will be much slower than the hearf
rate. During a sustained ventricular tachycardia however, the heart
rhythm will sound fairly regular - pulses will probably be palpable,
but reduced in strength, becoming weaker with faster heart rates.
Supraventricular premature complexes
Supraventricular premature complexes (SVPCs) arise from an ec-
Figure 5.9 (a) ECG showing a single supraventricular premature complex (arrowed)
topic focus or foci above the ventricles, i.e. in either the atria, the
 Note the premature timing and absence of an obvious P wave. An incidental fnding
30
AV node or bundle of His. The ventricles are then depolarised,
, from a 9-year-old Newfoundland dog (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
(b)
Arrhythmias
Figure 5.9 (b) ECG from a dog. Note the premature complex (arrowed) with a normal QRS-T morphology - this is a supraventricular premature complex (SVPC) (25 mm/sec
and 10 mm/mV).
iated
· normal QRS morphology;'
for each premature beat, the pulse rate will be much slower than the
ith
· QRS are seen to occur prematurely;
heart rate. During a sustained supraventricular tachycardia however,
·P waves may or may not be identified; and
the heart rhythm will sound fairly regular - pulses will probably be
ecto
· if P waves are seen, they are usually of an abnormal morphology
palpable, but reduced in strength, becoming weaker with faster heart
opia
(i.e. non-sinus) and the P-R interval will differ from a normal
rates.
sinus complex.
A run ofthree or more SVPCs is termed a supraventricular tachycar-
Escape rhythms
dia (SVT); it is usually ata rate in excess of 200/min ( but can be as high
as 400/min) and regular (Fig. 5.10). SVT needs to be distinguished
When the dominant pacemaker tissue (usually the SA node) fails
from a sinus tachycardia.
to discharge for a long period, pacemaker tissue with a slower in-
trinsic rate (junctional or ventricular) may then discharge, i.e. they
Clinical findings
escape' the control of the SA node. This is commonly seen in
On auscultation it is not possible to distinguish ventricular premature
beats from supraventricular premature beats (see p. 18). Occasional
(c）
 premature beats will sound like a tripping in the rhythm, with little or
no pulse associated with the premature beat. If the premature beats are
more frequent, the tripping in the rhythm will start to make the heart
rhythm sound more irregular. With very frequent premature beats,
the heart rhythm can sound quite chaotic, and with a pulse deficit
1 Except when there is aberrant conduction, see Chapter 10.
Figure 5.9 (c) ECG from a German Shepherd dog showing two SVPCs (arrowed).
31
-AnIntroductoryGuide
SmallAnimal ECGs-
Figure 5.10 (a) ECG showing a paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (arrowed) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Figure 5.10 (b) ECG showing initially a supraventricular tachycardia at 280/min, which then breaks to a normal sinus rhythm at 90/min (the first sinus complex is arrowed)
From a 6-year-old Irish Wolfhound with occult dilated cardiomyopathy (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
32
5 · Arrhythmias associated with ectopia
Figure 5.10 (c) ECG showing a sustained supraventricular tachycardia at 320/min. From a 9-year-old Weimaraner with myocarditis (25 mm/sec and 5 mm/mV).
Figure 5.10 (d) ECG from a 7-month-old Labrador with a sustained SVT at 350/min (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
33
Guide
association with bradyarrhythmias (e.g. sinus bradycardia, sinus ar-
 to an accelerated junctional or ventricular rhythm, disturbed AV
rest, AV block). Escape complexes are sometimes referred to as rescue
 conduction or depressed SA nodal function.
beats, because if they did not occur death would be imminent. Since
ictory
they are rescue beats they should not be suppressed by any form
ECG characteristics
of treatment. Treatment should be directed towards the underlying
The ECG shows a ventricular rate that is usually very slightly faster
Introdu
bradyarrhythmia.
than the atrial rate. The P waves may occur before, during or after the
If no escape rhythm has developed, i.e. there was no electrical
QRS complex. The P waves and QRS complexes are independent of
activity of any kind, then this is termed asystole. It would not be
An
each other with the QRS complexes appearing to ^catch up' on the P
dissimilar to sustained sinus arrest if no escape rhythm developed.
waves (Fig. 5.12). Complete AV block is one form of AV dissociation,
ECGs
This is a terminal event unless electrical activity returns. If there is
but AV dissociation does not mean there is AV block.
a failure of an escape rhythm during complete heart block, i.e. there
IAnimal
are P waves but no QRS complexes, then this is termed ventricular
Clinical findings
standstill. Again, if ventricular electrical activity does not return
The heart rhythm will sound fairly normal and the pulse should
death is imminent.
Small,
match the heart rate.
   l      s r
supraventricular ectopic), whereas ventricular escapes are abnor-
mal and bizarre (the same as a ventricular ectopic): see Figs 5.11
Fibrillation
and 6.2. A continuous junctional escape rhythm occurs at a rate
Fibrillation means rapid iregular small movements of fibres.
of 60-70/min and a continuous ventricular escape rhythm occurs at
a rate of less than 50/min. Either may be seen in complete AV block.
Atrial fibrillation
AV dissociation
This is probably one of the most common arrhythmias seen in
AV dissociation describes the situation when the atria and ventricles
small animals. In atrial fibrillation (AF) depolarisation waves oc-
34
Figure 5.1l (a) ECG from a Springer spaniel with sinus arrest. Following the long flatline, there is a ventricular escape complex (arrowed) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
mias
associated with ectopia
Figure 5.1l (b) ECG from a 7-year-old cat with intermittent failure of AV nodal conduction through to the ventricles (non-conducted P waves), i.e. second degree heart block
(see later). Following the consequential pauses in ventricular depolarisation, ventricular escape complexes occur (arrowed) (25 mm/sec and 20 mm/mV).
Figure 5.12 (a) ECG showing AV dissociation. Note how the P waves (arrows) appear to drift in and out of the QRS complexes (the P-R interval is variable). Incidental finding
from a 13-year-old Samoyed dog (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/m V).
35
Guide
Introd
An
(Awyu ol pue sasu s) pamoue ane sanem d 'huipuy jeiuaprout ue sem styl uoneiossip Ay surmoys hop roperqeT Pio-eak-g e uoy 5og (a) zi'g aina
ECGS
above the ventricles, it could also be classified as a supraventricular
· normal QRS morphology;2
Small Animal
arrhythmia.
· the R-R interval is irregular and chaotic (this is easier to hear on
auscultation);
the QRS complexes often vary in amplitude;
ECG characteristics
· there are no recognisable P waves preceding the QRS complex;
The QRS complexes have a normal morphology (similar to supraven-
and
normal to fast rate (Fig. 5.14). The ECG features are:
2 Except when there is bundle branch block (see Chapter 10).
79
Figure 5.12 (c) ECG from a cat following sedation with medetomidine with a bradycardia (80/min) and AV dissociation. P waves are arrowed (Leads 1 and 2, 25 mm/sec and
36
10 mm/mV).
Tip
5
As a guideline?: Supraventricular QRS morphology + Irregular (chaotic) R-R intervals + Absence of P waves = Atrial fibrillation
A
Clinical findings
The heart rhythm sounds chaotic and the pulse rate is often half
associ
the heart rate, especially with fast atrial fibrillation. This is a very
-se uo paiadsns aius aq u pue sop u eue un
iated
cultation by its chaotic rhythm and 50% pulse deficit. However, very
with
mimic it.
ectopia
Ventricular fibrillation (VF)
This is nearly always a terminal event associated with cardiac arrest.
The depolarisation waves occur randomly throughout the ventricles
R
(Fig. 5.15). There is therefore no significant coordinated contraction
to produce any cardiac output. If the heart is visualised or palpated,
fine irregular movements of the ventricles are evident - likened to a
'can of worms. VF can often follow ventricular tachycardia.
ECGcharacteristics
The ECG shows coarse (larger) or fine (smaller) rapid, iregular and
Figure 5.13 Diagram illustrating the wavelet theory for atrial fbrillation. Note the
bizarre movement with no normal wave or complex (Fig. 5.16).
multiple small wavelets that randomly depolarise small portions of the atria. This is
easiest to sustain when the atria are large such as in giant-breed dogs or animals in
Clinical findings
which there is atrial dilation.
No heart sounds are heard. No pulse is palpable.
 sometimes fine irregular movements of the baseline are seen as a
result of the atrial fibrillation waves - referred to as f' waves, how-
ever these are frequently indistinguishable from baseline artifact
(e.g. muscle tremor) in small animals.
3Except when there is bundle branch block, see Chapter 10.
37
Guide
-AnIntroductory
SLNU
Figure 5.14 (a) ECG showing atrial fibrillation with an average ventricular response rate of 180/min. The QRS complexes are chaotic - this is usually easier to hear on auscultation
of the heart. There are no P waves discernible, although the fine undulations of the baseline may be fibrillation waves in this instance (25 mm/sec and 1U mm/m V).
Small Animal ECGs -
Figure 5.14 (b) ECG showing atrial fbrillation with an average ventricular response rate of 180/min. From a 10-year-old Whippet with mitral valve disease (25 mm/sec and
10 mm/mV).
Figure 5.14 (c) ECG showing atrial fibrillation with an average ventricular response rate of 280/min. Such a fast ventricular rate is usually seen when the dog is in congestive
38
heart failure. From a 7-year-old Dobermann with pulmonary oedema due to dilated cardiomyopathy (25 mm/sec and 5 mm/mV).
L
1
LA
imias
associatedwithectopia
Figure 5.15 Diagram ilustrating the wavelet theory for ventricular fibrillation ( VF).
VF initially consists of large wavelets (coarse VF), that progress over a short period of
time to a greater number of smaller wavelets (fine VF).
Figure 5.16 ECG showing ventricular flutter/fibrillation. From an ll-year-old German Shepherd dog that died on arrival with advanced cardiac tamponade due to pericardial
haemorrhage (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
39
Guide
6 · Abnormalities in the conduction system
Introdt
Abnormalities in the conduction system are associated with faults in
arrest (Fig. 6.1). Long periods of arrest or block are often followed
An
either the generation of the impulse from the SA node or abnormali-
by ventricular ectopic escape complexes. Note: in comparison with
fies in conduction through the specialised conduction tissue, i.e. the
atrial standstill (see p. 42), sinus arrest produces a ^flatline' that is
AV node, bundle of His and Purkinje system.
intermittent, whereas atrial standstill results in a sustained absence
ofPwaves.
Animal
Sinus arrest and block
Chinical findings
When there is a failure of the SA node to generate an impulse, i.e. the
Small,
SA node has temporarily arrested - it is referred to as sinus arrest.
A pause in the heart rhythm will be heard on auscultation ( with no
Sinus block (also referred to as sinoatrial exit block) is when the
 palpable pulse); it will effectively sound as if the heart has briefly
electrical impulse from the SA node to the atria is blocked. These
stopped. With sinus block it will be a very short pause that can be
bradyarrhythmias can result in bradycardia and/or asystole.
arrhythmia. With sinus arrest the duration of the pause will depend
ECG characteristics
upon the duration of the period of sinus arrest and if this is occurring
There is a pause in the rhythm with neither a P wave nor there-
episodically or not.
fore a QRS-T complex, i.e. the baseline is flat (except for movement
artifact if present). If the pause is only twice the R-R interval (or
Sicksinussyndrome
multiples of), it suggests sinus block. However, if the pause is greater
 This is a term for an abnormally functioning SA node and is prob-
than two R-R intervals (but not exact multiples of) it suggests sinus  ably better termed sinus node dysfunction. This ‘umbrella? term
40
Figure 6.1 (a) ECG showing intermittent sinus arrest, from a 13-year-old West Highland White terrier with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
9
 Abnormalities
 in the conduction
Figure 6.1 (b) ECG from a Lakeland terier with sinus arrest - there is a 2-second pause (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
refers to any abnormality of sinus node function including severe
ECG characteristics
 system
sinus bradycardia and severe sinus arrest. In some situations the pro-
The electrocardiographic features are therefore quite variable and
found bradycardia alternates with a supraventricular tachycardia, this
is termed the bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome? Sick sinus syn-
include persistent sinus bradycardia or episodes of sinus arrest with-
out escape beats. One feature of sick sinus syndrome is that during
drome has been reported to occur most commonly in female minia-
long periods of sinus arrest there is often a failure of rescue escape
ture Schnauzers of at least 6 years of age and West Highland White
and Cairn terriers. It has not been recorded in cats.
bradycardia such as sinus arrest, alternating with a supraventricular
Figure 6.2 ECG from a 10-year-old miniature Schnauzer with sick sinus syndrome. This tracing shows periods of sinus arrest alternating with supraventricular premature
complexes. There is one ventricular escape present (arrowed) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
41
Guide
tachycardia (Fig. 6.2). The bradycardia may be unresponsive to an
the atria are not depolarised and remain inactive. If this occurs due
injection of atropine.
to hyperkalaemia, the impulses are conducted from the SA node by
internodal pathways to the AV node, thus there is a sinoventricu-
ictory
Clinical findings
lar rhythm. If this occurs due to myocardial disease, the internodal
pathways are also diseased and thus a nodal (or junctional) escape
Introdu
The findings on auscultation are very variable, from a markedly slow
heart rate, to a variable rhythm, or with long pauses (associated with
rhythm develops in these cases. Both ofthese rhythms look similar on
ECG.
An
riods ofslow heart rate alternating with periods ofvery fast heart rate,
ECG characteristics
and not necessarily with any regularity. There may be pulse deficits
ECGs
during the tachycardic episodes and no pulse produced during the
The electrocardiographic feature is of the absence of P waves, usually
periods of arrest.
with a slow (less than 60/min) escape rhythm (Fig. 6.3). The quality
Small Animal 
of the ECG has to be excellent (i.e. the baseline must be flat without
any artifacts) to diagnose the absence of P waves confidently. The
Atrial standstill
QRS complexes are often of a relatively normal shape (junctional
In atrial standstill there is an absence of any atrial activity, which
escape), but sometimes with a slightly prolonged duration. In a few
can be confirmed by fluoroscopy or echocardiography (there is no
 cases the escape rhythm can be ventricular. Note: in comparison
A wave on an M-mode of the mitral valve or no atrial contraction  with sinus arrest (see p. 40), atrial standstill results in a sustained
inflow on Doppler studies). This occurs due to a failure of atrial absence of P waves, whereas sinus arrest produces an intermittent
‘flatline'
Figure 6.3 (a) ECG from a Cavalier King Charles spaniel with atrial standsti with a ventricular escape rhythm at 70/min. Note the absence of P waves. The absence of atrial
42
activity can be confirmed by echocardiography (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/m V).
9
 Abnormalities
Figure 6.3 (b) ECG from a 7-year-old West Highland White terrier with atrial standstill(due to hyperkalaemia) with ajunctional rhythm at 40/min (25 mm/sec and 1 0 mm/mV).
 the
Clinical findings
Clinical findings
 conduction
The normal heart sounds will be heard (and associated pulse felt) No abnormality will be appreciated on auscultation or palpation
in association with ventricular depolarisation. The rate will vary in
of the pulse, and it cannot be distinguished from a normal sinus
each case, although generally it is slower than normal (often less than  rhythm.
system
contraction sounds are heard.
Second degree AV block
Heart block
to pass through the AV node, i.e. there is atrial depolarisation that is
This is the failure of the depolarisation wave to conduct normally
not followed by ventricular depolarisation.
through the AV node; the correct term is therefore AV block. Heart
 block is often used as a synonymous term for AV block. AV block may
 ) o  (o  s  sr d a
ECGcharacteristics
block).
The P wave is normal, but there is either an occasional or frequent
failure (depending on severity) of conduction through the AV node
First degree AV block
resulting in the absence of a QRS complex (Figs 5.9, p. 30, and
6.5).
First degree AV block occurs when there is a delay in conduction
Second degree AV block can be classified further. When the P-R
through the AV node and there is usually a sinus rhythm.
interval increases prior to the block it is termed Mobitz type I (also
known as Wenckebach's phenomenon). But when the P-R interval
ECG characteristics
remains constant prior to the block, this is termed Mobitz type II
The P wave and QRS complexes are normal in configuration, but the
and the frequency of the block is usually constant, i.e. 2:1, 3:1 and so
PR interval is prolonged (Fig. 6.4).
on.
43
 Small Animal ECGs- An Introductory Guide
0.24secs
Figure 6.4 (a) ECG from a dog showing a prolonged P-R interval, i.e. Ist degree AV block (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Complete (third degree) AV block
Complete AV block occurs when there is a persistent failure of the
depolarisation wave to be conducted through the AV node. A second
pacemaker below the AV node (i.e. the block) discharges to control
the ventricles. This second pacemaker may arise from:
Figure 6.4 (b) ECG from a cat showing a prolonged P-R interval,ie. frst degree AV
· lower AV node or bundle branches producing a normal QRS (i.e.
(heart) block (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
· Purkinje cells producing an abnormal QRS-T complex (i.e.
ventricular escape complex) at approximately 30-40/min.
Clinical findings
ECG characteristics
There will be occasional pauses in the rhythm associated with the ab-
sence of ventricular depolarisation. On very careful auscultation the
On the ECG, P waves can be seen at a regular and fast rate but the
atrial contraction sounds (A' sound or S4) can often be appreciated
QRS-T complexes are ata much slower rate, and usually fairly regular.
44
as a faint noise in association with atrial depolarisation.
The P waves and QRS complexes occur independently of each other
?
Abnormalities
s in the conduction system
Figure 6.5 (a) ECG from a 7-year-old cat with intermittent failure of AV nodal conduction through the ventricles (non-conducted waves), i.e. second degree heart block.
Following the consequential pauses in ventricular depolarisation, ventricular escape complexes occur (arrowed) (25 mm/sec and 20 mm/m V).
1
Figure 6.5 (c) ECG from an ll-year-old mixed breed dog with second degree AV block. The first few P waves are arrowed (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
45
Small AnimalECGs-An IntroductoryGuide
用田用
Figure 6.6 (a) ECG from an 8-year-old Labrador with third degree AV block (complete heart block) with a ventricular escape rhythm of 45/min (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
QRS
Figure 6.6 (b) ECG from a 10-year-old Collie dog with complete heart block with a slow ventricular escape rhythm at 30/min (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
PPPPP
QRSQRS
Figure 6.6 (c) ECG from a 14-year-old Siamese with complete AV block. The frst few P waves are arrowed. Note that in the first half of the tracing, the T waves merge with some
of the P waves, which makes this look like a sinus rhythm initially.
46
(Fig. 6.6). This is best demonstrated by plotting out each P wave and  slow. So a regular slow bradycardia is heard with normally a good
each QRS complex on a piece of paper (Fig. 15.1 on page 98).
 palpable pulse (sometimes the escape rhythm is not regular). On
 Abnormalities 
Clinicalfindings
very careful auscultation (sometimes using the bell of the stetho-
scope) the atrial contraction sounds (S4) can be faintly heard at a
In many cases the ventricular escape rhythm associated with com-
faster rate and not related to the normal lubb-dub of ventricular
contraction.
3
 the
conduction
 system
47
Guide
7 · Changes in the P-QRS-T morphology
ctory
Wandering pacemaker
(   an  re  o a )  
(Fig. 7.1).
This occurs as a result of the dominant pacemaker shifting from the
SA node to other pacemaker cells with a high intrinsic rate within the
atria. This is sometimes referred to as a wandering atrial pacemaker.
This is a normal variant and not uncommon in dogs. It is thought to
Changes associated with chamber enlargement
be associated with high vagal tone. Its significance is therefore similar
The ECG should not be viewed as being a means to diagnose heart
to sinus arrhythmia (see page 9).
enlargement in small animals, but as an additional diagnostic test
Small.
that might help to support such a clinical suspicion. Chest radio
ECG characteristics
graphs are often considered a better indicator of heart enlargement.
P waves can vary in morphology, i.e. there is a variation in ampli-
 Echocardiography is the best means to assess chamber size and
tude, varying from positive, negative or biphasic, or they can even 
morphology.
48
Figure 7.1 ECG from a dog showing a wandering pacemaker. Note how the P wave morphology changes (arrows) (Lead I, 25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
Table 7.1. Guidelines on normal values for cats and dogs (Tilley 1992).
Dog
Changes
e
Heart rate
Adult
70-160
120-240
Puppy
70-220
Measurements
3
P wave duration
<0.04 sec
<0.04 sec
the
Giant breeds
<0.05 sec
 P wave amplitude
<0.4 mV
<0.2 mV
-QRS-
P-R interval
0.06-0.13 sec
0.05-0.09 sec
QRS duration
<0.05 sec
<0.04 sec
Giant breeds
<0.06 sec
morphology
R wave amplitudes
<2.0 mV
<0.9 mV
Giant breeds
<2.5 mV
S-T' segment
Depression
<0.2 mV
No depression
Elevation
<0.15 mV
No elevation
T' wave
<0.25 of normal R
<0.3 MV
wave amplitude
Q-T' interval
0.15-0.25 sec
0.12-0.18 sec
Figure 7.2 ECG illustrating prolonged (0.06 sec) and notched P waves; this is termed
+40° to +100°
P-mitrale. From an 8-year-old Dobermann with dilated cardiomyopathy (50 mm/sec
Mean electrical axis
0° to + 160
and 10 mm/mV).
Note that in^ECG-speak'^enlargement’is commonly used to en-
is often associated with mitral valve disease). The notching occurs as
compass either hypertrophy or dilation, as these can rarely be distin-
a result of asynchronous depolarisation of the atria, the dilated left
guished reliably on an ECG.
atrium depolarising fractionally later than the right atrium. Note:
Table 7.1 lists normal values giving ECG complex durations and
giant breeds often normally have slightly prolonged P waves.
amplitudes. Measurements are usually measured in lead II at 50
mm/sec, unfltered.
Right atrial enlargement
When there is right atrial (RA) enlargement (or dilation) the P wave
Left atrial enlargement
is increased in amplitude (Fig. 7.3). Such tall P waves are referred
When there is left atrial (LA) enlargement (or dilation) the P wave is
to as P-pulmonale (as RA enlargement may be associated with cor
often prolonged and sometimes also notched (Fig. 7.2). A prolonged
pulmonale). Note that P-pulmonale is commonly seen in breeds that
and notched P wave is referred to as P-mitrale (as LA enlargement
are predisposed to chronic airway disease.
49
Guide
ctory
Introdt
An
ECGs
Animal
Small.
Figure7.3 ECGillustrating tall P waves (0.5 mV); this is termed P-pulmonale. There is
Figure 7.4 ECG illustrating tall R waves (6.0 mV) and prolonged QRS complex
fine muscle tremor artifact affecting the baseline. From a 1U-year-old Yorkshire terrier
duration (0.06 sec), which is suggestive of left ventricular enlargement. From a
with long-standing tracheal collapse (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
l-year-old German Shepherd dog with a patent ductus arteriosus (50 mm/sec and
5 mm/mV).
Left ventricular enlargement
largement are: prolongation of the QRS duration or a shift in the
Tall R waves are suggestive of left ventricular (LV) enlargement
MEA to the right.
(Fig. 7.4). An R wave in lead I greater than leads II or aVF, may
Abnormal mean electrical axis (MEA)
be associated with hypertrophy. An increase in R waves in leads I,
II and II may be associated with dilation. Other ECG features that
 A right axis may suggest right ventricular enlargement (Fig. 7.5), but
 may be due to displacement of the heart within the chest to the right
duration, S-T segment sagging/coving (see page 53) or a shift in the
side or might even be a normal-variation. A conduction disturbance
mean electrical axis (MEA) to the leff.
 sd ose (e ra as y q  n se s s
right axis deviation.
A left axis may be due to left ventricular enlargement, but may be
Right ventricular enlargement
due to displacement of the heart within the chest to the left or it may
Deep S waves are suggestive of right ventricular (RV) enlargement
 be a normal- variation. A conduction disturbance such as left anterior
50
(Fig. 7.5). Other ECG features that may be associated with RV en-
fascicular block (see Chapter 10) also produces a left axis deviation.
Low-voltage QRs complexes
QRS complexes will be smaller the further the electrodes are from the
Changes
heart and depend on the resistance to electrical conduction between
the heart and the electrodes. For example, the ECG complexes are
in the 
However, complexes can be small in limb leads in obese animals.
Heavy filtering on the ECG machine can also reduce the amplitude
:P-QRS-T
of the ECG complexes significantly.
Small complexes in dogs may be due to obesity, effusions ( pericar-
dial, pleural, ascites), hypothyroidism, hyperkalaemia, pneumotho-
rax, some respiratory diseases, hypovolaemia or it may be a normal-
morphology
variation.
ECG characteristics
An R wave amplitude less than 0.5 mV in the limbleads is considered
siemoi ys sixe ue pue ii pue I speaT ut saaem s daap suesnl! Dog S'z ana
small in dogs (Fig. 7.6). QRS complexes are usually small in normal
aVR, i.e. to the right. From a 2-year-old West Highland White terrier with pulmonic
cats.
stenosis (25 mm/sec and 5 mm/mV).
Figure 7.6 ECG illustrating small ECG complexes in a dog (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
51
-AnIntroductory Guide
Small Animal ECGs-
Figure 7.7 (a) ECG illustrating electrical alternans - note the alternating amplitude of the R waves. Froma Golden Retriever with pericardialeffusion due toidiopathic pericarditis
(25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Electrical alternans is associated with movement ofthe heart within
pericardial effusion, which is evident on echocardiography where the
heart can be seen to bounce′ from side to side within pericardial fluid
 as it beats. This movement of the heart causes a slight alternating
change in the cardiac axis and is seen on the ECG as an alternating
variation in QRS amplitude. Note: this should not be confused with
the more gradual variation in amplitude seen with respiration in some
animals, nor the variation seen with a supraventricular tachycardia
or atrial fibrillation.
Aepuoas uoisna ieipieriad ym sop praydays ueua e uog a (a) Z'tauna
Notching in the R wave
toa right atrialhaemangiosarcomaillustrating electricalalternans.TheQRScomplexes
are arrowed. Note the alternating amplitudes of the R waves, S waves and T waves in
Although these abnormalities can be seen commonly in heart dis-
this example (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
ease in small animals, the significance of notches is debatable - it
is the ‘heart disease’ that is of greater importance than trying to
Electrical alternans
analyse every minutia. Notches in the QRS complex are reported to
Thisis an alternation in QRS amplitude that occurs nearly every othen
occur with microscopic intramural myocardial infarction or are as-
52
beat (Fig. 7.7).
sociated with areas of myocardial fibrosis (Fig. 7.8). Notches in the
 Changes
in the P-QRS-T
morphology
Figure 7.7 (c) ECG from a German Pointer with pericardial effusion. In addition to the electrical alternans, also note the rising S-T segment sometimes seen with pericardial
disease (arrowed) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
QRS complex are also seen with intraventricular conduction defects
·hypercalcaemia
(see Chapter 10) and a slight notch is sometimes also seen with ven-
·digitalis
tricular pre-excitation in the upstroke of the R wave (see Chapter 11).
·atropine
Notches can also be produced artifactually in tracings in which there
·beta-blockers and calcium channel antagonists.
is excessive muscle tremor or electrical interference.
S-T segment abnormalities
Q-T interval abnormalities
S-T elevation is seen in:
The Q-T interval varies a little, inversely with heart rate, so it is
difficult to accurately define what is exactly abnormal.
·pericarditis (pericardial effusion) (Fig. 7.7c)
· severe ischaemia/infarction, e.g. full wall thickness.
 Prolonged Q-T intervals may be seen in:
S-T depression is seen in (Fig. 7.9):
· hypocalcaemia
·endomyocardial ischaemia (e.g. cardiomyopathy, trauma)
·hypokalaemia
· potassium imbalance
·
 hypothermia
·digitalis toxicity.
·
quinidine
· ethylene glycol poisoning.
Abnormalities of the Twave
Shortened Q-T interval may be seen in:
The morphology of T waves in small animals is very variable and
the diagnostic value of T wave changes is very limited compared
53
·hyperkalaemia
Small Animal ECGs- An Introductory Guide
Figure 7.8 ECG illustrating notching in the QRS complex. From a
it with dilated cardiomyopathy (50 mm/sec and 20 m/mV)
54
Figure 7.9 ECG illustrating depression of the S-T segment. From a 4-year-old Staffordshire Bull Terrier with mitral valve dysplasia (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Changes
3
the
Figure 7.10 (a) ECG illustrating a bradycardia at 50/min, the absence of P waves (atrial standstill) and tall peaked T waves from a dog with hyperkalaemia (25 mm/sec and
10 mm/mV)
P-QRS-T
with that of humans. A higher value might be placed on T wave
Hyperkalaemia may be associated with Addison's disease, acute
 s n   s e  n 
renal shutdown (e.g. feline urethral obstruction syndrome), diabetic
The most common abnormal change is the development of large T
ketoacidosis and severe skeletal muscle damage.
morphology
below) or myocardial hypoxia.
ECG characteristics
The ECG changes vary with increasing severity of the hyperkalaemia
as follows:
Hyperkalaemia
· there is a progressive bradycardia
· increased amplitude of the T wave, appearing narrow and spiked
Hyperkalaemia is a well known cause of ECG abnormalities
(Fig. 7.10), but it must be remembered that a normal ECG would not
· progressive decrease in amplitude of the R wave
 progressive reduction in amplitude of the P wave
 disappearance of the P wave, i.e. atrial standstill, with a slow junc-
levels should always be measured (and an adrenocorticotrophic hor
tional (nodal) rhythm
mone test performed) if this is suspected.
·finally, ventricular fibrillation or asystole
Figure 7.10 (b) ECG from a young dog with Addison's disease and atrial standstill. Note that, unlike in Figure 7.10(a), the T waves are not tall and peaked. The absence of
characteristic T wave morphology' on an ECG tracing does not exclude hyperkalaemia (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
55
PART 3
More advanced electrocardiography
57
8
8 · Understanding the EcG limb lead systems
Understanding 
An understanding of the ECG lead systems is necessary to under-
Table 8.1. ECG cable colour coding.
stand both the cardiac electrical axis and intraventricular conduction
the
defects, which follow this chapter.
Labelling often on medical
ECG
Limb
Standard
American
ECG machines
 Right fore
Red
White
RA (right arm)
limb
The six ECG limb leads
Left fore
Yellow
Black
LA (left arm)
Left hind
Green
Red
LL (left leg)
lead
In Chapters 2 and 3, the +ve and -ve electrodes, in the diagrams,
Right hind (earth)
Black
Green
RL(right leg)
were placed so as to obtain a recording of the electricity of the heart.
I systems
This combination of a +ve and -ve electrode is termed a bipolar
lead, simply meaning between two poles, i.e. a +ve and a -ve pole
(electrodes). For example, lead 2 is formed by the right fore elec-
trode being the negative pole and the left hind electrode the positive
can provide a total combination of six ECG leads.! Thus the six limb
leads look at' the heart in six different directions.
pole. Leads 1, 2 and 3 are all bipolar leads (Figs 8.1 a, b, c). However,
the term lead' can cause immense confusion, as an ECG cable or wire
Occasionally, I receive ECGs from students with only the first four
leads recorded (i.e. I, I, II and aVR). On enquiring as to why the
is often also called an ECG lead in common parlance. This potential
confusion should be avoided.
other two leads (aVL and aVF) were not recorded I am told: ^because
 there are only four leads on the ECG machine? That confusing term
While there are usually four ECG cables or wires (I'll avoid the
term “lead’ here!), one ofthese is an earth, each with an electrode clip
again! There are four cables, one is an earth and the other three are
(e.g. crocodile clip). The other three are the active cables to which the
active, these three provide a combination of six ECG leads.
-ve and +ve electrodes are connected. All cables are labelled and/or
colour coded for identification (Table 8.1), to ensure correct place-
ment on each of the limbs (although the colour codings of Europe
1 A small portion of 'poetic licence’ is used in this statement. Correctly, leads 1, 2
and America are not the same).
and 3 are bipolar leads, however leads aVR, aVL and aVF are augmented unipolar
leads. Unipolarleads measure the electrical potential between a positive electrode and
When the ECG clips are then attached to the animal, switching
a central terminal created electronically within the circuitry of the ECG machine by
^channels' on the ECG machine can provide different leads as shown
combining the electric currents obtained from the two other electrodes. The deflections
below (Fig. 8.1). It can be seen how three ECG cables and electrodes
are smaller than the bipolar leads and thus they are also augmented (1.5 times).
59
Small Animal ECGs-AnIntroductory Guide
(a)
Lead|
(b)
(c)
LF
RF
ve
+ve
-ve
inactive
inactive
ve
Lead ll
Lead Ill
inactive
Earth
Earth
Fve
Earth
Fye
RH
LH
RH
LH
RH
LH
(p)
(e)
f)
Lead aVR
Lead aVL 
LF
RF
+ye
+ve
LeadavF
ve
-ve
Earth
Earth
Earth
RH
LH
RH
LH
RH
LH
Figure 8.1 These diagrams illustrate how the six limb leads are generated by switching the electrode connections.
60
6
9 · Mean electrical axis (MEA) explained
Mean
electrical
Although depolarisation waves spread through the heart in all direc-
tions, the average direction and magnitude is represented by the QRS
axis
complex. Ifthe QRS is predominantly positive (upwards),the average
Lead aVL
RA
+ve
(MEA)
direction of the depolarisation waves is towards the +ve electrode.
Lead aVR
Conversely, if it is predominantly negative (downwards) then the
+ve
 depolarisation wave is moving away from the +ve electrode. When
I explai
the QRS complex is equally positive and negative (and usually also
Lead I
i o se iu ie  si am uood  un (s
ained
+ve electrode.
The limb leads ^look at' the heart from six different directions. The
average direction and magnitude of the depolarisation wave through
the ventricles is termed the mean electrical axis (MEA) or the cardiac
axis. As can be seen from Fig. 9.1, in which there is a normal axis,
leads I, II, III and aVF have positive deflections and aVR and aVL are
+ve
+ve
Lead III
+ve
Lead II
negative.
Lead aVF
Right axis deviation
If the right ventricle becomes enlarged as illustrated (either with
Figure 9.1 A normal mean electrical axis (large shaded arrow) and how this is 'seen'
from the six limb leads. RA - right atrium; LA - left atrium; RV - right ventricle;
hypertrophy or dilation), then the MEA swings to the right, because
LV - left ventricle.
the large increase in muscle mass on the right side creates a large
electrical potential difference during depolarisation.
Left axis deviation
In Fig. 9.2, for example, leads IHI and aVR become large and posi-
tive. Leads I, II and aVL become negative. Lead aVF is isoelectric in
- p auoda  ral paea s a  a 
this example. This is termed a right axis deviation.
lation), then the MEA swings to the left, because the large increase
61
ide
n5
ctor
aVL
aVR
+ve
aVL
AnIntrodu
+ve
aVR
+ve
+ve]
S5
+ve1
H
Animal
Small
+ve
+ve
+ve
aVF
+ve
avF
Figure 9.2 The mean electrical axis (large shaded arrow) in an animal with right
ventricular enlargement (RVE) and how this is 'seen' from the six limb leads.
-un al yim jeue ue ut (moie papeys ahie) sixe jetioala ua ayl e'6 aina
in muscle mass on the left side creates a large electrical potential
tricular enlargement (LVE) and how this is 'seen from the six limb leads.
difference during depolarisation.
to assist in the assessment of ventricular enlargement and in the
In Fig. 9.3, for example, lead I becomes taller than lead I1. LeadaVL
recognition of intraventricular conduction defects.
is also positive. Leads IHI and aVR are negative and aVF is isoelectric.
The value in exactly measuring the MEA in every case is question-
This is termed a left axis deviation.
able; a rough estimate of whether it is right or left is usually sufficient.
However, the understanding of how it is measured and how it varies
How to calculate the mean electrical axis
provides a better understanding of the ^electricity of the heart.
This is of limited value in small animals, in part because the vector in
How to estimate the MEA
the frontal plane (which is the plane that is measured from limb
leads) is less representative of the true direction of the vector in
There are a few methods of measuring the MEA; two are described
62
three dimensions, compared with humans. The MEA is used mainly
here.
(1) Eyeballing the MEA
6
 Using this method provides a quick system and, with practice, the
MEA can often be eyeballed' to see whether it is normal or abnormal.
Mean
Look again at the previous diagrams describing right and left axes,
and how the amplitude of the QRS complex varies in leads I, II and
electrical
5mm
III with these.
(i) Using all six limb leads and the hexaxial lead system, find the
lead in which the QRS complexes have the greatest (positive) net
axis
amplitude - the MEA is approximately in this direction.
(MEA)
(i) Similarly,find the most negative complexes, the MEA is opposite
 in direction to this.
(ii) Alternatively, find the lead in which the QRS complex is equally
 explained
positive and negative (and usually small) - this is called the
(b)
120
isoelectric lead. The MEA will be perpendicular to this. Find
+aVR
which of the six limb leads is perpendicular to the isoelectric
av
lead. If the perpendicular lead is positive, then the MEA is in
that direction. If the perpendicular lead is negative, then the
MEA is in the opposite direction to that lead.
1B0
+180
(2) Triangulation
Using two leads from a good-quality tracing, commonly leads I and
III are used to measure the net amplitude of the QRS complex in
each lead. In other words, measure the amplitude of the QRS com-
+120
plex that is positive and the amplitude that is negative. Subtract one
+ II
06+
Ⅱ+
(the smaller) from the other - this is the net amplitude. Plot this,
+ avF
to scale, on the hexaxial lead system shown below (Fig. 9.4). Draw
Figure 9.4 Estimation of mean electrical axis. (a) Method 1. In this normal canine
 perpendicular lines from each point. Where the two lines meet is the
ECG, lead aVL is the most isoelectric lead. Perpendicular to this is lead II. Lead II
direction of the MEA from the centre point.
is positive and therefore the MEA is towards the positive pole of this line, i.e. +60°.
 In fact, if the net amplitude in all six leads is calculated and plot-
(b) Method 2. In the same ECG. The net amplitude in lead I is +6 (Q = 0 and
ted on the hexaxial lead system, the lines that are drawn perpen-
R = +6). Plot 6 points along lead I in the hexaxial lead system diagram and draw a
perpendicular. The net amplitude in lead I is +6 (S = —2 and R = +8). Plot 6 points
dicular from each point should all meet at approximately the same
along lead IlI and draw a perpendicular. Draw an arrow from the centre to where the
point.
two perpendicular lines intersect. This is the direction of the MEA, i.e. +60°.
63
Guide
10 . Intraventricular conduction defects
Having understood the ECG leads and mean electrical axis, we can
tricle occurs normally, but depolarisation of the right ventricular
An
now explain abnormalities due to intraventricular conduction defects
 mass occurs through the myocardial cell tissue resulting in a very
(aka ventricular aberrancy).
prolonged complex.
ECGs
-dns sauq aunq iiu pue yat ou sapip si yo aunq a
ECG characteristics
Animal
The left bundle branch further divides into anterior and posterior
The QRS duration is prolonged (>0.07 seconds). The QRS complex
fascicles. As well as conduction block occurring in the AV node (i.e.
has deep and usually slurred S waves in leads I, I, II and aVF and is
Small,
heart block), a block can occur in conduction of the electrical im-
 positive in aVR and aVL. The MEA is to the right (Fig. 10.la and b).
pulse through one or more of these conduction pathways. The most
Note that RBBB needs to be differentiated from a right ventricular
commonly seen conduction defects seen are
enlargement pattern.
in dogs:
(a)
· right bundle branch block (RBBB)
· left bundle branch block (LBBB)
and in cats:
· left anterior fascicular block (LAFB).
These result in abnormal depolarisation patterns as there will be
a delay in depolarisation of the part of the ventricles supplied by
the affected conduction tissue. This is also referred to as aberrant
QRSQRS'QRS
ventricular conduction or ventricular aberrancy.
Figure 10.1 (a) ECG (lead II) from a 10-year-old mixed breed dog with a normal sinus
rhythm at 140/min, but conducted with aberrancy through the ventricles due to right
Right bundle branch block
bundle branch block. This was an incidental finding. Note the abnormal morphology
of the QRS complexes, with deep (negative) Q waves and prolonged QRS duration.
Right bundle branch block (RBBB) occurs due to failure/delay of 
 There is a P for every QRS, indicating the sinus origin of the depolarisation (25 mm/sec
64
impulse conduction through the RBB. Depolarisation of the left ven-
and 10 mm/mV).
(b)
/S1:10e1::2O:0Z
Intraventi
ricular
LM
defec
Figure 10.1 (b) ECG from a mixed breed dog with RBBB showing allsix limbleads. The complexes are very prolonged and negative in leads 2, 3 and aVF and the most positive
lead is aVR (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
An animal with atrial fibrillation can concurrently have bundle
(c)
branch block (Fig. 10.1c); this is often a more challenging ECG
interpretation!
Clinical findings
LNNNNNLNLLLN
The heart sounds and rhythm will sound normal with associated
palpable pulses. In some dogs, with very careful auscultation a split
second heart sound (S2) may be heard, due to delayed closure of the
pulmonic valve.
Left bundlebranch block
Figure 10.1 (c) ECG (lead I) from dog with atrial fibrillation (note the irregular R-R
intervals and the fibrillation waves) and right bundle branch block (deep S waves and
Left bundle branch block (LBBB) occurs due to failure of conduc-
prolonged QRS durations) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
tion through the LBB. Depolarisation of the right ventricle occurs
65
An Introductory Guide
ECGs
Animal
of the QRS complexes, yet related to the P waves, i.e. there is a P for every QRS, indicating the sinus origin of the depolarisations (50 mm/s and 10 mm/mV).
Small.
normally and depolarisation of the left ventricle is delayed and
ECGcharacteristics
occurs through the myocardial cell tissue resulting in a very pro-
The QRS duration is very prolonged (>0.07 seconds). There are
longed complex.
positive complexes in leads I, I, III and aVF and negative in aVR and
50
Figure 10.2 (b) ECG from an 8-year-old Boxer dog with LBBB showing allsix limb leads. Note the very prolonged QRS complexes and leads 1, 2, 3 and aVF are positive wherea5
66
aVR and aVL are negative (50 mm/sec and 5 mm/mV)
Clinical findings
0
The heart sounds and rhythm will sound normal with associated
palpable pulses.
Intraventi
Left anterior fascicular block
ricu
Left anterior fascicular block (LAFB) occurs due to failure of conduc-
lar
tion through the anterior fascicle of the LBB. It is not an uncommon
cond
finding in cats but is rare in the dog.
ECG characteristics
The QRS complex is normal in duration but there are tall R waves in
defec
leads I and aVL, deep S waves ( >R wave) in leads II, III and aVF. The
MEA is markedly to the left; approx. -60° in the cat (Fig. 10.3a).
Figure 10.3 (a) ECG from acat with taurine-responsive dilated cardiomyopathy. There
A cat with atrial fibrillation can also concurrently have fascicular
is a normal sinus rhythm but aberrant ventricular conduction due to anterior fascicular
block (Fig. 10.3b).
block (see text) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
Clinical findings
The heart sounds and rhythm will sound normal with associated
aVL (Fig. 10.2). LBBB needs to be differentiated from a left ventricular
enlargement pattern.
palpable pulses.
人人入人
Figure 10.3 (b) ECG from a cat with atrial fibrillation and anterior fascicular block.
67
SmallAnimal ECGs-An IntroductoryGuide
Figure 10.4 (a) ECG showing intermittent right bundle branch block. Note that there is a sinus rhythm throughout, with a P wave preceding every QRS complex, however there
is a change in morphology with some (arrowed) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Figure 10.4 (b) ECG from 4-year-old Golden Retriever with a broad complex tachycardia, which could be either a ventricular tachycardia or an SVT with aberrancy. Following
cardioversion an underlying right bundle branch block was evident, confirming this to be an SVT (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
68
More terminology..... VPC morphology
In Chapters 4 and 5 the morphology ofVPCs was described as having a -ve or +ve QRS complex. In ECG-speak however, the morphology
Intraventi
of the QRS complex is described as being of LBBB or RBBB morphology. It is not until ventricular aberrancy has been explained, that this
terminology can be used. So for example in Figs 4.1, 4.8b and 5.5a the VPCs would be described as having RBBB morphology and in Figs
4.2c, 5.3, 5.4b and 5.7c they would be described as having LBBB morphology.
In Boxer dogs with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, in which the VPCs arise from the right ventricular outflow tract
they are described as VPCs with LBBB morphology.
CQ
Intermittentventricular aberrancy
ECG characteristics
This is sometimes seen when a supraventricular premature depo-
The QRS complex is bizarre and prolonged, often a right bundle
larisation reaches the bundle branches before one or other has
branch block morphology and is premature. It can be very diffcult
det
fully repolarised (usually the right bundle branch), ie. is still par-
 to distinguish from a true VPC (Fig. 10.4a). If there is a preceding P
tially depolarised, which results in a functional block. Because
wave visible (and not hidden by the previous T wave) then this might
the QRS complex is premature and bizarre in shape it mimics a
help to confirm it was a supraventricular complex.
VPC.
An SVT with aberrancy will mimic a VT (Fig. 10.4b)
If a supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is associated with aber-
rant ventricular conduction, this will mimic a ventricular tachycardia
Clinical findings
(VT). Thus the term a broad complex tachycardia is sometimes used
 u  ssd e u m e q ad at sos 
to describe this ECG finding.
with aberrancy will simply produce a tachycardic sounding heart with
weak pulses.
69
Guide
11 · Some additional arrhythmias
Introdu
Ventricular pre-excitation
ECG characteristics
An
 an ss ou  an  ssd an uam so s
node through an accessory conduction pathway to the ventricles
 complex itself. There is a short PR interval, a slur or notch (delta
and therefore depolarises the ventricles prematurely. The impulse
wave) in the upstroke of the R wave and a slight prolongation of the
 QRS complex (Fig. 11.1). In WPW syndrome the supraventricular
the ventricles with the rest of the ventricles being activated in the
tachycardia is often in excess of 300/min.
normal sequence through the AV node. There are believed to be
Small
three accessory pathways: bundles of Kent, James fibres and Mahaim
fibres.
Clinical findings
The Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome consists of ven-
 If examined during a period of tachycardia, this will be heard and
weak femoral pulses appreciated. If there is not a tachycardia present,
tachycardia.
 The heart rhythm (except with WPW syndrome) is unaffected and
the pre-excitation will not produce an audible difference from that
of a normal sinus complex.
is usually regular.
Atrial flutter
This is a rare arrhythmia in dogs and it has not been documented in
cats.
ECG characteristics
The flutter waves (F waves) produce regular ^saw-toothed’ deflec-
Figure 11.1 (a) ECG from a 3-year-old Labrador with pre-excitation. Note the abnor
tions typically at a rate of 300-400/min, if seen. The ventricular
70
mally short PR interval (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
response is typically to produce a supraventricular tachycardia (this
10mm/mV25mm/sFi1
ⅡⅢ
Some
additional arrhythmias
Figure 1l.1 (b) ECG from a 4-year-old Boxer with pre-excitation. Note the short PR interval and the aberrant ventricular conduction with a right bundle branch morphology
(25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
is thus another potential cause of SVT). At high rates there may be
rate will be regular, however often the conduction can be variable,
a functional AV block thus producing a 2:1 or 3:1 conduction ratio
producing an irregular heart rate (similar to atrial fibrillation).
Clinical findings
The heart rate is typically very fast and can be regular or irregular.
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
This is an ectopic ventricular rhythm that is often not particularly fast
Figure ll.2 ECG from a I-year-old Boxer dog with atrial flutter. Note the flutter waves
( <180/min) and thus sometimes is described as a slow ventricular
and the variable capture rate, most of the time it is 2:1 (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
tachycardia (VT).
71
AnIntroductoryGuide
Small Animal ECGs.
Figure 1l.3 ECG from an Old English Shepherd dog with pancreatitis and an idioventricular rhythm at 130/min (too slow to be considered a ventricular tachycardia, cf. Fig. 5.7,
p. 28-29) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/m V).
ECG characteristics
It looks like a slowVT (Fig.11.3).
Clinical findings
The heart rate is typically regular to match to the rate, however the
rhythm may be irregular if not constant and intermingled with the
underlying sinus rhythm.
72
PART 4
Management and treatment of arrhythmias
73
12 · Management of arrhythmias
Management
Arrhythmias are a frequent finding in cardiac disease but are also
particularly if there are congestive failure signs prior to considering
often secondary to systemic diseases.
specific antiarrhythmic drugs.
f arrhythmias
Before using specific antiarrhythmic drugs, which have the poten-
A review of any concurrent antiarrhythmic drugs should also be
tial to be proarrhythmic, two questions need to be answered.
considered as a possible iatrogenic cause of arrhythmias. For example,
sotalol may lead to AV block, pimobendan may exacerbate re-entrant
(1) Does the arrhythmia suggest the presence of an underlying
 arrhythmias, digoxin may trigger ventricular arrhythmias and the-
condition?
ophylline may result in supraventricular arrhythmias.
(2) Is the arrhythmia of primary clinical significance?
However there are some specific situations, i.e. Boxers and
Dobermanns, with dilated cardiomyopathy: in addition to treatment
for the heart failure, antiarrhythmic drugs are considered appropriate
(1) Does the arrhythmia suggest the presence
to reduce the likelihood of sudden death (see later).
of an underlying condition?
Possible underlying conditions can be broadly categorised into pri-
Non-cardiacdiseases
mary cardiac diseases and non-cardiac diseases.
There is a very large list of medical conditions that can trigger effects
on the heartleading toarrhythmias. These conditions mayrange from
Primary cardiac diseases
There is potential for any clinically significant cardiac disease to lead
associated with splenic disease or gastric dilation, and from arrhyth-
   q      ss  
 on (ss Ards oi ap ia) erxodau A p s
arrhythmias. Typically atrial dilation and stretch can lead to atrial ar-
arrhythmia associated with intracranial disease. When presented
rhythmias such as supraventricular premature complexes and atrial
 with an animal in which diagnostics have not revealed the presence
fibrillation. Ventricular dilation or hypertrophy can lead to ventric-
of a primary cardiac condition, then the search needs to be widened
ular premature complexes. In general practice mitral valve disease
for a non-cardiac condition, by very thorough and comprehensive
would be the most common cause of atrial dilation in dogs leading
physical examination (and history) together with extensive blood
to supraventricular arrhythmias and the cardiomyopathies would be
 profles, urine analysis and radiography and/or ultrasonography to
a common cause of ventricular arrhythmias in both dogs and cats.
 screen for non-thoracic diseases. In the vast majority of situations in
In such cases it is important to manage and treat the heart failure
      s    
75
Guide
arrhythmia, treatment directed towards the condition will lead to a
and are able to walk into the clinic, however heart rates lower than
resolution of the arrhythmia. Simple monitoring of the arrhythmia
25/min tend to start producing weakness or recumbency. Dogs with
may be all that is required in many cases, unless the arrhythmia is
 a sinus arrest pause of 20 seconds at rest (i.e. low metabolic demand)
actory
of primary significance. Additionally monitoring of the arrhythmia
may not necessarily faint, however the same pause at exercise would
can often be a good means to assess response to treatment of the
result in syncope.
Introdue
medical condition, e.g. resolution of atrial standstill in dogs with
With tachyarrhythmias, as the heart rate increases there is less dia
Addison's disease.
stolic filling time, which consequently reduces the stroke volume and
It may be that arrhythmias develop as a consequence of medical
An
thus the cardiac output. The degree of reduction in stroke volume
drug therapy and a review of all concurrent medications should be
 is greater with ventricular arrhythmias than with supraventricular
ECGs-
performed.
arrhythmias. With a supraventricular arrhythmia, the depolarisa-
tion, and thus the contraction, of the left ventricle sustain a normal
IAnimal
sequence, which is efficient. Whereas when there is a ventricular ar-
(2) Is the arrhythmia of primary clinical significance?
rhythmia, depolarisation and contraction is inefficient and ejection
         
of blood is not well coordinated, resulting in a greater reduction in
Small.
 in signs of haemodynamic compromise, has the potential to lead to
stroke volume. Thus a supraventricular tachycardia may not result
sudden death or could lead to heart failure, e.g. tachycardia-induced
in signs of forward failure and weakness or collapse until it exceeds
myocardial failure.
 300/min, whereas a ventricular tachycardia may produce haemody-
namic compromise at rates as low as 200/min. The heart rate at
Arrhythmiascausing haemodynamiccompromise
which clinical signs of compromise occur will also be influenced by
As a generalisation, animals with arrhythmias but no clinical signs
the presence of concurrent disease.
 In contrast, it should be understood that occasional or even fre-
should not be medicated with antiarrhythmic drugs. Haemodynamic
quent arrhythmias are not likely to result in haemodynamic compro.
compromise, and thus clinical signs, will occur when an arrhythmia
results in a significant reduction in cardiac output. This can result
mise. As a generalisation there needs to be a sustained reduction in
cardiac output to produce signs, which will usually mean a sustained
due to either bradyarrhythmias or tachyarrhythmias.
arrhythmia, or at least long periods of an arrhythmia.
Cardiac output = Stroke volume × Heart rate
The clinical signs of haemodynamic compromise are essentially
those of forward failure, i.e. reduced mental status, weak/poor pulse
When the heart rate slows, there is a natural compensatoryincrease in
stroke volume to sustain cardiac output (Starling's Law of the heart)
cold extremities. Blood pressure assessment is useful to check for
and thus systemic blood pressure. However if a bradycardia were to
hypotension, although it can often be diffcult to obtain a blood
be profound, it would reach a point at which there is an inability  pressure recording accurately in hypotensive animals. Animals may
to compensate for the reduction in heart rate. Typicall dogs with  also present with a history of syncope or pre-syncope, recumbency
76
complete AV block with a heart rate of 30-40/min remain conscious  or even sudden death. In animals with concurrent disease, whether
cardiac or non-cardiac, it can sometimes be difficult to ascertain if
Atrialfibrillation
12
the signs are necessarily due to the arrhythmia or the disease. This
Atrial fibrillation is most commonly associated with dilation and
requires clinical judgement and experience.
Manager
stretch of one or both atria, resulting in the inability to sustain the
normal depolarisation sequence. In such cases, animals present in
Life-threatening arrhythmias
heart failure with a sympathetic drive resulting in a rapid ventricular
ment
As a general rule a sustained and rapid ventricular tachycardia is
response rate and >50% pulse deficit. Control of the ventricular
considered the most likely to progress into ventricular fibrillation
response rate is then desirable, minimising the pulse deficit. In dogs
with myocardial disease, digoxin is considered the drug of choice, but
and result in death, and thus rapid i/v cardioversion is normally per-
other options include calcium channel antagonists and beta blockers.
arrhytl
formed. Additionally very frequent and multimorphic ventricular
arrhythmias are usually considered malignant and require drug sup-
In contrast, in giant-breed dogs that present with lone AF, i.e. not
pression. Profound bradyarrhythmias, such as sinus arrest (or sick
in heart failure, it is debatable whether any treatment is required
hmias
sinus syndrome) or AV block with an inconsistent and slow ventric-
or not.
a a pe u l pipi ae u adesa 
urgent pacemaker implantation.
Treatment of arrhythmias
Having made the decision that an arrhythmia is of primary signif-
Tachycardia-inducedmyocardialfailure
icance, then antiarrhythmic drugs need to be chosen. However it
This occurs as a consequence of an incessant tachycardia sustained
is still important to remember that antiarrhythmic drugs may have
Over a period of days or weeks. In dogs, this is most likely to be seen in
proarrhythmic effects and can complicate the arrhythmia, thus con-
association with a sustained supraventricular tachycardia. Myocar-
finual monitoring and re-assessment is necessary. The aims of treat-
dial failure develops, leading to signs of congestive heart failure. And
ment also need to be considered in advance. It is often unlikely that
whilst they may not seem urgent in the first few days, if cardiover-
animals with frequent ventricular arrhythmias will have a complete
sion is not successful, the relentless progression into heart failure
resolution ofthe arrhythmias following medication. Thus judgement
makes this a challenging case to manage, thus prompt cardiover-
of the response should not be based on ECG findings alone, but im-
sp rn pasns aq u a rie au aeiaaid s uoiss
 portantly by the clinical improvement in the animal with a reduction
or weeks following cardioversion to sinus rhythm and thus mimic
or resolution of the signs.
 dilated cardiomyopathy on echocardiographic examination.
77
Guide
13 · Treatment of arrhythmias
ictory
Introdue
Bradyarrhythmias
sinus arrest must be to result in syncope depends on the activity
An
q  d s e a  a go ( a )
  s e an  n q   n
ECGs
Sinus bradycardia
Pre-syncope occurs if the duration of the sinus arrest is not quite
Clinical significance
sufficient to result in collapse but does cause signs of weakness or
Animal
stumbling.
There are several conditions that may be associated with
hypothermia, elevated intracranial pressure (e.g. following cranial
sinus arrest that overlap with causes of sinus bradycardia (see
Small.
trauma), systemic disease (e.g. renal failure) or drugs (tranquillisers
or antiarrhythmic drugs) and, additionally in cats, feline dysautono-
Chapter 3):
mia. Cats sometimes present with a sinus bradycardia when in heart
vagal stimulation associated with severe respiratory disease (it can
be normal in dogs with brachycephalic upper airway syndrome,
sponses to heart failure is an increase in sympathetic tone (i.e. a
for example) or associated with a vasovagal response, e.g. with
tachycardia would be expected).
vomiting or tenesmus;
Treatment
 atrial disease such as dilation, fibrosis, cardiomyopathy or neopla-
This should be aimed at the primary cause. Vagolytic or beta agonist
sia (e.g. haemangiosarcoma and heart base tumours);
metabolic or endocrine diseases such as an electrolyte imbalance
drugs can be used to increase the heart rate if symptomatic, but this
or hypothyroidism;
is rarely necessary.
drugs, either due to their effects or associated with toxicity, must
Sinus arrest/block
also be considered;
 irritation of the vagus nerve by neoplasia in the cervical area (e.g.
Clinical significance
thyroid carcinoma) or in the thorax (e.g. aortic body tumour).
s n nsn o  xo an m  
Sinus arrest / block can be a normal finding in some brachycephali
dogs (i.e. exaggerated respiratory sinus arrhythmia).
arrest;
· profound and regular sinus arrest can be a feature of sick sinus
A long period of sinus arrest may result in syncope, as no blood
flows to the brain and fainting occurs. How long the period of
syndrome.
78
Treatment
Atrial standstill
3
Treatment is usually only required in symptomatic cases. Pacemaker
Clinical significance
Treatment
implantation is a treatment option in some cases.
Atrial standstill can be classified into three types, based on the un-
derlying condition.
Sick sinus syndrome (sinus node dysfunction)
 s  g e   s   (
Clinical significance
English Sheep Dogs and mixed breed dogs and the author has
 arrhyth
As for sinus arrest described previously, prolonged periods of no
seen cases in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. This type is referred
to as persistent atrial standstill and is thought to be an atrial car
diomyopathy. The clinical signs are usually of weakness, lethargy
hmias
sinus bradycardia may present with lethargy and exercise intoler-
and syncope associated with the reduction in cardiac output and
ance due to an inability to increase cardiac output on demand. In
the bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome either the bradycardia or the
inability to increase the heart rate during activity. Heart failure
   n  do ss e d  
usually ensues insidiously.
(2)  Atrial standstilis described as temporary atrial standstill when
sult in weakness or syncope. It is most commonly seen in West High-
land White Terriers (with or without idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis);
it occurs as a consequence of a reversible condition. This may
be due to hyperkalaemia, which can be secondary to Addison's
has not been recorded in cats.
disease, diabetic ketoacidosis and oliguric renal failure. Iatro-
genic causes include excessive potassium infusion, transfusion
 of stored blood and potassum-sparing diuretics. Digitalis tox-
Treatment
icity is also a possible cause that can be established from the
If atropine (see boxed text below) or exercise fail to increase the heart
history and measurement of serum levels. The clinical signs are
rate significantly, it would suggest that excessive vagal tone is not the
similar to persistent atrial standstill, with the addition of the
cause of the bradycardia. The treatment of choice for symptomatic
signs related to the primary condition.
cases is pacemaker implantation and possibly also the addition of
(3) Atrial standstill can occur in association with a dying² heart and
antiarrhythmic drugs. It is usually diffcult to obtain satisfactory rate
is termed terminal atrial standstill.
 control with medical treatment alone.
Clinically signs include weakness, lethargy, syncope and congestive
heart failure. The prognosis is often poor.
Atropine response test
Treatment
Inject 40 μg/kg s/c (dog and cat) and re-assess heart rate response
Atropine usually does not increase the heart rate significantly. Treat-
(ECGs) in 30 to 40 minutes.
ment is directed towards congestive failure if present. Persistent atrial
79
Guide
standstill is poorly responsive to any medication, including atropine
Treatment
and also rarely responds to pacemaker implantation (in the author's
See complete heart block below.
experience).
Actory
Mobitz type I
Introdue
Av (heart) block
Clinical significance
First degree AV block
An
Clinical significance
Second degree AV block (Mobitz type I) is sometimes seen in normal
dogs with sinus arrhythmia, particularly brachycephalic breeds.
ECGs-
First degree block does not, in itself, cause any clinical problems. It
may occur normally in an animal with a slow heart rate or in ageing
Complete heart block
 Animal
animals due to degenerative changes in the AV node. Other causes
K hn roood se yns sirp ro 1o An sni ani
Clinical significance
occur when there is an abnormal potassium level. Treatment should
Small,
The clinical signs may include weakness, lethargy, syncope or sudden
be aimed at correcting the underlying cause.
death, depending on how slow the ventricular rate is, and the sub-
Second degree AV block
rhythm is usually associated with more marked clinical signs, with
the possibility of sudden death. It is common in chronic cases, with
Mobitz type Il
a slow ventricular response rate, to find a generalised cardiomegaly
Clinical significance
with or without evidence of congestive heart failure on thoracic ra-
diography. On auscultation a characteristic finding is a very regu-
Advanced cases of second degree AV block may present with weak-
lar and steady, but slow heart beat together with the palpation of
ness, lethargy or syncope; it depends on the severity ofthe heart block
 n  a s s e sd   
and the consequent reduction in cardiac output. Auscultation reveals
contraction sounds may be faintly audible. Complete AV block can
an intermittent pause in the cardiac rhythm. Second degree AV block
be associated with cardiomyopathy, cardiac neoplasia, digitalis toxi-
that is severe or advanced (meaning the block occurs frequently) is
city, AV node fibrosis, endocarditis, electrolyte imbalance and Lyme
do on ssaiod A se adi sin si h '1 adi zi Aens
AV block. It has been reported in older dogs with AV nodal fibrosis
disease.
and hereditary stenosis ofthe bundlle of His in the Pug, however many
Treatment
cases are idiopathic. It may also occur with digitalis toxicity or other
drugs, e.g. xylazine, detomidine, atropine and quinidine, or with a
Treatment may be attempted with parasympatholytic drugs (at-
potassium imbalance. The author is also aware of some anecdotal
ropine, probantheline) or sympathomimetic drugs (clenbuterol,
80
 reports of heart block in hypothyroid dogs.
terbutaline). Millophyline may be of some help in cats, or
theophylline in dogs. Pimobendan might also be tried, as this is a
Left bundle branch block
3
positive dromotrope.
Clinical significance
 s     s  n
Treatment
provided symptomatic relief and reduce the risk of sudden death.
The left bundle branch is thick and therefore a larger lesion is re-
quired to produce conduction block. LBBB is therefore rare in nor-
mal healthy animals and when it does occur it is often associated
Drug doses
with pathology: congenital (e.g. subaortic stenosis) or acquired heart
f arrhythmias
Parasympatholytic drugs
chaemia, cardiac neoplasia or trauma. In itself, it does not cause any
significant haemodynamic problems.
· Atropine: dog/cat: 20-60 μg/kg q6-8 hr per os
·Probantheline: dog: 0.5-2 mg/kg q8-12 hr; cat: 7.5 mg q8-12
Left anterior fascicular block
hr per os
Clinical significance
Sympathomimetic drugs
It is often considered a relatively specific indicator of left ventricular
Clenbuterol: dog: 1-5 μg/kg q8-12 hr; cat 1 μg/kg q12-24 hr
myocardial disease inthe cat and can be seen with many heart diseases.
 Terbutaline: 1.25-5 mg per dog q8 hr; 1.25 mg per cat q8 hr
and electrolyte imbalance such as hyperkalaemia.
Tachyarrhythmias
Bundle branch block
Sinus tachycardia
Right bundle branch block
Clinical significance
Clinical significance
Sinus tachycardia is a non-specific rhythm disturbance. Although it
The right bundle branch (RBB) is long and slender, thus vulner-
is often seen in heart failure, caused by a compensatory sympathetic
able to damage. RBBB is not uncommon in normal healthy dogs
drive, it is often due to a physiological response such as stress, ex-
 but can be associated with congenital or acquired heart disease,
citement and fear. Thus, it is of paramount importance to evaluate
cardiac neoplasia and trauma. RBBB, in itself, does not cause any
the ^state' of the patient - which during an ECG recording may, of
significant haemodynamic problems, however, if damage to the left
course, cause a degree of stress and fear! Comparing the heart rate
bundle branch were also to occur it would lead to complete heart
obtained during physical examination, when the animal is relaxed,
block.
is therefore invaluable in assessing its significance. Sinus tachycardia
81
Guide
can also be as a result of a disease process such as pyrexia, pain,
VT, multiform VPCs and ventricular bigeminy are usually associated
anaemia, shock, dehydration, haemorrhage, septicaemia, toxaemia
with severe underlying heart disease or a systemic disorder. R-on-
or hyperthyroidism. Current medication, sedatives or anaesthetics
T is believed to lead potentially to the development of ventricular
ictory
should also be taken into consideration.
fibrillation and sudden death. Therefore itis considered an important
finding that would warrant mana gement of the associated ectopia.
Introdue
Treatment
Treatment
This should be aimed at the primary cause, usually negating the need
An
to use antiarrhythmic drugs. Note: in animals in congestive heart
Treatment of the primary underlying cause (e.g. congestive heart
failure,a sinus tachycardia is often a necessarycompensatory response
failure) will often produce a significant reduction in VPCs, thus in
IECGs-
in an attempt to maintain cardiac output. Thus antiarrhythmic drugs
 many cases institution of antiarrhythmic drugs should be postponed
are generally not used to slow the heart rate - treatment is directed
to see if this occurs.
Small Animal
towards the congestive failure following which the heart rate then
A ventricular arrhythmia is considered significant when it causes
slows as sympathetic drive reduces.
haemodynamic compromise and thus signs such as: pallor, exercise
 intolerance, systemic hypotension, weakness / recumbency, syncope.
Ventricular arrhythmias
True frequency of serious arrhythmias may only be detected by
24 hour Holter monitoring.
Clinical significance
·<200 VPCs per 24 hours is considered a low frequency.
 Infrequent VPCs do not generally compromise the cardiac output
· > 1000 VPCs per 24 hours is considered a high frequency.
and, therefore, often do not require treatment (treatment should
be directed towards the underlying cause). However, with a rapid
In Dobermanns, a sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) >30
VT there is a marked reduction in cardiac output and animals may
seconds is considered a predictor of sudden death.
present with exercise intolerance, lethargy or collapse.
Indications for antiarrhythmic drug treatment of ventricular
VPCs may:
arrhythmias
· occur due to primary heart disease such as cardiac neoplasia,
Frequent multimorphic VPCs
cardiomyopathy (particularly in Dobermanns and Boxers), myo-
VPCs with a very short coupling interval, i.e. R-on-T
carditis (e.g. traumatic myocarditis/contusion), endocarditis or
VPCs frequently in pairs and triplets
· be secondary to a systemic disorder (see also accelerated idioven-
Rapid sustained VT (> 200/min)
tricular rhythm) such as gastric dilation, pancreatitis, splenic
Frequent VPCs or VT in Boxers and Dobermanns (with
masses, electrolyte imbalance, uraemia, pyometra and low blood
cardiomyopathy)
VT with inherited ventricular arrhythmias of German Shep-
failure or respiratory diseases). Drugs such as digitalis, anaesthet-
herd dogs (less than 18 months of age).
82
ics, atropine and isoprenaline may also produce VPCs.
The aims of antiarrhythmic drug treatment are to reduce the risk
Following cardioversion of a ventricular arrhythmia with lido-
3
of sudden death and/or improve clinical signs. However some stud-
caine, the options are as follows.
ies have shown that antiarrhythmic drugs have the potential to cause
Treatment
sudden death (i.e. proarrhythmic), thus their use needs strong justi-
·Wait and see if the arrhythmia does return (in which case repeat
fication. In most circumstances institution of antiarrhythmics orally
cardioversion is required).
is satisfactory. IfVPCs are life threatening i/v lidocaine is the drug of
· Administer i/v lidocaine as a constant rate infusion.
choice (see boxed text below).
Usual starting dose is 50 μg/kg/min.
 arrhythmias
Lidocaine (lignocaine)
Note: steady state levels take 3 to 6 hours to reach and thus small
boluses of lidocaine may be required in the interim.
Drug of choice for the cardioversion of acute life-threatening
ventricular tachycardia.
· Medicate with an oral antiarrhythmic such as mexiletine (which
· Its effects are nullified in the presence of hypokalaemia.
seems a pragmatic approach).
·Following i/v administration the half life is approximately 60-
· If i/v lidocaine proves ineffective then alternative i/v options are
90 minutes but antiarrhythmic effects wane after 10 minutes.
esmolol and procainamide.
Dosage
· Dog: i/v dose at 2-3 mg/kg boluses, every three minutes, max.
Oral medications
of 9 mg/kg in 20 minutes
Note: most antiarrhythmic drugs have a negative inotropic ef-
·Cat: Slow i/v at 0.25- 0.75 mg/kg, may give a repeat i/v injection
fect and should be used with caution in dogs with myocardial
after 20 minutes.
failure.
Response to treatment can be assessed from Holter monitoring pre
Toxicity
Note: cats are very prone to toxicity (seizures and respiratory
considered to be a reduction in VPCs by 75% when the VPCs are
arrest).
frequent.
· Signs of toxicity are neurological (twitching, nystagmus)
Mexiletine is one of the most common antiarrhythmics used in
seizures), these are usually self limiting and gastrointestinal
dogs. It is recommended for VT in the inherited ventricular arrhyth-
(nausea, vomiting, salivation).
mia of German Shepherd dogs ( +/ - atenolol or sotalol). It has similar
·Airway obstruction and/or respiratory arrest in cats following
properties to lidocaine, thus if lidocaine cardioverts an arrhythmia,
seizures.
mexiletine is often effective.
However there are other drug options - see text box below. Beta
 blockers are the drugs most commonly used to control ventricular
few minutes to effect (max. 0.3 mg/kg) + elevate head.
arrhythmias in cats.
83
Guide
Oral ventricular antiarrhythmic drugs
Treatment is therefore directed towards:
Mexiletine - dog: 5-8 mg/kg q8 hr per os
Introductory
 the shock and maintenance of normal hydration status;
Propranolol - dog: 0.2-2.0 mg/kg q8 hr; cat: 2.5 mg q8-12 hr
correction of acid-base and electrolyte imbalances;
Atenolol - dog: 0.5 mg/kg q12 hr; cat: 2 mg/kg q12-24 hr
monitoring Na and K regularly in such cases is very useful as
Sotalol - dog: 0.5-2.0 mg/kg q12 hr (often used in Boxers with
hypokalaemia is a common problem (although measurement
VT)
of serum K may not reflect total body K).
AnI
Amiodarone (dogs)
· reported to have significant side effects, so tends to be used
IECGs-
as a last resort
Accelerated idioventricularrhythm
· need to monitor liver and thyroid function regularly
Small Animal
· loading dose: 10 mg/kg q12 hr for 1 week
Clinical significance
■ maintenance dose: 5-10 mg/kg q24 hr
This is most commonly not associated with primary heart disease,
Magnesium amino chelate (200 mg tablets) at 10 mg/kg daily
but non-cardiac medical reasons, such as: splenic disease / neopla-
with food
sia, gastric dilation or volvulus, pancreatitis, prostatitis, trauma or
 neurological disease. Treatment is directed towards to non-cardiac
Ventricular arrhythmias associated with GDV
disease, and rarely if ever, are antiarrhythmics used to cardiovert the
idioventricular rhythm.
Approximately 40 to 50% of dogs with gastric dilation-volvulus
(GDV) develop ventricular arrhythmias, 12 to 72 hours after the
onset of GDV.
Supraventricular arrhythmias
It is caused by:
Clinical significance
Myocardial ischaemia (decreased coronary perfusion)
Infrequent SVPCs do not generally compromise the cardiac out-
Reperfusion injury
Hypokalaemia ( can also make the arrhythmias resistant to anti
be directed towards the underlying cause). However, with a rapid
arrhythmic drugs)
SVT there is a significant reduction in cardiac output and animals
Acidosis
may present with exercise intolerance, lethargy, episodic weakness or
Hypoxia
recumbency.
Myocardial depressant factors
SVPCs can be due to:
 atrial disease, e.g. dilation/stretch secondary to AV valve regurgi-
84
tation (associated with congenital and acquired AV valve disease,
cardiomyopathy, congenital cardiac shunts), right atrial haeman-
In a dog with sustained SVT or collapse, i/v cardioversion is necessary
3
giosarcoma or
-- see boxed text below.
· be secondary to some systemic illness including hyperthyroidism
Treatment :
in cats, or a side effect of some drugs, e.g. digitalis toxicity or
'stimulant'-type drugs.
 Intravenous supraventricular antiarrhythmic drugs
Clinical signs can be caused by very frequent SVPCs or sustained SVT,
Verapamil - calcium channel antagonist (often the conven-
tional first drug of choice)
f arrhythmias
Signs are more severe when there is underlying organic heart disease.
 Dose in dog: 0.05 mg/kg i/v every five minutes to effect (max
When an SVT is maintained at a high rate (>250/min) for days or
0.15 mg/kg in 10-15 minutes)
Esmolol - short acting beta blocker with a half life of 9 minutes
congestive heart failure (this mimics dilated cardiomyopathy).
· Dose in dog: 0.25-0.5 mg/kg i/v over 1 minute
Treatment
 Lidocaine - may have effects on some macroreentrant SVTs and
Treatment should be directed to any underlying disease first, partic
worth trying if other drugs fail (this is often the author's first
ularly when there is organic heart disease.
drug of choice for a re-entrant SVT and, if effective, mexiletine
The aims of treatment are:
then administered orally).
· SVT - cardiovert to a normal sinus rhythm and maintain rate
· 2-3mg/kg, repeated every 3 minutes to response, up to a max
control;
of 9 mg/kg
· SVPCs - reduce frequency, if very frequent and necessary.
 Procainamide - 2 mg/kg i/v, repeated to response, up to a max
Vagal manoeuvres such as carotid sinus massage ( up and down mov-
of 15 mg/kg in 20 minutes
ing pressure applied behind the angle of the jaw for 10 seconds):
·
 may terminate an SVT;
·  may slow an SVT and help identify the type of arrhythmia;
Oral supraventricular antiarrhythmic drugs
·
 may be ineffectual when animals have a high sympathetic tone,
Calcium antagonist
such as when they are nervous or in heart failure;
· Diltiazem - dog and cat: 1-3 mg/kg q8 hr
may work better after administration of beta blockers or calcium
channel antagonists.
·Verapamil - dog: 1-3 mg/kg q8 hr
Beta blockers
A precordial thump to the leff apex beat may:
· Atenolol - dog: 0.25-2 mg/kg q12 hr
 produce a VPC and thus a break in the SVT, although it may some-
· Propranolol - dog: 0.2-2 mg/kg q8 hr
times be brief, it can help to determine the underlying rhythm.
85
Guide
will depend on the extent of existing pathology. The causes are nu-
Note: when stopping beta blockers, they need to be weaned off
merous, but not dissimilar to those of VPCs and VT.
slowly.
Introductory
Digoxin (drug of choice if there is ventricular myocardial fail-
ure)
Atrial fibrillation
· Onset of action is too slow
Clinical significance
· Dose: see under Atrial fibrillation
Do uan o san e se sno ansn uoy 
-AnI
Sotalol
 pathology, i.e. dilation of one or both atria. Dilation and stretching
· Dose in dog: 0.5-2 mg/kg q12 hr
 of one or both atria is most commonly seen in medium- to large-
IECGs-
Amiodarone (dog)
breed dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy. However, it can occur in
· Reported to have significant side effects, so tends to be used
any breed of dog associated with atrial stretch secondary to AV valve
Small Animal 
as a last resort
incompetence, congenital cardiac shunts, heart base tumours and
· Need to monitor liver and thyroid function regularly
sometimes following rapid drainage of a pericardial effusion. It is
· Loading dose: 10 mg/kg q12 hr for 7 days
uncommon in the cat, but is sometimes seen when there is severe left
■Maintenance dose: 5-10 mg/kg q24 hr
fibrillation does not have major haemodynamic effects. The loss of
the atrial contraction contribution to cardiac output is approximately
10-20%, which is compensated for primarily by an increase in rate.
Ventricular pre-excitation
Atrial fibrillation is sometimes seen in giant-breed dogs with no
Clinical significance
gross cardiac pathology - referred to as lone' AF. Lone AF usually
has a fairly normal ventricular rate (< 120 - 130/min), as there is no
Ventricular pre-excitation itself is not haemodynamically significant,
increase in sympathetic drive since the dogs are not in heart failure.
however WPW syndrome may cause weakness or syncope, as the
However, many giant-breed dogs with lone AF progress to dilated
very rapid tachycardia is associated with marked reduction in cardiac
cardiomyopathy and ultimately heart failure. Beta blockers may be
 m ist n  se pd q a ain i
useful to minimise tachycardia during periods of high sympathetic
without organic heart disease.
tones such as exercise or stress and may have long-term benefits
Fibrillation and flutter
( upregulation of beta receptors) in occult dilated cardiomyopathy.
Ventricular fibrillation (VF)
Ireatment
Clinical significance
Cardioversion ofatrial fibrillation to sinus rhythm is generally not at-
Death usually ensues unless rapid electrical defibrillation with car-
 tempted because there is usually cardiac pathology. The drug ofchoice
86
diopulmonary resuscitation is initiated. However, the success of this
 for rate control of AF is usually digoxin, because of its mild positive
Table 13.1. Digoxin starting dose in dogs.
3
Causes of a persistently high heart rate in dogs with atrial
Body weight
Tablet dose
fibrillation receiving digoxin
Tablet size
Treatment
1-5 kg
62.5 μg (PG)
q12 hr
 Elevation of the heart rate in-clinic due to nervousness at the
6-13 kg
62.5 μg (PG)
1 q12 hr
time of examination- mayrequire 24 hour Holter to determine
14-23 kg
125μg
1 q12 hr
average heart rate at home
24-36 kg
125 μg
1q12 hr
Inadequate control ofthe congestive failure signs - sympathetic
>37kg
250μg
1 q12 hr
drive is still high
f arrhythmias
Dehydration / Hypotension due to over diuresis / vasodilation
Note: Dobermann dose is 125 μg tablet l q12 hr.
 Inadequate serum therapeutic levels of digoxin
 Concurrent medical disease, e.g. renal failure
inotropic properties. If there is good myocardial function, then cal-
Advanced myocardial failure and end stage heart disease
cium antagonists or beta blockers are alternative options - however
Heart rate poorly responsive to digoxin (check with 24 hour
these should be used with caution in dogs with myocardial failure.
Holter) - may require additional antiarrhythmic drugs
Use of digoxin for rate control of AF
It is primarily used in dogs; indications for use in cats are rare.
Bioaccumulation may occur with: an azotaemia, low serum albu-
·Dose in dog = 0.22 mg/m? every 12 hours, however Table 13.1
min, cachexia. Signs of overdosage are: depression, anorexia, vom-
provides a simple guideline for a starting dose
iting/diarrhoea, arrhythmias, in which case the drug should be
Dose in cat: <4 kg - 0.0625 mg tablet 1/2 q48 hr and >4 kg
stopped and re-introduced at a lower dose when signs have com-
0.0625 mg tablet 1/2 q24 hr
pletely resolved.
Steady state levels are achieved in 5-7 days. Serum digoxin levels
should be measured (approximately 6 hours post pill) to confirm the
Atrial flutter
dose is correct, as it varies between individual patients. Therapeutic
Clinical significance
dose range is 0.8-2.5 ng/ml; 1-2 ng/ml is a good target. Therapeutic
aims are to reduce the heart rate (at rest and non-stressed) to less
The consequence is the effects of a sustained SVT for which rate
than 150-160/min in dogs and less than 240/min in cats. Assessment
control is required. Cardioversion of atrial flutter can be difficult;
of the heart rate in-clinic may result in falsely high heart rates, so
i/v procainamide is considered a reasonable option in attempting to
clinical judgement needs to be made or Holter monitoring consid-
convert the atrial flutter. Atrial flutter can be associated with atrial
ered. Causes of a persistent high heart rate are listed in the boxed text
disease, such as dilation, or may be a primary reentrant tachyarrhyth-
below.
mia. Treatment with flecainide or amiodarone can be tried.
87
Guide
14. Pacemakers
ictory
Introdue
Pacemakers have become recognised as an effective and worth-
Note: bradyarrhythmia can occasionally be an early sign ofcardiomy-
An
while treatment of many bradyarrhythmias in symptomatic ani-
 opathy and the long-term prognosis is poor due to the underlying
mals. Whilst the technique of implantation appears relatively simple,
heart disease.
S5
studies have shown a significantly reduced complication rate when
EC
performed by experienced personnel, primarily in specialist centres.
Disadvantages
IAnimal
However it is still important for practitioners to be aware of the in-
The disadvantages are:
dications and the pros and cons when discussing the possibility of a
 pacemaker with their client.
Small,
· cost;
Indications
-xa dn-moy nemau ry lop aui q oi spau no a ·
tions and programming checks;
Symptomatic bradyarrhythmias such as:
· there are potential risks (see below).
· complete AV block;
Complications
· 2nd degree Mobitz type II, persistent or intermittent;
· 2nd degree Mobitz type I, with symptoms;
Complications are significantly less with cardiologists experienced in
· profound sinus bradycardia, with symptoms;
implantation ( >20 implants).
· sinus arrest;
· Major complications are:
·‘tachy-brady’ sick sinus syndrome, when anti-tachyarrhythmia
-lead dislodgement;
drugs produce symptoms;
-pacemaker failure, e.g. premature battery death;
· AF or flutter with a slow ventricular response (ie. AV block) and
-anaesthetic related death - reduced by preplacement of a tempo-
symptoms (rare in dogs and cats);
rary pacing lead, prior to induction of anaesthesia;
· persistent atrial standstill.
-infection of pulse generator/pouch;
Contraindications
-lead fracture;
· Active infection
-venous thrombosis and chylothorax in cats.
· Dilated cardiomyopathy
· Minor complications are:
88
· Cardiac neoplasia
-seroma formation;
-muscle twitch;
· The lead position is guided by fluoroscopic image intensification.
-induced arrhythmias;
-pacemaker movement (twiddler's syndrome).
mum amount of current required to stimulate the ventricle hence
 Pacemakers
indicating good electrode to endocardial contact.
Prior diagnostics
· Post-surgical protective bandages - these prevent the dog scratching
out sutures and introducing potentially lethal infection.
· Diagnostic ECG confirming cause of symptoms
● Comprehensive blood profle: haematology and biochemistry with
electrolytes and thyroid screen
Types of permanent pacemakers
· Chest radiographs and echocardiography to screen for organic
heart disease (e.g. neoplasia or DCM)
Pacemaker modes and identification
-X-rays: check for congestive failure (pulmonary oedema), which
These have been classified by a universal lettering code. There are
may require treatment prior to anaesthesia
fourth and fifth letters (programmability and anti-tachyarrhythmic
 n a   nsid  a no
functions) that are not currently relevant to veterinary use.
lead placement is via left jugular)
Table 14.1. Universal lettering code for pacemakers.
Equipment
First letter
Second letter
Third letter
· Pacemaker
-This contains electronic circuitry with lithium battery power
Chamber paced
 Chamber sensed
 Pacing mode
source; last 5-10 years. The unit is hermetically sealed in titanium
V= ventricle
V
I = inhibited
housing-
A = atrium
A
T'= triggered
· Leads: unipolar or bipolar leads
D= dual
D
 D = atrial triggered and
-Unipolar lead: the cathode (negative) is at the distal tip and the
ventricular inhibited
O=none
0
anode (positive) is the pacemaker.
-Bipolar lead: the anode is 1 cm proximal to the cathode, in the form
of a ring electrode. It is less sensitive to myopotential inhibition,
and less prone to cause muscle twitch.
Requiring oneventricularlead
· Tined (passive) and screw-in (active) leads are available; there ap-
· VVI, paces and senses only in ventricles; inhibited by intrinsic ven-
pears to be few advantages of one over the other.
tricular beats (demand pacemaker). This is the most commonly
· Pacemaker system programmer/analyser - these are different for
used type in animals.
every manufacturer; thus the assistance of a local hospital ECG
· VVIR - additionallyrate responsive (increased inrate) on detection
technician is essential.
of movement.
89
Guide
· VVI and VVIR are the common modes used in animals, as it re-
the pacing lead with fluoroscopic guidance, and placing the pulse
quires only one lead.
 generator subcutaneously in the dorsal neck. The jugular vein is
· VDR - one lead, paces and senses the ventricle, but additionally
normally occluded.
ictory
there are sensors at atrial level, thus one can track P waves (in AV
block) and pace ventricles following each P wave, thus providing
tricular apex, and thus surgical intervention (e.g. thoracotomy or
Introdue
atrioventricular synchrony and sinus node rate control. However
laparotomy), but does not require fluoroscopy.
 available human leads are only suitable for very large breed dogs.
An
Pacemaker follow-up
ECGs
Requiring dual chamberpacing
· 10-14 days, sutures out, check pacemaker sites for infection/seroma
· DDD = paces in either atrium or ventricle or both; senses in both;
 and correct function.
IAnimal
response can be inhibition of either chamber, or stimulation of
● 3-4 months following implantation, programming check and op-
atrium (demand pacemaker).
timise settings to minimise battery use.
· Thereafter every 12 months, programming check to ensure func
Small,
Rate responsive pacemakers
 tion and detect evidence of reducing batterylife by checking magnet
· These are designed to increase in rate with the activity ofthe animal.
rate.
Thus they are suitable for working dogs. The side effects are an
undesirable increase in rate with vehicle movement.
Hazards
· Other sensors under investigation include: oxygen saturation, pH,
central body temperature, and respiratory rate (not suitable for
·Pacemakers occasionally sense extrinsic electromagnetic interfer-
dogs, due to the phenomenon of panting'!).
ence (EMI), but with modern units this is minimised by pace-
maker designs and shielding. However surgical cautery and MRI are
problems.
Techniques of implantation
· Disposal of a carcass: before this can be done, the pulse generator
● The transvenous (jugular) route is curently the preferred option.
must be removed as cremation of the lithium battery results in
This involves the exposure of an external jugular vein, insertion of
explosion.
90
PART 5
Recording and interpreting ECGs
91
15 · Approach to interpretation of the ECG recording
Approach 
to
It is important to develop, and use, a routine when reading ECGs.
the number of complexes and multiply by 10. If the P wave rate and
 interpretation 
Always read an ECG from its beginning, i.e. from left to right. When
QRS-T complex rates differ, then record these separately.
the ECG is difficult to read, start from the easiest part of the tracing
that is recognisable, then continue reading (left to right) from that
A method for the mathematician
point.
If there is not a 6-second strip or there is a short paroxysmal tachy-
 It is important to not over-read or be too dependent on ECG
cardia, then the heart rate can be calculated from the P-P or R-R
findings. Since the ECG records onlythe electrical activity ofthe heart,
of the
 interval as follows. At a paper speed of 25 mm/sec there is 1500 mm
it should be remembered that this limits the information that can be
per minute. Measure the distance, with a ruler, between two com-
gained from it. It is often poorly related to the mechanical function
plexes (or count the number of small 1-mm boxes).
ECG
of the heart and does not provide information about aetiology or
Heart rate (in beats per minute):
severity of organic heart disease. A normal ECG does not necessarily
recording
infer that the heart is normal and, likewise, an abnormal ECG is
1500
HR(at 25 mm/sec) = :
R - Rinterval (mm)
not necessarily indicative ofheart disease. Additionally, if the ECG is
abnormal, it is important to determine what the clinical significance
At a paper speed of 50 mm/sec there is 3000 mm per minute, thus:
is, and if treatment is indicated or not.
3000
There are essentially four steps in ECG interpretation: rate, rhythm,
HR (at 50 mm/sec) =
R - Rinterval (mm)
complex measurement and mean electrical axis (see page 61).
(2) Determine the rhythm
Check if the complexes are complete, i.e. that there is a P wave for
(1) To calculate the heart rate (given as beats
every QRS-T complex, and a QRS-T complex for every P wave.
per minute)
This should be fairly easy, as you have already examined the animal
identifying parts of the ECG complex
and determined the heart rate on auscultation. (?)
In some instances it can be difficult to identify P waves, or it can
The simplest method of calculating the rate from an ECG is to
 be difficult to determine which are the P waves and which are the T
93
Guide
Tips
· It is often useful to mark the position of each P wave and QRS-T complex This can be done by placing a piece of paper below the ECG
AnIntroductory
tracing and placing a mark for each P and QRS (Fig. 15.1). This can help to establish if there is a pattern, or if there are hidden complexes,
and if a complex has occurred before or after it was due (or expected to occur).
· Since the heart must always repolarise (to be depolarised again) there must always be a T wave following every QRS complex.
· Using callipers, note the P-R interval and Q-T interval, for a run of beats, this will often reveal which deflection must be which - as the
P-R and Q-T intervals will generally remain fairly constant. This method is most usefully performed on a stretch of ECG in which there
is a variation in rate.
ECGS
Animal
1 mm = 0.02 sec
S-T segment
Small.
1 mm=
0.1 mV
Pwaves
QRS complexes
R wave
amplitude
Figure 15.1 ECG demonstrating how to mark out P waves and QRS complexes to help
identify complexes. Note that the dotted lines represent hidden P waves - note how
the frst one changes the shape of the ST segment compared with the others.
P wave
amplitude
(3) Measure the complex amplitudes and intervals
s o ie ds  l  e uo pd Ans si s
(100 mm/sec on computer print-out units) and on an unfiltered
P wave duration
Q-T interval
Baseline
section. At 50 mm/sec, 1 mm box = 0.02 seconds. Note the
P-R interval QRS duration
calibration.
Figure 15.2 A schematic P-QRS-T complex (lead II) from a normal dog, illustrating
Record the following (Fig. 15.2):
94
the various amplitudes, durations and intervals (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/m V).
· P wave amplitude and duration
·Note T wave morphology
· R wave amplitude and QRS duration
·Note S-T segment elevation or depression
· P-R interval - from start of P to start of QRS (strictly therefore a
Approach :
Use the table of normal values (Table 7.1, page 49) to check if the
P-Q interval)
measurements are within normal values or not.
· Q-T interval - from start of QRS to end of T wave
to
 interpretation of the ECG recording
95
Guide
16· Artifacts
ictory
Introdu
Artifacts are abnormal deflections reproduced on an ECG recording
waves) within the room in which the recording is being made. They
An
that are not associated with the electrical activity of the heart. They
 can be transmitted by the person restraining the animal who acts as
have the potential to either mask the ECG or mimic ECG activity:
an aerial or through the power-line of the ECG machine. The fine
producing an artifact- free tracing is of paramount importance.
deflections usually occur at a rate of 50 per second (Hz) (60 per
second in America).
Anima
Electricalinterference
To correct this problem:
Electrical interference produces fine, rapid and regular movements
6·Ensure the clip-to-skin connections are good and are insulated
Small,
on the baseline of the ECG recording (Fig. 16.1). They are often
(isolated), poor connections will permit electrical interference to
associated with interference due to electrical cables (electromagnetic
manifest.
Filter on
Figure l6.1 (a) ECG showing 50-cycle alternating current interference artifact (which masks the P waves in this example) that has then been removed by filtering (arrow)
96
(25 mm/sec and 5 mm/mV).
0 un Aq n uus no bqa  a A pod aq
16.
record the ECG in a standing animal (Fig. 16.2). Purring in a cat
(Fig. 16.3) will also result in baseline ^trembling"!
 Artifacts
To correct this problem:
· Ensure the limbs are relaxed and supported.
Figure 16.1 (b) ECG showing 50-cycle AC interference throughout the tracing (29
· Find a position in which the animal will relax best, preferably not
standing.
mm/sec and 10 mm/m V)
· Try holding the limbs to minimise the tremor.
● Ensure the animal is insulated from the surface by placing a rug
· To stop a cat purring: dab a little spirit on the cat's nose using cotton
under it.
wool.
· Ensure the ECG machine is earthed (to the building), or try not to
run on the mains supply but on battery.
Movement artifact
·Tryinsulating the handler from the dog by having them wear gloves.
This is a more exaggerated form of tremor artifact, but in this case
the deflections are not fine but variable and large. The stylus moves
Muscle tremor artifact
up and down the paper (Fig. 16.4a). It can be associated with respira-
This can look a little similar to electrical interference, but the fine
tory movement (Fig. 16.4b) or if the animal is moving or struggling
deflections in this instance are not regular but fairly random. It can
(Figs. 16.4c, d, e and 16.5).
y ay usn uaym sapnde xao u uonar au an (m) no pay uay s yym (il d gii g ose aas oe roan anu umus a ti an
(50 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
97
-An Introductory Guide
Small Animal ECGs
Figure 16.3 ECG from a cat with intermittent purring? artifact (brackets) (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
NBOHOXNOHIN
Figure 16.4 (a) ECG showing marked movement of
 movement or an unstable electrode (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/m V).
98
Figure 16.4 (b) ECG showing movement artifact synchronised with panting in a dog, which then stops panting towards the end of the recording (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
16.
 Artifacts
25nm/S8.85-35HzF581-1Z.2425nm/s0.e5-35HzF58AT12.84
25mn=日.85-35HzF5日月一2.0
Figure 16.4 (c) ECG from a cat showing intermittent limb movement that mimics VPCs in leads 1 and 2, but, note, not lead 3 (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Figure 16.4 (d) ECG from a dog with leg movement and muscle tremor that mimics atrial flutter/fibrillation and makes identification of P waves very diffcult (25 mm/sec and
10 mm/mV)
Figure 16.4 (e) ECG from a dog, in which the P-like movement artifacts create an effect that mimics heart block (50 mm/sec and 10 mm/m V).
99
/Guide
Small Animal ECGs-An Introductory(
Fgure 16.5 ECG from a three-channel recording in a cat (with left anterior fascicular block - see Chapter 10). Movement (bracketed) occurred in leads II and IIl, which can be
deduced to be movement of the left hind leg or its electrode - this is the connection that is common to these two leads (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
To correct this problem:
in leads I and II, then the connection that is common to these leads
is the right fore. Therefore, this connection needs to be checked and
· Correction of this is similar to tremor artifact.
the connection improved or the leg held still. If interference is seen
· Try to get the animal to relax and remain still.
in leads I and Ill, then the left fore needs to be checked. And if
· Ensure the ECG cables are not moving with movement of the an-
interference is seen in leads II and III (Fig. 16.5), then the left hind
imal, e.g. respiratory movement (see Chapter 17), or because the
 needs to be checked.
clips are not stable and secure.
Which leg moved?
Incorrectly placed electrodes
With the aid of Figs 8.1(a-c) one can determine which leg is moving
 This may result in inverted complexes or a bizarre mean electrical
100
or causing connection problems. For example, if interference is seen axis (Fig. 16.6).
16·Artifacts
2mm
Figure l6.6 ECG from a Border Collie in which lead 1 is inverted. Note the negative P waves (as well as the negative QRS complexes). This was because the red and yellov
forelimb electrodes where placed back to front. This misplacement of the clip also swaps leads 2 and 3 in effect
Tip
P waves are nearly always positive in leads I, II and II1. Double check the position of the ECG cables, use the colour code chart in Table 8.1
(page 59) if necessary.
101
Guide
17 . Recording an ECG
ictory
Introdue
The connectors (electrodes)
There are small metal plate electrodes - paediatric limb electrodes
An
(Fig. 17.2a), that can be used instead of crocodile clips, but they need
To connect the ECG cable to the animal's skin requires a connector
 to be positioned on the limb by means of tape (Fig. 17.2b), bandage
ECGs
- this is called an electrode. Since animals have a coat of hair, the
or Velcro tie.
commonly used human sticky adhesive electrodes (Fig. 17.1) are not
 The most commonly used electrode to connect the ECG cable to
Animal
convenient for everyday regular use. This is because a patch of hair
the animal's skin is a crocodile clip (Fig. 17.3). While these provide an
would have to be shaved, the adhesive electrode applied and it still
excellent electrical connection, their bite can be painful to less stoical
usually does not stick to animal skin! Therefore, it needs to be held
Small,
animals. To minimise the pain of crocodile clips the teeth can be filed
in place by wrapping a bandage around the limb and electrode.
down a little and the clips bent outwards (until they are atraumatic
but still stay in place). Or a small conductive plate can be soldered
into the tip of the teeth.
Making the connection
This is the single most important part of ECG recording to obtain
commonly used form of electrodes, the following discussion will be
based on these. But ifyou have decided to use an alternative electrode,
then adapt the description accordingly.
Using spirit
It is often sufficient with crocodile clips to pick up a fold of skin
between finger and thumb (rolling the skin to feel its edge through a
hairy coat) and with the other hand open the crocodile clip maximally,
part the hair and attach the clip to the skin (Fig. 17.4). To obtain good
102
Figure 17.l A selection of "human' adhesive electrodes.
 conduction between skin and crocodile clip requires the addition of
(a)
17.
Recording an ECG
Figure 17.2 (a) 'Human' paediatric limb electrodes; (b) how an electrode can be attached with tape to the leg of an animal (the hair usually needs to be clipped to ensure good
contact and gel used between the electrode and skin).
a conducting medium - spirit is often adequate. Spray with a little
cheap alternatives) on to the skin (Fig. 17.5) and then attach the
crocodile clip as above; or (2) attach the crocodile clips then rub
the hair to the skin.
the gel on the clip and around it onto the skin (Fig. 17.6). This ^way
 However, spirit evaporates after 5-10 min, so this method would
round' is usually easier, as your fingers are not too slippery to open
not suffice if the ECG recording takes longer than this (such as dur-
the crocodile clips thereafter!
ing anaesthetic monitoring). Additionally, if spirit does not produce
a good-quality, artifact-free recording, then an alternative method
Where to place the electrodes
needs to be considered.
In each animal you need to pinch the skin at various sites on the
limbs, preferably with little hair, to find the best site.
Using gel
Forelegs
Shave the site where the crocodile clip is to be placed. Either: (1)
In the author's experience, the flexor angle of the elbow is a useful
rub a little gel (ECG gel is ideal, but ultrasound gel or K-Y jelly are
site (Fig. 17.7).
103
Guide
Adhesive electrodes can also be placed on the central pad (of the
paw) in small animals (Fig. 17.10) - this provides a satisfactory site
of contact, although instability of the electrode can result in some
AnIntroductory
movement artifact. This can be a useful site in other domestic small
and exotic animals seen by the veterinary practitioner.
Isolating the electrodes
Once all the electrodes have been attached it is essential to ensure
ECGs
that each electrode, the skin to which it is attached and the con-
ducting medium (e.g. the spirit or gel), are not touching any other
IAnimall
part of the animal, the handler or the table. This has the poten-
tial to cause electrical shorting and introduce artifacts into the ECG
Figure 17.3 Crocodile clips commonly used in animals. The middle one has had its
recording.
Small,
teeth fled down and the lower one also bent outwards- these are methods of softening
the bite on this type of electrode.
How to position the ECG cables
An alternative site is caudal and just dorsal to the elbow. However,
In addition to the above, it is prudent not to place the crocodile clips
since this is close to the chest, respiratory movement can result in 
such that the ECG cable runs over the animal, which can lead to
movement of the cable and clip, thus the ECG recording may be
 respiratory movement artifact (as mentioned above) or to then twist
spoiled by movement artifact. Another site is halfway between the
the cable and ultimately the clip and skin - even stoical animals may
elbow and carpus, on the palmar aspect of the leg.
not tolerate this. When applying the crocodile clip have the ECG cable
positioned away from the animal (Fig. 17.11) and resting on the table
Hind legs
(or ground).
In the author's experience, the flexor angle of the hock (or sometimes
just above this) is a useful site (Fig. 17.8). Alternative sites are either
above or below the knee, on the dorsal aspect of the limb.
Positioning the animal
To minimise the electrical activity of skeletal muscles the animal
When using adhesive electrodes
must be relaxed and resting. If the animal trembles, shakes, pants or
Adhesive electrodes usually need to be held in place by a bandage,
 purrs, then all this activity will be manifest on the ECG, resulting
therefore shave sites on the forelegs above the carpus and on the hind
      r     
104  legs above or below the hock (Fig. 17.9).
waves, especially in cats, or mimic ECG activity. Thus a good-quality
17·Recording an ECG
C）
Figure 17.4 Placing a crocodile clip to the skin of a dog (flexor angle of hock in this instance). Pinch a good piece of skin (a), position the crocodile clip with its jaws fully open
and over the skin as far as possible (b), so that the clips maintains a good bite of skin (c) and therefore good clip-skin contact.
105
Small Animal ECGs- An Introductory Guide
Figure 17.5 Gel can be applied to the skin before placement of the crocodile clip.
Figure 17.7 A useful site of attachment for the crocodile clips on the forelimbs is the
skin at the flexor angle of the elbow.
ECG will have minimal movement and there should be a nice steady
baseline in between each ECG complex.
 If the animal would be put at risk (e.g. if it was in respiratory
distress) by making it adopt a position (as follows) that it would not
Figure 17.6 Alternatively gel can be applied after the crocodile has been attached, over
tolerate, then an ECG should be recorded in whatever position is
106
the clip and adjacent skin.
achievable.
17 · Recording an ECG
Figure 17.8 A useful site of attachment for the crocodile clips on the hind legs is the
skin at the flexor angle of the hock.
Figure 17.9 Placing an adhesive electrode on a dog's leg with the aid of tape to hold it
in place.
Dogs
good-quality tracing with minimal baseline movement artifact can
be obtained.
many dogs a recumbent position will reduce skeletal muscle electrical
activity.Andthe normal values for the dog ECG have been determined
based on this position. If measurement of amplitudes are not critical,
Cats
such as when examining primarily an arrhythmia, then recording an
The normal values for cats have not been determined in a
ECG while the dog lies, sits or even stands is acceptable, provided a
lateral recumbent position, thus recumbent positioning is less
107
Small Animal ECGs- An Introductory Guide
Figure 17.1l A dog having an ECG recording using crocodile clips
Figure 17.10 An adhesive electrode on the central pad of a foot.
important. Many cats will often sit in a hunched position quite
still (Fig. 17.13) - but each individual cat is different and the vet-
erinary surgeon must determine how each cat prefers to keep still.
 In fractious cats (if the electrodes can be placedl) putting the cat
back in a basket together with the electrodes attached and ECG ca-
Figure 17.12 A dog having an ECG recording using paediatric limb electrodes
108
bles until it settles is a useful method. When, or if, the cat settles,
the ECG can be recorded while the cat sits in the basket. How-
17
ever, this method should, of course, be aborted if the cat starts to
·
bite the ECG cables. Often cats do resent the crocodile clips, in
Recording
which case, shaving a patch of hair and bandaging in place adhe-
sive electrodes or metal plates, although more time consuming, is
easier!
 an ECG
Chemical restraint
All sedative and tranquilliser drugs have a variable effect on the heart
and/or autonomic tone. Drugs can therefore change the rate and
rhythm of the heart directly or through effects on the autonomic tone.
So, if you are performing an ECG to determine what the arrhythmia
is that you heard, then there is a possibility that this will change if
a chemical restraint is used. Ideally, therefore, any form of chemical
restraint should be avoided prior to recording an ECG. If chemical
restraint cannot be avoided then, based on physical examination,
determine the rate and rhythm before and after using the drugs, and
any differences should be taken into account when interpreting the
ECG recording.
Setting up and preparing the ECG machine
This will vary a little between different ECG machines and adjust-
ments to the following guidelines (which are based on a standard
ECG machine) should be allowed.
Paper speed
Figure 17.13 A cat having an ECG recording using paediatric limb electrodes.
Select the paper speed. Options are usually 25 or 50 mm/sec
(Fig. 17.14), and sometimes 100 mm/sec. The paper speed selection
is partly dependent on the animal's heart rate. As a guide: for
  s  ie as a is so  s u r
109
Guide
AnIntroductory
ECGs
Small Animal
Figure 17.14 ECG showing the effect of paper speed.
there is a fast heart rate (and routinely for cats) set the paper
the filter will reduce the amplitude of the complexes by a variable,
speed at 50 mm/sec. In ECG machines with a computer-type
print-out that produces a steppiness in the lines (ie. pixel ef-
and there is baseline artifact that cannot seem to be avoided, then
fect), measurement of ECG complex durations is best achieved at
filtering can reduce the baseline artifact and make reading of the
100 mm/sec.
ECG tracing easier (Figs 17.16 and 16.2, page 97).
Calibration
This is usually set at 1 cm/mV. However, if the complexes are very
Positioning the stylus
small this can be increased to 2 cm/mV and if the complexes are
During the recording the stylus should be positioned (if this is
very large it can be reduced to 0.5 cm/mV. The calibration should
manually operated on the ECG machine) so that the whole of
d  a  a aq ad     
the ECG complex is within the graph lines' of the ECG paper.
and pressing the 1 mV marker button (Fig. 17.15) - found on most
 o uu i sx s ad sd  a 
standard ECG recorders.
sn (iaded no snis al jo s au apino io) raded yden,
Filtersetting
is referred to as clipping (Fig. 17.17). Remember then to move
the stylus, up or down, so that the whole of the ECG tracing is
Ideally, if good connections have been made, this can usually be left 
within the graph paper (and not extending into the white mar-
off, i.e. no flter. Additionally amplitude measurement should always
 gins) or alternatively reduce the calibration - whichever is more
110
 be performed in an unfiltered tracing, as the dampening effect of :
appropriate.
 Recording an ECG
Figure 17.15 ECG showing three 1-mV calibration marks at different sensitivity settings: 0.5, 1 and 2 cm/mV.
Recording an ECG-a suggested routine
tated an occasional abnormal beat, then the ECG rhythm strip will
need to be run until that abnormal beat is repeated If lead II does not
Ten seconds ofall six limb leads
produce a good-quality tracing with satisfactorily large complexes,
Run the ECG on each ofthe six bipolar leads, I, II, IHI, aVR, aVL and
then run a rhythm strip on a lead that does. Or if you are searching
aVF, each for approximately 10 seconds. In order to ensure that each
for P waves (which can often be small and hard to see) then run the
lead is well centred within the graph lines' of the ECG paper, briefly
limb lead in which these are best shown.
pause the ECG paper (with the stylus still moving) when switching
the ECG machine from one lead to the next, until the stylus can be
re-positioned as described above.
Arepresentativerhythmstrip!
If you auscultated what you thought was an arrhythmia, but it is not
revealed on the ECG rhythm strip, then simultaneously auscultate
Arhythmstrip
the animal while continuing to run the ECG recording. It might be
Switch back to lead II and record a long rhythm strip, 30-60 seconds,
that the abnormality is only intermittently present, in which case you
depending on each individual case requirement. If you have auscul-
may have to continue to auscultate the animal until the arrhythmia is
111
-AnIntroductoryGuide
Small Animal ECGs
Filteron
from an unfiltered tracing to avoid potential underestimation of amplitudes. But also note the reduction in muscle tremor artifact (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV).
Figure 17.17 ECG showing the effect of clipping (arrows). If this went unnoticed, the R wave amplitude could mistakenly be measured as 1.8 mV when it should have measured
2.4 mV - potentially a considerable underestimation (25 mm/sec and 10 mm/mV)
112
heard and hopefully captured on ECG. Maybe the arrhythmia is still
colleagues within your practice to be able to examine the record-
二
audible on auscultation but not recognised on the ECG - in this case
ing, or in case you need to submit the tracing to a cardiologist for
·
the ECGtracing should be sent to a cardiologist forinterpretation. Or,
interpretation.
Recording
the abnormal heart sounds heard may not be an arrhythmia but, for
 an ie asa Krs un os do e aq o 'aa
Checklist
examination.
 State in which position the animal was restrained.
I an
 State if any chemical restraint was used.
ECG
· Note paper speed and if, and where, it was changed.
Label the tracing
· Note calibration and if, and where, it was changed.
 Label filter level, and when, and where, it was used.
Ensure the ECG recording is well labelled (unless the ECG machine
· Label each lead at its beginning.
does this automatically), either for future reference, or for other
113
Guide
18· Choosing an EcG recorder
In attempting to put down on paper some advice on choosing an
will mean an ECG recorder with either paper in rolls or Z-fold paper.
An
ECG recorder - which is a question often asked of the author - I
 Sometimes Z-fold paper can fail to adequately allow scribing of a
can only describe my own personal preferences and opinions. Other
deflection on the fold itself (Fig. 18.2); however Z-fold paper is easy
ECGs
cardiologists may have differing opinions.
for storing, compared with paper rolls.
An ECG machine required for diagnostic purposes is preferably a
nal
recorder rather than a monitor. In other words using an ECG mon
IAnim
itor (used in perianaesthetic or intensive care monitoring) is not
Ease of use
Small,
  i ssa  l sr    a a
The recorder is simple and intuitive to use, i.e. not so complex that a
- a recorder for diagnostic electrocardiography and a monitor for
detailed users' manual is required to understand it.
anaesthesia.
Quality
Automatic labelling
This is the most important factor for me. Recorders should produce
It is very useful to purchase a machine that performs automatic la-
 belling, on the paper trace, of the calibration, paper speed and fl-
a good-quality high-resolution tracing such that no pixelation (step-
ter level (Fig. 18.3). It is also best if any alteration to the settings
ping) is evident. Older computerised recordings tended to produce
 are labelled immediately following a change rather than at fixed
a pixelated print-out (Figs 18.1a, b). Occasionally ECG recorders
that print onto ECG tracing paper, yet the print-out is pixelated
intervals.
(Fig. 18.1c). Any pixelation in the tracing will affect the ability to
recognise important small deflections, in particular when hunting
Automatic vs. manual recording mode
for P waves.
My preference is manual mode. Automatic mode means that the
recorder runs through each of the leads, recording a set duration for
Continuousrecording
each lead; however this is not a necessity. If automatic mode is used,
The ability to record a continuous paper trace without interruption
  q  n ds   o   e 
 u o s op a m ao s i  n d   xa a issd nu s s d si a in u 
114
machines and computers that print out onto sheets of A4 paper. This  perform a continuous lead II rhythm strip.
18 · Choosing an ECG recorder
(a)
C
Figure 18.1 (a, b, c) Examples of the type of low-resolution pixelated tracings to avoid.
These can make it difficult to identify the presence or absence of P waves (as in these
 examples) particularly when there is a complex arrhythmia and may be compounded
by baseline artifact.
Figure 18.1
Interpretative software
This does not appear to work reliably in animals: primarily due to
attempts at interpreting baseline artifacts, particularly movement
Figure 18.1
artifact. I have seen a number of owners referred on the basis of
115
Small Animal ECGs- An Introductory Guide
0mm/mV25mm
Figure 18.2 Z-fold paper, whilst permitting a continuous recording, can also prevent
proper scribing of the deflections on the Z-fold as in this example, which masks the
VPC in this instance (arrowed).
Figure 18.3 Automatic labelling of the lead, paper speed and calibration is a useful
feature.
misleading or wrong computer interpretation, such that I would
be of the opinion that this should be avoided, except in the
hands of someone experienced (in which case, interpretation is not
can mimic an ectopic (Fig. 16.4c and 16.5), but in a three-channel
required!).
recording, usually one lead will remain unaffected, and thus reveal
the cardiac rhythm was normal.
Paper width is important when opting for a multichannel recorder.
Multichannel vs. single channel
Some machines print out three (and sometimes four) leads on fairly
Multichannel recorders permit the simultaneous recording of more
 miserly paper width resulting in the top and bottoms of QRS com-
than one lead at a time, most commonly three leads, for example,
 plexes overlapping (Fig. 18.4). This can make interpretation challeng-
116
leads I, I and II1. If a leg moves during a recording, sometimes this  ing. Halving the sensitivity is less than an ideal way to get round this
Calibrationsettings
18
The standard paper speed settings are 25 mm/sec and 50 mm/sec.
Choosing
Other speeds (5 mm/sec, 12.5 mm/sec or 100 mm/sec) are sometimes
additionally available - these can occasionally be useful options, but
are not essential.
The standard amplitude sensitivity is 10 mm/mV. A double sen
an
sitivity of 20 mm/mV is useful when the complexes are quite small
ECG
such as with cats. A half sensitivity of 5 mm/mV is required when
the QRS complexes are very tall in some dogs that might have
recorder
cardiomegaly.
A filter is often required in animals to reduce baseline artifact noise
from electrical interference of muscle tremor. One filter level is usually
sufficient, although some machines provide two filter levels.
F50AT-1
09
F50
Figure 18.4 A three-lead multichannel recorder on 8-cm wide paper, its just a bit of
Automatic centring vs.manual control
a miserly squeeze and can make rhythm analysis diffcult, due to the overlap of the
deflections.
Control of the stylus can either be performed manually (usually in
older recorders) or automatically. Both options are fine, and the au
tomatic centring in new machines usually works well, despite animal
problem on a regular basis. So if choosing a multichannel recorder
movement.
chose one with respectably wide paper, which I would suggest should
be >8 cm.
It is also preferable that the machine is set up so that there is not
Internal battery
a repeat of the lead II rhythm strip, creating a fourth channel and
compromising space.
This is a useful feature and in most machines comes as standard.
Precordial chest leads
Jack plug lead fitting
These are generally not required for animal use. I occasionally use a
Crocodile clips and paediatric limb plates are the two most common
single precordial lead in search of small deflections, such as P waves. f
 types of electrodes used in animals; these both require jack plug type
But this is rarely required and the additional leads create an added
fitting. The press stud fitings are oflimited use in animals; in huma ns
storage problem.
they are used for attaching to circular adhesive electrodes.
117
Guide
Monitor screen
have the machine serviced prior to use. If the machine comes without
leads, there are companies that can make these up.
This is a useful optional extra on some machines. It means the ECG
ictory
rhythm can be monitored for long periods without printing to paper
(and thus wasting paper) Machines that have a memory function are
Summary of features to look for in an EcG recorder
Introdue
useful in this seting, so that an arrhythmia seen on screen can then
· High-resolution tracing with no pixelation
be printed out for the records or posting for an expert interpretation.
· Continuous real time recording (not separate sheets of paper)
An
·Ease of use
Thermal paper vs. ink paper
· Automatic (and immediate) labelling of: lead, speed, calibration
S5
Thermal sensitive paper is more practical than ink, avoiding the need
and filter
EC
·Pre-set to manual mode
 Animal
turns black (rather than blue) usually provides the better contrast
· Avoid interpretative software
for photography or scanning. However some papers do not have a
·● Multichannel recorder (3 leads) with paper width >8 cm (and no
long-term retention (> 1year) ofthe image recorded, which gradually
repeated lead II rhythm strip)
Small,
fades over time - something to watch for and try to avoid.
· Precordial chest leads are not necessary
· Calibration settings pre-set to 25 mm/sec, 10 mm/mV and filter
off
New vs. second-hand
· Internal battery (can run off-mains)
Whilst a new ECG recorder is the ideal, the cost of this can prevent
● Jack plug fittings supplied with both crocodile clips and paediatric
some practices from purchase of an ECG machine - which would
limb electrodes
be ‘the greater of two evils'! If cost is a limiting factor, then a second
● Monitoring screen - can be useful
hand machine can be a good option. In these cases it is important to
· Records on thermal paper
118
Further
Further reading
reading
As a general reference guide the following text is recommended:
P. R. Fox, D. Sisson and N. S. Moise (1999) Textbook of Canine and
L. P. Tilley ( 1992) Essentials ofCanine and Feline Electrocardiography:
Feline Cardiology, WB Saunders.
M. D. Kittleson and R. D. Kienle (1998) Small Animal Cardiovascular
Interpretation and Treatment, 3rd edn, Lea & Febiger.
Medicine, Mosby.
For practising reading ECGs, which is strongly recommended:
V. Luis-Fuentes and S. Swift (1998) Manual of Small Animal Car-
L. P. Tilly and F. Smith (1993) Canine and Feline Cardiac Arrythmias:
diorespiratory Medicine and Surgery, BSAVA, Cheltenham.
Self Assessment, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
M W. S. Martin and B. Corcoran (2006) Notes on Cardiores-
piratory Disease of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn, Blackwell
An audiotape or CD:
Publishing.
E. W. K.Smith, B. W. Keane and L. P. Tilley (2005) Rapid Interpretation
L. P. Tilly and J-K. Goodwin (2000) Manual of Canine and Feline
of Heart and Lung Sounds: A Guide to Cardiac and Respiratory
Cardiology, Saunders.
Auscultation in Dogs and Cats, Saunders.
O. L. Nelson (2001) Small Animal Cardiology (The Practical Veteri-
C. Kvart and J. Haggstrom (2002) Cardiac Auscultation and
narian), Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd.
Phonocardiography in Dogs, Horses and Cats, Clarence Kvart,
T. Day (2005) ECG Interpretation in the Critically Ill Dog and Cat,
Uppsala, Sweden.
Iowa State University Press.
B.W. Keane and R. Hamlin (1997) Small Animal Cardiology,
Books on veterinary cardiology:
Saunders.
W. Ware (2007) A Colour Handbook of Small Animal Cardiology,
P Darke, J. D. Bonagura and D. F. Kelly ( 1996) Color Atlasof Veterinary
Mason Publishing.
Cardiology, Mosby- Wolfe.
119
ide
n5
ictory
np
Intro
accelerated idioventricular rhythm, 71-2, 84
calcium antagonists, 85
electrical interference, 96-7
Addisonis disease, 55
cardiac electrical activity, 4-8
electrocardiograph (ECG),
antiarrhythmic drugs, 82-4
formation of normal P-QRS-T complex,
defnitions and types, 3
arrhythmias 23-39, 40-7
4-7
equipment choice considerations, 114-18
ECC
defined, 15
nomenclature of QRS complex, 7-8
 interpretation approaches, 93-5
management, 75-7
chamber enlargements, 48-51
interpretative software, 115-16
Animal
treatment, 78-87
left atrial, 49-50
limb lead systems, 59-60
artefacts, 96-101
right ventricular, 50-1
recording methods and procedures, 102-13
asystole, 34
clipping techniques, 110 
electrode misplacements, 100-1
atrial fbrillation, 34, 36-7, 38
 conduction system abnormalities, 40-7
electrode placements, 103-4
management, 77
atrial standstill, 42-3
escape rhythms, 18, 19, 31, 345
$
treatment, 86-7
heart block, 43-7
atrial flutter, 70-1, 87
sick sinus syndrome, 40-2
‘f' waves, 37
atrial standstill, 42-3, 79-80
sinus arrest and block, 40, 41
fibrillation, 34-9
atropine response test, 79
see also intraventricular conduction defects
atrial, 34, 36-7, 868
AV (atrioventricular) node, 4
ventricular, 37-9, 86
AV block,43-7
digoxin, 87-8
first degree AV block, 43, 44
drug dosages, 81
gastric dilation-volvulus (GDV), 84 
second degree AV block, 434, 45
drug indications, 82-4
third degree AV block, 44-7
dysrhythmia, see arrhythmias
heart block, see AV block
treatment, 80-1
heart enlargements, 48-51
AV dissociation, 34, 35, 36
ectopia,15-22
left atrial, 49-50
assessment procedures, 15
right ventricular, 50-1
beta blockers, 85-6
classifcation and terminology, 18-19
heart rate,
bradycardia,
morphology of supraventricular depolarisation, 18,
normal values, 49
sinus origin, 10-11, 78
19-20
hyperkalaemia, 55
bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome 41-2
 morphology of ventricular depolarisation, 15-18,
broad complex tachycardia, 69
21-2
intermittent ventricular aberrancy, 68, 69
bundle branch block, 64-5, 65-7
types of arrhythmias, 23-9, 70-2
intraventricular conduction defects, 64-9
treatment, 81
electrical activity, see cardiac electrical activity
intermittent ventricular aberrancy, 68, 69
bundle of His, 4
electrical alternans, 52-3
left anterior fascicular block, 67
120
left bundle branch block, 65-7, 81
abnormalities, 53
sinus tachycardia, 10, 11
nght bundle branch block, 64-5, 81
normal duration values, 49
treatments, 81-2
QRS complex,
sinus node dysfunction, see sick sinus syndrome
left anterior fascicular block, 67
electrical alternans, 52-3
supraventricular ectopic complexes, 18, 20, 30-3,
left atrial enlargement, 49-50
formation, 6-7
84-5
left bundle branch block, 65-7
general nomenclature, 8
supraventricular premature complexes (SVPCs), 18, 20,
treatment, 81
low voltage complexes, 51-2
30-3
left ventricular enlargement, 50
normal complexes, 15, 17
treatments, 84-5
lidocaine (lignocaine), 83
normal duration values, 49
sympathetic drugs, 81
limb lead systems, 59-60
ventricular ectopic abnormalities, 15-18
T wave formations, 8
mean electrical axis (MEA), 613
R wave formation, 6-7
abnormalities, 53, 55
 abnormalities, 50-1
 normal amplitude values, 49
normal amplitude values, 49
calculations, 62-3
notches, 52-3, 54
tachyarrhythmias, 10, 11
normal values, 49
R-on-T, 24, 27
treatment, 81-2
mexiletine, 83
rescue beats, see escape rhythms
Mobitz type I/II block, 43, 80
respiratory sinus arrhythmia, 9, 11
ventricular ectopic complexes, 15-18, 21-2, 23-30, 69,
movement artefacts, 97-100
night bundle branch block, 64-5
824
muscle tremor artefacts, 97, 98
treatment, 81
ventricular fibrillation (VF), 37-9
right ventricular enlargement, 50-1
treatment,86
P wave formation, 5-6
ventricular pre-excitation, 70, 86
 normal values, 49
S wave formation, 7
ventricular premature complexes (VPCs), 23-30
P-mitrale, 49
S-T segment,
morphology, 16-18, 21-2, 69
P-pulmonale, 49-50
abnormalities, 53, 54
treatment, 82-3, 84
P-QRS-T complex, 4-8
 normal duration values, 49
ventricular standstill, 34
 morphological changes and associated conditions,
sick sinus syndrome, 40-2
ventricular tachycardia (VT), 24, 28-30
48-55
treatments,79
VPCs, see ventricular premature complexes
P-R interval, 5-6
sinoatrial (SA) node, 4
(VPCs)
normal values, 49
sinus arrest, 40, 41
pacemakers, 88-90
treatments, 78-9
wandering atrial pacemaker, 48
 parasympathetic drugs, 81
sinus arrhythmia, 9, 11
wavelet theory,
positioning animals, 104-9
sinus block, 40
atrial fibrillation, 37
Purkinje fibres, 4
treatments, 78-9
ventricular fibrillation,39
sinus bradycardia, 1l-12
Wenckebachis phenomenon, 43
Q wave formation, 6
treatments, 78
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, 70
Q-T intervals,
sinus rhythm, 9, 10
121