practical
wildlifecare
second edition
lesstockerMBE
Blackwell
Publishing
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Practical Wildlife Care
Second Edition
Les Stocker MBE HonAssocRCVS
Blackwell
Publishing
Practical Wildlife Care
Practical Wildlife Care
Second Edition
Les Stocker MBE HonAssocRCVS
Blackwell
Publishing
 Les Stocke1 2000,2005
Editonial Offices:
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel: +44 (0)1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Professional, 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
Tel: +1 515 292 0140
Blackwell Publishing Asia, 550 Swanston Street, Ca1lton, Victotia 3053, Australia
Tel: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
The night of the Author to be identified as the Author of this Work has been asserted in accordance with
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All ights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 01
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording o1 otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copynight, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the pnior pe1mission of
the publisher.
First published 2000
Repninted 2001 (twice), 2002, 2003, 2004
Second edition published 2005
Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stocker, Les.
Practical wildlife care / Les Stockel. - 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-2749-3 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-4051-2749-X (pbk. : alk. pape1)
1. Wildlife rehabilitation. 2. Wildlife Tescue. 3. Wildlife diseases-Treatment.  4. First aid for
animals I. Title.
SF996.45.S755 2005
639.96-dc22
2004026967
ISBN-13 978-1-4051-2749-3
ISBN-10 1-4051-2749-X
A catalogue Iecord for this title is available from the Bnitish Library
Set in 9.5 on 11.5 pt Times Ten
by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed and bound in India
by Replika Press Pvt, Ltd, Kundli
and which has been manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free and elementary chlorine-free
practices. Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text papel and cover board used have met
acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
For further information on Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
www.blackwellpublishing.com
Contents
ForewordtotheFirstEdition
vii
Foreword to the Second Edition
ix
Preface to the First Edition
xi
Preface totheSecondEdition
xiii
Acknowledgements
XV
1
Prime Directives
1
2
First Response
13
3
 Fluid Therapy/Part I: Building Blocks
25
4
 Fluid Therapy/Part II: Administration
34
5
Wound Management/Part I: The Biology of Wounds
43
6
Wound Management/Pat II: The Treatment of Wounds
50
7
 Biology and First Aid of Fractures
60
8
Fracture Management
67
9
Avian Wildlife Disease
88
10
Mammalian Wildlife Disease
98
11
Garden Birds
108
12
Pigeons
120
13
Game Biids
129
14
Corvids
132
15
Water Birds - Ducks
136
16
Water Birds - Swans
143
17
Geese and Other Wate1 Biids
151
18
Birds of Prey
159
19
Seabirds
171
20
Hand-rearing Orphaned Birds
183
21
 Small Mammals
193
22
Hedgehogs
200
23
Rabbits and Hares
216
24
Red Fox
224
25
Badgers
232
26
Other Mustelids
244
vi
Contents
27 Deer
253
28Bats
268
29 Other Mammal Species
280
30 Reating Orphaned Wild Mammals
287
31Reptiles and Amphibians
303
Appendix 1 Bat Conservation Trust Guidelines on Handling Bats
312
to Cetacean Strandings
314
Appendix 3 Birds on Schedule 4 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as of March 2004)
315
317
Appendix5S
 Suggested Record Sheet to Accompany Bat Samples to the Central Veterinary
Laboratory
319
Appendix 6 Selected Rehabilitation Supplies and Suppliers
320
Appendix 7 Useful Addresses in Wildlife Rehabilitation
321
Appendix 8 Rehabilitation Protocol for Otters Contaminated with Oil
322
ReferencesandFurtherReading
325
Index
330
Foreword to the First Edition
A fundamental paradox besets wildlife rehabilita-
encouraged - an attitude that has no doubt sig-
tion today
y-most wildlife rehabilitators have
nificantly aided the development of the Wildlife
insufficient understanding of veterinary medicine
Hospital Trust and one which vets and reha-
and most veterinarians have little expetience with
bilitators alike must develop to a greater degree
wildlife. Although there are scattered references
if further advances are to be made in the field.
in the literature describing the care and rehabilita-
Prachical Wildlife Care is wTitten in a sufficiently
tion of British wildlife casualties, a comprehensive
informal style to hold the attention of the inter-
account of the subject, in a format accessible to the
ested amateur yet contains enough medical detail
dedicated rehabilitator and professional veterina1-
to inform the veteninanian. This book should
ian alike, has hitherto not been published. In Prac-
certainly facilitate growth of the essential partner-
tical Wildlife Care, Les Stocker has gone a long way
ship and stimulate ceaseless debate between the
towards addressing this problem.
partners!
Les Stocker is perhaps the best known and prob-
Prachical Wildlife Care takes the teader through
ably the most expetienced Bnitish wildlife rehabili-
the many different phases of the rehabilitation
tator, and under his inspired leadership the Wildlife
process and provides essential veterinary infor-
Hospital Trust (more familiarly known as St Tiggy-
mation about every group of animals likely to be
winkles) has grown from a garden shed to Europe's
 presented to the Bnitish rehabilitator. In attempting
 largest, purpose-built wildlife hospital. This would
to be so comprehensive it is clear that the book
be a wonderful achievement in itself, but Les has
will not satisfy everybody's thirst for detailed infor-
always believed that to develop rehabilitation tech-
mation about his or her chosen speciality. As
miques without passing the knowledge to others
more is leaint about the rehabilitation of different
would only achieve half of his self-imposed mission.
In wTiting Practical Wildlife Care he has been able
required.
to offer the benefit of his long experience to reha-
Rehabilitators and vets in the UK have long been
bilitators all over the world. Although Les's expe-
 starved of a common-sense manual of good prac-
Tience has very largely been with British wildlife,
tice and I suspect that many will use this book as
much of the information provided and many of the
their fist port of call when confronted with a
techniques described are applicable to species from
wildlife casualty.
a much wider geographical range.
Throughout the book, a close partnership
DrJohn Lewis
between Tehabilitators and their veterinanians is
IntemationalZooVeterinaryGroup
vii
Foreword to the Second Edition
Publishing the first edition of Practical Wildlife Care
the key goal is to retum an animal to the wild in a
was yet one more outstanding achievement by Les
fit state with a high chance of survival,hitherto few
Stocker. Much of his life has been dedicated to
studies have looked into the impact of different
improving the standards of treating wildlife casual-
treatments on post-release survival. As part of his
ties both in Britain and elsewhere in the world, and
overall ethos of improving both knowledge and
Practical Wildlife Care encapsulated ove1 twenty
standards, Les has worked with a range of people
years of unparalleled expertise in wildlife rehabili-
to look at the survival of casualties post-release, and
tation. It was the first truly comprehensive manual
 it has been a great pleasure to collaborate in these
covering all aspects of the treatment of wildlife
studies.
Aay ari asaq Aipidei yns se pue 'sans
 One of the big dilemmas facing wildlife rehabili-
source of information for veterinary nurses, animal
tators is trying to decide if a paticula1 course of
care students and wildlife rehabilitators. Howevel,
 action is appropriate fo1 a wild animal; what may
the pressures facing British wildlife are constantly
be appropriate for a domestic animal may be totally
changing, new problems arise and levels of knowl-
inappropniate for a wild animal. The second edition
edge improve. Five years on, the need for a second
of Practical Wildlife Care will prove to be an even
edition is testament to the value of Prachical
more indispensable source of information for
Wildlife Care.
animal carers faced with such decisions.
Despite the wealth of information compiled by
Les, we still have a great deal to learn about wildlife
Stephen Hartis
rehabilitation. In paticular we know little about
Professor of Environmental Sciences
the survival of animals following release, and whilst
University of Bristol
x
Preface to the First Edition
Although the overall care and treatment of any
is once more Teturned to my care for its rehabilita-
animal, including a wild animal, usually falls to the
tion and release.
veterinary surgeon, the support of the veterinary
This book deals with the anomalies of wildlife
nurse Or the trained Tehabilitator is crucial to
care and covers the vital disciplines of wildlife care,
manage the number of wild casualties now being
namely Iescue, frst aid, rehabilitation and release.
found.
The diagnosis of disease is always the province of
Nearly all of the casualties are as a direct result
 the veterinary surgeon but I have touched on those
of collision with man or the environment he has
diseases that are so regularly seen that routine
cTeated. The truly natural casualty is a rarity but
treatments can easily be directed by a veterinary
incidences do occur with our innate compassion
surgeon. Also included are simple stabilisation
demanding that these animals are also taken into
techniques that can often be adopted to prevent
care.
 pain and suffering and provide a long-term treat-
Howevel, practically all wildlife casualties are
ment of choice.
the victims of trauma and are suffening from some
 Although there may be other products available
degree of shock. A knowledge of the physiology of
fo1 the treatment of wildlife casualties, those I have
wild animals and an understanding of the metabolic
mentioned have proven suitable for the many thou-
changes that may occur will allow anyone to
sands of patients The Wildlife Hospital Trust (St
provide the first-aid and life-saving techniques that
Tiggywinkles) has cared for. However, although
will keep the animal alive to benefit from the evet-
at the time of witing the medical information
advancing techniques of veterinary surgery. The
given is cotrect, the reader should always fiist
pupose of this book is to lay out simply the support
verify that the data have not changed. Neither I
services that the veterinary nurse Or rehabilitator
nor the Publisher can take Iesponsibility for any
 may provide to assist the veterinary surgeon.
matters arising from the guidance given in this
The book is a result of my 20 years of expelience
book.
in dealing with the idiosyncrasies of Bnitish wild
Over the last 20 years the care and treatment of
animals In that time I have always worked in
sick or injured wildlife has become accepted all
close cooperation with
veteninary
surgeons
over the world. Yet all over the world the vast
especially for diagnosis, presctiption and surgical
majority of the care has been provided by veteli-
intervention.
nary nurses and rehabilitators under the direction,
My directive is to rescue the animal, keep it alive
where possible, of veterinary surgeons.
and provide first aid and stabilisation. Under the
Early in the development of St Tiggywinkles I
diection of the veterinary surgeon many of the
was indebted to Gary and Derek Carthew of
casualties need no more than care and support
Millpledge Pharmaceuticals for their care and
before rehabilitation and release, whereas others
advice on many aspects of animal support. Now,
need the surgeon's diagnosis, medication and even
nea1ly 20 years late1, I still look to Gary, Graham
surgery. Howevel, after these disciplines the animal
Cheslyn-Curtis and Millpledge for their support
xi
xii
Preface to the First Edition
and I am especially grateful for their sponsorship of 
will lead to more wildlife casualties Teceiving that
the colou1 photographs in this book which makes
vital fist aid, expertise and rehabilitation allowing
more than ever to survive and be released back into
nurses and students.
the wild.
I believe that if we all work togethet and take out
own Tesponsibilities then wildlife care will not
Les StockeT MBE
Aylesbury 2000
Preface to the Second Edition
The fiist edition of Practical Wildlife Care has
been put on the Birds of Conservation Concein
been well received and well thumbed by many
Red List (Gregory et al.,2002). Their numbers had
veterinary practices and 1ehabilitators, throwing a
dropped so drastically ove1 the last 25 years that
lifeline to many more wildlife casualties that other-
they had joined the song thrush (Turdus philo-
wise might have fallen through the net. At the time
melos) and the skylark (Alauda arvensis) on the
of its publication all seemed settled in the field of
slippery slope towaids extinction. Now those indi-
Bnitish wildlife...but every year has seen some
vidual spatrows, thrushes and skylarks tescued by
trauma or other affecting the way we deal with wild
the wildlife carer play a crucial part in the survival
animals.
of what were once our commonest birds.
Who can forget the awful year when foot
Yes, times are changing, even sometimes for the
and mouth disease blighted the countryside? Not
bette1 when red kites, buzzards, otters and polecats
many realised that the hedgehog, in particular, had
are all to be seen in the countryside again. And
shackles put on its movements. Rehabilitators and
there are newcomers: with the often ill-informed
nurses, as always, found a way of treating their
fashion fo1 keeping more exotic species, 1ehabilita-
prickly patients making house calls, albeit in envi-
tors and the veterinary profession are now called
Tonmentally-secure space suits.
upon to attend to a profusion of snakes, wallabies,
Britain's bats have all of a sudden become rabies
parakeets and even, dare I say it, wild boat, injured
suspects but we have found a way around the bar-
and needing care.
niers by getting ourselves vaccinated and once again
These animals prove that Britain can be a good
making house calls, this time to collect bats so that
place in which to roam free and I am sure that given
nobody unprotected has to handle them.
a positive attitude and bolting the stable door
The work life of wildlife care and rehabilitation
in time we should together, one by one, bring
is very much on a one-to-one basis, often scoffed at
those spatrows, starlings and thrushes back into
as a waste of time by numerically minded conser-
the countryside.
vationists. But then it was fevealed that Britain's
two most familia1 birds, the house spalrow (PasseI
Les Stocke1 MBE HonAssocRCVS
domesticus) and the starling (Sturnus vulgaris), had
Haddenham 2005
xiii
Acknowledgements
The scope and variety of wildlife needing care
University. I really do appreciate having access to
seems to have changed since the first edition of
his unequalled knowledge of British mammals and
Practical Wildlife Care (2000) but following set p10-
his agreeing to write the foreword to this second
cedures and veterinary intervention is the sure way
edition of Practical Wildlife Care.
of meeting all these new challenges.
As in the fiist edition I would like to bring
Once more I am indebted to Dr John Lewis of
forward and thank Mel Beeson, of the Swan
the Intemational Zoo Veterinary Group for being
Sanctuary, for her information on swan treat-
available at all odd hours and, of course, for once
ments; and as always those intrepid divers, Alan
again vetting my manuscript, which has benefited
Knight and Maik Stevens of the British Divers
from his comments and advice. Also I must thank
Marine Life Rescue, for the procedures of sea
him, and Rosemary Green, for allowing me to use
mammals strandings, Dr Andrew Kitchener for his
their expeniences of the ottet, an animal I rarely see.
wo1k on Scottish wildcats, Dr Katherine Whitwell
The drawings, in this second edition, have been
fo1 her research on diseases of the hare and Martin
produced and brought to life by Crystal Powell. I
Goulding for sharing his knowledge on the wild
appreciate her talents with a pencil as well as a
boar.
stethoscope in her nursing role.
I would also like to thank Liz Hudston of Naylor
 The intricacies of typing onto computers seem to
Industries Plc for the use of their design of an
escape me, so I am gateful to Louise Sims and
artificial badgel sett; Kirsty Meadows of the Joint
Chris Carthy for marrying my handwritten manu-
Nature Conservation Committee for the use of
scnipt with the computer copies.
‘Advice on Bats and Rabies’(Appendix 1) and
Over the last two years I have worked very
Tamzin Thornton of Veterinary Times on skin
closely with Professor Stephen Hairis of Bristol
avulsions of the jaw.
XV
Prime Directives
Wild animals are mammals, birds, 1eptiles, am-
practices demanded by wildlife casualties. These
phibians, fish o1 invertebrates All these groups
additional practices may appea1 at fist onerous and
sound familiar: they are exactly the same classes
time-consuming, but the wild animals will benefit
of animal seen in veterinary practices. Howevel,
as, indirectly, will their handlers as more animals
there the similanity ends. Wild casualties may be of
lecovel and become suitable for release into the
a similar structure to companion Or domestic
wild.
animals but they demand a completely different
All the techniques are part of The Wildlife
strategy in theit care and treatment (Stocker, 1995).
Hospital Trust's (St Tiggywinkles) own code of
It is a demanding strategy, especially for veterinary
practice and, although not so stringently adhered to
practices that are already overloaded, but
to
in some other centres, we have found them essen-
succeed with wildlife casualties it is crucial to set
tial for a well-managed hospital and a consistent
aside time and facilities to cater for their specialised
success rate. Trying not to make them sound like a
needs.
list of ^dos and don'ts', you will find that they malry
Of course, wild animals beneft from the frst
well with standard procedures and when in place
principles of veterinary surgery and they will
will themselves become standard in the wild animal
prosper given the basic disciplines of standard vet-
facility.
erinary nursing or animal care procedures, such as:
 Some of the basic principles of wildlife care may
seem out of place in a veterinary practice or other
· A sound regime of hygiene practices both for the
animal centre but they are essential for good,
animals and the handlers
humane care for wild creatures. Such care should
● The measured clinical use of prescribed drugs
not even be attempted if you cannot provide the
and the sterile use of multi-dose bottles, needles,
specialities wild animals demand.
 syringes and other medical disposables
The following
practices Tecommendedf
for
· The use of sterile utensils, equipment and clean
wildlife complement the whole spectrum of a wild
cages and bedding
animal's stay in captivity night through to its
· The proper disposal of clinical waste, especially
Telease, if that is possible.
sharps and bodies
· Adherence to health and safety Tecommendations
● Proper acquaintance with and maintenance of
(1) NEVER MIX WILD ANIMALS AND
the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health
DOMESTIC ANIMALS
(COSHH) registeI
·A prohibition of eating, drinking or smoking
The author appreciates that this would put an enor-
wherever animals are present
mous burden on the facilities of many veterinary
practices and animal care establishments, but this is
These practices should already be in place. They
the directive most often fouted with disast1ous
provide a fim base on which to build the additional
consequences. A wild animal facility joined on to an
Practical Wildlife Care
existing practice does not need to be a state-of-the-
cumstances. Wild animals, therefore, have to rely on
art hospital. It could be just a small room or a base-
their own immune systems to fight these diseases.
ment where only wild animals are kept. Many
Their immune systems will not previously have
wildlife 1escue centres around the world operate
been exposed to many of these domestic diseases
from sheds or caravans in a garden. Without them
and consequently any disease will quickly Tun its
wildlife 1ehabilitation would not have made the
course unchallenged, culminating in the death of
great strides forward that it has.
Aa "l jenuos oi qanoua Ayngun [eue pl Aue
There are sound teasons for this aversion to
 keeping wild and domestic animals separate we are
mixing wild and domestic animals and the author
at least taking all the precautions possible to
knows of some wildlife rescue centres that have suf-
prevent that happening.
fered tenmibly by innocently allowing companion
animals into their facility.
Stress
Wild animals are programmed to classify some
Disease
 o d  a   s
The major disaster that brought the matter to the
list are human beings, so when a wild animal is
fore was when over 30 badgers died afte1 contract-
picked up it will become severely stressed. Then if
ing canine parvovirus at a Tescue centre that
it is taken to within scenting, hearing or seeing dis-
allowed people, with dogs, to visit. It was not
tance of another arch enemy its stress levels can Tun
Tecorded if the parvovirus was contracted directly
out of control. Add to this confinement in a cage
from the dogs or from contamination on the visi-
and the animal will rapidly lose control of its inter-
tors’ footwea1, but it made everybody aware of the
nal homeostatic mechanisms. It panics more and
potential hazards.
possibly injures itself in its efforts to escape. The
Some wild animals are susceptible to many of the
animal might well die just from being put into a
common diseases seen in some of our domestic
cage near to a potential enemy. Some of the inci-
animals, but they do not have the benefit of vacci-
dents the author has witnessed, when picking up a
nations. Most companion animals taken anywhere
casualty, highlight the stress these animals must
by anybody should be vaccinated against the famil-
have been going through:
iar diseases But what if they are not or what if they
had been vaccinated with a live-virus vaccine and
· A wild deer put into a kennel in a 1oom full of
ale shedding the virus? Any contact with infected
dogs. The deel's tellor must have been absolute
animal material can lead to fatal disease for wild
as it could scent, hear and see, as it was in this
animals. No one knows if viruses shed by vaccinated
case, similar animals to those that had injured it
companion animals into the environment are
im the first place.
affecting wild animals but in the close confines of a
ea e Aq painfu piayoelq uapies io uoon y ·
practice or rescue facility the likelihood of infection
and now put into a cattery full of cats. Small biids
is infnitely greater.
are renowned for dying instantly from stress.
Many diseases affecting domestic animals have
· A fox, surely the most nervous of all wildlife
been recorded in wildlife. These include:
casualties, also put into a kennel in a foom full of
dogs.
· Parvovirus in badgers; can also affect foxes
● To top all these there is the constant to and fro
· Canine distemper in foxes
in a busy centre exposing any wild animal kept
● Infectious canine hepatitis in foxes
there to an ever-changing cavalcade of humans -
● Feline leukaemia in Scottish wildcats
the worst enemy of all.
●Paramyxovirus in pigeons
· Viral haemonhagic disease in rabbits
Stress is said, in humans, to have been the
· The possibility of Aleutian disease in mustelids
twentieth-century disease. This is also the case
in the wild animal population even before they
Generally it is not advisable to vaccinate wild
are brought into captivity and subjected to even
animals routinely unless there are extenuating cir-
more.
Prime Directives
3
Noise
lighting of dawn or the darkening of dusk. It is
something familiar in the strange captive world in
Working at any treatment facility you cannot fail to
hear all the noisy bangs and clangs going on the
which they now find themselves.
Bird fanciers even ft dimmer switches to thei1
whole time. Most of them ale unavoidable:
lighting so that their birds are not subjected to the
· The stainless steel lids of pots and pans that ale
sudden switch on o1 switch off. Even this may help
impossible to remove quietly
a wild casualty relax that little bit more and help it
· The buzz and hum of clippers and vacuum
Tecover more quickly.
cleaners
· The hiss of autoclaves
· The bang of those stainless steel cage doors you
(3) WHITE COATS
try to close quietly
● The incessant Tinging of the telephone
There is no teason that white coats have to be
white. Surely any coat, if it is laundered properly,
Every noise must be like a gunshot to a wild
will be just as hygienic. Wild animals taken into care
animal that is not used to the closely confined
only know that this gleaming white apparition is
atmosphere of a practice facility.
going to approach and catch hold of it. If the animal
It is difficult, if not impossible, to counter disease,
was not already stressed this white coat is just
stress or noise in a close environment, but just a bit
another stimulus it could well do without.
of peace and quiet in an annex will give a wild
With green or dark blue coats there is not that
casualty that little bit extra it needs to recovel.
stark contrast that is so alarming, and more colour
conscious coats would still look 1espectable to
onlookers (Fig. 1.1). Birds are easily stressed by
Familiarity
Another hazard of keeping wild animals near
domestic animals is that they may become familiar
with those animals and lose any fear they might have
had. When they are released, these wild animals
might seek out the company of “familiar’ domestic
animals and fall foul of an enemy (Plate 1).
Similarly, orphaned wild animals should never be
reared by, or be in the company of, companion
animals The same perils will beset these orphans
when they are teleased.
(2) PHOTOPERIOD
Wild animals are very much creatures of habit: if
they are diumal, they are active during the day and
if they are noctumal, they are active at might.
However, when we take them into care they move
into this glassy world of electric lighting putting yet
another stress on an already confused animal.
Yes, operatives need bright lights in order to
examine, operate on o1 even clean animals, but
once these necessary procedures are completed the
lights should be turned off so that the animal is in
Fig. 1.1 Green or blue coats are much less stark than
daylight or night. Do not close the blinds during the
white coats.
day o1 even at night. Wild animals need the gradual
4
Practical Wildlife Care
coloured images. Green and blue are far more
Fimally, all this information should be entered on
natural than white and are more teadily accepted
a database and any findings published, as there is
than the danger colours birds respond to: black, 1ed
still a dearth of worthwhile literature Televant to
Or yellow.
British wildlife casualties.
(4) RECORDS
(5) PERSONNEL HAZARDS
Written tecords are even more crucial for the
Any wild animal taken into care will be ternifed
wildlife casualty than they are for domestic animals.
and feel under threat. It will make every effort to
The information that is so important to the
escape and, if it has the capability, it will fight, bite,
animal's treatment can be vital to a medical data-
scratch, kick and even scream.Some animals do not
base and may also produce matenial useful to
pose much of a threat to a handler, but even a
biologists and zoologists majoring in British wild-
sparrow or a mouse can inflict a painful little bite,
life. Vital information tecorded as the animal is
while other creatures can cause serious injury.
admitted can have a direct beaning on its treatment
When wildlife is handled prope1ly there should be
and future. Included on a record card (Fig. 1.2), as
no need to get bitten o1 otherwise injured. Taking
well as its medical programme, should be:
the tight precautions, concentrating on the animal
and being prepared for even a comatose animal to
· The name, address and telephone number of
suddenly spring to snapping life will prevent any
whoever found the animal. This is important in
Imishaps. Potentially dangerous animals likely to be
case any further information is required and if
presented for care include:
assistance is needed in getting the animal to an
appropriate release site. Furthermore, being able
· Badgers, otters, foxes and seals have very power-
 to contact the finder could be crucial if ever your
ful jaws and will bite if given the opportunity.
possession of a protected bird or other animal is
Their reactions are much faster than those of
challenged in law.
a human being, so give them plenty of respect
· The circumstances of rescue can often assist the
(Fig. 1.3).
veterinary surgeon in coming to a diagnosis, e.g.
· Deet are more predictable. They are extremely
a bird that has fown into a window that shows
sttong and will kick, head butt or use theii
no apparent injunies could be suffening from
antlers. It takes two people to even think of
head trauma.
restraining a fallow buck. Small deer like muntjac
●Any treatments given. Sometimes cating people
O1 Chinese water deer will attemmpt to slash with
will already have provided their own version of
their tusks.
first-aid care and medication. This may include
· Birds of prey and some crows will attack with
imappropniate substances, detrimental food and,
their feet, which in the case of birds of prey, are
most common of all, a dnink of watei, brandy,
aTmed with razor-sharp talons.
warm milk or herbal remedies that can predis-
● Some birds of prey will bite, as will crows and
 pose to inhalation pneumonia.
gulls.
· It is important to know exactly where the animal
● Sharp-billed birds like herons and some sea biids
was found.
will stab like lightning at the face. Always wea1
· If it is a terlitonial or bonding species, like a swan,
 goggles and restrain the bird's head frst of all.
did it have a mate and were any dependent sib-
·Squirels are potentially the most dangerous.
lings left behind?
They are exceptionally fast and will bite severely.
· Lastly, once the animal is admitted, comprehen-
They will also scratch with the long claws on their
sive records must be maintained of its progress,
back feet, often causing chronically infected
any medication given or biopsies caied out, and
wounds.
procedures involved and the final outcome of its
· Scottish wild cats are like aggravated feral cats
stay in care.
only much stronger and more aggressive.
Prime Directives
5
DATE
NO
ST TIGGYWINKLES.
...RECORD
I.D.
NAME
CIRCUMSTANCE OF RESCUE
ADDRESS
POSTCODE
SOURCE
DAILY TREATMENT
TEETH
SEX
AGE
WEIGHT
CONDITION
LAB. REF. NO.
OUTCOME
DATE/TIME
WEIGHT
A
D
U
TREATMENT
NOTES
 Please tick this box if you do NOT wish to receive any future mailings about St Tiggywinkles.
I agree that St Tiggywinkles will not be handing this animal back to me....
Fig. 1.2 A record card carries vital information for treatments and database entry.
· The only native poison snake is the adder O1
potentially venomous as some non-venomous
viper. These very Tarely need tescuing but should
exotic snakes still have a nasty bite.
still be treated with the utmost caution. Because
● Wild boar are now being seen in some of the
of all the exotic snakes that have escaped from
southein counties. These can be extremely dan-
the pet trade there will be calls to snakes that are
gerous and are best handled by zoo personnel
not easy to recognise. Treat all strange snakes as
with experience of the species.
6
Practical Wildlife Care
of an infected bat. Antibodies to the virus have only
been identified in Daubenton's bats (three cases in
15 years of surveillance in the UK).
The vaccine is available from GPs, free to
rehabilitators o1 veterinary staff involved with bats.
It consists of three injections into the arm over a
petiod of 28 days with boosters every five years.
Simple precautions when handling bats would
ensure complete safety. These should be:
· Obtain vaccination before handling bats
· Always wear gloves when handling bats
· If you are bitten and not vaccinated, wash the
wound thoroughly with soap and water for five
minutes
● Take advice from you1 GP as to whether post-
exposure treatment is necessary
If handled correctly and reported early,exposure
Fig. 1.3 Badgers have powerful jaws and will bite if
given the opportunity.
to EBLV need not be fatal. In fact people who are
handling bats regularly should refer to the guide-
lines in Appendix 1 and read the Bat Convention
Trust website on www.bats.org.uk.
(6) VACCINATIONS
Vaccinations are important not just for companion
(7) GL0VES
animals but also for anybody working with animals.
Unfortunately, vaccinations are not available for all
Although not always used in veterinary practices,
the zoonotic infections an animal worker might
disposable latex gloves offer good protection
encounter, but two vaccinations will stand anyone
against zoonotic infection when handling wildlife
in good stead if they ale exposed to the diseases.
casualties. They are cheap and essential.
hazardous substances that all too regularly affect
Tetanus
wildlife. In particular oils, solvents, acids and paints
Tetanus is caused by the toxins of the bacterium
are seen on birds, hedgehogs and other small
Clostridium tetani. Tetanus is potentially fatal and
mammals.
can be contracted through any open wound. All
Also the handling of medicines during treatment
animal workers should make sure their tetanus
can lead to absorption through the skin. Latex
immunisation is up to date. Boosters are needed ten
gloves will prevent this. Particular precautions must
years after the primary course, but can be given at
be taken if an operative is sensitive to some drug.
five-year intervals in high-risk vocations such as
e.g. has an allergy to penicillin.
animal care.
(8) BARRIER NURSING
Rabies
Following the death from European bat lyssavirus
Although the majority of wild animals admitted to
type 2 (EBLV-2) of a bat conservation worke1, I
a facility are going to be the victims of trauma, there
would recommend that anyone who handles bats
will also be those that are debilitated by disease.
on a regular basis should be vaccinated against
Diseases can often be transferred from one animal
rabies. The Tisk of catching the virus is extremely
 to another but most are kept in control by daily
low but the disease can be contracted from the bite
cleaning and disinfection routines in the facility.
Prime Directives
7
There are, however, some diseases that pose a
the Tight precautions and standards of practice and
severe threat to some animals and as well as to
hygiene they should not be a problem.
humans (zoonoses). Some of the main threats to
humans are highlighted in (9) Zoonoses (below)
but they can usually be kept under safe control by
Leptospirosis (Weil's disease in humans)
a system of barrier nursing. Essentially, with barlier
Leptospirosis can be fatal if prompt medical atten-
nursing any danger of contracting most zoonotic
tion is not sought. In wild animals Leptospira bac-
infections can be alleviated by the use of gloves,
 masks and protective clothing.
telia are well entrenched in the brown rat, Rattus
norvegicus, which is now at plague proportions in
The micro-organism affecting a diseased animal
Bnitain. Transmission is through the urine of
can be spread by a variety of methods:
infected animals and is reported to be contaminat-
● By direct contact between animal and handler
ing many of Bnitain's watercourses.
Wild animals, especially those like the fox, who
· Through contact with an animal's body fuids:
prey on brown rats, are susceptible to the disease.
unine, saliva, milk, semen, birth fuids etc.
Normal conditions of hygiene should 1ule out the
· By a bite
transmission of infection but typically an animal
· By aerosol being breathed out by the animal
●From contaminated bedding or cages
with leptospirosis infection will show yellowish
● From the incorrect disposal of an infected dead
mucous membranes. Clinical tests will confirm if the
body
animal is positive for leptospirosis. Any suspect
animal should be isolated and barriet nursed. Bear
To ty to counter these potential sources ofinfec
in mind that although many foxes present with the
typical yellow mucous membranes and a small p10-
tion, the following procedures must be adhered to:
potion may be infected with leptospirosis, most
seem to be suffering from infectious canine hepati-
· The one or two operatives detailed to an infected
tis, which is not contagious to humans, and from
animal should deal with any other animals first
internal haemorrhage, especially affer 1oad traffic
and deal with the infected animals last of all.
accidents (Plate 2).
· The infected animal should be kept in an isolated
watm1oom.
· Warning signs must be posted.
● Every person entening the area should tread
Lyme disease
through a footbath filled with suitable disinfectant.
Lyme disease is a disease of humans caused by the
●Food bowls should be sterilized and bedding
spirochaete bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi and
should be discarded with clinical waste and not
does seem to be on the increase. It is transmitted
be recycled for other animals.
by ticks from animals, particularly dee1. If anybody
●After barrier nursing has been put in place, the
finds a tick that causes a reaction anywhere on their
veterinary surgeon should be asked for a defini-
 body, then the bite should be referred to a gen-
tive diagnosis and a presctibed treatment.
eral practitioner who will presctibe a course of
antibiotics which should overcome any infection.
Untreated Lyme disease can be fatal or can lead to
(9) ZOONOSES
severe arthnitis.
 Ticks appeat to be resistant to many parasiticides
Anybody who wants to offer care to wildlife casul-
 s0 any that fix themselves to a human have to be
alties is a welcome ally. The negative information,
Temoved manually. An essential part of any reha-
like zoonoses, that is provided is not to be taken as
bilitator's kit should be an *O'Tom’ or, in Amelica,
a deterrent but more as words of advice to help
"Tick-Twister’ tick lifte1. These make it easy t0
wildlife care prosper.
remove ticks from one's person, without leaving
Zoonotic hazards are diseases with which
the mouthparts embedded and causing infection.
animals can infect handlers, with a range of condi-
Without a tick lifter, ticks can be dabbed with
tions ranging from irritating to fatal. Howevel, with
cotton wool soaked in anaesthetic ether. The tick,
8
Practical Wildlife Care
once anaesthetised, should be able to be lifted com-
Mange
plete and clean.
Sarcoptic mange in particular is the infestation
Make sure any ticks taken off handlers or
most likely to affect people handling contagious
animals are killed. If not they can travel and climb
animals. Caused by a mite, Sarcoptes scabiei, it can
on to people who may not necessanily feel their
bite.
be controlled in foxes, its most likely victims, with
ivermectin o1 doramectin. It can,however,be trans-
mitted to humans, where the infestation is known
Ringworm
as scabies. Given time it can spread all over the
body and from the outset needs intervention by a
Ringworm can be contracted off many companion
general practitioner.
animals and usually fuoresces under a Wood's
Causing similar severe skin imitation is an allergy
lamp. However, the form of tingworm found on 
to sarcoptic mange, which seems to fare up within
hedgehogs does not fluoresce and is often misdiag-
48 hours of handling an infected animal. This is
nosed. The organism involved is Trichophyton eri-
a very common side effect of meeting sarcoptic
nacei and it can transfe1 to humans (Stocker, 1987).
mange but can be prevented, as can scabies, by
Infection usually starts with an itching bump on the
wearing protective clothing, surgical gloves, apron,
hand or fingers. It will spread rapidly and should be
 mask and cap, when handling suspect animals. This
Tefetred to a general practitioner.
allergy usually resolves after about three weeks of
constant irritation and application of soothing oint-
ments (Stocke1, 1994b).
Tuberculosis
The author has only seen one confirmed case of
In its many forms, tuberculosis is a chronic pro-
human scabies in over 20 years and that responded
gressive disease and is caused by bacteria of the
genus Mycobacterium that has three common
One point of note is that, contrary to the comments
forms: M. bovis, which affects Tuminants and
of some authors, sarcoptic mange is not likely to be
badgers; M. aviurn, which affects birds, mainly
seen in hedgehogs.
pigeons; and M. tuberculosis, which affects humans.
Humans are susceptible to all three forms, so the
veterinary surgeon will advise if an animal, par-
West Nile virus
ticularly a diseased pigeon, may be harbouring
West Nile vius (WNV), which is found in wild
Mycobacterium.
bi1ds, is often transmitted by mosquito bites. Ove1
the last few years the disease has occurred in
America, affecting many species of wild bird
Ornithosis
and also many humans, often fatally. By the end
Omithosis is the non-psittacine term for psittacosis.
of 2002, more than 270 people had died and ovel
It is caused by various strains of Chlamydia, which
3600 had been confirmed as infected cases
ale Tickettsia-like organisms. In wildlife Tescue,
(www.NewScientist.com news service, 22 July
care should be taken of any of the pigeon family
2003). American rehabilitators are very aware of
showing ocular o1 nasal discharge. In particular
the disease and are advised to take particular care,
look out for the ^one-eyed cold', a term applied by
especially when handling corvids, owls and hawks,
pigeon fanciers to birds showing symptoms of the
the most regularly infected birds (Dr Erica A.
disease. Be particularly careful with all pigeons.
Miller DVM - personal communication).
Make sure they are kept in light, airy quarters. Any
 Precautions with suspect cases (for symptoms see
biid that shows symptoms of respiratory disease,
Chapter 9, pp 96-97) should be to isolate the bird
including open-mouthed breathing, when not hot or
from other birds and, if handling, to wear gloves
stressed, should be isolated, barrier-nursed and
and gowns or aprons The author would even rec-
Tefelled to the veteninary surgeon for diagnosis and
ommend the use of masks as an added precaution.
instruction.
Laundry, feeding implements and dishes used with
Prime Directives
these birds should be washed and sterilised
· Toxocariasis
separately from other equipment.
●Pasteurellosis
Finally, if carrying out post-mortem examina
· Campylobacteriosis
tions on sluispected cases, extra care should be taken
by weaning two pairs of gloves and a mask as well
Fimally, in discussing zoonoses, it is vital that
as increasing ventilation to the point of possibly
mouth-to-mouth or mouth-to-nose Iesuscitation is
using respirators (Dr Erica A. Miller - personal
 nevet resorted to because the Tisk of picking up an
communication).
infection is far too great.
As yet the disease has not been recorded in
Bnitain. Although many Tesident birds have been
shown to caIy antibodies to WNV, all the birds
(10) THE ANIMALS
Jecorded were healthy. It may be that West Nile
virus may not erupt in Britain in the way that it has
Wild animals ale obviously different from com-
affected America, but if it does, and that is
panion animals - they demand individual methods
extremely likely, it is vital that those handling wild
of treatment, but generally the nursing, care and han-
bids take every precaution with suspect cases.
dling of casualties differ greatly from the “hands on',
Jeassuring practices that work with our own pets.
Bird fancier's lung
Staring
Bird fancier's lung is a general term for vatious
lespiratory conditions expetienced by people who
In the wild an animal feels under threat if another
keep birds. It has been well known for imany years,
animal stares at it. This is in response to the
as its name suggests, particularly in the world of
inevitable predator concentrating and staring
cage-bird fanciers and pigeon keepers. Its effect can
before it moves in for the kill. A wild animal can
be severe and can cause keepers to have to stop
therefore take our direct gaze as a threat so always
keeping birds.
try not to stare at a casualty but avert youl eyes.
As usual prevention is better than cure, so if you
However, when you are concentrating on handling
are keeping bids try to adhere to the following
a dangerous animal then it will demand your full
practices:
attention even if this does involve staring.
●Always keep birds in a well-ventilated 1oom O1
shed
Viewing
·Wear a Tespiratory mask when cleaning
out,
A wild animal feels stress every time a human being
particularly when removing dry droppings
· At the first sign of your own respiratory prob-
is close to it. Coupled with stating it must be teTi-
fed. Imagine if there was a constant stream of
lems, go to your general practitioner and tell
humans staring at it. Life would be one long torture.
him/her that you work with birds
Also, a regularly disturbed patient is going to take
longer to heal and, worst of all, might cause itself
Other zoonoses
further injury in its efforts to avoid being seen.
Wild animals going through a peniod of care in
Thele are other zoonoses that can be contracted
from animals. Most of them, including rabies, come
captivity should not be put on public display.
In the case of birds it has been this author's
under standard veterinary codes of practice. In
expetience that it is beneficial to have them in cages
general, working cleanly and hygienically should
only above our head height.
prevent infection. Talk to the vetelinary surgeon
about the following diseases and learn to be aware
of them:
Fussing
·Rabies (see (6) Vaccinations, p. 6)
With a companion animal, patting on the head with
·Salmonellosis
a few soft words of compassion can work wonders.
10
Practical Wildlife Care
But a wild animal takes any touch as a threat and
The trouble is euthanasia is often seen as the easy
does not recognise the platitudes so effective for
option, and animals are killed because somebody
Ou1 dogs and cats. No petting, stroking, patting,
 does not want to put in the time and effort neces-
grooming: no contact whatsoever is the order of the
 sary to treat it. Animals do not have much. The one
day. Howevel, when approaching a wild animal, talk
thing they have is life and they will fight tooth and
to it quietly - not to pacify it but just to let it know
claw to preserve that one thing. If we are caring fo1
you are there so as not to startle it.
the animals then it is our duty to give each patient
the chance to keep that life.
Imprinting
This is not to say *Neve1 resort to euthanasia'. Of
course sometimes it is necessary. The attitude
Crucially, it is imperative not to talk regularly to o1
should be 'Is there another humane option?'. If not
handle any young animals and birds. Obviously in
then euthanasia is the only course. A good back-up
Taising orphans there has to be a certain amount of
policy is that at least two senior animal staff have
bonding but once that vital weaning stage has been
to consult on any proposed euthanasia, the inquest
Teached the animal must be encouraged to sever
to be held before the animal is killed.
any links. If this does not happen the animal
becomes permanently imprinted on humans and
Candidates for euthanasia
will never interplay with its own species.
A regime to prevent impninting is to use differ-
Most cases are blatantly obvious and seem to follow
ent people for different stages in an animal's devel-
a similar pattern. Guidelines have been drawm up
 Opment. A foster mother will provide pre-weaning
so that a casualty can be killed without unnecessary
feeding but then the animal is taken over by a
delay.
juvenile animals’ team who integrate it with others
Chiteria for euthanasia in cleal-cut cases are:
of its own species and never handle it again.
·A severed and displaced vertebral column
● The loss of two or more limbs
Pets
·A bird that is blind
An imprinted animal will never be suitable for
· A swan, goose or duck that loses a leg
Telease. Kept in captivity its wild instincts will cause
· Most male deer that cannot be Ieleased
it to be forever restless. It will not settle into domes-
● Disabled wood pigeons - wood pigeons never
ticity like a dog o1 a cat. Wild animals, in spite of
settle to captivity
what some of the pet trade suggests, do not make
· Birds of prey with only one leg.
good pets. You could never trust one not to bite O1
Not quite so obvious, but still candidates for
scratch or attack - you could nevel relax with it -
euthanasia are animals that:
and the animal, which may even be nocturnal, will
never settle to a ‘nine-to-five’ existence.
· Are going to have to suffer unacceptable levels
From the outset strive only to get the wild casul-
of pain even if treated
alty released back to the wild, but if it is slightly dis-
● Will never have any quality of life even if they
abled consider finding a sanctuary where it can live
Tecover and are kept in captivity
with others of its own kind. If not then euthanasia
·Cannot benefit from veterinary
techniques
should be seriously considered.
evolved for domestic animals but that are unsuit-
able for wild animals
● Will require a long period in close confinement
(11) EUTHANASIA
without suitable facilities being available
Consultation
 For one thing it is a human term just like putting it
to sleep', 'putting it down'’ or 'putting it out of its
It there is any doubt about whether or not the
misery'. All of these euphemisms mean one thing --
animal should be euthanased, then why not grant a
"killing' - and this should be bome in mind, just in
stay of execution while you discuss the case with
case ^euthanasia' is seen as an easy way out.
colleagues.
Prime Directives
II
Methods
Saving its failing life is winning against the odds.
Many of them are going to die in spite of everything
Euthanasia is all about stopping unnecessary suf-
that is done for them.
fening, and that very action of killing an animal
 Mistakes might have been made, however, but
should not include suffering. To make sure of this,
how can those mistakes be cofrected if the causes
procedures should be adopted that make it unlikely
of the animal's death are not known? Every wild
the animal suffers.
animal that dies should undergo a post-mortem
The Tecommended drug is pentobarbitone
sodium. This is a controlled drug, so must be given
examination. The veterinary surgeon may not be
able to perform every post-mortem examination
under the direction of the veterinary surgeon, must
but can advise when there is a particularly intnicate
be kept in locked cupboard and each use could be
case. Any person with knowledge of hygiene and
Tecorded in a register. The preferred method of
anatomy can perform a gross examination that will
injection is rapidly via an intravenous 1oute. So if
often give the answers as to why an animal died. In
an animal is on an intravenous dnip the drug can be
administered easily.
most cases, a gross examination proves that the
animal had an inreversible problem that would
Many animals and biids are too small to be able
never have resolved. Also post-mortem examina-
to access their veins. An intracardiac o1 intraperi-
tions may provide pathological information to
increase existing data on British wildlife.
animals should be deeply anaesthetised before the
injection is given.
Any animals being referred to the veterinary
surgeon for post-mortem examination should be
Amphibians can be euthanased by lengthy
properly stored until needed. As soon after death
immersion in a bath of tricaine mesilate (MS222
as is possible, the animal should be cooled rapidly.
Thomson and Joseph) at a concentration higher
Then it should be stored in a plastic bag in reffig-
than the accepted anaesthesia concentration of
25-1000g/l.
eration. If the post mortem has to be delayed for
longer than 24 hours, the body should be deep-
frozen. Freezing may damage tissue and affect the
Serum banking
identifcation of micro-organisms, but much valu-
able information can still be obtained, especially
As patt of the diagnostic process, the veterinary
with victims of trauma.
surgeon may take blood samples to assist in that
 Standard post-mortem procedures can be set up
diagnosis Any unused serum should be stored,
and would include:
frozen, in a Vacutainer?. These serum samples ate
then available should other incidents occu1 affect-
· A strict adherence to a health and safety proto-
ing similar species.
col designed specifically for post-mortem proce-
dures (the veterinary surgeon will be able to
provide a suitable code of practice)
Disposal
· A separate area away from the clinical centre of
All sharps and syringes must be disposed of safely
any facility
●A set of instruments and disposables kept just for
as clinical waste. Bodies are also clinical waste and
must be sent for incineration.
 post-mortem examinations
· Sets of surgical gloves, aprons and masks for
operatives
●A standard gross post-mortem examination form
(12) POST MORTEM
that follows regular procedures (Fig. 1.4)
· Sample bottles and formol saline for body tissues
Often it is fairly obvious why a casualty dies, but
· Body bags to take clinical waste
sometimes the reason is a mystery. People working
with casualties often blame themselves, and nurses
Any information and relevant tissues should be
and rehabilitators have left the profession becauise
kept and stored for future reference and databases.
they thought they were failing. A wild animal
Not only do post-mortem examinations pro-
brought into care is not far from death anyway.
vide vital information, they help carers over that
12
Practical Wildlife Care
Gross Post-mortem
Species:
NAME:
DATE:
Teeth
Sex
Age
Weight
EXTERNAL
Normal/Mange/Ringworm/Oedematous
INTESTINES
Normal/Gaseous/Haemorrhage/Parasites
STOMACH
Normal/Gaseous/Haemorrhage/Parasites
SPLEEN
Normal/Damaged/Enlarged
LIVER
Normal/Patchy/Discoloured..
./Enlarged
GALL BLADDER
Normal/Enlarged
KIDNEYS
Normal/Discoloured...
BLADDER
 Normal/Enlarged
LUNGS
Normal/Discoloured/Pussey/Bloody
Parasites
Live/Dead
HEART
Normal/Enlarged
Fig. 1.4 A gross post-mortem record provides vital data
temible feeling of I did not do enough’ and they
They can be adopted even by the smallest facility
also expand the knowledge of wildlife.
and easily adapted to meet new challenges such as
Tabies in bats and, potentially, West Nile virus.
Setting up a facility under the direction and assist-
SUMMARY
ance of a veterinary surgeon is essential and that
veterinary surgeon will appreciate that these wild
All these prime directives have been tried and
animals are receiving the best of care even before
tested by wildlife Tehabilitators over many years.
he o1 she becomes involved.
2
First Response
Most wildlife casualties are the victims of some
tial for anybody rescuing or handling wild animal
form of trauma. They regularly present with severe,
casualties. These vital sigms in a healthy animal will
infected injunies and shock not commonly seen in
be an indication of its well-being.
companion or domestic animals. The wild animal,
A living body is made up of cells, all of which
howevel, appears to demonstrate a greater capa-
depend on a good supply of oxygen and nutnients
bility to cope with these injunies and will often
so that cellular metabolism can be fuelled. The
Tecover if given the chance and the necessary sup-
waste products of this metabolism, such as carbon
portive treatment.
dioxide and lactic acid, must be removed from the
Yet even the most sophisticated nursing and
cells' immediate environment to avoid them being
treatment is of no use if the casualty does not
poisoned.
survive long enough to reach the treatment table.
The circulatory, Or cardiovascular, system, the
The first consideration with any wild casualty is to
heart, blood vessels and the blood fowing through
make sure all the life-supporting processes are suf-
them, provides the means by which oxygen and
ficiently intact to get the animal to the treatment
nutrients can be distributed to every cell in the
facility.
body and the waste products removed. Oxygen,
Getting the animal to the treatment table may
nutrients and the waste products that have to be
involve simply retrieving it from the ca1dboard box
Temoved can only be exchanged across the walls
 presented at eception or may involve transporting
of the extensive network of tiny blood capillaries.
it some distance from the scene of an incident.
The normal function of this microcirculation is
Assuming the animal is alive when picked up, it is
vital for the life of any tissue or any organ in the
obviously crucial to keep it that way until more
body.
sophisticated first-aid resources can be brought into
Breathing is the mechanism by which oxygen is
play.
taken into the lungs, or into the ait-sac system in a
To assist in any situations that might arise, a
biid or reptile, and delivered to the red blood cells
frst-aid kit for wild animals should be to hand. It
in the lungs’ capillaries for distibution throughout
should contain items to cover the whole range of
the body. Simultaneously, waste carbon dioxide
contingencies that wild casualties can present
is 1eleased from the blood and voided as the
(Table 2.1).
animal breathes out. Amphibians have the added
ability of being able to absorb air through the
skin.
THE VITAL SIGNS OF LIFE
An animal's vital signs provide information
about the functional state of the cardiovascular and
Vital signs are the clinical indications of the exist-
Tespiratory (breathing) systems and can reveal the
ence and stability of the life of an animal. A prac-
 condition of the crucial life-support mechanisms.
tical knowledge of an animal's vital signs and the
Any compromise of the cardiovascula1 01 respira-
physiological processes giving Tise to them is essenl-
tory systems can put life itself at tisk.
13
14
PracticalWildlifeCare
Table 2.1 Components of a first-aid kit suitable for
simply means there is no effective output of blood
wildlife casualties.
from the heart. It occurs when either the heart has
Component
stopped (cardiac arest) or is malfunctioning due to
uncoordinated beating of different parts of the
Stethoscope
heart (e.g. ventricular fibrillation).
Cuffed endotracheal (ET) tubes
If the heart is beating, the veterinary surgeon
K-Y Lubricating .Jelly (lohnson & .lohnson)
may ask for the heatt rate. This is not the same as
Laryngoscope
a pulse, although it can be. The heartbeat rate
Disposable examination gloves
Cotton weave bandages - 2
should be counted at the chest wall over the heart
Artery forceps - 2 pairs
using a stethoscope. Using a watch, count the
Space blankets
numbe1 of heartbeats in 15 seconds and multiply by
TraumastemTM (Millpledge) haemostatic powder
four. This gives the number of beats per minute
First-aid protocol
(BPM). Based on this information the veterinary
Ambu Bag resuscitator
Mixed small uncuffed ET tubes for birds
surgeon may presctibe atropine sulphate and other
10ml syringe for infating ET tubes (not in birds)
drugs.
Sterile swabs
Cohesive bandage - 2
Intrasite? Gel (Smith & Nephew)
(2) Pulse rate and strength
Scissors
Giant cotton buds
The pulse is the result of the heart pumping blood
Thermometer
around the artenies It is counted and assessed at
 During hot weather - a cool box for drugs and some
points around the body where arteries can be felt
Huids
just under the skin. If the heart is functioning noT-
mally, the pulse rate will be the same as the heart
Tate.
The vital signs of life include:
Three common sites to take a pulse tate are:
(1) Heart rate
● The coccygeal artery, which can be felt under-
(2) Pulse rate and strength
neath the base of the tail
(3) Quality, rate and gross sounds of breathing
● The femoral arteries as they pass behind and par-
(4) Colour of mucous membranes
 allel to the proximal thid of the femurs on the
(5) Capillary refill time (two seconds is normal)
imside of the thighs
(6) Core body temperature
· The brachial artenies which can be located as
they cross the distal third of the humerus
It is far safer to monitor these vital signs than it
is to try to reverse the often-inreversible effect of
It is worth familianising yourself with these points
their failure. These monitoring procedures are
on a dog or cat in advance of an emergency.
directed towards assessing the oxygen carrying
The pulse rate and its quality give an indication
ability of the blood and the effectiveness of the cir-
of how effectively the heart is distributing blood
culatory system in distributing this blood to main-
around the artenies:
tain an animal's cellular metabolism.
When handling or transporting an animal, fre-
· Its strength provides information on the pressure
quent monitoring of these vital signs and taking the
at which blood is being pumped from the heart.
appropriate action when changes in them indicate
A peripheral pulse tells you whether blood is
a problem, will prevent a number of unnecessary
being circulated to the penipheral capillary
deaths.
network.
● The pulse will indicate if its Iegularity is differ-
ent from the heart.
(1) Heart rate
· Monitoring the pulse may provide a warning that
Without a functioning heart, none of the vital life.
the heart is weakening allowing remedial mea-
supporting mechanisms can work. Heart failure
sures to be implemented under the direction of
FirstResponse
15
the veteninary surgeon. It is one of the most
branes lining the mouth also gives a good indica-
important signs of life.
tion of the presence of oxygen in the microcircula-
tion (see (4) Colour of mucous membranes).
As with heart rate, the pulse rate can be calcu-
Impending failure of the respiratory system can
lated by using a watch and counting how many
often be detected by:
pulse beats there are in 15 seconds and multiplying
by four to give the number of beats per minute.
· A fall in the tate of breathing to less than 50%
of normal
· A progressive fall in the depth of breathing
(3) Quality, rate and gross sounds of breathing
·A pallor or blue appearance of the mucous
Even if the heart is beating and the circulation func-
membranes
tioning, without breathing there is no exchange of
oxygen, Or removal of waste carbon dioxide,
through the lung capillaries.
(4) Colour of mucous membranes
The vital sign that an animal is breathing is a
The mucous membranes, o1 mucosa, are the moist
steady nise and fall of the chest. This is not always
layers of tissue lining many of the structures of the
obvious in birds and reptiles. To assess their quality
body. They are heavily perfused with blood from
of breathing, look in the mouth and observe the
the microcapillaries of the circulation and their
opening and closing of the glottis, which is the
status can be seen. Thei1 normal healthy colour of
entrance to the trachea (Fig. 2.1).
bright pink is another vital sign of a good ciculat-
Sounds of breathing, inhaling and exhaling may
ing supply of oxygen and good respiration. Changes
indicate the presence of blood or mucus in the
in this microcirculation can often be seen by
mouth or trachea. The colour of the mucous mem-
changes in the colour of the mucosa.
(5) Capillary refill time
The gums are part of the mucosa and as such have
a microcirculation of capillary blood vessels that
can be seen. By pressing on the gum, with the
thumb, the capillaries will be occluded and the
 Upper jaw
gums become pale. By judging how long it takes for
the capillaries to refill and the colour return once
Eye
the thumb has been removed it is possible to assess
the capillary 1efill time (CRT). Normally the CRT
in animals is between one and two seconds. Any-
 Opening to
thing over this provides another vital sign that the
oesophagus
microcirculation is below pa1.
Glottis (opening 
to trachea)
(6) Core body temperature
Tongue
Cellular metabolism in an animal is reliant on a
selies of highly complex chemical reactions within
cells. These can only occur within a limited tem-
perature fange. Taking an animal's core tempera-
Lower jaw
ture, usually with a thermometer passed into the
Tectum, gives an indication of well-being.
However, many species have different normal
core temperatures and that must be taken into
Fig. 2.1 The open mouth of a bird showing the glottis,
account before any Temedial action is taken (Table
the opening to the trachea.
2.2).
16
PracticalWildlifeCare
Table 2.2 Some body temperatures of British wild
animals.
Animal
Temperature (°C)
Badger
37.8-38.5
Bats
Vary according to ambient
temperature
 Birds in general
40
Bottle-nosed dolphin
37
Brown rat
37.2-37.8
Cetaceans
36-37.5
Deer
38-39
37.840.0
37.8-39
Grey squirrel
37.4-38.5
Hedgehog
34-37 (Hibemation 6°C)
House mouse
36.1-36.7
Fig. 2.2 The complete range of endotracheal tubes will
Mink
37.5
be required for emergency procedures.
12110
38
Passerines
40-41
Pigeon
40-41
Rabbit
38-39.6
Seabirds
39-41
A:Airways
Seals
36-38
B:Breathing
C: Circulation
D:Drugs
SIGNS OF DEATH
Airways
There is no point in attempting to monitor vital
· Check that the passage of air into the lungs is
signs of life if the animal is already dead! Just as
unobstructed
there are signs of life to watch, there are also signs
 Remove any blood clots,foreign bodies, mucus O1
+
of death:
vomit from the mouth
●Make sure the entrance to the trachea is clea1 of
(1) Lack of heartbeat
obstruction
(2) Wide dilation of the pupils
●Make sure that the tongue is pulled forward and
(3) Agonal gasping
is not obscuring the tracheal entrance
(4) The animal is not breathing
· Extend the head and neck forward to maintain a
(5) There are no teflexes
clear airway
(6) Rigor mortis may o1 may not be present
(7) And the most positive sign: the usually smooth,
If there is a problem keeping the airways clear
moist fronts of the corneas become glazed and
then an endotracheal tube can be passed into the
winkled
trachea (Fig.2.2). Make sure the tube itself does not
get blocked or become kinked.
Birds in particular will find breathing easier if
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
they are maintained in an upright position on thei1
keels.
The vital life signs will provide indications as to the
well-being of an animal. Howevel, if problems do
Breathing
arise and life signs are not as they should be, it
is important to follow the basic principles
s-the
Check whether o1 not the animalis breathing.Signs
ABCD - of first aid. These are:
of respiratory failure can be detected by:
First Response
17
· No signs of breathing for one minute
·A pallor or blue appearance of the mucous
membranes
· Violent and frequent struggles by the animal to
draw in breath
If there are still no signs of breathing then artificial
Tespiration can be commenced.
Artificialrespiration
Chest compressions
Intermittent pressure on the chest wall can be tied
to establish an airfow in and out of the lungs, but
this is extremely ineffcient for anything more than
a couple of minutes.
Mouth-to-mouthrespiration
It is now recommended that mouth-to-mouth inter-
vention is not practised with wild animals to avoid
the nisk of zoonotic infection.
Ambubag
One of these should be included in every first-aid
kit and animal treatment centre. Quite simply an
Ambu bag fits on to the endotracheal tube enabling
ai1 to be passed directly into the lungs and waste
carbon dioxide Temoved. Short regula1 compres-
sions of the Ambu bag, say two breaths a second,
will keep the respiration functioning (Plate 3).
The only drawback to Ambu bags is that they
Fig. 2.3 Using a hypodermic needle (25g) to stimulate
the acupuncture point at the nasal philtrum can encour-
cannot be used on birds, reptiles o1 amphibians,
age an animal to take a breath.
which are particularly susceptible to injury by over-
infation of their lungs or air sacs.
There are on the market various automatic ven-
tilators that can be attached to an animal via an
while you are peforming artificial respiration, a
endotracheal tube. These can be used to provide
few drops of doxapram hydrochloride (Dopram-V
Inte1mittent Positive Pressure Ventilation (IPPV),
- Willows Francis Veterinary), a Tespiratory stimu-
which may be necessary for quite some time,
lant, should be placed under the tongue. Its effect
especially during surgical procedures, with some
is comparatively short-lived and should be repeated
species.
every ten minutes or to effect.
Injectable doxapram can be given intravenously
Acupuncture
at 1-2 mg/kg.
Just below the nares or thinarium is the nasal
philtrum which, when pricked with a sterile needle,
Circulation
can stimulate a breathing response (Fig. 2.3).
Listen to the chest with a stethoscope or feel for a
Drugs
pulse. If neither is present or is not normal then
In an attempt to encourage the animal to breathe
various conditions could be present.
18
Practical Wildlife Care
Cardiac arrest
Ventricular fibrillation, or rapid heartbeat
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) is disorganised electri-
It is crucial that the heart is monitored constantly.
 cal activity in the ventricles of the heart, which, in
Feeling usually the left and sometimes the Tight
fact, will have stopped pumping blood.
side of the chest of a normal animal you should be
In some birds, particularly wood pigeons, pheas-
able to detect a heartbeat, even if it is very slow.
ants and some passenines, the heart will be felt
Listening with a stethoscope O1 one of the new
to start racing. The rapid vibrations can easily be
electronically-enhanced oesophageal stethoscope
described as fibrillation although technically this is
amplifiers will help in tracing even the faintest
not the case. As a biid's heart rate accelerates it will
heartbeat and, of course, the lack of a heartbeat.
lead to cardiac alrest. The only hope of saving the
If the heart fails, the lack of oxygen to the brain
bid is quickly and urgently to place the bird in a
Tesults in irreversible brain damage within three
dark, warm environment, i.e.in a cardboard box O1
minutes. Time is of the essence so exteinal caidiac
under a towel, and leave well alone. It is, howevel,
massage, intermittent pressure on the chest wall
unlikely that the bird will recover.
over the heart, may help to keep the blood circu-
lating to the brain and other organs Placing the
head down will assist the blood fow to the brain.
Drugs
However, with any compressions for cardiac resus-
citation it must be borne in mind that the animal
Vanious specific drugs can be useful in life-
may have some chest damage, e.g. broken nibs, and
threatening situations. They should always be to
hand both for routine emergencies and for pre-
it is possible to cause further injury. Coupled with
this should be some attempt to support and rein-
scTiption by the veterinary surgeon. They should
state the respiratory system with artificial respira-
preferably be kept together and separate from
tion and oxygen, if it is available.
 other drugs in an emergency container,'a crash box
Under the stnict direction of a veterinary
01 ‘a crash trolley', where they will be accessible
surgeon, adrenaline can be administered and may
2.3).
stimulate the heart to start beating again. Adrena-
line is administered intravenously at 0.01 mg/kg
every 3-4 minutes 0r as a last resort may be injected
into the heart. Simplifed, this would be 1ml
SHOCK
1/10000 adrenaline pe1 10 kg. It is crucial that the
heart is actually failing before adrenaline is
All wildlife casualties will show some degree of
administered.
dehydration and can be assumed to be suffering
Even if the heart does tespond,the effect may be
from some degree of shock. Generally brought
only temporary so the patient must be monitored
on by trauma, shock can also be precipitated by
closely and any sign of the heart slowing taken into
severe dehydration, haemorrhage, diarrhoea O1
 account and reported to the veterinary surgeon.
vomiting.
With cardiac alrest there will be Tespiratory
 Shock is not a mental condition. It is a failure
failure. Attempts at 1esuscitation should combine
of the microcirculation (basically the capillary
both cardiac stimulation and artificial respiration.
network) to provide adequate perfusion of the
 Respiratory failure usually precedes cardiac failure,
tissues with blood. Cells are deprived of oxygen and
giving little opportunity to be prepared for cardiac
nutrients, and waste products such as carbon
aTrest.
dioxide and lactic acid are not removed. Local cell
Where there has been failure of both systems
death will occur, followed by the death of the
there is very little likelihood that you1 attempts at
animal. Vanious categories of shock can be diag-
Tesuscitation will be successful. Howevel, if there is
oeid iso jo jnq uoeains Aieuuaiea ayl Aq pasou
just respiratory failure, and the attempts to restart
tical importance is hypovolaemic (low volume)
the breathing are successful, then the patient must
shock, which is due to the loss of blood, plasma OT
still be closely monitored for any signs that the
just water and electrolytes. Without the input of a
Tespiratory system might fail again.
veterinary surgeon, it is safe to assume that any
First Response
19
Table 2.3 Crash procedures and dosages notice for instant reference.
Crash Procedures
Follow A, B, C and D
A-Airway
B - Breathing
C- Circulation
D -Drugs
Adrenaline
Use only 1:10000 concentration:
· Supplied as 1:1000
● Mix with 10 parts water for injection i.e. a 2ml syringe should contain 0.2ml adrenaline plus 2ml water
·Dose with 1ml/10 kg
Use only in cases of cardiac arrest unless directed by a veterinary surgeon.
Dopram V Injection (Fort Dodge Animal Health)
Intravenous injection 0.1 ml/kg; repeat after 15 minutes
Dopram V Drops (Fort Dodge Animal Health)
Orally 2-3 drops per animal under tongue repeat after 10 minutes
hins Aeuaiea Aq paiaip ssaun isaue Aroiedsai yo sase ul as
Atropine Sulphate
[ntravenous 0.1 mg/kg
StTiggywinkles
The Wildlife Hospital Trust
animal suffening from shock is suffering from this
HYPOTHERMIA
low volume shock'.
The clinical signs of shock include:
Hypothermia describes the condition in which the
animal's core body temperature falls below normal.
· Pale mucous membranes
The ambient temperature can have an effect on
· Capillary tefill time (CRT) longer than two
whether an animal becomes hypothermic or not.
seconds
Animals that are wet and in a cold environment ate
●Hypothermia and cold extremities
particularly susceptible to hypothermia as are
· Lowered level of consciousness
animals that are debilitated in some way.
· Weak tapid pulse
Treatment of hypothermia could entail warm
· Increased heart tate
fuid infusion (see Chapter 3) or warming by
·Increased breathing
fanning heat fom a car heatei, hair dryer or a
●Weakness in the muscles
closely monitored infrared lamp over the animal.
Immersion in a bath of water at normal body tem-
Shock is a complicated medical condition that
perature is particularly effective as long as the
needs countering in different ways In particular the
animal is dnied thoroughly afterwards.
use of fuid therapy is essential. Its effect and uses
Contact heat using a heat pad will only heat
are more fully discuissed in Chapter 3.
1o suunq asnes Aeu pue [eue ayl jo jed uo
20
Practical Wildlife Care
other tissue damage. To counter hypotheimia the
bleeding may well have stopped before you attend
animal's total environment has to be warmed.
the animal.
There are four natural defences that may stop an
animal bleeding although they may not be sufficient
HYPERTHERMIA
to save its life:
Hypertheimia is the teverse of hypothermia and
(1) Clotting. All natural ways of stemming haem-
can also be exacerbated by the ambient tempera-
ture. It is caused by an excessive lise in body tem-
the bleeding point. If the fow of blood is not
leaq ynu ooi oi ainsodxa qanoni rauiia aimeiad
to0 great, i.e. it is from the capillaries rather
or else is through an abnormal production of body
than from a major blood vessel, then it will
heat. Clinical signs include: rapid pulse, breathing
probably clot without any assistance. It is only
and panting; extreme weakness, trembling and col-
when the blood vessel is large or under the
lapse. Unless urgent measures are taken to reduce
enormous pressure of an artery that clotting
the body temperature, convulsions and death will
cannot take place without a first aider's
follow.
assistance.
Treatment could entail putting the animal in the
(2) Constriction of the blood vessels. Arteries by
shade, immersing it in cold watet, wapping it in wet
nature have elastic walls that, when torn across,
towels o1 even packing it with ice bags Increased
will constnict to close the vessel, aiding clot for-
ventilation will enable the animal to disperse some
mation.A tea1 has more chance of closing than
of its own heat by increased respiration and
a straight cut caused by something sharp.
panting. Cold water lavaged into the rectum, e.g.
(3) Low blood pressure. As an animal bleeds, its
from a sports bottle with a spout, will greatly assist
blood pressure becomes lower until there may
the reduction of body heat.
g Aue [adxa oi ainssaid qnoua aq 1
blood. At this point clots will be able to form
 at the bleeding points in the damaged blood
HAEMORRHAGE
vessels.
(4) Back pressure. Where an animal is bleeding
Even with a good heartbeat and a Tegular breath-
imternally into a body cavity, the cavity may
ing pattem, any casualty's life could still be in
eventually fill. When the pressure of the blood
danger from haemorrhage. Most wildlife casualties
imside the cavity equals that escaping from the
will be suffering from some form of bleeding,
blood vessel(s) no more blood can escape and
whether it be a minor scratch Or a major life-
once again clots will form.
threatening wound. It may be external bleeding
that is obvious or it may be intemal bleeding that
An animal that has ingested warfarin, or other
is undetectable without sophisticated diagnostic
types of anticoagulant rodent poison, will have its
techniques Or surgery.
blood clotting mechanism impaired. There may be
Exteinal bleeding is where blood appears on
s0 many small haemorrhages that it may be nigh on
the surface of the body. This may be from open
impossible to save an affected animal. Howevel,
wounds or may be blood, lost internally, escap-
injections of vitamin K (Konakion? - Roche) at
ing from the mouth, ears, nose or intestinal or
1-2mg/kg repeated after six hours, may aid clot
uinary tract. Inteinal bleeding cannot be readily
formation.
seen and may be the result of severe bruising OI
damage to inteinal organs such as the spleen, liver
Health and safety
and lungs.
At the scene of an incident, or when you first see
Through any of these natural processes, any bleed-
the animal casualty, take note of any signs of blood
ing may have stopped before you approach the
and where it may have come from. Also try to assess
animal to move it. At this point it is worth consid-
how much blood has been lost. Any animal's body
eTing whether the bloodstains noted are from the
has its own defences against blood loss and any
animal's blood or from someone who was trying to
First Response
21
help it. An experienced handler of wildlife, espe-
haemohages until the animal can be delivered to,
cially of badgers, foxes, otters, seals o1 even squir-
 OT be seen by, the veterinary surgeon.
rels, should not get bitten. The good Samaritan,
Far more birds are found as wildlife casualties
however, is very likely to get bitten and bleed p1o-
than mammals; to be effective their blood pressure
fusely. There is a danger of infectious disease being
tends to be higher than mammals’ and in small
transmitted between humans so surgical gloves are
birds even the loss of little more than 10% of thei1
essential if this situation arises. Assuming that all
blood volume could be fatal. This could be just the
Tescuers, before being sent to animals, have had 
equivalent of one o1 two drops spilt by the neigh-
their rabies and tetanus inoculations, any other
bourhood cat.
persons who get bitten in a rescue situation, should
There are three classes of extemal haemorrhage:
be sent to the local hospital for treatment.
The expenienced handler should not get bitten,
Class I Where haemorrhage is mild, for example
but be aware that infection can be carried not only
10-15%, there will be few if any changes in the
in a bite but also in an animal's body fuids. Notably
animal's vital life signs.
animals’ urine is the usual medium for transmitting
Clinical signs: Animal alert
leptospirosis, which causes the potentially fatal
Mucous membranes pink
Weil's disease in humans. Also any ticks can trans-
Capillary refill time two seconds
mit Lyme disease.
Pulse pressure appears normal
Class II With a moderate degiee of haemmorrhage
any changes in the animal's vital life signs will be
Reactive haemorrhage
appreciable.
Hopefully, natural processes will have taken effect
Clinical signs:
Animal alert but nervous
to cause blood clotting to stop any further bleed-
 Mucous membranes pale pink
ing. Unfortunately, the efforts of fist aiders may
Capillary Tefill time two seconds
well dislodge the clots and start the bleeding again.
 Pulse pressure slightly weak
There are three ways this reactionary haemor-
Class III With severe or life-threatening haemor-
Thage can be provoked and all are unavoidable:
rhage, for exarmple with 30% of the circulatory
volume lost.
(1) Just moving an animal by picking it up or taking
Chinical signs will be obvious and will include:
it out of a container can dislodge a blood clot
Animal depressed o1 comatose
and start the bleeding all over again.
Mucous membranes very pale Or
(2) As you pick an animal up it may struggle and
white
its heart rate may increase enough to raise its
Capillary refill time two seconds
blood pressure enough to dislodge any blood
Pulse pressure weak or absent
clots.
(③) The introduction of intravenous fuids to
The first aider may feel helpless with an animal
increase the circulating blood volume may also
bleeding intemally: fuid therapy and speed to the
dislodge any clots that have formed. But, as will
operating table are the only possible ways of saving
be seen in the next chapter, on fluid therapy,
the animal's life, yet the first aider can be very effec-
shock is the most likely cause of a casualty's
tive in controlling bleeding from exteinal wounds.
 death and must be given priority over other
The point of bleeding needs to be located and the
likely conditions.
type of blood loss noted. Blood from wounds will
either be arterial, venous, capillary or,more usually,
External haemorrhage
a mixture of all three:
From these examples it is easy to see how the first
·Arterial bleeding -bleeding from a major artery.
aider can do little to cope with internal haemor-
Arterial bleeding will usually be seen as being
Thages. External haemorhages emanating from
 pumped under great pressure in pulses that coin-
wounds are much more accessible, giving the first
cide with the heartbeat. It will be bright red and
aider an opportunity to control life-threatening
 may be pumped out ovel considerable distances.
22
PracticalWildlifeCare
This is the most serious form of haemorrhage and
pad and bandage to prevent reactive bleeding.
will result in copious blood loss unless it is con-
Direct digital pressure can be effective, but in prac-
tolled immediately.
tice the use of pressure pads and bandage are more
· Venous bleeding. This is a much darker Ted and
practical and even more effective.
tends to pour out of a wound under low pressure.
Occasionally, there may be a slight pulsing, but
Pressure pad and bandage
nothing near the force shown by arterial bleed-
img. In large wounds the blood can be seen
A bleeding wound that you cannot control with
coming from the side of the wound furthest from
direct digital pressure may be stemmed with a pres-
the heart. Even though it is not under great pres-
sure pad or pads and bandages. In this procedure a
sure, extensive venous bleeding can result in
pad of stenile gauze swabs is used to pack the
major blood loss.
wound completely. Then a non-adhesive cohesive
· Capillary bleeding. The whole body is packed
bandage (Co-Flex? - Millpledge Veterinary) is used
with small capillary blood vessels, the micro-
to wrap the pad tightly into the wound (Fig. 2.4). If
circulation, which will 1upture with the slightest
the wound is still bleeding add another pad over the
wound. Any bleeding will be of small amounts, as
top of the old one and re-wrap. The old pad should
capillanies are fine vessels, allowing clots to form
not be removed because this will probably dislodge
more easily.
any clots that have formed. The pad and bandage
· Mixed bleeding. The trouble with mixed bleeding
should be left in place until the animal is seen by
from more than one type of blood vessel is that
the veterinary surgeon.
it is difficult to identify the source and decide on
which first-aid measures to use. Unfortunately
virtually all wounds will show a mix of bleeding
from any of these sources.
Controlling haemorrhage
As a general measure it is a good idea to dress each
wound with IntraSite? Gel (Smith & Nephew)
before any procedures are started. This helps
control the inevitable bactenia in all wounds and
keeps further debris out.
Direct digital pressure
Not requiring any instruments or materials, the use
of clean or surgical-gloved fingers can control the
haemonhage from many wounds, especially those
of venous or capillary blood vessels. A finger and
thumb is placed on the intact skin on each side of
the wound. The intact skin is then pinched, effec-
tively closing the blood vessels at the same time.
The sides of the wound, if there are no foreign
objects in it, are then pushed together and held.
This direct digital pressure needs to be held for
five minutes giving the blood in the veins time to clot.
The pressure must not be relaxed until the five
minutes are up or else any clots that have formed will
be dislodged and you will have to start all over again.
Fig. 2.4 Pressure bandage applied to the leg of a fox to
stemhaemorrhage.
Once the bleeding has ceased, apply a pressure
First Response
23
Ring pad
to the femur. Pressure here will slow any arterial
bleeding below the stifle.
A wound will often have foreign bodies embedded
· The coccygeal artery passes along the underside
in it. In these circumstances the uise of a straight
of the tail. Pressure under the base of tail will
pressure pad would only serve to push this debris
slow any arterial bleeding in the rest of the tail.
deeper into the damaged tissuie.A ring pad uses the
aoi e st ing ped ainssaid ai se aidound as
towel or bandage laid on the intact skin around the
Toumiquets
margins of the wound, completely encircling it. The
Toumiquets are very dangerous to use in that they
pressure bandage is then applied over the ling with
 Occlude all blood vessels, damage underlying tissue
just enough pressure to stem the fow of blood.
and, if left in place for longer than 15 minutes,
can cause tissues beyond them to die. They can,
Artery forceps and ligatures
however, be used if a limb has sustained major
injury which may necessitate amputation. Only fat
Where a major blood vessel, an artery o1 vein, is
material or a belt should be used. String Or any
damaged it may be possible to isolate it and it is
CTucial to identify the vessel that is damaged. It
even more damage.
is dangerous to just grope around the wound
The toumiquet can be applied on the intact skin
with artery forceps as itreparable damage can be
above a wound. It must be teleased every 15
inflicted on the many nerves present in the skin
minutes and moved closer to the wound allowing
area.
the tissues under its original position to recover.
If it is definitely located, the vessel can be
Tourniquets should be avoided wherevel pos-
clamped closed, but do not be over-conceined
se isnf aq ues agepueq pue ped ainssaid e - alqrs
about closing a major artery. Once a blood vessel
effective and is far safer.
has been effectively closed off, surrounding vessels
will slowly expand and re-route the blood supply to
areas beyond the defect. Eventually even new
Haemostatics
blood vessels may form to cope with the change.
A product from Millpledge Veterinary called
The clamped vessels can be ligated with suitable
Traumastem may be lsed to control small arteriolar
suture material or the forceps can be left in place
O1 venous bleeding in combination with the appli-
until the animal can be seen by the veterinary
cation of short-time digital pressure or pressure
surgeon.
packing.
Pressure points
Other bleeding points
Sometimes the fow of blood at a wound makes
The nose
it impossible to identify the offending blood ves-
Epistaxis, OT nosebleed, is often seen where an
sels, usually artenies. With wounds to the limbs and
animal has suffered a head injury. There may well
tail it is possible to apply digital pressure to the
be damage to the bones of the nose. No real remedy
alteries at the pressure points between the defect
is available to stop the bleeding although cold com-
and the heart. The pressure points are the same on
presses may help.
all animals and can be located by feeling for the
With epistaxis it is crucial to make sure that the
pulse on a dog or cat:
animal can breathe by keeping its nostrils or, if that
is not possible, its mouth clear.
· The brachial artery Tuns down the inside of the
humerus with its pulse being clearly felt over the
Toenails
distal humerus. Pressure on this point will slow
Both birds and mammals bleed copiously from
any arterial bleeding below the elbow.
nails or claws damaged in accidents. Usually it is not
· The femoral artery pulse can be felt as it 1uns
too serious and can be stemmed with the lse of
down the inside of the thigh behind and parallel
Traumastem (Millpledge Veterinary).
24
PracticalWildlifeCare
Pin or blood feathers
Taking all these measures on board should make
When a bird is growing new feathers, at each moult,
sure that any wildlife casualty stands a good chance
these feathers have a major blood supply. If one of
of staying alive to receive the next crucial stage of
these pin feathers is broken there could be a
its first-aid treatment, that is the introduction of
massive loss of blood that could be life threatening,
Auid therapy, either at the scene of the incident
especially to small birds. Clamping the feathers with
Or at the medical facility.
artery forceps o1 plucking them should stop the
bleeding-
3
Fluid Therapy
Part I: Building Blocks
TRIAGE
(3) In a life-threatening condition demanding
emergency life-saving measures and the imme-
The vast majority of wildlife casualties taken into
diate summoning of the veterinary surgeon.
care are the victims of some kind of trauma.All too
often their obvious injuries attract attention while
These guidelines on triage can also be applied
the real life-threatening conditions are unseen but
when there is more than one casualty at a time, for
alieady in progress, taking the animal to a point of
instance during an oil spill (see Chapter 19).
no teturn. These less obvious tesults of trauma,
Shock is not often encountered in companion
shock o1 dehydration must be countered before any
animals but it is safe to assume that every wildlife
attempt should be made to deal with other injuries.
casualty is suffering from some degree of shock or
The fiist procedure is to provide a quick and
dehydration which should be addressed if there is
accurate assessment of the needs of the casualty.
to be any chance of successful rehabilitation.
This is known as triage. The principle of triage is to
so1t casualties into categonies of priority fo1 treat-
ment. With wildlife casualties there is usually only
DISTRIBUTION OF WATER IN THE BODY
one animal presented at any time but a vaniation
on triage can be applied specifically tailored to suit
An animal's body is made up of a great deal of fuid,
the available resources and, in particular, not to
which, in an adult, can mean that 50-60% of the
call on the veterinary surgeon to each admitted
body is water (Fig. 3.1). Younger animals will have
case. An expetienced nurse o1 rehabilitator can
a higher water content, about 70-80%, whereas
provide instant triage and only call the veterinary
older animals have teduced body watel, about
surgeon for life-threatening conditions, whereas
50-55%. Also, fat contains less wate1 than other
other cases can be fitted into a planned programme
types of tissue so consequently fat animals will have
of care.
proportionally less water.
All casualties will require treatment and exami-
Two-thirds of a body's water (equivalent to 40%
nation at some stage, but initially they can be
of bodyweight) will be inside the cells of the body
categorised:
tissues. This is known as intracellula1 fuid (ICF).
The remaining one-third (equivalent to 20% of
(1) Not in a life-threatening condition and only
bodyweight) will be outside the cells and is called
jequining Toutine first-aid treatments.
An
extracellular fuid (ECF)
example would be an orphaned baby biid.
The ECF is further divided into:
(2) Injured, not in a life-threatening condition but
requiring first aid, stabilisation, pain relief and
(1) 5% plasma wate1 which is contained within the
probably radiographs to enable the veterinary
blood vessels
surgeon to fully assess the animal. Candidates
(2) 15% interstitial fuid which is contained in the
for euthanasia fall into this category.
spaces between the cells
25
26
Practical Wildlife Care
(3) Less than 1% transcellular fuid for the
Smaller animals, especially birds, may have a
processes like gastiointestinal secretions and
greater water requirement than this, i.e. a range of
cerebrospinal fuid
66-132 ml/kg pe1 day,the smallest needing the most
pTo rata to body size (see Table 3.1).
The body constantly loses water from the ECF.
Inevitable water loss needing replacement in
This inevitable water loss is essential to support the
mammals also varies according to the size of the
four functions from which the loss emanates:
animal.
Drinking is obviously the best way of getting
(1) Respiration. From the respiratory tract during
water, but some birds and other animals very rarely
breathing, since expired ai1 is moistened as
drink. Their water intake is gained from their food
it passes through the nasal passages and the
whether it be meat, vegetable matter, Or, as some
Tespiratory system.
finches manage, the metabolism of dnied seeds and
(2) Urination. From the kidneys during urination,
nuts for their water content.
although the body's metabolism will adjust for
changes in hydration and water availability for
exCTetion.
DEHYDRATION
(3) Gastrointestinal processes. From the gastro-
mtestinal tract in the faeces or senious fuid
Commensurate with its size, any animal will survive
losses through dianrhoea or vomiting.
going without food for far longer than it will survive
(4) Skin losses. Reliant on ambient conditions,
without fuid intake. An animal that does not
Huids are lost through the skin or from pores in
 a jo y e r  r ia i s
the feet during perspiation. Bids will open
still be losing fuid at the rate of about 50 ml/kg per
their mouths to disperse heat by vibrating the
day fo1 a 10kg animal. Although as dehydration
gular region in their throats.
sets in the kidneys will concentrate the urine to
Teduce water loss, losses from respiration, the skin
To replace this water loss, an animal, on average,
and gastrointestinal tract cannot be reduced. There-
must take in about 50ml/kg of water per day.
fore a reduced water intake can easily become life
threatening to an animal, as can increased fuid loss
such as through serious diarrhoea Or vomiting.
Described simply as a fuid deficit percentage of
bodyweight, a 15-25% deficit can generally be
Body
taken as fatally irretnievable (Tables 3.2 and 3.3 and
60% water
Plate 4).
 Many wildlife casualties, especially orphans, will 
be showing some degree of dehydration. This is just
because they will not have eaten or drunk for a
/Intracellular
Extracellular
period of time and may have been lying unpro-
fluid (ICF)
fluid (ECF)
tected from hot summer weather. In fact any wild
40%
20%
biid taken into care can be assumed to be 5% dehy-
drated. Unless the dehydration is very pronounced,
10-15%, the condition may not be life threatening.
Table 3.1 Fluid intake required to replace inevitable
water loss, based on bodyweight.
/Interstitial
Plasma
Transcellular
fluid
water
fluid
Weight of animal
Approximate daily fuid intake
15%
5%
<1%
1kg
100ml/kg
10kg
50ml/kg
Fig. 3.1 The breakdown of a body's water content.
100kg
30ml/kg
Fluid TherapyPart I:BuildingBlocks
27
Table 3.2 Estimation of dehydration in birds.
Clinical signs
Estimated
percentage of
dehydration
No obvious changes but assume all
<5%
injured birds have some fuid deficit.
Skin appears tight, especially over the
5-10%
keel (breast bone). The skin forms
temporary tents if pulled up. The
0:135
eyes look dull. The inside of the
WEYLUX
mouth is dry, not moist as is usual.
The mouth is very dry. The feet and
10-15%
wing tips are cold. The skin stays
tented if it's pulled up (Plate 4).
The heartbeat is rapid and the bird
Fig. 3.2 Every
casualty should be weighed on
looks ill, listless and depressed. The
admittance.
bird is near death. Not moving. It
feels cold as shock sets in.
possible to estimate its fuid requirements without
Table 3.3 Estimation of dehydration in mammals.
the need for laboratory tests such as packed cell
volume (PCV), which, anyway, may be misleading
Clinical signs
Estimated
unless interpreted by a veterinary surgeon.
percentage of
Calculate the likely fuid deficit as a percentage
dehydration
of bodyweight.Added to this would be the animal's
daily maintenance requiements at an average of
No obvious signs of dehydration but a
<4%
 50 ml/kg per day or 60-132 ml/kg pe1 day for biids
history of fuid loss. Assume all
casualties have some deficit.
depending on their size. The protocol is to try to
5-7%
Teplace the deficit over 2-3 days while still provid-
The skin appears tight. Mouth is dry,
eyes starting to dry. Mucous
ing daily maintenance for those days (Example
membranes in mouth are dry and red.
3.1). If there is any doubt about calculating the fuid
Eyes beginning to sink. Urine is
deficit then just provide fuids for maintenance until
concentrated and reduced in volume.
the veterinary surgeon advises further.
Pulse very weak. Animal very cold.
8-10%
Animals suffering from lesser degrees of fuid or
Eyes shrunken. Animal almost
blood loss may not actually be in shock, as various
comatose. Skin remains tented
(Plate 4). Mucous membranes pale.
adjustments in the body's fuid distribution will
Life-threatening.
have been made to compensate for these losses.
This, initially, maintains 
the microcirculation.
However, they will be heading towards shock and
However, the added stress of being brought into
such losses should be replaced to prevent shock
captivity and handled may well push the casualty to
occurning.
its limits.
Therefore assume that every casualty is suffering
Whatever t
the degree of dehydration it is
from some degree of shock. Dehydration is tanta-
absolutely crucial that the casualty is given the Tight
mount to shock and its assessment gives some idea
Auids without any delay. Too much fuid, especially
of the depth of shock from which the patient is suf-
parenterally, can cause pulmonary oedema in some
fering. Fluid therapy will counter this as will the use
species, while too little will not remedy the situa-
 of corticosteroids, which are generally considered
tion. Coupled with the animal's weight (every casul-
to aid 1ecovery (Fig. 3.3).
alty should be weighed as it alrives) (Fig. 3.2), and
X-rays for fractures and other internal injuries
an assessment made of its degree of dehydiration,
can wait 24 hours for the animal to stabilise. An
using the guidelines in Tables 3.2 and 3.3. It is then
ugent X-ray such as for a suspected fractured spine
28
Practical Wildlife Care
osmotic pressures of the solutions A process
A tawny owl weighing 400g is presented in a
called osmosis allows water to fow from one
dehydrated condition. Its dehydration is estimated at
compartment to the other in order to maintain
10% of its bodyweight.
equilibrium.
Assume its pre-trauma weight would have been
Different fluids exert different osmotic pressures,
420g
but using plasma as a yardstick those fuids exett-
Fluid deficit:
10%×420=42ml
ing the same osmotic pressure as plasma are said to
Protocol adopted is to replace deficit over 3 days
be isotonic. Those fuids that exelt a highel osmotic
giving the owl an extra 60ml/kg per day over and above
pressure are said to be hypertonic and those exert-
its deficit.
ing a lower osmotic pressure are hypotonic.
When we provide fuids to an animal we must
The owl would receive
Day 1:
deficit
21 ml
make sure they are not hypertonic or else existing
Maintenance
25 ml
life-supporting fuids may be drawn out of the
46ml
extracellular fuid. Usually isotonic or hypotonic
Day 2:
↓ deficit
11 ml
fuids should be given to a dehydrated or shocked
Maintenance
25 ml
36ml
by the veterinary surgeon. They may need hyper-
Day 3:
↓deficit
10ml
tonic fuids like glucose but advice on their use
Maintenance
25ml
should also be left to the veterinary surgeon
35 ml
(Fig. 3.3).
Day 4:
Maintenance only
25ml
These amounts are further divided into smaller doses
given throughout the days.
FLUID REPLACEMENT
Example 3.1 The calculation of the fluid requirements
Fluid replacement can be provided through a
of a tawny owl (Strix aluco) admitted in a dehydrated and
shocked condition.
number of routes including oral, intravenous, sub-
cutaneously, intraperitoneal and intraosseous, the
latter being the 1oute suitable for most small biids
and other animals.
may be one of the exceptions, whereby a short
Various proprietary fuids are available to suit
anaesthetic with isofurane may be the only way
any situation. However, wildlife first aid will only
to get a satisfactory radiograph. Otherwise the
evel need a few of these just to overcome dehy-
prudent use of sedatives like diazepam can safely
diation and possible starvation. All of these are
quieten the animal to permit X-rays and the putting
either hypotonic for oral use o1 isotonic for par-
up of an infusion line.
enteral use.
TONICITY
ORAL REHYDRATING SALTS
The administration of particular fuids will assist
There are many brands of oral rehydrating salts
many animals in overcoming the life-threatening
manufactured for human consumption and avail-
perils of shock. True, an animal that starts drinking
able at chemists. They are perfectly adequate for
will be able to maintain its own body water content,
use in animals and may even taste better than the
 but it will benefit from assistance in replacing any
veteninary equivalent. Similaily there are various
deficit.
brands manufactured for animal consumption.
Various electrolytes (solutes) are dissolved in the
Usually obtainable through veterinary practices,
water content of the body, which is divided into
Lectade (Pfizer) is available in packets that make
the intracellular and extracellular compartments.
up only 1 pint of solution, thus saving a lot of
The concentration of these solutes in both com-
waste, as it has to be discarded 24 hours after
partments is kept on an equal footing by the
mixing.
Fluid Therapy Part I:Building Blocks
29
 Inject methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrone V -
- Fort Dodge Animal Health)
 Record card 
Weigh
Install intravenous or intraosseous line
Infuse Hartmann's solution and 10%
 Duphalyte (Fort Dodge Animal Health)
(Solu-Medrone V - Pharmacia)
 and methylprednisolone
 Calculate fluid deficit 
Arrival
Fig. 3.3 Flow chart for newly admitted casualties.
Gavage oral Hartmann's with 10% vitamins
 abpoa nos - ajeudna) spioe oujue pue 
Inject methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrone V -
Animal Health)
30
Practical Wildlife Care
It is possible to mix your own equivalent oral
Apart from the oral fuids, all fuid preparations
rehydrating salts by using the following ingredients:
 are prescription-only medicines that should be used
under the direction, but not necessarily in the pres-
7g sodium chloride
ence, of a veterinary surgeon. They are given by
5 g sodium bicarbonate
injection or via intravenous cannulae from a drip
3g potassium chloride
bag (Plate 5). In all cases they must be used in
40 g glucose
aseptic practice as their entry point offers a peifect
2 litres water
ingress for bacteria and infection.
With wildlife casualties only a few preparations
The solution must be mixed thoroughly and dis-
are needed to cope with all first-aid situations.
carded after 24 hours.
These are:
Oral fuids can be effective if nothing else is
available and if an animal is not severely dehy-
· Compound sodium lactate
drated. They ale lseful as maintenance fluids after
●Amino acids and vitamins
an animal is stabilised and before it is drinking O1
· Dextrose saline
feeding itself. They are probably not very effective
●Plasma volume expanders
in replacing major fuid defcits, especially in a
shocked animal, whose gastrointestinal processes
They are lsed by either the subcutaneous, intra-
may be compromised. They are, in the main, more
venous, intraosseous or intrapenitoneal 1outes. The
Teadily absorbed than subcutaneous fuids.
intraperitoneal route involves entry into the body
cavity. This is unnecessary in a first-aid situation and
shouid be strictly the province of the veterinary
International rehydration fuid (IRF)
surgeon, as a practice controlled by the Veterinary
This is very much a ‘stopgap' measure if nothing
Surgeons Act 1966.
else is teadily available. It can usually be made up
from ingredients found in any kitchen cupboard.
 Plasma volume expanders
It is hypotonic and can only be given orally. Inter-
national rehydration fuid (IRF) is made up by
In cases of shock, the colloid plasma volume ex-
mixing:
panders are the frst fluids added once an intravenous
catheter has been installed. They are not to be used
· A dessertspoonful of sugar
for subcutaneous infusion. As a first administration
· A teaspoonful of salt
they should replace about one-twelfth of the fuid
· 1 ltre of warm water
deficit.A standard rate could be 10ml/kg, which could
be doubled if there are signs that there has been
IRF should be discarded after 24 hours.
severe haemonrhage. The fuids should only be stored
at Toom temperature and, if necessary, only heated in
a bath of hot water. They should not be microwaved.
SYSTEMIC FLUIDS
A proprietary brand of plasma volume expander
is Gelofusine? (Millpledge Veterinary).
The main purpose of any fuid replacement is to
increase the circulating blood volume. Fluid prepa-
tations are either colloid or crystalloid. Colloids,
Corticosteroids
which are the plasma volume expanders, stay in the
To combat shock, coupled with the plasma volume
bloodstream a little longer than crystalloids and are
expanders, massive doses of corticosteroids are
Tecommended. They can be infused directly via an
ciculating blood volume. Crystalloids are not as
intravenous line or if that is not available given by
lseful as plasma expanders, but can be used as such
intramuscular injection.
and may also be used to replace vital electrolytes
The intramuscula1 1oute, however, may be slow
and give nourishment in the form of glucose.
Or pointless if the animal is in profound shock,
Fluid Therapy Part I:BuildingBlocks
31
when its peripheral circulation will have closed
Dextrose and saline
down and diug absorption will be impaired. The
Dextrose/saline is another isotonic parental infu-
drug of choice in this situation is methyl-
sion, like Hartmann's. It contains 0.18% sodium
prednisolone sodium suiccinate (Solu-Medrone -
chloride in a 4% dextrose solution.
Pharmacia), which is administered intravenously at
With 10% Duphalyte (Fort Dodge Animal
a dose rate of 20-50 mg/kg. It can be repeated 4-6
Health) added, dextrose/saline is useful to replace
times daily.
primary water loss and to provide maintenance
once an animal is stabilised.
Compound sodium lactate
This is a crystalloid solution to be used once the
LIQUID NUTRITION
plasma volume expander has been administered. It
is usually known as Hartmann's solution and its
smaller molecular structure allows it to pass more
Once an animal is stable, clear of its dehydra-
tion and recovered from shock, its recovery will
freely from the extracellular fuid (where it is
lo saop 1l j uaddey uaae 1ou Ae pue mo[s 2q
added) to the interstitial fuid. It replaces lost water
 get some nutrition. Wild animals are understand-
and electrolytes, especially after diarrhoea.
The other beneft in a wildlife casualty situation
ably nervous when in captivity. Even if they are
on the point of starvation many of them will refuse
is that Hartmann's contains bicarbonate of soda,
to eat, and, although fuids will keep them alive,
which is a buffer in countening metabolic acidosis
their condition will deteriorate. With animals like
- another aftel-effect of shock. In metabolic aci-
deer, which have complicated nutritional processes,
dosis the pH value of the blood is disturbed. Large
their gastrointestinal mechanism may cease to
changes in pH may result in the animal becoming
function.
depressed and ultimately dying. Diagnosis of
 Before any attempt is made to provide liquid
metabolic acidosis o1 its opposite, metabolic alka-
nutrition, though, it is important to try to offer the
losis, is not easy and is strictly the province of the
animal the type of food it normally sees. For
veterinary surgeon. A prescription to counter aci-
dosis, the more likely of the two, would be bicar-
instance, many mute swans (Cygnus olor) have
grown up on lakes and ponds on a diet of bread
bonate of soda. The amount of bicarbonate of soda
 given to them by passers-by. Often a swan in care
in Hartmann's solution offers some buffering in
seems to ignore other more nourishing diets but
cases of acidosis even before the condition is
will polish off bowl after bowl of white bread foat-
diagnosed.
ing on water (Fig. 3.4).
 Some other species eat specific fare in the wild
and on admittance should be offered food they are
Amino acids and vitamins
likely to Tecognise:
Hartmann's solution, although full of essential salts
such as sodium chloride and bicarbonate of soda,
●Owls and falcons will only recognise dark-
does not contain the amino acids and B vitamins
coloured mice.
contained in Duphalyte (Fort Dodge Animal
· Hawks will only take dead small birds.
Health). When added to Hartmann's at a tate of
· Fish-eating birds including herons and kingfish-
10% it provides these extras as well as sodium
ers need fresh fish (frozen fish need a vitamin
acetate trihydrate, which requires less metabolising
supplement added, e.g. Aquavits - IZVG)
to be utilised than the lactate in Hartmann's. The
· Toads and frogs must have live insects.
Auid replacement can now be utilised by tissues
· Slow worms will eat small grey slugs.
other than the live1, fo1 example by the muscles. In
● On humane grounds - as well as for their safety
severe cases of dehydration and starvation in seri-
 snakes cannot be given live mice but may be
ously compromised birds o1 reptiles it can be lised
undiluted.
string-
32
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 3.4 Swans will often only take white bread floating
on water.
Think about nutrition carefully. Identify the
animal and look up in books what its natural diet
would consist of. Try to copy that diet if you can and
hope that the animal starts to feed on its own.
Sometimes a non-aggressive member of the same
 species that is eating while in care will encourage
the reluctant feeder. If all this fails, liguid nutnition
Fig. 3.5 Larger animals can benefit from nutrition given
 O1 force-feeding are the inevitable answers.
by intravenous infusion.
Liquid nutrition for birds
Birds are classic animals that may not feed once
PARENTERAL NUTRITION
they are in care. Many of them arlive for treat-
ment in a severely emaciated state. Once their
Gavage is not really an option for mammals.
hydration is retuming to normal, say after 24 hours,
For many years humans have benefited from
then it is important to provide artifcial nutnition
being fed by intravenous infusion. It has always
by mouth. Birds in particula1 are ideal candidates
been a complex process involving intensive nursing
fo1 a therapy called gavage, wherein a stomach
and monitoring as well as a constant replacement
tube is passed into the oesophagus o1 crop and
of the fuid reservoi1 and giving sets in major veins.
liquidised foods are syringed directly into the biid.
 B. Braun Medical has now perfected an intravenous
Many products are available for use in gavage for
nutrition system, Nutnifex Lipid Peli, which is more
bids, especially Complan (Crookes Healthcare)
flexible and versatile than previous systems.
and Ensure (Abbott Laboratories) both liquid
Self-contained in a three-compartment sterile
nutrition available from chemists  for
human
containel, Nutriflex Lipid Peni provides all the
consumption.
constituents of a complete building diet simply
There are, howevet, products specifically formu-
administered through peripheral veins such as
lated for feeding to birds by gavage. Manufactured
the cephalic and lateral saphenous veins At The
by Vetafarm Europe, Poly-Aid provides all the
Wildlife Hospital Trust (St Tiggywinkles) we have
nutrients a bird needs until it starts to feed for
been using it successfully to rally deer, which
itself.
seem to lose condition tapidly, and other animals,
Fluid TherapyPart I:BuildingBlocks
33
especially those with mouth and jaw problems
and often demand innovative measures to assist
(Fig. 3.5).
them. Over the years many wildlife rehabilitators
All of these liquid preparations are available to
have worked perfecting techniques of administer-
benefit wildlife casualties and all have a place in the
ing the fuid products at their disposal. The next
arsenal of anybody dealing with wildlife. Wild
chaptel seeks to highlight the systems evolved to
animals are quite different to companion animals
provide fuid therapy to wildlife casualties.
Fluid Therapy
Part Il: Administration
FLUID ADMINISTRATION IN BIRDS
25ml/kg of bodyweight. This yardstick will calculate
auo Aue 1e piq a oju aeaea oi pmu yon moy
Oral rehydration (gavage)
time.This method of infusion poses no threat of over-
perfusion, unlike intravenous or intraosseous fuids.
This is a comparatively non-invasive method of
administering fuids and liquid nutrition to bids of
The liquid should be wa1med to 39°C and drawn
up into a syringe, which is attached to the end of
all sizes. In many parts of the world it is the pre-
the Tubber tube. As the liquid is passed down the
feTed way of rehydrating birds,primarily because it
tube into the oesophagus it is absolutely vital to
can be carlied out without any veterinary facilities.
monitor the bird's throat for any liquid backing up.
The procedure 1equires two people: one holds
This would show that too much liquid is being
the bird with its head erect while the other inserts
offered. A pull back on the sytinge would then be
a lubricated, soft rubber, blunt-ended tube attached
necessary to draw up any excess.
to a syringe down the bird's throat. Using a watel-
based lubricant will not affect the bird (K-Y?
Do not separate the syringe and the tube when
Temoving them. Still attached to each other they
Lubricating Jelly - Johnson & Johnson). The tube
will be holding any excess liquid. Separate them
passes by the glottis, the entrance to the bird's
and this will fow back into the bird and possibly
trachea and respiratory system, and is allowed to
into the glottis and trachea.
slide; no pressure should be used, into the bird's
 This method of gavage can be used for fist-aid
oesophagus (Fig. 4.1).
fuid administration, maintenance fluids and liquid
In the crop, and not all birds have crops, it may
nutrition. However, it is not as effcient as provid-
well meet resistance. Without pushing, the tube
ing intravenous fuids. To provide intravenous
should be twisted towaids a point just to the left of
therapy a managed range of fuids and disposables
the top of the bird's keel (Stocke1, 1991b). Then the
allows for instant fuid infusion via parenteral
oesophagus continues down to the proventniculus
-sa aq pnoys juiod sul 'piezzia s.pinq ayl pue
1outes (Table 4.1).
mated and marked on the tube before it is inserted.
The gizzard lies to the bird's leff, just below the
Intravenous fuids
sternum or breast bone (Fig. 4.2).
More effective than oral fuids but only Teally
Have the syringe (which can range from 1 ml to
suitable for larger birds, intravenous infusion does
50ml) attached to the tube and both filled, to
allow the first-aider to provide instant plasma-
ensure that the first compression of the sytinge does
volume expansion and effective access for emer-
not push just air into the bird.
gency drugs. Smaller birds receive the same benefit
through intraosseous infusion, which is more prac-
tical as the veins of small birds are too small for the
Quantity oforal fuids
insertion of cannulae.
A bid's alimentary system is capable of taking
Intravenous therapy for, in particulai, swans,
34
Fluid TherapyPart II:Administration
35
Feeding
Oesophagus
tube
Crop
Oesophagus
Glottis
Proventriculus
Syringe
Trachea
Tongue
Liver
Crop
Pancreas
Fig. 4.1 A gavage tube should pass the glottis.
Gizzard
Table 4.1 Fluids and disposables instantly accessible
 for emergency fluid administration.
Bags of sterile fuids:
Hartmann's solution
Intestine
Dextrose/saline
Caecum
Plasma volume expander
Duphalyte (Fort Dodge Animal Health)
Giving sets to fit infusion pumps
Giving sets for gravity feed
Over-the-needle intravenous catheters:
20g×32mm
22g × 25 mm
Cloaca
18g × 51 mm
23g, 25g, 27g butterfly catheters
Fig. 4.2 The alimentary canal in a bird possessing a
Heparinised water for injection (5000 units in 100ml
crop.
sterile water, 1:50000)
VetbondTM (3M) tissue glue
2.5 cm adhesive plaster
neous ulnar veins, in the wings, and are less likely
Alcohol or surgical swabs
to be damaged by cannulation. Butterfy infusion
Sterile swabs
 Solu-Medrone (Pharmacia), 500 mg and 125mg
sets ale ideal as they are simple to insert and can
Diazepam, 10mg vials
be held in place by a small drop of instant tissue
No. 11 scalpel blades (for use with muntjac deer)
glue (Vetbond" - 3M). The size of butterfly catheter
Artery forceps and elastic bands to use as tourmiquets
depends on the size of the bird, but a range of 23 g.
20g and 18g Cookes intraosseous cannula introducers
25g or 27g will suit swans to herons, respec-
20g x 40mm spinal needles and smaller if they are
available
tively. They will, howevel, need fushing with a
25g x 16mm hypodermic needles
heparinised solution before insertion, as a bird's
blood will quickly clot and clog them.
Most intravenous infusions Tely on gravity to
geese, herons and any large bird of prey o1 corvid
operate. Because of the minute size of some of
can be provided where a vein can be accessed. The
these catheters a much surer and more accurate
veins of choice are the medial tibial veins, which 1un
infusion can be guaranteed using either an infusion
up the inside of both legs (Plate 6). These veins have
pump ol a syringe pump.
more support around them than the large cuta-
 Larger over-the-needle type intravenous catheters
36
Practical Wildlife Care
can be used to infuse into the cutaneous ulnar vein
Intraosseous cannulation
where it crosses underneath the humerus It is a
Although it may be possible to introduce a catheter
larger vein capable of accommodating a 22 g ove-
into the veins of small birds, the practice is par-
the-needle catheter, but it has been found to be
ticularly diffcult and invariably results in torn O1
very mobile and fragile without the stability of a leg
Tuptured veins. A much more stable, Tigid and
on which to fix it.
accessible route for fuid infusion is via the cavities
As for all intrusive procedures, the area around 
in some of the limb bones A bird's bones ale
the catheter and all the components must be sterile.
heavily vascularised and as receptive as a vein to
Auid infusion (Ritchie et al., 1990). The bones of
Quantity of intravenous fluids for birds
choice are easily accessible and are the ulna in each
Wild birds seem to fare better on intermittent
wing or the tibiotarsus in each leg.
boluses of sterile fuids than on the continuous infu-
Entry is obtained by gently pushing either a
sion so suitable for mammals. As with mammals it
spinal needle or a small hypodermic needle through
is absolutely crucial that the correct amount of fuid
the centre of the proximal end of each bone until it
is provided. With too much fuid, circulatory ovel-
Teaches the bone's intramedullary cavity. The site
load can easily occur and cauise major problems.
must be prepared aseptically after one or two feath-
Any bird must be weighed accurately, its fuid
ers have been plucked out.
defcit and maintenance Tequirement calculated
While steadying the proximal end of the bone in
and divided into as many doses (boluses), not
one hand and gently pushing and rotating the
exceeding 10ml/kg, as it takes to tehydrate it
needle into the centre of the bone, a sudden lack of
(Example 4.1).
Tesistance shows that it has entered the cavity. If the
The use of infusion or syringe pumps facilitates
needle misses o1 exits the bone it can be detected
precise administration of the amount of fluid and a
by the hand steadying the bone and re-sited. There
precise time, say 2-3 minutes, over which the infu-
may be some bleeding back, which may clot in the
sion is given (Plate 8). Before infusion, all fuids
needle unless a small drop of heparinised solution
should be warmed to 39°C and kept at that tem-
is passed through it.
perature. Fluids running through a giving set will
Small hypodermic needles such as 30 g, 27 g, 25 g,
cool rapidly. Running the set through a bowl of
 and 23g may become clogged with bone as they ate
watm water will keep it nearer the desired
insetted. Using a syTinge to aspirate the clogging
temperature.
material allows a small amount of sterile fuid o1
Tawny owl (Strix aluco) estimate 10% dehydrated
Estimated pre-trauma bodyweight 420g
Calculated to receive on its first day in care (see Example 3.1)
50% Huid deficit
21 ml
Maintenance
25ml
Amount of fuids to be given in first 24 hours
46 ml
With a maximum bolus of 10ml/kg
4.2 ml
Therefore:
(a) 11 boluses of 4.2ml to be given in 24 hours
46.2 ml
or
(b) Six boluses of 4.2ml every hour
25.2ml
Six boluses of 3.5ml every two hours
21.0ml
46.2 ml
These provisions are also applicable to intraosseous infusion in birds.
Example 4.1 Calculating the amount of each bolus of fluids given to a dehy-
drated tawny owl.
Fluid TherapyPartI:Administration
37
heparinised solution to be syringed through to cleal
often used is over the back, the pelvis and the syn-
the needle completely.
sacrum. Fluids should never be infused in any other
With slightly larger birds, from the size of a
areas on a bird for there is a danger of putting fuid
pigeon and upward, it is possible to cannulate the
into the bird's extensive ai1 sac system, which could
bones with spinal needles. These have an indwelling
prove fatal. Do not try to put too much fuid into
stylet that prevents the needle being clogged during
any one site as over-stretching the skin may cauise
placement. The stylet can be Iemoved to facilitate
necrotic areas. After the fuids have been injected,
infusion and can be replaced to keep the site viable.
and the needle withdrawn, pinching the skin over
Spinal needles that are 20g o1 22g × 40mm suit
the site will prevent fuids leaking back out.
many species (Plate 7). The hypodermic needles in
Hyaluronidase (Hyalase - CP Pharmaceuticals)
smaller birds can be closed with a luer stopper to
can be used to speed up the absorption of subcuta-
keep them viable. They can all be held in place by
neous fluids (Eatwell, 2003). At a concentration of
Vetbond* (3M) instant glue but should be removed
150iu/ml, add 1.0ml to each bag of fuid intended
after 48 hours. A coating of antiseptic ointment o1
fo1 subcutaneous use in biids (Lightfoot, 2001).
CTeam around the insertion site and a cover made
from a 5 cm sterile swab with a slit cut in it will assist
FLUID ADMINISTRATION IN MAMMALS
in preventing infection at these very sensitive sites.
The advantages of using the ulna in the wing
Oral rehydration
rather than the tibiotarsus in the leg seems to be
that the indwelling cannula there cauises less inter-
Oral rehydration by gavage is not really an option
ference with the bird's mobility.
in mammals: for one thing, they have teeth, which
Intraosseous fuids for birds should never be given
could seriously damage the gavage tube. In addi-
via the pneumatic bones - the humerus or femur.
tion, unlike birds, the mammalian trachea is diff-
cult to see. If the tube were inadvertently inserted
into it, the fuids that were thus administered would
Subcutaneous infusion for birds
enter the animal's lungs and be likely to drown it.
While intravenous or intraosseous fuids ale the
The only oral support really available to wild
therapy of choice for very ill birds, injecting fuids
mammal casualties is to bottle feed infants or to
subcutaneously (under the skin) can be effective in
slowly dribble oral rehydration salts into a cooper-
providing maintenance for birds that are stable O1
ative mammal's mouth. In both cases it is impera-
not seliously dehydrated. It is doubtful whetheI,
tive to make sure that the animal swallows properly.
because of the shutdown of the peripheral blood
Animals that will drink for themselves, provided
vessels, this 1oute would be of much benefit to a
they have the night kind of drinking dispensel, will
deeply shocked bird. It is, however, suitable for biids
not need any assistance other than the provision of
that appea1 to be less than 5-7% dehydrated and can
Tehydration fuids for their consumption.
be very useful in encouraging orphan birds to feed.
The incapacitated adult mammal may also
Only crystalloid fuids, like Hartmann's solution
benefit from liquid food given to it by mouth (Plate
laced with 10% Duphalyte (Fort Dodge Animal
10). Notably Ensure (Abbott Laboratories) O1
Health), should be given subcutaneously. A bird’s
Complan (Crookes Healthcare) will provide nutii-
skin is not very elastic so the maximum bolus at any
ents. A less incapacitated animal may be able to
one time should be restricted to 10 ml/kg, but it can
take it from a bowl.
be inserted into more than one site.
 Do not on any account give any mammal, or bird
As with all intrusive fuid administration, the
for that matter, any of the following liquids:
sites must be aseptically prepared and only sterile
·Brandy
equipment and fluids used for the actual infusion.
●Whisky
depressives
They should be warmed to 39°C. The wing, web 01
● Bread and milk
some animals cannot
the area of the sternum can be used as infusion
● Milk on its owm
digest the lactose
sites, but the capacity is somewhat restricted. A far
·Blood
bats do not drink blood
better site is found in the groin, on the inside of
each thigh, where the loose inguinal area of skin
Their use should be condemned as ‘old wives'
joins the leg to the body (Plate 9). Anothe1 site
tales'.
38
Practical Wildlife Care
Intravenous infusion
The cephalic veins are the veins of choice for
Intravenous infusion is the fuid therapy route of
intravenous infusion, but just as accessible are the
choice for mammals Most British mammals pre-
lateral saphenous veins on the back legs. Of course
there is the choice of the jugular veins if there is dif-
sented for rescule are of a size where the venous
ficulty accessing the others. In general do not attach
system is reasonably easily accessible. Of the
an intravenous line to a leg that is injured.
animals not suitable for intravenous therapy the
The line is fitted to an over-the-needle catheter
hedgehog is just about borderline, so anything
 and strapped to the leg with adhesive plaster. They
smaller will be Teliant on subcutaneous fuids. The
generally will not last long before a lively casualty
hedgehog itself is one of the few mammals that are
will either twist them beyond recognition or chew
suitable for intraosseous fuids.
through the lines. Elizabethan collars do not suit
Other animals - badgers, foxes, dee1, otters, wild-
wild animals, which are adept at destroying them!
cats and larger mustelids - can all be given intra-
venous fist-aid therapy. The problem with all these
animals is that they are wild and unless comatose
Quantity ofintravenous infusion formammals
they will not cooperate and will bite o1 kick. Seda-
Mammals, especially the livelier ones, do not allow
tives such as diazepam are safe for use in these
intravenous lines to stay viable for long. For this
animals. A dose rate of 1 mg/kg should quieten an
Teason it is often advantageous to run quite a lot of
animal enough to allow an intravenous line to be
Huids in, say, the first hour and let the animal call a
setup and maintained.
halt to the infusion when it is only Telying on main-
All the camivorous species are potentially dan-
tenance fuids. In fact, in cases of profound shock,
gerous whether they look lively o1 not. It is safer to
the infusion can be given at 40 times the mainte-
muzzle the animal while it is being handled (see Fig.
nance rate in that first hour.
8.2) but be aware that if it is bleeding into the nose
All larger wild mammal casualties should receive
o1 mouth or seems to vomit then the muzzle must
 the full treatment to counter shock. This means
come off. These animals are much better at biting
using plasma volume expanders, corticosteroids
than humans are at avoiding a bite. Concentrate at
and crystalloid infusions. Maintenance fluids can be
all times and never put anybody in a situation
at an average of 50ml/kg per day with all the cal-
where they may get bitten.
culations worked on that basis (Example 4.2).
A badger (Meles meles) is presented having been caught in a snare. It weighs 7.6kg and appears to be between
7-10% dehydrated.
 An intravenous line is set up using a 20g x 32mm over-the-needle catheter in a cephalic vein.
[ts fuid deficit is calculated at 10% of an estimated weight of 8.5 kg
= 850 ml
Its maintenance requirements for 24 hours
= 425 ml
It is decided to replace deficit over 2 days
Therefore in the first 24 hours the badger is to receive 50% deficit plus maintenance on an infusion
= 850ml
 pump drip rate of 3 drips per second in a infusion set giving 15 drips per ml
In the first half hour the badger can be given 40 x maintenance rate which is 360ml leaving the rest of
the day to be infused with only 490ml in 23.5 hours
However, as there is still 50% of the deficit to recover on the second day, it is an advantage to infuse,
for the rest of the first 24 hours, at maintenance rates
For the rest of the first day the badger would receive via an infusion pump say 425 ml at 18ml per hour
= 423 ml
With no infusion pump and a giving set giving 15 drips per ml the seting would be 4 drips per minute
= 384 ml
Example 4.2 Calculating the quantity of fluids necessary to stabilise a badger casualty
Fluid Therapy PartI:Administration
39
Infusion of too much fuid could lead to ovel-
Subcutaneous fuids
perfusion of the circulation and result in pulmonary
Although intravenous fuid infusion is the most
oedema. So with all intravenous infusions it is vital
direct way of overcoming dehydration o1 shock, the
to monitor the animal and its condition closely
facilities for cannulation, especially of the smaller
(Table 4.2).
mammals, are not always available. In these situa-
tions and with very small mammals, mice, shrews,
Intraosseous cannulation
voles, dormice and bats, for example, subcutaneous
Simila1 to the procedure seen with bird therapy,
fuids are the only answer. Hartmann's solution
laced with 10% Duphalyte is warmed and injected
intraosseous cannulation can be the most suitable
under the skin over the back of the animal. Too
means of infusing some of the smaller mam-
mals (Otto et al., 1989). Hedgehogs (Erinaceus
much in one place may cauise the skin to stretch and
slough, so subcutaneous fuids can be spread over
europaeus), for instance, are the most frequently
more than one injection site. Hyaluronidase will
presented wild mammal requining first aid and
help the absorption of subcutaneous fuids (see
many of them are in a dehydrated, emaciated o1
Fluid Administration in Birds).
shocked condition. The hedgehog's femur is easily
The amount to give is about equivalent to 10%
accessible under it spiny pelage and is an ideal site
of bodyweight, fo1 example a hedgehog weighing
for intraosseous cannulation.
400 g should receive 40ml of fuid. The smalle1 the
Mammalian bones, however, are much more
hypodermic needle the better it is for the animal
Tesistant to needles than avian bones For this
(Table 4.3).
Teason insetting any form of needle requires
mechanical assistance. Cook Veterinary Products
now market an intraosseous cannula introducet. An
FLUID THERAPY FOR REPTILES
intraosseous cannula fits ovel a stylet attached to a
AND AMPHIBIANS
small handle. The handle gives the added purchase
to wind the catheter into the bone. The stylet pre-
People are becoming aware of the importance of
vents clogging with bone particles. Once inserted
the handle and the stylet merely unclip.
protecting Britain's reptile and amphibian popula-
To place a catheter into the proximal end of the
tions. Consequently more of these casualties are
being picked up, whereas in the past it was assumed
femur the site is fist clipped and cleaned. Local
that an injured snake or toad had to be killed.
anaesthetic, such as lidocaine or amethocaine should
As more of these cold-blooded animals are pre-
be applied to anaesthetise the site. The intraosseous
sented for treatment, so more techniques are being
cannula introducer is aimed at the trochanteric fossa
developed to help them. Fluid therapy is just as
of the femur in order to avoid involvement of the
sciatic nerve. Slowly at fiist, 1otate the introducet by
important to these animals as it is to their warm-
blooded neighbours.
the handle and, once it is established in the bone,
slightly more pressure and 1otation drive the needle
through. As the needle passes through the bone and
Fluid administration for reptiles
into the medullary cavity, a loss of resistance is felt.
Snakes
Flicking the needle with a finger will show that it
 si l  is aq m i - pas ad s
Injured snakes, especially grass snakes (Natrix
properly in place it will wobble. Once in place,
natrix),are now being found and brought for treat-
gentle suction with a syringe should be applied to
ment. When presented they demonstrate the classic
the needle, which should then be fushed with a
signs of dehydration, especially skin tenting.
heparinised solution. The needle can be held in place
Rehydration, at about 10% of bodyweight,
by suturing or by the use of a tissue glue.
can be orally via a stomach tube passed to a point
Fluid infusion is at the same rate as for birds, a
about one-third of the way along a snake's body.
maximum of 10ml/kg per hour, although an infu-
Hartmann's solution laced with 10% Duphalyte
sion or syringe pump would facilitate a continuous
(Fort Dodge Animal Health) should be used, even
feed infusion at standard rates per kg.
though this is an oral procedure.
40
Practical WildlifeCare
Table 4.2 Maintenance rates of fluid infusion wall chart.
Fluid therapy - maintenance rate
Standard giving set at 50 ml/kg per day, 15 drops per ml
Bodyweight
Daily intake
Hourly rate
Drops per minute
Time
(kg)
(ml)
(ml)
(no.drops)
(seconds)
0.5
25
1
240
１２３
50
２４６
120
100
1
60
150
2
40
4
200
8
2
30
56７
250
10
24
300
12
3
20
350
14
4
18
8
400
16
4
15
9
450
19
13
10
500
6
12
11
550
23
6
11
12
600
25
[
10
13
650
27
了
988777~
14
700
29
8
15
750
31
8
16
008
33
9
17
850
35
9
18
900
37
10
19
950
39
10
666
20
1000
42
11
21
1050
44
11
22
1100
46
12
23
1150
48
12
24
1200
50
13
25
1250
52
13
26
1300
54
14
5
27
1350
56
14
55４
28
1400
58
15
29
1450
60
15
OE
1500
62
16
4
31
1550
65
17
32
1600
67
17
33
1650
69
18
A
34
1700
71
18
35
1750
73
19
４4
36
1800
75
19
37
1850
77
20
38
1900
79
20
39
1950
81
21
40
2000
83
21
45
2250
94
24
50
2500
104
26
Add deficit of
3-5× maintenance over 2 days
Shock
40 × maintenance for 30-60 minutes (Gelofusine - Millpledge Veterinary, as a plasma expander)
Fuid TherapyPartI:Administration
41
Table 4.3 Needle sizes for subcutaneous fluid
the gut mucosa may be compromised. This means
administration.
that bacteria could cross from the gut lumen into
Needle size
Animal
the circulation. For this reason, all animals that are
being treated for dehydration O1 shock must
22g
Squirrels, rabbits
Teceive a broad-spectrum antibiotic. The antibiotic
23g
Hedgehogs, moles, weasels
we use is injectable long-acting amoxycillin at stan-
25g
Water voles
dard dose tates Injection is subcutaneous. The
27g
Mice, voles, bats, shrews and dormice
O1 even those that can be given intravenously, such
as enrofloxacin.
Subcutaneous fuids at 10% of bodyweight can
be given into the lateral sinuses about halfway
along the snake (Plate 11).
Analgesics
Care must be taken with adders (Vipera berus),
Painkillers are available for animals if required. They
which are the other common Bnitish snake. They
are poisonous, quite unlike the superficially similar,
infusion. Carprofen and funixin are longer acting
but now very rare, constnicting smooth snake
than buprenorphine but all should be prescribed for
(Coronella austriaca), which is very unlikely to turn
individual cases by the veterinary surgeon.
up injured.
Diuretics
Lizards
When listening to the chest with a stethoscope, if
The othel native British reptiles are lizards, includ-
signs of pulmonary oedema from either over-
ing the slow worm (Anguis fragilis). These are often
perfusion of the circulatory system or even from the
caught by cats, and benefit from subcutaneous fuids
original trauma are heard, then the veterinary
at 10% of bodyweight.
surgeon must be advised immediately in order for
Temedial action to be taken.
Terapins and tortoises
Terrapins and tortoises are not native British
Oxygen (02)
reptiles. Escaped from captivity they should be
It has been found that animals with head injuries
lefered to the veteninary surgeon for treatment.
OT concussion fare better if provided with 100%
Oxygen therapy by facemask.
Fluid administration for amphibians
Common native amphibians are frogs (Rana tem-
SUMMARY
poraria), toads (Bufo bufo) and newts (Tnturus
spp). Frogs and toads especially get injured regu-
Fluid therapy is recommended for all wildlife casl-
larly in gardens or on the 1oads. Subcutaneous
fluids at 10% of bodyweight are the best way t0
alties. Carnied out properly it will save many lives.
The golden Tules are:
counter dehydration and shock.
●Maintain a check list of components of intra-
PROCEDURES RELATED TO
venous therapy (Table 4.4)
FLUID ADMINISTRATION
· Always use the correct fuids and none of the^old
Antibiotics
wives’ tales' temedies
· Use only sterile products for intravenous,
When an animal is in shock the microcirculation of
mtraosseous or subcutaneous administration
42
PracticalWildlifeCare
· Keep all areas of insertion aseptically clean
· Discard all disposables afte1 uise safely into clin-
· Monitor all animals in case problems anise at the
ical waste containers. The veterinary surgeon can
msertion site
advise on clinical waste disposal.
● Monitor respiratory response in case pulmonary
oedema is apparent
Table 4.4Check list notice of components of intravenous therapy
St Tiggywinkles
The Wildlife Hospital Trust
Emergency Intravenous Therapy
All intravenous (i/v) infusions should be warmed to body heat
Catheters
Swans, herons
24 g × 16mm
Foxes, badgers, small deer
20 g × 32mm
Large deer
20 g × 32 mm, 18 g × 51 mm
Muntjac
20 g × 32mm
Plasma expanders
Gelofusine? (Millpledge Veterinary)
10ml/kg (for severe haemorrhage use 20ml/kg)
Severe shock and cardiovascular collapse
 Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrone - Pharmacia)
50mg/kg
Dexamethasone - slow infusion
0.1 mg/kg
Fluids
Primary loss, vomiting, diarrhoea
Hartmann's solution
Long-term loss, dehydration
Dextrose 4% with sodium chloride 0.18%
[Both with 10% Duphalyte (Fort Dodge Animal Health) added]
[For drip rate see separate chart (e.g. Table 4.2)]
Sedatives
Diazepam
1 mg/kg (can go intramuscularly)
Antibiotics
[/V
Enrofloxacin
5mg/kg
Metronidazole
40mg/kg
Subcutaneous:
Amoxycillin
40mg/kg (varies with species)
Analgesics
Buprenorphine (Temgesic - Schering-Plough Animal Health)
0.012mg/kg
Flunixin (Finadyne - Schering-Plough Animal Health)
1mg/kg
Carprofen (Rimadyl - Pfizer)
4mg/kg
Anti-toxaemics (established infection)
Flunixin (Finadyne - Schering-Plough Animal Health)
1 mg/kg
Diuretics (for pulmonary oedema)
Frusemide
2.5mg/kg
5
Wound Management
Part I: The Biology of Wounds
TYPES OF WOUND
Contusions and haematomas may be seen as
swelling or bruising under the skin
In dealing with wildlife casualties, the large number
· May include wounds to inteinal organs, e.g. Tup-
and variety of wounds seen means that any type of
tured liver
wound in any condition should be expected. Many
· Hard to access o1 control blood loss
of these wounds would rarely be seen in normal
· Only accessible by surgery
veterinary practice, but in spite of the sevenity of
some of them a good wound management protocol
Open wounds
will ensure that most of the casualties will recover
enough to be released back into the wild.
· Can usually be seen
Basically all external wounds go through similar
· Blood loss can be evaluated
stages of healing, so it is important that any treat-
· Blood loss can be controlled
ments complement the natural processes and do no
· Can usually be treated without surgery
further harm.
A wound may be defined as a break or division
All open wounds can be further categonised into:
in any tissue caused by injury or surgical operation.
It is obvious that wildlife care and treatment only
· Clean
initially needs to cope with wounds from injury.
●Clean contaminated
Surgical wounds are part of a surgical nursing pro-
· Contaminated
gramme instituted by the veterinary surgeon and
●Infected (dirty)
are outside the scope of this book.
The majonity of wounds that wildlife care is
Clean wounds
concemed with ale open wounds where there is a
break in the skin or accessible mucous membranes.
A clean wound can only occur where the surgeon
Closed wounds are within the body covering and,
aseptically cuts the skin covering during surgery.
although some may benefit from the use of com-
Even this clean wound is likely to become contam-
pression bandages, they really are in the domain of
inated if the surgery invades unclean body tissues
the veterinary surgeon.
OT products. These two types of clean wounds will
The differences between the two types of wound
never be encountered other than in the surgery.
are:
Contaminated wounds
Contaminated wounds are those that, to all intents
Closed wounds
and purposes, are inflicted with a clean object.
· Cannot always be detected by superficial
Puncture wounds and wounds of compound
examination
e s aie   re n s
43
44
Practical Wildlife Care
bacteria will have invaded the unprotected wound.
·First intention
It is said that it can take bacteria 4-6 hours to gain
· Second intention (granulation)
a foothold in a wound. If the circumstances are
Tight, this ^golden period’ allows for the wound to
First-intention healing
be cleaned and closed with less tisk of infection.
This type of healing occurs when two damaged but
clean, uninfected tissues are brought together.
Infected or dirty wounds
Blood capillaries will migrate from one side to the
Infected or dirty wounds are the type most com-
other forming a vital union. This type of healing is
monly seen with wildlife casuialties Often it will have
usually seen in surgical incisions that are sutured.
been several days since the injunies occurred, with
Occasionally a wild casualty will have clean but
the bactenia fiimly entrenched and in a battle with
contaminated incised wounds that respond well to
the body's natural defence mechanisms This natural
cleaning and suturing, and with the wound edges in
defence may be able to cope with minor wounds but
apposition will heal by first intention (Fig. 5.1a).
the infection seen in some major wounds will
inevitably lead to the death of the animal.
Infection or dirt in a wound will inhibit healing
Second intention - healing by granulation
forthe followingTeasons:
Most wounds seen in wildlife casualties have too
much soft tissue damage and, with the edges not in
· Debris in the wound can inhibit the function of
apposition, they cannot heal by fist intention.
the defending white blood cells and antibodies
These wounds, infected or not, have to heal from
·Infection can damage the vascular
supply
the inside out by the processes of granulation (Fig.
preventing systemically-administered antibiotics
5.1b). All wounds precipitate natural processes in
fom teaching the wound
the body from the moment that the body tissue is
· Infection prolongs the inflammatory phase of
damaged. The processes have evolved to clean and
wound healing
eventually close a wound and involve four stages:
· Infection produces enzymes that digest the col-
lagen needed to close a wound
(1) Infammatory phase
● Infection reduces the vascula1 supply
(2) Granulation
· Exudate, containing white blood cells, bacteria
(3) Re-epithelialisation
and necrotic tissue, separates the wound edges
(4) Maturation
The main purpose of all wound management,
whether natural or artificial, is to get the wound
cleaned so that it can eventually be closed and
Epidermis
fresh wound that has not been cleaned properly will
Dermis
Clot forming
only provide a safe haven for bacteria to multiply.
A wound cannot heal with all the cumulative
exudate of dead leucocytes (white blood cells) and
(a)
ingested debnis and bactenia. This type of closed-up
Epidermis
ditty wound will then become an abscess, which will
need to be cleaned out before healing can start to
Dermis
begin.
Granulation tissue
TYPES OF HEALING
(b)
There are
 two types of healing classified as
Fig. 5.1 The process of wound healing. (a) First inten-
tion; (b) granulation.
(Fig. 5.1):
Wound Management Part I: TheBiology ofWounds
45
(1) Inffammatory phase
process. Then the fibroblasts start to contract and
pull the edges of the wound together.
Immediately on wounding, an increase in blood
flow to the damaged area will cause extra bleeding
This ^granulation’ tissue with its copious blood
while delivering fuids nich in protein and white
 supply appears bright pink and is very resistant to
blood cells (leucocytes) to the damaged tissues. The
infection. Comprising a matnix of fibroblasts and
blood capillanies, this tissue then forms a healthy,
initial bleeding serves to fush debris from the
secure foundation over which the delicate epithe-
wound. Infammation caused by the initial insult
lium can form to cTeate a base for the eventual
and the release of chemical agents from the
closure of the wound.
cells serves to close off damaged blood vessels to
Granulation tissue is so well supplied with blood
assist the clotting of the blood. An increase in the
that it will bleed profusely if it is damaged. This is
permeability of the blood vessels allows concen-
why when it comes to cleaning wounds the author
trating of antimicrobials and leucocytes at the
would recommend that lavage is the method of
wound site.
choice (see Chapte1 6).
Inflammation is charactenised by the Tedness.
heat and swelling caused by the increased blood
fow and by fuid released from the interstitial fuid
(3) Re-epithelialisation
through increased permeability of the capillaries.
On the bed of granulation tissue the delicate
With major inflammatory Teactions the diversion
epithelial cells migrate inwards from the edges of
of blood to the wound area can lead to further
the wound to form a one-cell-thick layer. This is
decreases in circulating blood volume so crucial to
very fragile and should be protected. Howevel, at
shocked animals.
this stage of healing there is little danger of further
At this stage vatious leucocytes (neutrophils and
infection as long as a protective diessing prevents
macrophages) statt to ingest (phagocytose) bacte-
damage to the epithelial layer.
nia, foreign matter and necrotic tissue in a debride-
ment phase. The lesulting exudate of dead
leucocytes and ingested debris and bactenia is the
(4) Maturation
pus so commonly seen in the wounds of wild
Once the first layel of epithelium is in place more
mammals. Pus may appea1 repulsive, but its p10
cells will be added, very gradually, to thicken the
duction is essential: the leucocytes destroy infective
layer. This process is very slow and may take some
material and bacteria, and in mammals its liquidity
weeks to provide a reasonable cover for the wound.
can then fow away from the wound.
While this is taking place the majority of the capil-
Unfortunately, the exudate itself is an irlitation
lanies supplying the granulation tissue will recede.
to the healing process. Its presence continually
Eventually the new epithelium will show as a scar
CTeates more dead leucocytes, which in turn p10-
but this will not be quite as strong nor as fexible as
hibit the next phase of healing, granulation, from
the original skin layers before the wound damaged
beginning. Also at this time an increased blood
them.
supply is brought in for defence so the infamma-
 By managing these four stages of wound heal-
tion will not recede. This is also a detenrent to the
ing the ideal conditions for each process can be
commencement of granulation.
achieved. This will accelerate the healing period
allowing a much earlier release of the animal.
(2) Granulation
Scarring
Once the wound is cleared of infected tissue and
exudate, p1obably after 3-4 days’ treatment, fib1ob-
At the time of injury, natural processes will begin
lasts, which are cells of connective tissue, migrate
immediately, starting the healing processes. It is
into the wound and form a matrix that will fill the 
very important to understand these processes so
wound. Capillanies in the surrounding tissues then
 that proper management can assist and speed them,
proceed into the matrix and provide the copious
 culminating in a much stronger scar site. On
blood supply that is necessary for the healing
healing, all wounds except the finest surgical o1
46
PracticalWildlifeCare
incised wounds will leave a sca1. Scarring can lead
to problems which should be taken into consider-
ation before an animal is released.
Typical scaining problems ate:
● The loss of protective or insulating plumage O1
pelage
· The distortion of structures such as the eyelid
·Actual scanring of the cornea
· Scanring around small orifices, e.g. the tip of the
[q)
penis or prepuce
(a)
TYPES OF WOUND
All open wounds not healing by first intention,
(c)
have to go through the processes mentioned above
before they can heal. All the different types of
wound encountered in wildlife casualties benefit
from being identified and managed accordingly.
All open wounds can be identified as falling into
one of the following categories (Fig. 5.2):
· Simple incised wounds
· Avulsed incised wounds
· Simple lacerated wounds
(d)
(e)
· Avulsed lacerated wounds
●Puncture wounds
Fig. 5.2 The types of wound. (a) Simple incised; (b)
●Abrasions
avulsed incised; (c) puncture; (d) simple lacerated; (e)
●BuTns
avulsed lacerated.
Simple incised wounds
Simple incised wounds are caused by a sharp
holding them closed until a more permanent
object, such as the wound caused by a surgeon's
Temedy can be alranged.
incision with a scalpel. In the wild they can be
Apart from contamination caied in by the
caused by glass, cans, barbed wire and, in the case
object inflicting the injury, these incised wounds
of deer, other animals. Muntjac (Muntiacus reevesi)
Iemain reasonably free of environmental debris
and Chinese water deer (Hydropotes inermis) have
such as soil or sand.
Iazot-sharp tusks which are specialised canine
These are the wounds that can only be seen in
teeth. In rutting fights the males attempt to slash
their opponents and, although deerskin is very
sustaining its injury (Fig. 5.3). Within the ^golden
tough, the occasional slash will inflict a simple
period’ of 4-6 hours the wound can be cleaned,
incised wound.
closed and should heal by first intention.
Becauise the wound is cauised by a sharp object,
 any injured blood vessels will be cut cleanly and will
Avulsed incised wounds
bleed profusely. Howevel, small incised wounds
 may stay closed and restrict blood flow allowing
An avulsed wound is one in which a fap of skin has
clotting to take place. Large incised wounds may
been torn away from the underlying tissue but one
gape open, demanding the first-aid measure of
end of the fap is still attached. They are often
Wound Management Part I: TheBiology ofWounds
47
Fig. 5.3 Muntjac
casualty
yshowing
simple incised wound and avulsed lacer-
atedwound
Fig. 5.4 A typical lacerated wound on a
muntjac.
triangular in shape and will ft back into the defect
Iagged, torn edges making closure diffcult. They
whence they came.
are usually not very deep and being exposed attract
If the wound is fresh and uninfected the fap can
environmental debris and bacteria, which stick to
be thoroughly cleaned and sutured back into posi-
the exposed surfaces. There is not much bleeding as
tion in the defect, which has also been cleaned. In
 contraction of the blood vessels will in itself stop
most cases the edges of the wound will heal by first
bleeding. They can cover a wide area and are char-
intention but sometimes some of the fap will die
  r   i
back and have to be temoved. When the temainder
pain (Fig. 5.4).
is in place in the defect, the remaining cavity will
There are many causes of this type of injury with
have to be treated as a lacerated wound.
the commonest being road traffic accidents, attacks
by other animals, collisions and being trapped on
wire or fencing.
Simple lacerated wounds
Sometimes the casualty is presented shortly after
Simple lacerated wounds are anything but simple
it has received its injury, but even then there will
and are the wounds most regularly seen in wildlife
normally be too much debris and bactenia to allow
casualties. They ale usually extensive and have
early closure and healing. First intention healing is
48
Practical Wildlife Care
out of the question, but thorough cleaning of the
· Shot wounds. If the animal has, reportedly, been
wound and the use of systemic antibiotics may
shot then searching through the fut or feathers may
facilitate an early attempt at closure. However, it is
Teveal shot wounds X-rays will determmine whethe1
usually impossible to remove all the debris and bac-
there is shot still in the body. If not then there will
tenia, so infection will set in and cause the wound
be exit wounds opposing the entry wounds.
to break down, necessitating removal of any
·Bite wounds. Sometimes animal attacks are
sutuning-
leported but often the casualty is just presented
Most wildlife casualties will persevere with theit
with bloody patches on its fur o1 feathers Bite
lacerated wounds until finally the infection gains a
wounds are usually in pairs where the canine
major foothold, spreads throughout the animal and
teeth of the attacker have penetrated the skin.
it can persevere no longer. This is when the animal
Opposing these two puncture wounds will
drops its defences, is found and brought into care.
usually be two more puncture wounds from the
By then any wounds will be grossly infected,
attacker's other two canine teeth.
demonstrating prolific exudate (quantities of pus),
Talon wounds. Simila1ly, mammals o1 biids
much necrotic tissue or, more often than not,
attacked by birds of prey will have talon wounds
 maggots devouring not just the pus and dead tissue
where they have been captured. Usually the back
but often the animal itself. These wounds look
talon penetrates the deepest but the opposing
appalling and often smell hornibly but with proper
three talons will have also punctured the skin.
cleaning and management they can be treated suc-
This is the case for both feet so an animal
cessfully. As most wounds in wild animals are of this
laia isea[ ie aaey l Aaid jo piq e Aq payoeie
nature it is essential that any care facility be geared
puncture wounds.
up to cope with them.
· Impaling wounds. These are easily located as the
unfortunate casualty is usually firmly impaled on
Avulsed lacerated wounds
the sharp object causing the puncture wound. In
wildlife this could be fishing hooks, wire from
Just like avulsed incised wounds, these avulsed
fencing or litter.
lacerated wounds consist of faps of skin torn away
from the undeilying tissues. Attempts can be made
Whatever their cause, puncture wounds are
to clean the wounds and suture the faps back in
usually comparatively small, but deep. They ate
place (Fig. 5.5).
However, just like most lacerated wounds, they
will be dirty and even already infected. In most
cases the fap will be necrotic beyond redemption
and should be cut back to healthy tissue. The under-
lying wound would then be treated like a sim-
granulation.
Puncture wounds
Wildlife casualties have often suffered puncture
wounds that may be difficult to see. They are usually
small in diameter but are often deep. Shot wounds
 often course tight through the body, exiting from
the other side.
The circumstances of an animal's injuries may
give a clue that there are unseen puncture wounds.
For instance any of the following incidents will
 probably have left puncture wounds that need to be
Fig. 5.5 An avulsed lacerated wound on a hedgehog
found:
Wound Management Part I: TheBiology ofWounds
49
contaminated but if found early enough can be
destroyed this degree of burning may not always
cleaned and will heal very quickly. One problem
be painful.
that does arise is becauise of the smallness of the
The classification of burns also requires the
entry wound, any exudate cannot escape and an
assessment of the amount of body surface affected.
abscess can form.
For instance 40% burning would mean the whole
 of one side of the animal was affected and pro rata.
Abrasions
Unless there is a reported history of burning, any
burns may not be immediately recognised. It may
An abrasion is a wound in which the skin is not
even take a few days for the tell-tale signs to mate-
completely punctured but the outer layers have
been torn away. They are usually caused during
nialise. Good indications of possible burns are:
Toad traffic accidents when the animal is dragged
· Redness and heat radiating from the area as the
along the carriageway. Due to the traumatic way in
blood vessels dilate in the inflammatory phase of
which they are inficted, they are usually accom-
wound healing
panied by bruising and pain.
·The tissues in the affected area will swell with the
Abrasions ale normally heavily contaminated
inflammation but may also have a moist appear-
ance where tissue fuid is allowed to percolate
lial layers are already intact.
from the capillaries onto the damaged surface
· Pain may be apparent with superficial buins but
many wild animals will mask any discomfort
Burns
● Singed hair, feathers 01 spines (Plate 12)
The final category of wound is those caused by
· Sometimes if the fur was not burnt away at the
burns. These are usually serious and can account for
time of injury it will fall out after a few days. This
a massive loss of fuids and the ensuing shock.
is due to damage incunred by the hair follicles.
Bums that affect wildlife can be caused by a
· Often bums destroy the vitality of the surface
numbet of incidents including:
tissues and after some days the affected skin will
diy, become black and eventually peel away
● Dry heat from the fire of a bonfire
exposing a granulating wound underneath.
· Excessive cold in the form of frostbite
● Chemical burns from a variety of sources
Chemical burns
· Sunburn where an animal lies exposed to the sun
and is unable to move
Normally chemical burns are known to exist
· Electic fencing and power lines often cause
because the animal was found in contact with the
bums to wildlife (Plate 47)
hazardous substance. It is important when accept-
ing a casualty to learn the identity of the chemical
Burns may be classified as:
in case the animal has ingested some in trying to
clean itself. In these cases the animal will need
·Superficial burns (Istand 2nd degree burns) that
treatment for poisoning as well as for its buins.
do not penetrate the skin o1 underlying tissue.
It is also crucial that Health and Safety guidelines
They are extremely painful.
are followed in case any chemicals involved are
·3rd, 4th,5th and 6th degree burns that occuT
toxic to handlers. Gloves should always be woin.
where the skin has been penetrated or destroyed
The Vetelinaly Poisons Infoimation Selvice (see
and the underlying tissue involved. As most of
Appendix 7) can give advice on tieatment fo1
the nerve endings in the skin will have been
chemical burns and ingestion.
Wound Management
Part II: The Treatment of Wounds
The treatment or management of any wound
·Fractures -Any fractures must be temporanily
should start the moment the wild animal is picked
stabilised to ease the animal's discomfort and
up. First of all, wounds should be covered with clean
prevent further injury should the animal move.
gauze or lint to stop any further contamination.
Burns -These are painful, cause a lot of fuid loss
Under this cover a layer of IntraSiteTM Gel (Smmith
and are ideal for invasion by bacteria. Treatment
& Nephew) or K-Y? Lubricating Jelly (Johnson &
at this stage will help overcome shock and pain
Johnson) will give extra protection against further
leaving a more stable animal to be treated.
contamination, and can easily be removed with
Clean or contaminated wounds - The cleaning of
water once the animal reaches the treatment facil-
these should only be considered once the animal
ity. In fact, if IntraSiteTM is left in the wound for
is stabilised, comfortable and free of pain.
24 hours o1 even 12 hours there is a considerable
·Fly-strike wounds - At this stage removal of the
decrease in bacterial contamination (N. Mills, peI-
 maggots or fly eggs will prevent further damage
sonal communication).
to healthy tissue.
Compound fractures may be obvious or there
·Infected wounds -Although often unsightly and
may be a small hole pieiced by a bone fragment
smelly, infected wounds have been on the animal
that is covered with fur or feather. These are
for some time. Leaving the cleaning of them may
common in wildlife casualties but can usually be
not make any difference to their pathogenicity
 treated if the exposed bone remains vital. Covering
and will give the animal that much longer to
a compound fracture with a wound dressing,
recover from its shock and admission. However,
like the paraffin-tulle dressings (Grassolind?
Over 24 hours bacteria can spread into the blood-
Millpledge Veterinary) now available, will keep the
stream and toxaemia can set in, so each casualty
exposed area moist until further treatment can be
should be cleaned as soon as it is stable.
considered. The paraffin-tulle should be covered by
a non-adherent dressing and held in place with non-
adhesive cohesive bandage (Co-Flex - Millpledge
TREATMENT OF BURNS
Veterinary).
At the treatment facility a 1outine protocol for
The first-response procedures to cope with shock OT
the treatment of wildlife casualty wounds should
fractures are dealt with in more depth elsewhere in
follow a regular pattern and the vanious products
other chapters Bums need to be addressed just as
Jo adAi Aue qiim ados oi Aiessanau saissaip pue
uigently at a first-aid stage whereas further treat-
wound should be available. The toutine should be
ment will require the input of the veterinary surgeon.
to treat, in a set order, the following:
· Shock - All casualties must, as a prionity, be
Dry heat burns
treated for shock and dehydration before any
The protocol once the bums have been identified is
other procedure is attempted.
to:
50
Wound Management Part HI: TheTreatment ofWounds
· Cool the affected area as quickly as possible
· Do not apply pressure bandages
o Running cold water over the wound will bring
· Do not administel corticosteroids but do provide
pain relief and in cooling the tissues prevent
broad-spectrum antibiotics and analgesia
more cells from dying. It will also counter the
· Do not initially amputate as many apparently
nisk of hyperthermia.
non-viable tissues will recover
o Running water over the wound is better than
cold packs as there is less pressure on painful
areas
Chemical burns
o Wrapping the areas in cold wet towels will also
Whereas in handling all wildlife casualties you
 relieve pain and swelling
should wear latex surgical gloves, where there has
· At the same time the rest of the animal must be
been chemical pollution a pair of industrial 1ubber
kept warm, not by direct heat but by wrapping in
gloves will protect you from burning.
blankets or space blankets.
Preferably, before handling, teference should be
· Bums are initially sterile in that the heat will have
killed any bacteria on the skin surface. Covering
made to the Control of Substances Hazardous
to Health (COSHH) paperwork of the chemical
the wounds with sterile non-stick dressings held in
involved. The Veterinary Poisons Information
place by a small amount of sterile absorbent dress-
Service (see Appendix 7) will be able to advise on
img secured with a bandage will prevent further
previous animal incidences involving that particu-
contamination. Cold wet towels can be wrapped
lar chemical.
around the dressing sites to cool the area.
If an animal has chemical burns, the affected area
· Finally, wrapping the whole area in polythene
should be vigorously washed with copious amounts
will keep the wound moist until the veterinary
of water. The chemical should be identified and if it
surgeon can be summoned.
is a known:
Normally any ointments should be avoided, but
·Alkali, hike caustic soda, should be washed off
a cream, such as silver sulphadiazine (Flamazine?
with a solution of equal parts household vinegar
Smith & Nephew) or Hypercal (Nelsons), does
and water
provide some relief from pain and infection.
· Acid, can be washed with a concentrated solution
of bicarbonate of soda o1 washing soda
Frostbite
Also check inside the mouth for burns and
In very severe weather conditions some animals
ingestion.
may be exposed to frostbite and severe freezing
Chemical bums are not usually very deep. Their
burns. This has been seen in water birds and some
sevenity is usually because of the high toxicity of the
birds of prey.
substances involved.
Frostbite is a rare occurrence in the milder parts
of Britain. However, if it does occur the use of
Preparation HTM (Whitehall Laboratonies) may be
Sunburn
beneficial as well as a suggested protocol (Plunkett,
1993). Preparation HTM is a haemorrhoidal prepa-
Seen especially where cetaceans are stranded on
ration for humans containing shark liver oil and
beaches, there are now recommended protocols to
yeast cell extract. Its use, applied to an area, seems
deal with these situations. Guidelines can be found
to increase the fow of blood and assists the Ievi-
in Appendix 2.
talisation of constricted tissue.
Other incidences of sunbum have been where
Also:
young furless Or featherless orphans have been
found lying in full sunlight. Apart from the standard
· Apply warm compresses to the affected areas or
treatment for bums, Flamazine (Smith & Nephew)
· Immerse the affected areas in warm water
and a homeopathic ointment (Ointment for Burns
°Do notrub the affected areas but dry them gently
- Nelsons) have proved effective in sunburnt casu-
and apply cotton bandages
alties (A.C. Creswell, personal communication).
52
Practical Wildlife Care
TREATMENT OF CLEAN OR
dressing will assist the debridement and can be
CONTAMINATED WOUNDS
soaked or pulled away bringing much of the wound
debris with it.
Just as there should be protocol procedures for any
practices at a treatment centre, so there should be
Sensitivity
an order of approach to wound management and
treatment. In order of practise these should be:
Before the wound is properly cleaned it is useful to
alrange a bacteriology culture and sensitivity test
to establish the most suitable course of antibiotics
(1) The temoval of any dressings put in place
before the admission of the animal
with which to treat it.
(2) Any haemorrhage Tesulting from this proce-
dure should be controlled
Gross debris removal
(3) At this point a bacteniology swab should
Any large amounts of debris in the wound can now
be taken for the purposes of bacteniological
be lifted free with a clean pair of forceps. Where
culture and sensitivity test to establish the
there is a large object such as a stake or a long thorn
 most appropriate course of antibiotics
piercing deep into the underlying tissue it should
(4) Any causative agents such as wire, glass o1
be cut short for convenience but left in place for
pellets should be removed
(5) The wound should be packed with IntraSiteTM
the veteninary surgeon to remove. This is in case
Gel (Smith & Nephew) or K-Y? Lubricating
Temoval releases haemorrhage in the deep body
tissues, which might need surgery.
Jelly (Johnson & Johnson) to prevent the
In a shot-wounded animal it is not always possi-
imgress of more debnis especially when the
ble to tetrieve any shot. When the shot entered the
 animal is clipped or prepared for cleaning
body it will have dragged either hair, or feathers in
(6) The area around the wound is clipped; or, in
a bird, into the wound. Leff in place it is going
the case of birds, the feathers plucked
to be a constant source of irritation and infection
(7) The sutrounding area is cleaned with a skin
cleaner or antiseptic making sure not to get
but is not always easy to access, especially in the
abdominal cavity or chest. In these situations the
any of this into the wound itself
shot can be left in situ as long as the veterinary
(8) The wound itself is cleaned
surgeon is happy that it will not interfere with life
(9) The wound is dressed or
processes or locomotion.
(10) The wound is closed
Protecting the wound
Removal of dressings
Packing the wound with IntraSiteTM or K-Y? not
Hopefully any dressings put on to wounds, before
only provides a barnier to fur or feathers further
the animal is brought in, are on a base of IntraSite?
contaminating the wound as the surrounding area
Gel or K-YTM Lubricating Jelly. These should
is prepared, but also stops antiseptics o1 cleansing
simply lift without causing further damage. If the
agents that may be used on the skin from running
dressings have dried in situ then they will need
into the wound.
soaking off with warmed water or saline solution.
This practice also continues to keep the wound
moist, an essential for good, rapid healing.
Haemorrhage
Preparation of the wound site
Removing dressings may dislodge any blood clots
that have formed. Any ensuing bleeding can be con-
All areas sunounding all wounds should be
trolled with sterile pads of preferably a haemosta-
thoroughly prepared before any attempt is made
tic dressing like Kaltostat (ConvaTec Ltd) that can
to deal with the wound itself.
be left in position for 24 hours if necessary. Cut to
The skin surounding the wound needs to be
fit inside the wound, this type of calcium alginate
clipped in a mammal, plucked of feathers in a bird
Wound Management Part H: The TreatmentofWounds
53
and cut back with curved scissors in a hedgehog.
The safest way to rermove all the offending
Shaving mammals should not be considered as it
mattet and used gelis to flush all the wound, lavage,
can cause inmitation and further complications.
with stenile saline. No antiseptics or disinfectants
Plucking a bird's feathers is the accepted way of
are necessary, and anyway some of these may be
preparing bird wounds. Once plucked, the feather
cytotoxic and destroy healthy cells alound the
will be replaced by fresh growth. However, if they
wound, although chlorhexidine gluconate, in a less
are cut, feathers will not be replaced until the next
than 0.05% solution, is apparently not cytotoxic.
moult, which may be months away. Just a word of
Plain water can be used for fushing out the
warning, the plucking of feathers seems to be one
bulk of the foreign matter in really dirty wounds
of the few practices that can cause pain to a bird.
initially. Howevet, it is not isotonic and may prompt
Take this into account, be quick and precise and
changes in osmolanity and damage to fragile
Temove only the minimum number of feathers.
healthy cells.
Plucking primary feathers in a large bird can be
 As mentioned above, by far the safest fluid to use
very difficult as they are firmly anchored to the
in lavaging wounds is stenile saline solution, but any
peniosteum.
stenile isotonic fuids, such as Hartmann's o1
dextrose/saline that are left over from infusing a
patient, are suitable. A mix of one teaspoonful of
Cleaning of the wound environment
salt to one litre of cooled, boiled water can be made
Once it is cleaned of fur or feathers, the skin sut-
up if none of the others is available.
Jounding the wound should be cleaned with dilute
The pressure requied for fushing can be
proprietary skin cleaners (Table 6.1).
obtained by fitting a 19g hypodermic needle,
It is preferable, but not essential, to avoid getting
through a three-way tap, to a 35 ml or 60 ml syringe.
any of these cleaning products into the wound itself.
A bag of sterile saline or fuids are then attached,
Some antiseptic o1 disinfectants may be cytotoxic
by giving set, to the three-way tap.
to the intact cells still inside the wound.
To make lavage even simpler, there is a wound
lavage system available from Kruuse that fits onto
Wound cleaning
a1l! e oi dn saplaoid pue pimu jo seq piepueis Aue
of lavage at the light pressure (Plate 13). Also
The wound at this stage is still full of gel and
 on the market, and especially useful for lavaging
the oniginal small debris and bacteria. Exudate is
wounds where there are maggots, are little electric
forming at the base of the wound as the leucocytes
pumps with nozzles, sold for dental hygiene pui-
phagocytose the debnis and bacteria. Underneath
poses. These have a little tank that is flled with the
all this is a wound base of original tissue now pro-
fuid and the pump pulses jets of it out through a
fusely supplied with a blood supply and an army of
nozzle into the wound.
blood cells. It is important when cleaning all the
An additional support to lavage is the availabil-
foreign matenial out that any sound material and
ity of a chemical debriding agent. A mixture of
healthy cells are not damaged.
malic, benzoic and salicylic acids (Dermiso]@
Mechanical cleaning of the wounds with swabs O1
Multicleanse Solution - Pfzer Animal Health) will
cotton wool will damage sound tissue and will force
enhance temoval of necrotic tissue from the wound
debris further into the wound. Also, loose strands
without damage to the underlying healthy tissue. Its
from the swabs or the cotton wool will themselves
use is particularly helpful on animals where it is not
be deposited as further debris.
possible to dress any wounds and which are dan-
Table 6.1 Recommended dilution factors for skin cleaners.
Generic name
Trade name (manufacturer)
Recommended dilution for cleaning skin
Chlorhexidine gluconate
Hibiscrub (Coopers Pitman-Moore)
1:1000
Cetrimide solution
Savlon (Coopers Pitman-Moore)
1:1
Triclosan
MediScrub (Medichem Intermational)
1:1
54
Practical Wildlife Care
gerous to handle. Dermmisol has been successfully
effective during the first few hours but after that
used to treat wounds in badgers, otters and deel, all
their use is pointless. Targeted systemic antibiotics
of which are unapproachable to treat in any other
are the only treatment that will be effective.
way.
There should be strict guidelines with any wound
management protocol. In particular, these are some
practices that are contraindicated in wound
Dressing the wound
treatment:
The aim of all wound dressing is to keep the wound
in a moist condition so that any necrotic material
· Powders of any sort should not be used in
can be easily removed either by the body's natural
wounds
processes or by further sessions of lavage.
· Antiseptics and disinfectants, unless proven
otherwise, can be cytotoxic to healthy cells in a
wound
Primary dressing
· Povidone-iodine for cleaning is ineffective as it is
The fiist few days of treatment are a peliod of
de-activated by any debris
debridement and cleaning of debnis. Any dressing
· Wounds should not be mechanically scrubbed
during this peliod can be positive because the
with swabs or cotton wool
sooner the wound is clean the sooner it will start to
heal.
Types of suitable dressings for use during this
Second-phase dressing
debridement phase are:
These are applied once the wound is clean, free of
infection and starting to granulate. Pink granulation
·Hydrogels
tissue will be seen forming around the edges and
o IntraSiteTM Gel (Smith & Nephew) - a conve-
 aCToss the floor of the wound. The fbroblasts may
nient hydrogel in a Te-sealable tube
already be causing the wound to shrink.
o Vigilon (Seton Healthcare) - semi-permeable
The continued use of hydrogel or hydrocolloid
sheets of gel on a polyurethane mesh support
dressings will protect the granulation tissue while
o BioDres? Wound Dressing (BK Veterinary)
providing the light environment for tissue growth.
a hydrogel on a supportive sheet
Remember when changing these dressings that
·Hydrocolloids
although the wound is now free from infection the
o Comfeel (Coloplast) - an impregnated soft
granulation tissue is still extremely fragile and
elastic pad or paste for application directly into
should be treated carefully and as a sterile field.
the wound
 Lyofoam? (Seton Healthcare) - a polyure-
Final dressing phase
thane foam dressing with which to fill the
wound
The second-phase dressings are changed regularly
until the thin, fragile layer of cells, the epithelium,
These primary dressings will covel and keep the
starts to form across the granulation tissue. Then
wound moist to aid debridement. They should be
any dressing is just to protect the fragile 1e-
changed daily or every second day and will clean
epithelialisation.
the wound without damaging healthy tissue.
Suitable dressings include:
Wet packs are the alternative dressing: lint swabs
are soaked in saline solution and allowed to dry in
·AllevynTM (Smith & Nephew) - a hydrocellula1
the wound. Necrotic and healthy tissue material
polyurethane dressing
become attached and as the packs ale pulled free
Tegaderm (3M) - a semi-permeable polyure-
much of this material comes with them. Unfortu-
thane film
nately the use of wet packs constantly damages the
· OpSiteTM Flexi-grid (Smith & Nephew) - a semi-
healthy tissue underlying the exudate.
permeable polyurethane film
Much is written about adding antibiotics directly
· Melolin (Smith & Nephew) - a low adherence
to the wound. Generally, topical antibiotics may be
dressing
Wound Management Part HI: TheTreatment ofWounds
55
· Rondopad? (Millpledge Veterinary) - a low
adherence dressing
·Co-Flex (Millpledge
Veteninary)
O
adhesive cohesive bandage to keep dressings
im place
Generally all wounds benefit from a moist envi-
Jonment. However, dressings must not be allowed
to get wet from external sources or else bacteria can
pass through them into the wound. Change dress-
ings regularly.
The use of silver in wound management
The use of silver ions and silver mixed with sulpha
dlugs is proving very effective not only in the treat-
ment of burn injunies but also to treat chronically
infected wounds or heavily contaminated wounds.
The action of the silver ions inhibits the growth
of over 150 organisms and also is effective without
causing further inflammation that could impede the
healing of a wound (Mills, 2003).
Two products are available:
(1) Acticoat (Smith & Nephew) - silve1 in the form
of minute nanocrystals allows the continuous
release of silver ions into wounds
(2) Flamazine? (Smith & Nephew)
Fig. 6.1 How to tie a simple interrupted suture.
- silver in
the form of w/w 1% silver sulphadiazine in a
hydrophilic cream can be used for burns
Temoved, say after 10 days, with a special surgical
staple remover. It is important to record how many
Artificial closing of wounds
staples were inserted to make sure the same
A clean incised wound should be cleaned and
number is removed.
closed as soon as possible, preferably on admit-
Suturing is a procedure that is best learnt under
tance. To heal it must be held with both sides of
the auspices of a veterinary surgeon or on one of
the wound touching. After the sound edges of the
the veterinary nurse suturing courses. It may be the
wound have been clipped, or plucked in a bird, the
only way of closing some wounds and is the only
wound can be held closed with an adhesive dress-
-rapun paseep ro sasdeoid suedai po pona
ing or butterfy strips. If practical a non-adhesive
lying tissues such as muscle (Fig. 6.1). It is prefer-
bandage can be applied to assist in keeping the
able to use sutures with swaged-on needles as they
wound edges together. The aim is for the wound to
cause less traumatic damage especially with the
heal quickly by first intention. It may not be possi-
fragile skin of some biids.
ble to hold the wound closed in this way, especially
It is important:
if the animal will not tolerate dressings. In these
cases suturing or stapling are the only solutions.
· To place sutures only in viable tissue
Stapling is becoming more populal as it is rea-
· Not to tie sutures too tightly o1 tissue necTosis
sonably quick and effective in forming good adja-
may be the outcome - the two wound edges
cent healing surfaces (Plate 14). Surgical staples are
should just about be touching
available in ready-to-uise staplers o1 else have to
· To allow a fairly large margin between the suture
be fitted into a stapling machine. They have to be
and the wound edge
56
PracticalWildlifeCare
· To place the sutures at a suitable distance apart,
say 1 cm for small wounds
· To use mattress sutures in order to get the most
suitable interface for healing (Fig. 6.2)
Incised wounds and any clean avulsed wounds
that ale artificially closed should heal by fist
intention. Apart from these incised wounds, and
the occasional ‘suitable for suturing’ granulation
wound, all other wounds will need to Tun the full
course until granulation and Te-epithelialisation
bring about closure.
TREATMENT OF EXCEPTIONAL WOUNDS
SEENIN WILDLIFE CASUALTIES
As well as the wounds already mentioned, wildlife
casualties do suffer other types of wounds that,
because of their idiosyncrasies and the fact that
they occur commonly, ought to be highlighted here.
Fly-strike wounds
Any wild casualty injured duning the warmer
Fig. 6.2 How to tie a mattress suture
months of the year is in danger of attracting fies
that will invade any wound. Also, contrary to
popular opinion, flies will attack healthy animals
Merial Animal Health) or doramectin (Dec-
that have some kind of contamination on them. In
tomax? Injectable Solution for Cattle and Sheep -
particular flies will be attracted to flea faeces on any
Pfze1 Animal Health) (Stocke1, 1992). Do not use
hedgehog that ventures out during the day. Simi-
on chelonians.
la1ly rabbits may be attacked around the anal and
If an animal is presented with actual maggots in
genital area.Animals with diarrhoea Or faecal con-
a wound, or around its body in any onifice available,
tamination around the hindquarters are typically at
then it is imperative that these are lemoved or else
nisk. In fact every casualty brought in during the
they will kill the animal. Stenile maggots in small
warmer months, especially hedgehogs, should be
quantities are being used in human medicine to
thoroughly examined for fy strike.
clean wounds but in wild casualties there are too
The fly eggs themselves are like tiny grains of
many maggots to Testrict their consumption to
white 1ice (Plate 15). They will hatch quickly into
necrotic tissue. When necrotic tissue is not available
tiny maggots that immediately start attacking
they will quite happily consume healthy tissue. At
necrotic or healthy tissue. Fly eggs can be brushed
the same time the sheer number of them produces
off with a stiff washing-up brush or picked off in
masses of toxic waste products and even toxins that
clumps with forceps. Particula1 attention should be
can percolate through the tisslies.
paid to all potentially damp areas: around the anus
Maggots can be picked off with forceps but if
and genitalia, in the ears, in the eyes, in the mouth
there is a massive infestation then an electric pump
and under each leg.
like a Water Pik (Teledyne) will fush them out
In order to allow for any missed eggs that might
while also lavaging the wounds. Drying maggot-
hatch it is worth starting any affected animals on a
infested wounds with a hair dryer can be effective
course of ivermectin (Ivomec° Injection for Cattle
even if somewhat time consuming.
Wound Management Part H: The TreatmentofWounds
57
A topical larvicide that kills maggots can be
ligature to become tighter and tightei. Sometimes
made, as it is required, by mixing a solution of one
the ligature gets so tight that the limb below the
part ivermectin to nine parts ordinary tap water.
stnicture falls off leaving a nice clean amputation
Only small amounts should be used and as it is
site. The animal can then usually cope very well
unstable it should be applied immediately it is
with a leg or toe missing. Where the ligature does
mixed.
not actually cut through the skin and tissue it will
Once again, to cover any straggling maggots
put pressure on tissues underneath it causing skin
missed in the clean-up, the animal should be started
and cells to die through pressure necrosis.
on a course of ivermectin o1 doramectin. Also, as
Once you remove every trace of the ligature you
maggots do seem to produce toxins, a non-steroidal
will be left with a necrotic, infected wound follow-
anti-inflammatory like funixin (Finadyne?
ing the line of the stricture. Where the wound is on
Schering-Plough Animal Health) will help counter
a leg it is possible to treat it as any other infected
any endotoxic shock.
wound with a course of dressings. However, if the
wound is around the neck or body then dressings
are not practical. Then the wound has to be treated
Ligature wounds
with regular dressings of IntraSiteTM Gel (Smith
Ligature wounds are very common in wildlife casul-
& Nephew) o1 Dermisol Multicleanse Solution
alties. They are caused by: pieces of string, fishing
(Pfizer).
line or netting lying around in the environment;
The insidious nature of ligatures causing these
snares, which are unfortunately still legal; fences
wounds is only the tip of the iceberg. Many animals,
particula1ly with fallow dee1 (Fig. 6.3) and muntjac
especially snare victims, are freed from ligatures
(Fig. 6.4); and somehow minute pieces of hair
with apparently no injunies. Howevet, the ligature
around the legs and feet of feral pigeons, sta1l-
might well already have caused senious damage to
ings (Stumus vulgaris) and sparrows (Passer
the cellular structures beneath the skin surface.
domesticus).
After a few days the pressure neciosis affecting
An animal that becomes caught up in such a
these tissues will be seen as an open infected wound
hazard will, in its struggle to free itself, cause the
along the line of the ligature.A badger was released
Fig. 6.3 Fallow deer trapped by the back
leg.
58
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 6.4 Muntjac buck trapped in a
fence.
from a snare with apparently no injunies and within
Abscesses
a week pressure nectosis had cut that badger in half
External abscesses are formed when a wound is
and killed it. This is why any animal released from
closed before any debnis o1 bacteria have been
a ligature or snare should be held in captivity fo1 at
evacuated. They are noticeable as they fill with pus,
least a week in order to monitor the stricture line.
the exudate of phagocytosis. They are probably
painful and can grow huge. Some will burst spon-
Prolapses
taneously, while closed abscesses will need opening
Aiaa jou 'sieo Aq 1yanes spi1q uapiea ul uaas uao
by lancing with a No. 11 scalpel blade. At this stage
common in mammals but life-threatening for any
it is beneficial to expand the exit hole by blunt dis-
animal, is an intestinal prolapse, where the body
section with dressing scissors.
wall has been punctured and the abdominal organs
The wound will never heal while there is still
exposed. If there is a veterinary surgeon available
exudate present, so this must be expressed and any
refer the animal immediately. If not, and if there is
Iemainder cleaned out by lavage with saline solu-
to be any delay in treatment, first aid is essential to
tion o1 Dermisol Multicleanse Solution (Pfze1).An
save the animal's life (Table 6.2).
abscess needs to heal by granulation, so the veteri-
This is one of those major procedures that is both
nary surgeon may decide to cut away some of the
first aid and life saving. The animal might still die
skin covering to allow the wound to drain more
anyway but it definitely will die if no action is taken.
freely.
Bacteniology cultures and sensitivity tests can be
done on the exudate but sometimes pus will be
Eye wounds
stenile and not register the need for antibiotics.
Wild animals do suffer damage to their eyes, usually
Howevel, antibiotic cover should be instigated
during collision incidents. The assessment and treat-
with the addition of an antibiotic effective against
ment of eye damage is a specialised veterinary p10-
anaelobic bactenia. Metronidazole by injection will
cedure that should not be attempted except by a
control all anaelobic bactenia present.
veteninary surgeon.
Wounds caused by compound fractures are very
If the eye is prolapsed, covering it with K-Y
common in wildlife casualties and can lead to
Lubricating Jelly (Johnson & Johnson) will keep
 abscesses The wounds themselves can be treated as
it moist until the veterinary surgeon can take
any other wound whereas there is a whole range of
over.
measures to deal with any fractures (see Chapter 7).
Wound Management Part H: TheTreatmentofWounds
59
Table 6.2 Emergency procedures to deal with prolapsed abdominal organs.
St Tiggywinktes
The WildlifeHospital Trust
Intestinal Prolapse First Aid Procedures
The procedures, which do not have to be expert, are:
(1) Put the animal on an intravenous drip
(2) Wash exposed abdominal organs in warmed sterile saline
（3）
Any tears in the intestines should be cleaned and sutured the best you can with 4/0 Vicryl (Ethicon), all the time
bathing the exposed organs with the warm saline
(4）
Gently push all exposed tissue back into the body cavity
（5）
Then locate the tear in the abdominal muscle wall and suture it closed with Vicryl
(6)1
Next treat the skin tear as a lacerated wound, clip and clean the defect and then suture or staple closed
(7) Provide broad-spectrum antibiotic cover, e.g. enrofloxacin in adults
(8) Pass the animal, as soon as possible, to the veterinary surgeon
WOUNDS IN BIRDS
solid. When a wound in a bird starts to granulate,
a process called dry necrosis conglomerates dead
Wounds in wild bird casualties behave differently
tissue and debris into a solid mass that can be
to those in mammals. Initially they bleed, bruise and
picked away, often intact, with forceps. Undeineath,
get dirty but avian blood clots much more quickly
the granulation tissue will have apparently sealed
than that of mammals and their higher body tem-
off the wound and needs no further cleaning. Every
perature makes them more resistant to infection.
2-3 days this dry necrosis should be picked away
There is also a theory that birds have a distribu-
until re-epithelialisation reduces the amount and
tion of pain receptors different to that of mammals.
fills the wound cavity.
Consequently even with fractured wings or legs
 Bid wounds very tarely smell bad. Howevel,
they continue to try to fly or walk and cauise far
sometimes a bird may be presented with an
more soft tissue damage than that inflicted by their
extremely foul-smelling wound. The infection
 initial accident. Being more resistant to infection,
seems to be particularly virulent and rapidly
after wounds have been cleaned, and possibly
destroys all the soft tissues leaving a typical smelly,
sutured, biids put down granulation tissue rapidly
liquid residue. At present it seems that once the
underneath any debris or contamination.
infection has taken hold it advances so rapidly that
The battle of leucocytes and bacteria does not
no treatments seem to be effective. Cleaning off the
often produce the exudate seen in mammal
lesidue only leaves necTotic tissue, necessitating
wounds; in fact pus in birds is usually solid or semi-
amputation if the infection is in a wing.
Biology and First Aid of Fractures
A fracture is defined as a complete or incomplete
O1 the jaw. The long bones include the humerus,
break in the continuity of a bone. Displacement of
radius and ulna, femur, tibia and fbula (tibiotarsus
the bone fragments is not always evident. Wild
in birds). There may well be fractures of bones set
casualties are particulaily prone to bone fractures,
in deep tissue and not easily recognised. Because
usually as a result of collision, trauma, predator
of these all wildlife casualties should be handled
damage or gunshot wounds, although the cause is
carefully until radiographs Tule out fractures of the
not always apparent.
pelvis and spine.
In most wildlife cases, if it is possible to catch a
A very useful adjunct is a range of mounted
normally elusive adult wild biid, o1 mammal, then
skeletons of the species normally encountered
it is often a fractured limb, o1 limbs, that disables
(Fig. 7.2).
the animal enough so that it can be caught. In fact
In describing any suspect fractures of a long
all wildlife casualties should be thoroughly exam-
bone, an indication of thei1 site on a particular bone
ined, especially looking for fractures of the limb
can be provided by these terms:
bones, pelvis, spine and jaw.
The veterinary nurse or wildlife rehabilitator is
●Proximal - that part of the bone nearest to the
often the frst to see an animal and suspect any
body
skeletal damage. It is then their responsibility to
· Distal - that part of the bone farthest from the
institute management of any fractures until the vet-
body
erinary surgeon can examine the animal, obtain
· Mid shaft - a fracture more or less in the centre
Tadiographs and prescribe a course of treatment.
 of a long bone
Before any animal with suspected fractures is
moved, those fractures must be immobilised, albeit
Further location detail can often be provided
temporarily, until the animal can teceive further
after fadiographs have been taken. These are:
treatment. Any immobilisation ensures that there
is:
· Physeal - a fracture through the growth plate of
an immature animal
· No further displacement at the fracture site
· Diaphyseal - a fracture of the diaphysis o1 mid
● Some pain relief
shaft of the bone
●No further soft tissue damage
· Epiphyseal - a fracture of the epiphysis
● No further contamination of an open wound
· Condylar - a fracture of the epiphysis when
condyles are involved
To be able to immobilise even the simplest frac-
ture, it is crucial to have some understanding of the
Radiographs will also provide evidence of frac-
skeletal structure of mammals, birds and to some
tures to the spine, pelvis, shoulders, tibs and skull,
degree reptiles and amphibians (Fig. 7.1). Notice-
and in birds will highlight fractures of the coracoid
able fractures usually involve the limb long bones
 and other bones.
60
Biology and First Aid ofFractures
61
Skull
Vertebrae
Pelvis
Scapula
Tail
Hibs
Humerus
Femur
Patella
Sternum
Tibia
Radius
Fibula
UIna
Tarsal
Carpal
bones
bones
Metacarpal
 Metatarsal
bones
bones
(a)
Phalanges
Alula
Carpal
joint
Skull
Radius
Metacarpus
Humerus
Ulna
Mandible
Scapula
Elbow
Pelvis
Cervical
vertebrae
Synasacrum
Clavicle
Tail
(caudal vertebrae)
Coracoid
Femur
Sternum
(keel of
Tibiotarsus
breast bone)
Hock joint
Phalanges
Metatarsus
(b)
Fig. 7.1 Diagrams of the skeletal frames of: (a) a mammal; (b) a bird; (c) a reptile; (d) an amphibian.
62
PracticalWildlifeCare
Pubis
Humerus
Scapula
Fibula
Femur
Coracoid
Hyoid
Tarsals
Tibia
Clavicle
Metatarsals
Radius
UIna
Sternum
Carpals
(c)
Metacarpals
Premaxilla
Maxilla
Supra scapula
Radiale
Distal carpals
Metacarpals
Radio-ulna
Phalanges
Humerus
Tibio-fibula
Metalarsals
ibiale
Distal tarsals
Femur
Pelvis
(p)
Fibulare
lschium
Fig. 7.1 Continued
The fracture itself is further classified as:
·Greenstick fracture-
- often seen in immature
animals where the fracture does not pass tight
·Simple fracture - where there is only a single frac-
through the bone
ture line through the bone
Pathological fracture
usually means where
·Comminuted fracture -where there are three O1
disease has damaged a bone. This can be seen, fot
 more bone fragments
example, in young animals reared on an inap-
·Open or compound fracture-
-where there is a
propniate diet (see Metabolic Bone Disease in
break in the skin above the fracture site
Chapters 9 and 10).
· Closed fracture - where there is no break in the
skin
Biology and FirstAidofFractures
63
· Heat - the tissuies alound a fracture site will feel
hot
· Swelling - most of the swelling at a fracture site
is caused by haemorrhage,i.e. a haematoma
·Pain - the animal will be in some degree of pain
but wild animals, except perhaps badgers, will
give no indication of the discomfort
·Crepitus - as a fracture site is moved a grating
may be felt, and even heard, as bone fragments
grate against each other. Moving the fragments
will be very painful and should be resisted until
Fig. 7.2 A mounted skeleton, this is a noctule bat, is a
useful reference for orthopaedic injuries.
the animal is anaesthetised at the treatment
facility.
FIELD FIRST AID FOR
SIGNS OF A FRACTURE
SUSPECTED FRACTURES
Although some fractures cannot be confirmed
A wild animal with fracture trauma will obviously
without the use of radiography there are often
be in some distress and may appear motionless and
detectable signs of the most common fractures,
easy to catch. But even with more than one frac-
those in the limb bones. Signs to look out for
tured limb a wild animal's innate fight response
include:
will enable it to move away from any would-be
Tescuer at an amazing tum of speed. So before any
·Open or compound fracture - Quite often there
fractures can be immobilised the animal has to be
will be fragments of bone emerging from skin
caught and, unfortunately, handled firmly until it is
wounds. Even without obvious fragments of
under control.
bone, any bleeding or skin damage around a sus-
Sometimes further damage during capture is
pected fracture site could signify a compound
umavoidable but once the animal is under control
fracture.
any fractures can be temporarily immobilised in
● Deformity - Often the fist suspicion of a possi-
Order to transport the casualty to the treatment
ble fracture is where an animal's leg or wing
facility. It is important to get to a treatment facility
appears to be at an unusual angle.
as soon as possible but simple precautions can be
●Immobility - Usually any limb catying a fracture
taken to maintain the animal's condition without
will hang loosely and uselessly.
causing any unnecessary delay.
·Lameness -An animal with a fractured limb will
be unable to walk or fly properly. Although
First aid for fracture wounds
wildlife casualties will continue to try to use an
injured limb their lameness points to a fracture.
Any compound or open fractures should be
●Paralysis - Fractures of the spine Or pelvis may
covered with a sterile dressing OT a piece of clean
prevent an animal from using its hind legs. Occa-
cloth. A pressure ting pad held in place with cohe-
sionally a fracture of the neck vertebrae will also
sive bandage will protect any wound site, contiol
paralyse the front legs Suspicion of this type of
any further haemorrhage and restrict excess inflam-
facture needs radiography to provide a com-
mation. Once these ale covered any fractured limbs
plete assessment. The animal's bladder will prob-
can be quickly and simply splinted.
ably need expressing.
These are signs for observation but when the
First aid for mammal fractures
animal is contained it may be possible to identify
Possible fractures of the spine, pelvis, neck, femur
further indications of fracture injury:
 Or humerus cannot be immobilised by simple splint-
64
Practical Wildlife Care
ing. Animals suspected of sustaining any of these
First aid for bird fractures
injuries should be strapped to a stretcher o1 laid
Apart from swans, geese, herons and the large birds
out on the bottom of a suitable carrying basket.
of prey, most bird casualties are smaller than most
With larger animals such as deer it is important that
mammal casualties. The concept of fist aid to
more than one person lifts or rolls the casualty onto
immobilise any fracture temporanily is the same.
the stretcher. If a stretcher is not available then
However, birds seem to have little sensation of pain
any flat piece of wood will provide the requisite
stability
from a fracture and, especially with wing fractures,
will continue trying to fy with the bone fragments
Paralysed deer should not be moved without a
increasingly shredding the soft tissues of the wing.
stretcher even if euthanasia is to be performed.
There are probably fractures present and these
The potential for ineparable damage makes it
paramount that fractures in birds are rendered
will cause extreme pain if the animal is moved
harmless until more sophisticated immobilisation
carelessly.
Suspected fractures of the radius, ulna, tibia,
can be put in place at the treatment facility.
Fractures of the legs are not as common as wing
fibula, carpal or tarsal bones can be temporarily
fractures and can be quickly and simply immo-
immobilised by binding the injured limb to a splint
bilised with a splint and cohesive bandage.
O1 piece of wood. A few layers of padding (cotton
By far the most common injury a bird will suffer
wool) should first be wTapped around the limb. No
 attempt should be made at this time to reduce the
is a fracture of one or more of the brittle wing bones.
A fractured wing will hang uselessly beyond the
fracture. It is sufficient that the bones are approxi-
fracture site although the proximal wing may still be
mately aligned.
used to fap. To immobilise the whole wing simply
The splint is then applied to the caudal surface
for a short period the bird, with both wings held
of the limb and held in place with three or four
folded against the body, can be slipped into a length
stmips of cohesive bandage. Where possible, joints
above and below the fracture should be included in
of tubular bandage o1 an old sock o1 stocking with
the end cut out. This will also contain the legs.
the splint.
Various types of splinting material can be caTied
Large birds should have the damaged wing
sttapped in a folded position to the side of the body
for just this purpose:
(Plate 16). Cohesive non-adhesive bandage (e.g.
●Zimmer splint -is a malleable aluminium strip up
Co-Flex - Millpledge Veterinary) should be ctossed
Over the injured wing in its folded position. Then it
to 30 mm wide with foam padding on one side
is taken under the bird to behind its legs and then
· Gutter splints - come in vatious sizes and are
up under the other wing, passing in front of the
plastic, gutter-shaped and lined again with foam
shoulder. The bandage is then taken across the back
padding
of the bird, down over the injured wing and back
·Half casts
 - saved from treatments of similar
animals these are just leg casts cut in half to be
under, this time in front of the legs. It is then
brought up under, but behind, the other wing and
used like a gutter splint
Over the back to be secured over the injured wing.
· Wooden splints -any pieces of fat nigid wood can
be cut roughly to the shape of a leg
Birds will tend to sit if they are transported in an
aerated daik box with a towel on the bottom for
· Infatable splints - these are used for human casul-
their feet to grip. Larger birds that cannot fit into a
alties and can be used for some animals but there
calrying box will beneft from having theii heads
are disadvantages to their use in wildlife, includ-
covered with a towel or cloth.
img them getting bitten and deflated
·Newspapers or Magazines -if nothing else is
available then a thick whole newspaper O1 maga-
zine can be wrapped around a broken leg and
TRIAGE AND INITIAL MANAGEMENT
held in place with cohesive bandage
OF FRACTURE PATIENTS
With any splinting it is necessary to leave toes
Once the casualty is at a treatment facility and has
exposed to detect any swelling.
received its life-saving first aid and fuid therapy,
Biology and First AidofFractures
65
then any fractures can be evaluated and teceive
·Malunion - the fragments will have healed
more sophisticated fixation o1 treatment.
together but not in their original line. There is a
danger of entrapment of the tendons and other
Fracture healing
soft tissues.
· Osteomyelitis － where there is infection is in
A fracture heals in a similar way to any other
the bone preventing final healing and callus
wound. The body's first response is to divert blood
formation
to the fracture site where a haematoma will form,
· Short limb - where the bone fragments are ovel-
as the blood vessels are damaged. In a clean and
nidden, shortening the limb and causing con-
stable fracture site granulation tissue will form and
taction of the tendons
stem cells migrate into it to form a callus. The callus
·Fracture disease - paticulaily applicable to biids,
will provide some stability but itis only formed with
where the callus and healing of a fracture expand
fbrous tissue, cartilage and immature bone. As time
and involve nearby joints, causing them to
passes the fibrous tissue is replaced with more car-
ankylose
tilage and bone until the fracture is stable. Then
in a peniod of remodelling the callus is gadually
Assessing fracture severity
Teplaced with new bone to bning about the original
shape of the bone.
Assessing the sevenity of any fractures will give
Any initial misalignment of the original frag
some lead as how to treat them initially. Fractures
ments may result in a distorted callus leading to a
can be classified in one of three categonies.
somewhat misshapen bone. In most cases, this will
be acceptable, but a deviation in any of the bones of
Critical fractures
a bird's wings can lead to problems with flying. For
this reason the first attempts at definitive fracture
Cnitical fractures Tequire immediate intervention
stabilisation, at the triage stage, should take into
by the veterinary surgeon. They are generally life
account that any fracture has four criteria without
threatening or non-sustainable requiring defnitive
which it will not heal satisfactorily. These are:
 treatments or diug application.
These emergencies include skull fractures, spinal
(1) Reduction - the fracture fragments must be
fractures, jaw fractures and joint dislocations. One
aligned in their original positions
condition we see regularly in deer casualties is the
(2) Fixation - the fracture fragments must be held
Monteggia fracture, where a fracture of the ulna is
nigidly until a substantial callus has formed.
accompanied by a dislocation of the radial head
Even the slightest movement may impede cap-
(Fig. 7.3). The veterinary surgeon may want to
illary buds trying to migrate across the fracture
operate as soon as possible. Any delay may make
 gap and will encourage a large callus.
the fracture harder to treat o1 even inoperable.
(3) Blood supply - there must be a viable unim-
These fractures, together with fresh open or com-
peded blood supply to the fracture area
pound fractures, should be dealt with immediately
(4) Soft tissue -soft tissue sutrounding the fracture
on admission. Failure to do so could be inficting
site must remain relatively undamaged with all
unnecessary pain on the casualty and may jeopal-
tendons, ligaments and nerves intact.
dise the chance of satisfactory healing.
Failure at any stage of a fracture's treatment can
Semi-critical fractures
Tesult in complications that may or may not be able
to be tesolved:
Semi-cnitical fractures may lead to complications if
not handled appropriately from the outset. Initially
·Non-union -where the bone fragments do not
at tniage the semi-cnitical fracture can be immo-
join
bilised for future assessment by the veterinary
· Delayed union - where a considerable length of
surgeon within 24 hours.
time is taken for the connective tissue to provide
Semi-critical fractures include old open fractures,
a stable callus
closed fractures of the long bones, joint surfaces
66
Practical Wildlife Care
and epiphyseal growth plates as well as fractures of
the pelvis.
Humerus
Non-critical fractures
Non-critical fractures are still important but can
often be immobilised with coaptation splints Ie-
quiring no further intervention. These include
closed fractures of the lower limb bones, greenstick
fractures and tail fractures.
Ulna
 This chapter has dealt with the general biology
and fist aid of fractures. The management of frac-
tures will be dealt with in the next chapter (see
Radius
Chapte1 8).
Fig. 7.3 Monteggia fracture.
8
Fracture Management
Part I: Fractures in Mammals
The neuroprotective diug methylprednisolone
sodium succinate (Solu-Medrone - Phaimacia
Fractures in mammals may be classified according
Animal Health) may Teduce secondary spinal cord
to the three categories detailed in Chapter
了.
injury and its use should calry on after the infusion
namely cnitical, semi-critical and non-cnitical.
with the initial fuid therapy (Hall, 1992). The addi-
tional doses should be given slowly intravenously at
15 mg/kg fou1 and eight hours afte1 the initial dose
(Coughlan, 1993).
THE CRITICAL FRACTURE
It is a matter of opinion whether other corticos-
teroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Any suspected critical fracture must be Tefelled to
(NSAIDs) should be used, as their efficacy is un-
the veterinary surgeon for immediate intervention.
certain. In any case, it is important to remember
never to use both corticosteroids and NSAIDs at
the same time.
Spinal fractures
Spinal fractures are often complicated but the
following guidelines may give some indication of a
A casualty must be kept strapped to a stretcheI OT
likely prognosis (McKee, 1993):
medical trolley until the veterinary surgeon has
·An animal with some voluntary movement of its
been able to obtain radiographs and make a
limbs may Tecover
prognosis.
· An animal with no voluntary movement of the
Although euthanasia is usually the only option
hmbs is unlikely to tecover
available sometimes the veterinary surgeon may
decide there is a chance of surgery Or recovery.
Even with some hope of recovery, if there is no
Keeping the animal completely immobile will assist
improvement within 2-4 weeks of injury then the
if there is a chance of recovery.
animal should be euthanased.
Paralysed animals have usually lost bladder func-
McKee also 1ecommends that corticosteroids
tion so to ease this life-threatening condition the
have no place in post-operative management of
bladder can be expressed at least twice daily. There
spinal trauma patients.
may also be loss of anal tone and reflexes, leading
to constipation and/or contamination of the area.
Although the back legs may not work, suggest-
Skull fractures
ing a spinal fracture, there is often a refex with-
Animals with suspected skull fractures should, like
drawal in response to pinching. This may not mean
all casualties with head injuries, be provided with
that the spine is undamaged. The response needed,
 100% oxygen by face-mask or nebuliser. The vet-
on pinching a back leg, is for the animal to con-
erinary surgeon may require radiographs but the
sciously 1eact by moving its head (McKee, 1993).
 animal should be kept immobile until this time.
67
68
Practical Wildlife Care
handling o1 approach to the animal only succeeds
in creating extra stress.
 At triage, the fractured jaw of any mammal with
a well-defined muzzle can be supported by a tape
muzzle (Welsh, 1981). This consists of two rings of
tape, one around the animal's muzzle just below the
eyes with the other around the neck just behind the
ears (Fig. 8.2). The rings are made of two lengths,
each of 2.5 cm zinc oxide tape, placed adhesive sides
together, as nings around the muzzle and neck. They
are joined by simila1 double straps of zinc oxide
plaster to keep them in position. The nose ting
should be loose enough so that the mouth can open
slightly in case the animal vomits. This will keep the
jaw secure until the veteninary surgeon decides on
treatment.
Fresh open or compound fractures
Although not often seen in veterinary practices,
open or compound fractures are very common in
wildlife casualties. They add the hazard of infection
to a fracture site and the possibility of osteomyelitis
 affecting the bone itself. There is also the threat of
damage to soft tissues such as blood vessels, nerves,
ligaments and tendons. Treating the fracture site,
just as with any other wound, it is easy to see that
if advantage could be taken of the so-called 'golden
period' then infection may be kept at bay so reduc-
ing the period the bone takes to heal.
Fig. 8.1 Muntjac skull showing, below the pedicles, the
skull stems that are oten fractured.
In spite of an attempt to contiol any infection, a
bacteniological swab for sensitivity testing should
be taken before any attempt is made to clean the
wound. This is to provide guidance as to which
Muntjac deer have two stems of the skull that
 antibiotic therapy is most suitable.
provide bases for the pedicles and antlers. Being
The fracture site should then be treated along the
skull tissue, these stems are much more fragile than
lines of any other clean but contaminated wound
the antlers and often get fractured in collision
(see Chapters 5 and 6). This involves covening the
wound, clipping and cleaning the surrounding
ping them together with 2.5 cmm fibreglass casting
intact skin and lavaging the wound and bone frag-
tape (VetGlas - Millpledge Veterinary). These skull
ments with stenile saline solution.
fractures usually heal with no complications in
Any exposed bone should be manipulated to
about six weeks (Fig. 8.1).
beneath the skin covering. This does not mean a
Teduction of the fracture but the skin covering will
keep the bone moist, vital and clear of further infec-
Jaw fractures
tion. Temporary sutures O1 skin staples covered
Until a jaw fracture is stabilised an animal is not
with a non-adhesive dressing will hold the covering
going to be able to eat or drink. Nasogastric O1
skin until the veterinary surgeon operates.
 Oesophageal feeding tubes are not really appropri-
The veteninary surgeon may well decide on a
ate for wild mammal nutritional therapy, as any
system of internal or intemal/extemal fixation of
FractureManagement
69
Fig. 8.2 How to tie a tape muzzle
any fracture. Before this takes place, any fractured
namely the tadius, ulna, metacarpals and the tibia,
limbs should be immobilised, especially those with
fibula and metatarsus. When it is applied to include
open fractures that are temmporarily covered.
the joints proximal and distal to the fracture it pr0-
Without either internal or intemal/extemal fixa-
qnu ooi Suidde inonm joddns Apimis sap
tion, fractured limbs can be Ieasonably well immo-
pressure to the soft tissue involved. As with any
bilised with a series of coaptation devices that at
immobilisation method two toes should be left
least diminish the opportunity for the animal to
exposed just in case any swelling develops If it
cause itself any more trauma by trying to use a frac-
does, the bandage must be temoved immediately.
tured limb. These devices consist of three recog-
mised bandaging techniques:
Application of the Robert Jones bandage (Fig.8.3)
(1) Cut two strips of 2.5cm adhesive tape long
(1) The Robert Jones bandage
enough to cover the metacarpal o1 metatarsal
(2) The Velpeau sling
bones plus about 10 cm. These are then applied
(3)The Ehmer sling
to the front and back of the foot with the extra
OT a mixture of innovative splints and casts.
10 cim of tape overhanging the foot and being
stuck to each other.
Robert Jones bandage
(2) The leg is held extended by these two tapes
while four o1 five layers of a complete 1oll of
A Robert Jones bandage can be applied to provide
cotton wool is wTapped around the leg, cover-
stability to fractures of the lower limb bones,
img the fracture site and the joints above and
OL
PracticalWildlifeCare
passed up the side of the chest and over the
shoulder.
(4) It is then taken down the side of the othel
shoulder, across the chest and back under the
original forearm.
(5) This is repeated several times, each time p10-
gressing the bandage on the forearm towards
the foot and all the time keeping the elbow
below the carpus.
(6) The Velpeau sling is secured with adhesive
tape.
This is not an ideal solution to injury of the uppet
front leg, but as a temporary measure the Velpeaul
sling should not impede the animal's movement
and can provide stability until surgery is alranged.
Fig. 8.3 A fox coping with a Robert Jones bandage
immobilising a fracture.
Ehmer sling
The femur and hip area of an animal are usually so
well covered in muscle that it is impossible to
below it. It is stopped short on the foot so that
immobilise fractures or dislocations successfully
two toes are leff exposed.
without surgical intervention. However, the Ehmet
(3) Then bandage over the top of the cotton wool
sling will support that area of the leg and reduce
with white open-weave bandage starting dis-
the opportunity for further trauma or dislocation.
tally and working up the leg.
(4) ‘Flick' the bandage with a finger. It should
Application of the Ehmer sling (Fig. 8.5)
make a resonant sound that lets you know
(1) The animal is laid on its side with its injured
there is sufficient tension on the cotton wool.
leg uppermost.
(5) Pull apart the two strips of adhesive tape and
(2) Cotton wool is wrapped around the metatar-
leflect them back along the bandage to provide
sus to prevent rubbing and swelling.
stirups to stop the bandage slipping.
(3) The hock and stifle should be slightly fexed --
(6) Now cover the whole bandage with either
full fexion could impair circulation to the
adhesive tape or cohesive bandage.
Tegion.
(4) Using cohesive self-adhesive bandage (Co-
Flex - Millpledge Veterinary) wTap it a few
Velpeau sling
times around the metatarsus.
It is not possible to splint exteinally eithel a frac-
(5) Flex the whole leg and turn the foot inwaids
tured humerus or scapula. As a temporary support
 bringing the bandage up over the inside of the
a Velpeau sling will prevent the animal from using
stifle.
the front leg that is injured.
(6) Bring the bandage down and once more pass
it under the metatarsus and back over the stifle.
Application of the Velpeau sling (Fig. 8.4)
(7) This time bring the bandage down over the
(1) The shoulder area and forearm should be
stifle but behind the hock.
lightly padded with cotton wool.
(8) Bring the bandage back under the metatarsus,
(2) The elbow is then placed in fexion at an angle
back over it and up over the inside of the stifle
of about 90°
once more.
(3) Conforming (Knit-Fix - Millpledge Veteri-
[un sueepueq 1yara-jo-ainsy sul peaday (6)
nary), open-weave OT self-adhesive cohesive
the hip and leg feel secure.
bandage is then wrapped around the forearm,
(10) Secure with adhesive tape.
FractureManagement
71
Fig. 8.4 How to apply a Velpeau sling.
In some small animals, particula1ly hedgehogs, it
Zimmer or finger splints (AlumaFoam?
is not possible to ft an Ehmer sling. In these situa-
Millpledge Veterinary) are made of aluminium,
tions the hind leg can be immobilised by being
of different widths, padded on one side with foam
folded and held in position by one or two simple
Tubber. They can easily be moulded to fit the leg
sutures.
but are not very strong and would be bent easily
by larger animals.
· Gutter splints are plastic padded inside the gutter
gTOove. They can be bought in different sizes
Splints
and can be cut to ft. They are stronger than
Splints are much easier to apply to fractures of the
aluminium splints and can be used even for
lower limb bones than a Robert Jones bandage.
deer.
However, they are not as effective and, if fitted
Wooden splints can be cut from any piece of flat
incoectly, can cause Iestriction o1 damage to the
wood. Marine plywood of 10mm thickness is
soft tissues o1 conversely can be too loose to be
ideal for cutting to the shape of an animal's hind
effective.
leg.
Splints are available to buy o1 can be made quite
· Split casts are the remains of a plaster or plastic
easily:
cast that has been used on another animal of
72
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 8.5 How to apply an Ehmer sling.
similar shape and size. When a cast is removed it
Stirrups like those used on Robert Jones ban-
should be cut on both sides of the leg with an
dages may help to keep splint bandages in place.
oscillating saw. The half from the back of the leg
All open fractures still require immobilisation o1
can then be used for other animals.
else bone fragments may jeopardise any healing.
Bandaging techniques offer stability while still
Application of splints
being simple to rermove and replace at each dress-
All splints should be fitted as follows:
ing change.
(1) A laye1 of padding is wrapped around the limb
THE SEMI-CRITICAL FRACTURE
to include joints above and below the fracture
site.
Although semi-cnitical fractures may not be imme-
(2) The splint is placed on the back of the leg.
diately life threatening, it is still crucial that they are
(3) Several more layers of padding are wrapped
managed correctly before the veterinary surgeon
around the leg and the splint.
decides on a course of treatment.
(4) This is all covered with conforming or white
open-weave bandage starting distally and
Chronic open fractures
leaving the toes exposed.
(5) Adhesive o1 cohesive bandage is then used to
It is not uncommon to receive animals with long-
cover the whole splint.
standing open fractures These will be grossly
Fracture Management
73
infected and contaminated, with obvious necrotic
tissue and often necrotic bone. They need to be
treated as infected wounds, but the veterinary
surgeon will also need to debride the area and pos-
sibly remove non-vital bone. Howevet, as the lesion
has been festering for some time this procedure
need not be classed as urgent. A course of broad-
spectrum antibiotics should be begun and standard
wound management dressings applied until the
sUTgeon presctibes otherwise.
 Immobilising the fracture may be of beneft in
the long term and initially it will give some pain
relief and prevent further damage.
Wound dressings (see Chapter 6) under standard
fracture bandaging techniques will start the
 debridement process.These bandages and dressings
will need changing each day.
Extemal fixation
Sometimes, especially with hedgehogs, a chronically
infected open fracture wound will not heal until the
fracture is immobilised. Usually as a last resort, to
save a leg, for example, a veterinary surgeon may
insert an intramedullary pin backed with exteinal
fixation. This will hold the bones Tigid while leaving
the wound uncovered to be treated topically with
hydrogels such as IntraSiteTM Gel (Smith &
Nephew). The intramedullary pin can be temoved
Fig. 8.6 Four pins bent to 90° stabilizing a compound
once the extemal fixation is secure.
fracture in a hedgehog.
Four hypodermic needles are placed transversely
through the uninfected skin and through the two
bone fragments - two proximal to the fracture and
two distal to it (Fig. 8.6). With small pliers bend the
tips of the four needles at right angles Next a mould.
properly managed they may well become com-
pound and develop complications in healing. They
ing of Hydroplastic (TAK Systems) is formed
can be stabilised initially with bandaging tech-
around the ends of the pins This is done on both
miques, which may even be adopted by the veteri-
sides of the fracture so that each set of four points is
fiumly held. The wound can then be treated like any
nary surgeon as the long-term treatment of choice.
The surgeon may opt for internal or internal/exter-
other infected wound with bone fractures held rigid
nal fixation but the bandaging will provide tempo-
and not impeding the healing process The wound
Tary stability.
will then have a chance to heal. If any necrotic bone
was Temoved before the extracutaneous fixation was
attached, the fracture will also heal. External fixator
Casts
kits using stainless steel nuts, bolts and rods are avail-
Some animals, particularly deer, make it impracti-
able for use with larger animals.
cal to try to maintain a Robert Jones bandage O1 a
Closed fractures of the limb bones
simple splint on a fractured leg. In these instances
the temporary splinting can be with synthetic
Unlike open fractures, closed fractures of the limb
casting matenial that is easily removed with an
bones are not life threatening but unless they are
oscillating saw.
74
Practical Wildlife Care
Applicationofa cast
Just as more Teseaich is needed on the fate of
(1) Two pieces of adhesive tape are attached as
Teleased rehabilitated animals, so more Iesearch is
stiTrups.
needed on the outcome of spaying a wild animal.
Se[ ol o ao u padde sI sa[ a[om aul (7)
of cotton wool or fibre bandage with extia
padding over it.
THE NON-CRITICAL FRACTURE
(3) The casting material is activated and wrapped
on, working distal to proximal overlapping by
The non-critical fracture is one that would proba-
one-half to two-thirds at each tuin.
bly heal even if left alone. Included in this group
(4) Pull apart the two strips of adhesive tape and
could be foot fractures, greenstick fractures and tail
reflect back along the cast to provide stirups
fractures. All these would probably heal but would
to stop the bandage slipping.
benefit from immobilisation by one of the bandage,
(5) The whole is covered with cohesive bandage
splint or casting methods.
leaving the toes exposed.
(6) Remove and replace the whole cast after three
This first part of the chapter has covered the triage
days and, of course, if any swelling of the foot
and treatment procedures that would benefit
is noticed before then or if the cast is loose.
mammals with fractures. However, birds suffer by
far the greatest number of fractures in wildlife.
Their bones and the treatment of them is a vast
Once again the veterinary surgeon may opt for
subject, which will be addressed in the next part of
casting to provide the long-term treatment of some
this chapter.
closed fractures, especially comminuted fractures
with many fragments.
Part I: Fractures in Birds
Pelvic fractures
By fa1 the greatest number of wildlife casualties in
Pelvic fractures will often cause an animal to lose
this country is in birds. The skeletal structure of a
the use of its back legs temporarily. Once confirmed
biid is both light and strong (Fig. 8.7). However,
by radiograph the veterinary surgeon may pre-
scnibe cage rest as the long-term treatment of
choice.
However, if the animal is a female an assessment
should be made of any distortion to the pelvis that
may prevent her giving binth. Sometimes a female
brought in with a fractured pelvis is seen on radi-
ograph to be pregnant already. The veterinary
suigeon may decide to operate to remove the fetus
and spay the animal. Similarly, a female with a
pelvic distortion that could lead to dystocia should
be spayed before she is released.
Nobody is quite sure how spaying would affect a
female's interchanges with others of her species.
Certainly in pack species like coyotes
(Canis
latrans) a change in a female's scent may make her
subject to harassment by othel pack members. We
do not have major pack animals in this country.
Although foxes and badgers do maintain small
colonies, they do not have the fierce hierarchical
system seen in coyote and wolf (Canis lupus)
Fig. 8.7 A mounted skeleton of a pigeon will assist
colonies.
orthopaedic treatment of this commonly injured bird.
Fracture Management
75
because the bones are very thin and supported by
fracture in the wing will alter the airfow over the
a network of internal braces, they are also very
wings causing a less than effcient flight capabil-
brittle. Consequently the slightest impact o1 stress
ity. This may be acceptable for a duck that does
will shatter bid bones, often into many pieces.
not need to fy perfectly but, for instance, a
On the plus side, apart from apparently not
hunting bird like a kestrel (Falco tinnunculus)
causing much pain for the bird, a bird's bones, given
must have peifect aerodynamics. Any deviation
the Tight circumstances, will heal much more
could cause it to fail to catch its prey, with the
quickly than will those of a mammal. Even if the
Tesultant starvation.
biid seems to show no reaction to pain, there is
· Ankylosis - The condition most often forgotten
going to be some pain that can prevent normal
about until it is too late is ankylosis in a bird's
function of some areas This can delay and even
joints, particularly in the wing. Its onset is sur-
prevent the healing of a fracture. There is a Tange
prisingly rapid, often within five days.
of analgesics that have been tried in birds (Dor-
A fracture near to or in the joint will cause
Testein, 2000). These analgesics include butor-
phanol tartrate (Torbugesic? - Fort Dodge Animal
fbrous or sca1 tissue to be laid down in or around
Health) and funixin meglumine (Banamine?
the joint in a process that is not always avoidable.
However, it seems that just not using a joint will
Schering-Plough Animal Health).
Within five days of a fracture in a bird,fbrous
cause that joint to ankylose, preventing the bird
from regaining normal flight.
tissue will already be stabilising the fracture. In nine
For this reason any immobilisation of a fracture
days cancellous bone is being laid down in the
callus until at three weeks a bony union is in place
in a bird over five days, should not involve the joints
distal and proximal to the fracture,the normal prac-
and the bird can use the limb again. Another three
tice in mammals Even where a fracture is near to
weeks sees the remodelling of a simple fracture
a joint, leaving the joint free and mobile from any
callus back to the original shape of the bone (Coles,
fixation may prevent the build-up of fbrous and
1997).
However, things can easily go wrong and,
scat tissue on the moving surfaces.
Of course, not immobilising the joint predisposes
because of the speed of healing in a bird, unless
Temedial action is taken quickly this healing could
to 1otation or movement of the fragmented bone,
which can cause even more callus to form and
be less than perfect,jeopardising the functional use
impede the joint. So any treatment of fractures in
of a limb and possible 1elease. Complications not
bids, particularly in the wings, has to involve sta-
often seen with mammal fractures must be taken
bilising the fracture and somehow preventing the
into account from the moment a bird aimives at the
fragments twisting as the joints proximal and distal
treatment table. These complications could be:
are still functioning.
● Misalignment - Bird fractures are usually grossly
Time is of the essence when dealing with frac-
displaced due to the pull of the muscle masses.
tures in bird casualties. Since a bird with even a
Even when grossly displaced, fbrous tissue and
callus will be forming within days, linking the
slight disability is a doubtful candidate for release,
the author feels that all fractures should be treated
fragments together. Once in place this fibrous
tissue will be hard to remove in order to get good
as cnitical fractures.
bone apposition. This is why it is essential to
sttive for a perfect reduction from the outset.
TYPES OF FRACTURE
· Entrapment - The build-up of fibrous tissue can
be exceptional and it can entrap vital soft tissue
mechanisms like tendons. Once again good
Spinal fractures
Teduction from the outset is crucial.
Many biid casualties ale presented with a notice-
· Deviation - A bird's bones have evolved to
able faccid paralysis of both legs. On examination
provide strength yet be fexible enough to with-
the legs may not be fractured, pointing to damage
standthe
ever-shifting aerodynamic
forces
of the nervous system by either a spinal fracture Or
imvolved in fying. Even a slight 1otation of a
a head injury. A radiograph of the spine o1 pelvis
76
PracticalWildlifeCare
may provide an answer but these X-rays are noto-
Beak and jaw fractures
niously difficult to interpret (see late1 in Fig. 13.1).
If there is defnitely damage to the biid's spine
Broken beaks are not uncommon but are not
then euthanasia is Tecommended. Where no
always suitable for 1epair. The beak is made up of
damage is discemible then the bird should be
the maxilla (top jaw bone) and the mandible
treated as a head injury case being given initially
(bottom jaw bone). The front of these is ove1laid
100% oxygen therapy followed by a course of dex-
with keratin giving the maxillary Thamphotheca
amethasone coupled with antibiotic cover. There
and the mandibular Thamphotheca.
should be some improvement in the tone of the legs
Fractures of the bone of one side of the maxilla
after a few days. However, if there is no improve-
and mandible can be stabilised by the veterinary
ment over a period of 1-2 weeks then the bid
surgeon with stainless-steel wire sutures. HoweveI,
should be euthanased.
damage to the keratin will not resolve by healing.
It is worth noting that a bird that is recumbent
Coles (1997) suggested using epoxy Tesin, super
for any length of time will not be able to evacuate
glue or bone cement (cyanomethylmethacrylate)
its cloaca. These birds will need assistance to keep
but even that would eventually break down and
their cloacae and surlounding feathers clean.
have to be Ienewed. The bird will need to be kept
There will also be some pressure necrosis of the
in captivity; it would not survive in the wild.
skin overlying the keel bone. This should be closely
With more setious fractures that involve breaks
monitored and if necessary treated with one of the
on both sides of the beak, simple sutures will not be
water-based(
ointments.
Water-based(
ointments
stIong enough. Many attempts have been made by
should be used becauise they can be washed off and
various operatives to pin or wire these fractures but
not impair the surrounding feathers.
none have been truly successful. However, the
author knows of a Canada goose (Branta canaden-
sis) that survived in captivity with a pin through the
Skull fractures
whole length of each side of the bottom jaw.
The common occurrence of a biid fying into a
Where the beak is missing, various prostheses
window and knocking itself unconscious could
have been tried but none have been truly success-
Tesult in a skull fracture. In fact Klem (1989)
ful. The leverage forces employed in a bird's beak
Tevealed that of 500 bids examined after being
are very powerful. To overcome these poweiful
killed hitting windows, all died of head injuries and
forces a prosthetic device would have to be securely
 not of bioken necks as was widely supposed. From
anchored. Unfortunately, the lightweight nature of
this information all window collision casualties
the bird's skull means that there is no firm solid
should be treated for head injunies on the assump-
 bone in which to fix and secure prostheses for a top
tion these may involve fractured skulls.
beak.
Generally these cases either respond to oxygen
Birds in captivity can often cope without a top
and dexamethasone therapy O1 Iapidly die (see
beak although their ability to preen may be
“Head trauma' in Chapter 9, p. 91).
impaired. Similarly some birds can learn to cope in
captivity when both top and bottom beaks ale
broken off to similar lengths.
Coracoid fracture
A bird without a bottom beak could not cope,
According to Coles (1997) this is a massive bone
though, as its tongue would have no support and
counteracting the compressive forces of the pec-
would quickly become traumatised. Efforts have
toralis muscle. Fractures of the coracoid rendeI a
been successful with prosthetic bottom beaks made
bird unable to fy. Remedial surgery is necessary
from acrylic and anchored to the remaining
with birds weighing over 500 g but in smalle1 birds
mandible with long pins. It is worth having a try, as
the bone may heal by itself and the bird be able to
euthanasia is the only other option.
fy again.
With any broken or missing beak it really is
Any fractures of the coracoid are only discein-
worth persevering to find a solution. In particular
able by radiograph and must be immediately
the modern dental acrylics and glues may provide
Tefetred to the veterinary surgeon.
an answer for just one bird. But whatever happens
Fracture Management
77
the bird must never be released (Plate 17). Any
as Itrafungol? (Janssen-Cilag) for administration
beak Tepair1
must, howevel, be regarded
as
orally at 10-20 mg/kg twice daily.
temporary.
The wound should be prepared and cleaned using
the same principles applicable to open fractures in
mammals. The major difference is that rather than
Open or compound fractures
clipping hair around the wound site any surround-
Although birds' bones are very light and strong,the
ing small feathers are very carefully plucked out.
bone cortex is very thin and brittle. Coupled with a
Where a feather is plucked a new one will giow to
biid's apparent scant recognition of pain, it may still
Teplace it but if the feather were cut it would not
be using a fractured bone with sharp jagged edges
Iegrow and would only be replaced at the next
as if it were whole. Consequently any soft tissue in
annual moult, which could be months away.
the area of a fracture can quickly be torn to shreds
Larger primary Or secondary feathers should,
and the covering skin punctured. Most bird casual-
preferably, be left in place. Plucking them may
ties with wing bone fractures have succeeded in
cause damage to the feather follicles and may
 making them compound.
lead to problems as new feathers grow without
Even though a compound fracture can be serious
the support of a mature neighbouring feather. In
in birds, a planned course of treatment can quickly
moulting, most birds naturally moult one primary
bring about healing. Apart from the complications
feather at a time so that any soft new feather has
in the healing surfaces that can occur and prevent
support from neighbouring feathers as it grows.
healing, osteomyelitis in birds does not seem to
At first-aid treatment, after the wounds are
cause the same systemic infection seen in mammals
cleaned and any fragments replaced under the skin,
with open fractures (Coles, 1997). HoweveI,
any fractures should be dressed and stabilised until
osteomyelitis is responsible for the failure of a great
the veterinary surgeon decides on a course of man-
  os 'y oi  o 
agement. Wounds should be temporarily sutured
the admission and triage process should include a
and covered with a non-adhesive dressing. Adhe-
bacteriological swab for sensitivity testing.
The
sive tapes should never be lsed on birds becauise
institution of a course of a broad-spectrum anti-
they could damage the intricate structure of the
biotic, such as enrofloxacin (Baytril 5% - Bayer)
feathers as the tapes are temoved. A non-adhesive
at 10mg/kg twice daily, may provide a better
cohesive bandage such as Co-Flex (Millpledge
spectrum of activity than either amoxycillin or gen-
Veterinary) is much more suitable.
tamicin (Bennet & Kuzma, 1992).
At this stage, before any cleaning or stabilisation
is considered, notice should be taken of open frac-
STABILISATION OF FRACTURES
tures of the humerus. In a bird the thoracic ai1 sacs
extend into the pneumatic cavity of the humerus. If 
Until the veterinary surgeon operates to provide
the humerus is exposed to contamination it is worth
inteinal or inteinal/external fixation to a fracture in
the veterinary surgeon considering tieating the
a bird, the fractures, which are usually in the wing
bi1d prophylactically fo1 aspergillosis, especially as
stTucture, need to be immobilised by external coap-
trauma can exacerbate this fungal disease.
tation, which may even be adopted as the long-term
Aspergillosis is not particularly sensitive to anti-
treatment of choice. In birds, both closed and open
fungal drugs but itraconazole(
(Sporanox
fractures require the same methods of immobilisa-
Janssen-Cilag) has been effective at 20 mg/kg twice
tion, the cTiteria being to immobilise any fractures
daily for up to 30 days. Sporanox@ comes in 100 mg
but avoid ankylosis of the joints.
capsules, far too large for most birds but it can be
Various methods of immobilisation, including
diluted in Diet Coca-Cola? (Coca-Cola Co.) to
surgical techniques,
have varying degrees
of
make it easier to divide: dilute one capsule of
success. Whatever the fracture of a wing bone and
100 mg Sporanox? in 4 ml of cola making a suspen-
whatever the expertise available ^There are options.
sion of 25 mg/ml, this suspension should be left for
There are always options. (Ness, 1997). The p1oto-
24 hours before using. Itraconazole is now available
col is to adopt the option most likely to suicceed
without the need for dissolving in Diet Coca-Cola?
and, of course, to be available (Table 8.1).
78
PracticalWildlifeCare
Table 8.1 Comparison of the likely success of fracture treatments of the long bones of wild birds.
Method
Suitable Bones
Surgery or Triage
Likely Outcome
Release Potential
 No treatment -
All
N/A
 Misalignment and
Doubtful
cage rest only
fracture disease
Extermal coaptation
All
Triage
Some misalignment
Possible
(splints)
Intramedullary
Humerus, radius/ulna,
Surgery
Ankylosis
Possible
pinning
femur, tibiotarsus
Intramedullary
A1l
Surgery
Good
Probable
shuttle pin
Extemal fixation
All
Surgery
Good
Probable
No treatment
Each bone, particularly in the wings, requires a dif-
ferent form of external coaptation and in many
Should there be no facilities at all, a bird with a frac-
cases these techniques have produced birds that
ture can be kept confined and its fracture will prob-
can be released.
ably heal. The healing may not be suitable - there
may well be misalignment, entrapment, shortening
and even ankylosis. Nevertheless, this would be
TREATMENT OF FRACTURES
preferable to well-intentioned but illjudged
interference.
However, with very tiny birds such as wTens
Fractures of the humerus
(Troglodytes troglodytes),goldcrests (Regulus
The humerus is probably the most important bone
regulus), redpolls (Carduelis spp), warblers and
in a bird’'s wing. Apart from being involved in the
some finches, any form of immobilisation will prob-
Tespiratory system it transfers the power from the
ably fail because these small birds do not seem to
 massive pectoral muscles into flight. Consequently,
tolerate treatment of any sort. Often these biids
when the humerus is fractured and the bird contin-
will recover sufficiently if they are kept confined in
les to try to fly, these muscles will be constantly
a cage for a week or two and then exeicised in an
forcing the proximal fragment away from any distal
aviary. Sometimes even a distorted wing will be
fragments and into the soft tissues, causing untold
counteracted at the next moult when new feathers
damage.
are somehow adjusted to cope with the disability.
The only truly successful way of overcoming
these forces is with surgery or, in a compound frac-
ture, a shuttle pin. External coaptation is possible
External coaptation
by strapping the biid's wing to its body but the
outcome is doubtful.
Ever since wild-bird rescue and rehabilitation fist
started, soon afte1 Wo1ld Wa1 II, extemal coapta-
External coaptation
tion with cardboard and lolly sticks has often been
the only treatment available. Gradually over the
Splinting is out of the question, as the humerus is
years these external splints have been modifed to
too well covered with muscle mass to be accessible.
try to overcome the problems of, primarily, fracture
The wing can be strapped to the body to produce
disease Or ankylosis.
some stability (Plate 16) howevel, those pectoral
Only Tecently have more sophisticated surgical
muscles will still be able to move the proximal
techniques become more widely acknowledged.
fragment. Keeping the bird quiet, in subdued light-
But even now these are not available in many situa-
 ing and without attempts to handle it can mean that
tions, so the tried and trusted splint still has a place
 it has no need to try to fly. This petiod of inactivity,
in wildlife care. It is also the treatment of choice to
a maximum of seven days to avoid ankylosis, may
stabilise fractures until surgery can be performed.
give the natural response of the laying down of
FractureManagement
79
fbrous tissue time to cement some sort of stability
between the fragments. But even then when full
healing has taken place there will be some distor-
tion of the fight patterns prohibiting the release of
some species.
Shuttle pinning
Shuttle pinning is a comparatively new technique
being used by some veterinary surgeons to provide
stability to fractured bird bones, especially the
humerus (Coles, 1997).
As the humerus is a pneumatic bone with a large
Fig. 8.8 How to install a shutte-pin fixation device in a
intramedullary cavity, any intramedullary pin has
medullary cavity (after Coles, 1997).
itself to be large and this can then interfere with the
bone healing by obscuring the inside of the cavity
from endosteal bone formation. In addition, an
intramedullary pin has to be inserted and removed
of the humerus, without interfering with the shoul-
through a joint, predisposing to fracture disease and
der joint, is often the only remedy possible. Even
ankylosis.
where a fracture is near to one end of the humerus
A shuttle pin is inserted through the fractured
the intramedullary pin may well be the only
ends of the fragments and is light enough to be
solution.
left in place once the bone has healed. The
There is always the possibility of damage by 1ota-
polypropamide 1od from the centre of a plastic
tion of the fragments when a pin is used, but by
hypodermmic syringe can be cut down to fit inside the
strapping the repaired wing to the bird's body for
humerus and cut short to provide a peg to lock the
five days the problem should be overcome.
fragments together. Its cruciform shape allows for
Various hypodermic and spinal needles are
some endosteal bone formation and it is sterile.
useful as intramedullary pins for use in birds, in
 A suture is passed through one end of the peg
particular the sizes:
and, once the peg is pushed into the longer of the
fragments, the suture can be used to pull it back and
●14g×51mm
into the other fragment. The suture is then removed
·16g × 51 mm
and a figure-of-eight wire is passed at one end
●18g× 44 mm
through the bone and the peg and, at the other end,
●20g× 45mm
through the bone of the other fragment only,
beyond the peg. Carefully tightening this wire will
Extracutaneousfixation
then bring the two fragments together and prevent
Totation (Fig.8.8). The wing is then bandaged to the
Where the fracture of the humerus is mid-shaft,
body for 2-3 days with a typical humerus bandage
then extracutaneous fixation (ECF) is the treat-
technique.
ment of choice.
Biodegradable bone implants are also available
Initially an intramedullary pin is inserted in
but thei1 cost is prohibitive.
Order to line up the two fragments. Four pins are
then passed laterally through the fragments, two
Intramedullarypinning
through each. As most wild birds refelred for treat-
ment are crow size Or smaller, 23 g × 2-inch hyp0-
Although not ideal, the use of intramedullary pins
dermic needles make ideal cross pins. The ends of
can be very helpful in resolving fractures of the
these pins are then bent to ninety degrees and are
humerus. In fact, where there are more than two
held in place by moulded plugs of Hydroplastic
fragments, threading them onto an intramedullary
(TAK Systems). The intramedullary pin is extracted
pin that has been placed through the proximal end
after three days in order to remove any impediment
80
Practical Wildlife Care
to the shoulder joint. For these three days the whole
The cage-rest regime of ‘no treatment' is not
wing should be strapped to further prevent any
leally an option if both the radius and ulna are
movement.
broken, as these two bones have to move longitu-
Hypodermic needles useful as cioss pins are:
dinally to each othe1. If no control is exercised over
their healing, then the callus formation will proba-
·21g× 50mm
bly incorporate both bones in a solid mass pre-
●22g×40mm
venting the biid from ever having contiol of its
·23g× 60mm
fight patterns.
·25g× 40mm
However, if only one of the bones is fractured
·27g×40mm
then the other will act as an appropriate splint, so
no further action needs to be taken other than cage
A set of model-maker's pliers is essential for
       
bending and cutting these needles (Fig. 8.9).
movement (Fig. 8.10).
Fractures of the radius and ulna
External coaptation
Probably more often fractured than the humerus,
Using a simple cardboard splint will provide the
the radius and ulna work symbiotically in the fight
necessary immobilisation of the radius and ulna.
patterns of the wing and often both are fractured at
The splint is folded along the length of the folded
the same time.
wing with the fold over the carpal joint. Initially
it will be wTapped with a cohesive figure-of-eight
bandage including at least one wrap around the
humerus to provide support (Fig. 8.11). As all the
wing joints are involved in this bandaging there is
a great Tisk of ankylosis so it should be removed
 after five days and the joints physically moved.
The next stage is to make a smaller splint that
will support the radius and ulna without involving
the elbow or the carpal joint. Using a piece of X-
Jay film cut to the length of the radius and ulna,
it is folded over the radius and down over the
ulna reaching about half-way down the secondary
feathers. The film on both sides of the feathers
is then stapled together including the feathers
(Fig. 8.12). The elbow and carpal joints are then
free to move while the fractures, initially stabilised
with fbrous tissue formation, should heal reason-
ably well. Left in place for a furthe1 two weeks the
wing should heal well enough for the bird to fy
again.
Coles (1997) desctibed an exte1nal splint fo1 the
Iadius and ulna using a lightweight plastic material
padded with polyurethane foam.
The plastic splinting material, Vet-Lite (Runlite)
OT casting tape, is cut to the length of the radius and
ulna, not including the elbow o1 carpal joints. A
length of polyurethane foam is cut to line the
plastic. Four to six separate sutures are then passed
Fig. 8.9 A set of model maker's pliers ideal for shaping
through the splinting matenial down through the
bone pins.
skin well behind the ulna and the shafts of the sec-
Fracture Management
81
Fig. 8.10 Radiograph of the ulna of a
buzzard fractured by a shotgun pellet.
The radius successfully splinted the
fracture and the bird was eventually
released.
26/7
Date splint
applied
Fig. 8.11 External coaptation of a fracture of the radius and ulna
ondary feathers. The sutures should be placed in
the splint with a radiograph after five days to
front of the ligament, which runs along the back of
 confim the fragments are properly aligned. Two to
the ulna. The sutures are all tied at the same time
three weeks should see formation of a stable callus
so that the splint can be properly positioned. Check
allowing the removal of the splint.
82
Practical Wildlife Care
carpal joint
cover
carpal joint
entry point
Fig. 8.12 A splint of the carpal joint and metacarpus
using X-ray film secured with staples.
Braillesling
A strip of gauze o1 soft cloth is folded over the
carpal joint. A slit is cut in the fold so that the gauze
slips over the carpal joint. The two ends of the strip
Fig. 8.13 Making a braille sling out of cloth and fitting to
aTe then tied medial to the distal humerus then
an injured carpal joint.
passed over the elbow joint and tied including the
metacarpal bones (Fig. 8.13). As with all of these
immobilising devices, the author believes it should
be teplaced afte1 five days with the exteinal splint
The pin should be able to be removed in two to
Tecommended by Coles (1997).
three weeks.
These are three ways of producing good stability
Extracutaneous fixation
to the radius and ulna where surgery has not been
necessary. Howevel, probably the best treatment
Following on from intramedullary pinning of the
for fractures of the radius and ulna is with
Tadius, if the ulna has a mid-shaft fracture it is worth
intramedullary pinning or with external fixation
fitting extemal fixation while using the pinned
(Fig. 8.14).
Iadius as a guide (Fig. 8.14). The intramedullary pin
can then be lemoved after five days and the ECF
Intramedullary pinning
in two to three weeks.
Not ideal but effective in fractures of both the
Fractures of the metacarpus
radius and ulna is the use of an intramedullary pin
just in one fractured bone, enough to support the
The small metacarpal bones are often dismissed as
other. This also keeps interference with the joints
unimportant. Quite the contrary, the bid uses this
to a minimum.
part of the wing to contiol the finer points of its
The radius is the nalTower of the two bones.
flying ability. They are small and so often get broken
Tequiring a much smaller pin than the ulna. Using
and are difficult to align except with an external
the 1etrograde pinning method a hypodermic
splint.
needle of suitable gauge and length is passed
The blood supply to this part of the wing is par-
through the distal fragment of the radius and
ticulaily poor and even slight damage can impede
through the carpal joint taking care to ensure that
the circulation, causing necrosis and die-off. To
the joint remains fexible. The pin is then reversed
combat this all metacarpal injuries are massaged
into the proximal fragment of the radius effectively
daily with a human haemorhoid treatment, Prepa-
stabilizing the fracture. Strapping for three days
Tation H? (Whitehall Laboratonies), which does
gives added stability for initial healing.
seem to have some beneficial effect.
Fracture Management
83
Fig. 8.14 Before (top) and after
(bottom). A sparrowhawk showing. on
radiograph, fractures of the radius and
ulna. An intramedullary pin in the radius
(removed after five days) provided a rigid
guide for extracutaneous fixators to be
used to immobilise the ulna.
This susceptibility to circulation damage also
Primary feather suturing
often precludes the opportunity for surgical inter-
In very small birds it is possible to suture together adja-
vention. This leaves external coaptation as the only
cent primary feathers on each side of a fracture. The
viable option.
feather shafts are attached to the metacarpal bones.
Extemal coaptation
Fractures of the femur
Simila1 to the external splints used for the tadius
and ulna, a splint is made from a piece of X-ray film
The femur is situated within a muscle mass and is
cut just wide enough to cover the metacarpal bones
very diffcult to immobilise without surgery. Where
but not interfere with the carpal joint. It is folded
both legs are essential for the survival of the bird,
down over the metacarpus and secured by sutures
through the skin over the shafts of the primary
surgeon must be involved to calry out the neces-
feathers.
sary intramedullary pinning.
84
Practical Wildlife Care
cavities. The segments will tend to revolve. Either
suturing to the body for five days o1 strapping
with a whole-body bandage for five days would be
enough to stabilise the site.
Three weeks should be sufficient before the pin
is removed.
Extracutaneous fixation
If there is enough room to get the requisite four
pins laterally through the femur then the intra-
medullary pin is only needed as a guide and
could be removed after five days.
Fig. 8.15 How a body bandage can temporarily immo-
bilise a femoral fracture in a blackbird.
Fractures of the tibiotarsus
Much easier to stabilise than the femur, the tibio-
tarsus seems to be the leg bone most likely to be
There are two other, less complicated, methods
fractured. As with other long bones, external fixa-
available.
tion would be the treatment of choice but for once
extemal coaptation can be very effective (Fig. 8.16).
Extermal coaptation
Splints
The leg is folded into a natural sitting position. The
tibiotarsus is strapped to the tarsometatarsus. Do
Splints to match the length of the tibiotarsus can be
not fold the joints completely as this may impede
fashioned out of tongue depressors, lolly sticks 01,
the circulation. A 1oll of gauze is taped underneath
perhaps the best, cut lengths of bamboo or half
the body next to the folded leg. The whole leg is
syringe cases where the leg can fit into the channel.
then wTapped with cohesive bandage, which is
Quite simply the fracture is reduced, a single wrap
passed over the body to support the leg (Fig. 8.15).
of conforming bandage (Knit-Fix - Millpledge
The splint should be removed every five days and
Veterinary) is applied, the splint is laid along the
the joints checked for mobility.
bone and the whole thing wTapped in either
adhesive OT cohesive bandage.
Flex the tarsal joint through 90° at least for the
Avian bone splints
fiust week of treatment. This seems to provide the
Cook Veterinary Products now market a range of
Tight stress on the fracture site and initially stops
avian bone splints. Made of PTFE, a biologically
the bird from using the leg.
inert lightweight material, the splint is inserted
across the fracture into both fragments of the bone.
Avian bone splints
A central pin through the splint aids positioning,
 and barbs at each end provide 1otational stability.
Just as in the femur, the Cook Avian Bone Splint
Available in two widths, 1.7 mm and 2.5 mm, they
can be effective for larger biids in immobilising a
are suitable for femur, tibiotarsus or humerus
tibiotarsal fracture without involving the hock or
Tepair. The one drawback is that they are compar-
stifle joints.
atively expensive.
Plastic splints
Intramedullary pinning
Boddy and Ridewood market a pigeon splint,
As a surgical procedure, an intramedullary pin is 
 Colomboclip, made specifically for pigeon fanciers
passed through the top of the femur into the bone to use if one of their bids breaks a leg (Fig. 8.17).
Fracture Management
85
Fig. 8.16 A splint on a blackbird's tibio-
tarsus will provide sufficient immobilisa-
tion for healing.
Used over padding, they immobilise the tibiotarsus,
hock joint and tarsometatarsus but do tend to fall
short of immobilising the proximal fragment if it is
adjacent to the stife joint.
 Not just useful for pigeons, the Colomboclip has
been used successfully on kestrels, tawmy and ba1n
owls.
 It is possible to apply plaste1 o1 synthetic casts to
tibiotarsal fractures but they are usually too heavy
for the bird.
Fractures of the tarsometatarsus
Fractures of the tarsometatarsus can be treated in
a fashion similar to fractures of the tibiotarsus.
Fractures of the digits
extemal coaptation.
Extermal coaptation
Quite simply a piece of cardboard or lightweight
plastic is cut to the shape of the foot as if it were
Fig. 8.17 The pigeon Colomboclip
(Boddy
and
placed flat. Each toe is then wrapped to its relevant
Ridewood) is useful for many species.
piece of cardboard and the whole structure
wrapped in cohesive bandage.
86
PracticalWildlifeCare
Casting
Part MI: Fractures in Reptiles
and Amphibians
Quite often birds do seem to suffer a fracture
involving either the distal tibiotarsus o1 the proxi-
mal tarsometatarsus. Simple immobilisation in
REPTILES
the fexed position using a malleable lightweight
casting like Vet-Lite (Runlite) will render the area
In Britain we have only two types of native reptile:
stable. Ankylosis may occur in the ankle joint but
snakes and lizards. Until recently not much work
normally the bird retains full use of its foot.
 had been carried out on rehabilitation of any of the
species. However, grass snakes and slow worms are
Fractures of both legs
now being presented for care and some of them
have obvious fractures.
Sometimes a bird may fracture both legs. In this
Unfortunately the main fracture site seems to be
case the fractures are usually found to be similar.
in the vertebral column, where the fracture is either
The fractures can be treated just like any other frac-
 the result of trauma or pathological conditions, e.g.
ture but the bird needs to be suspended in a sling
Salmonella nfection. Amazingly some snakes can
to prevent the legs being used (Fig. 8.18).
survive with a broken back but it is really up to a
Once again, Boddy and Ridewood produce a
veteninary surgeon with expenience of reptiles to
sling that will hold a pigeon (the Injury Harness).
give a p1ognosis (Fig. 8.19).
This can be suspended from a frame until the legs
heal. As the legs are not used, much of the strap-
ping can be removed after seven days, letting
gravity provide the traction.
 Improvising to suit the sizes of other birds, slings
have been made for herons (Ardea cinerea), finches
and even swans, which are notoriously difficult to
treat when they have even one broken leg. Keeping
the bird in a warm, dark, quiet environment will
help it come to terms with its restraint.
Fig. 8.18 Birds with both legs broken can be suspended
Fig. 8.19 Radiograph of a grass snake whose spine
like this little owl.
Anlun aun ym padoo ayeus aul bop e Ag panlui sem
Fracture Management
87
AMPHIBIANS
occasional bath. Synthetic splinting material o1
Vet-Lite (Runlite) can be used to splint hind-leg
Frogs and toads appear quite frequently on the
fractures whereas sutuning with non-absorbable
agenda of wildlife rescue. Frogs tend to get caught
sutures will usually be suffcient for the front legs.
in lawn mowers and strimmers causing fractures to
Intramedullary pins fashioned from small hypoder-
the legs and often the jaw.
mic needles have been successful in treating limb
Toads, on the other hand, are usually Toad traffic
fractures in amphibians.
victims especially during their migration in ea1ly
The mandibular bones are thin and incomplete
but will respond to non-absorbable sutures.
legs and pelvis.
Keeping wild amphibians in captivity for the
An amphibian skeleton is a mixture of true and
length of time it takes fractures to heal does not
cartilage bones. Fractures will heal but becauise the
always work. Toads will eat well in captivity but
animals are ectothermic the healing process can
frogs tend to lose weight and condition rapidly.
take a considerable time.
These fogs will do well in an enclosed garden pond
Fractures ought to be stabilised with wateI-
area, where they can be monitored and eventually
Tesistant matenials, as the amphibians will take an
have their sutures and casts temoved.
Avian Wildlife Disease
Bnitish wild bird casualties present a range of prob-
Like any other fungus, Aspergillus thrives in
lems that can be classified as disease. These include
damp, decaying vegetable matter especially mouldy
natural phenomena such as infections or the regu-
O1 wet hay. Conversely, although the fungus needs
lally seen consequences of trauma. Diseases can
damp conditions to fourish, its spores are spread
affect more than just one species. The aim when
through dry conditions like the bottom of a dusty
dealing with wildlife casualties is not necessarily to
cage. Both these conditions can be found in some
make a diagnosis, but the frequency with which
bird-holding facilities so preventive management is
these conditions are met makes it practical to have
Tequired to make sure that damp hay or straw and
standardised precautionary treatments in place at
dry cage debris are not left in the vicinity of birds.
the time of triage. Of course, the veterinary surgeon
Aspergillus is widespread in the environment
may presctibe a differing course of treatment once
and, probably, already present in the respiratory
the casualty is more fully examined.
system of many birds. Howevel, it is not always
The drugs and other substances mentioned in
pathogenic and can exist in small amounts without
this chapter may not feature in the standard
any adverse effects on the bird. Certain circum-
aImoury of a veterinary practice. To offer a com-
stances can cause an overgrowth of the fungus, seri-
 prehensive treatment regime these should be kept
ously affecting the bird's capacity to breathe. These
in stock for wildlife casualties.
circumstances can include pre-existing disease,
 Below are some of the more common problems
adverse environmental conditions, immunosup-
often seen in wild animals.
pression or stress.
Once the fungus starts to become invasive it can
affect the whole respiratory system including
ASPERGILLOSIS
trachea, syrinx, bronchi, lungs and the air sacs,
which make up 80% of the respiratory systemm.
Species regularly affected: Water birds, pelagic
Once established three forms of Aspergillus infec-
birds, birds of prey and pigeons.
tion are recognised:
Aspergillosis is the result of a fungal infection by
 One of the Aspergillus species. Relevant to wild
· The acute forn, which is fatal within 1-7 days.
birds are: A. fumigatus, A. favus, A. niger, A.
Clinical signs are the moist 1ales of pneumonia
glaucus and A. nidulans.All have been tecorded in
and the typically fuffed-up depressed look of a
biids but A. furmigatus is most commonly responsi-
very sick bird.
ble for disease.
·The sub-acute form may take 1-6 weeks to
The problem with aspergillosis is that it is hard
develop and kill. Clinical signs may include a Ies-
to detect and by the time that clinical signs are
piratory wheeze and open-mouthed breathing as
obvious, the disease is so well entrenched that it is
the disease develops.
nmigh on impossible to cure. Often the affected bird
The chronic form of aspergillosis takes weeks O1
will just die without showing any symptoms.
months to develop. Clinical signs are similar to
88
Avian WildlifeDisease
89
those in the sub-acute phase but with chronic
Animal Health) at a dose of 10-20mg/kg 0rally
disease the bird will lose weight and become
twice daily.
emaciated as well.
Once a bird is open-mouth breathing the disease
is well advanced. Treatment can be provided with
Aspergillus is one of those infections that often
Oxygen therapy, itraconazole and clotrimazole in
shows no clinical signs until post-mortem examina-
nebulisation. Bronchodilation can be provided
tion shows the typical lesions in the respiratory
by etamiphylline camsylate (Millophyline-VTM
tract. Sometimes the open-mouthed breathing gives
Anolds
s Vetelinary Products) or clenbuterol
a chance of prolonged targeted treatments If there
hydrochloride (VentipulminTM - Boehringer Ingel-
are no outward signs of the disease but the veteri-
heim).
nary surgeon has any suspicions then laboratory
Usually aspergillosis is not even suspected until
tests will provide a diagnosis.
it is too late. Prophylaxis for high-risk birds has
For many yearsit was assumed Aspergillus would
proven to be useful and, in pelagic birds, is the
not respond to treatment and, even now, if
only way of preventing the disease gaining a
aspergillosis is confirmed it can take many months
foothold.
of expensive tieatment to possibly bring about a
cure. It is now accepted as more convenient and
practical to look to prevention rather than cure.
AVIAN POX
Normally birds that are healthy and kept in a
clean environment with good ventilation will not be
Species usually affected: Pigeons, passerines and
affected. Howevel, all wild birds taken into care are
birds of prey.
stressed and often sick, making them ideal candi-
Avian pox is a viral infection that takes two forms:
dates for infection. It is not possible to treat every
(1) A moist form found in the pharynx and upper
but it is wise and practical to medicate the high-1isk
lespiratory tract
species routinely.
(2) A dry form seen as browm, scabbing lesions on
Pelagic and seabirds do seem to develop acute
unfeathered parts of the bird
aspergillosis soon after they are taken into captiv-
ity. In particulat, seabirds affected by oil are espe-
It is the dry form that is usually seen in wild bird
cially vulnerable and many will succumb to the
casualties, presenting as scales on the beak, cere,
disease unless treated prophylactically. Diving
feet and sometimes the wing edges.
biids, because of theit respiratory technique of the
Avian pox is not a deadly disease in wild birds.
Te-circulation of air when diving, seem to be more
In fact it is mild and self-limiting but it is still highly
at Tisk than others. At The Wildlife Hospital Trust
contagious to similar birds. It is spread by contact
(St Tiggywinkles) all pelagic birds are started
O1 by biting insects This makes it preferable that
immediately on a course of antifungal treatments
any bird showing pox lesions is isolated. Generally
whether they are affected by oil or not.
the birds will recover spontaneously and can be
Joseph (1996) 1ecommended a prophylactic
Teleased.
Tegime of a two-week course of itraconazole (Itra-
 During its stay in captivity the bird may knock
fungol
 Janssen-Cilag) given orally at 10-
the lesions causing a small amount of haemorrhage.
20 mg/kg twice daily. In fact at St Tiggywinkles we
The bleeding can usually be stemmed with a caustic
provide 20mg/kg fo1 two weeks plus nebulisation
pencil or a wound powder.
with clotrimazole (Canesten? Fungicidal Solution -
Bayer) in a three-days-on-two-days-off programme
for 30-45 minutes per session.
ECTOPARASITES
Tseng (1997) of the Intemational Bird Rescue
Research Centre in Califomia, one of the world
· Fleas - Wild birds in general do not have trouble
leaders in oil-spill research with birds, recommends
with massive fea burdens
that pelagic species receive prophylactic anti-fungal
· Ticks - Similarly ticks are not often seen on wild
medication of itraconazole (Itrafungol? - Janssen
bird casualties
90
Practical Wildlife Care
● Lice - Lice on wild bids are strictly host specific
FISHING LINE AND HOOK INJURIES
and live in different layers of the feathers. They
exist on feather detritus and are usually not a
Species most at risk: Swans, geese, ducks and other
problem to their hosts.
water birds.
● Mites - Mites usually seen on wild birds, paitic-
ularly corvids, are visible to the naked eye. Much
Before the introduction of nylon monofilament
easier to detect than those on mammals, they
fishing line, anglers used catgut, which was bio-
have the alarming habit of leaving a bird and
degradable, so that if it were discarded it would
Tunning over a handler's hand and arms. They
only temain as a hazard until it disintegrated.
are not, howevel, a problem to the handler.
Monofilament nylon line, on the other hand, does
Treatment of affected or suspect birds is with a
not degrade and, coupled with any hooks o1 weights
topical dab of ivermectin (IvomecTM Pour-on -
still attached, is particularly dangerous to most
Melial Animal Health) on the back of the neck.
water birds, especially to swans.
An estimated dose would be 0.1ml per crow-
The line may have been left entangled in a tree
sized bird.
OT waterside vegetation and may still even have the
· Biting flies -These louse flies (hippoboscids) a1e
bait attached to the hook. Birds, especially swans
often first seen when one o1 two leave their host
(Cygnus olor), will be attracted to the bait and will
and land on a handler's face and arms. They have
often swallow it and the hook, the line and any
a flattened appearance, sucker-like feet and
weights still attached (Fig. 9.1). Once in the 0esoph-
 Aau paads seie ue pe saemais anis
agus the hook easily becomes snagged in the soft
not bite humans, but their presence and habit of
oesophageal walls and, being barbed, is not easily
sticking make them very disconcetting. Theit flat-
Temoved.
tened bodies make them difficult to squash but a
When the hook is securely embedded in the
mild insecticide powde1 (Whiskas? exelpe1?
 Oesophageal wall, the bird continues to swallow the
Masterfoods) will extinguish them. Unless there
Test of the line which then forms into a ball of in-
are signs that they are causing problems such as
destructible nylon. As the bird feeds, food gets
anaemia or irnitation to their host, it is much
trapped in the line and ball of line, until finally the
easier to leave them undisturbed.
oesophagus o1 proventriculus becomes completely
● Maggots - Fly strike can be a problem for debil-
blocked. It does not then take long for the bird to
itated birds. Nitenpyram (Capstar? 11.4 mg
starve to death.
      (
Sometimes, if the bird is lucky, it will be spotted
bodyweight (see Chapter 22).
with line still hanging from its beak and can be
Fig. 9.1 Swans will regularly swallow fishing
line, hooks, bait and weights.
Avian WildlifeDisease
91
caught. The hook and line will be so firmly embed-
each one will need to be cut off and removed
ded that it will not be possible to remove them
separately. The technique is the same for hooks
easily. The bird should be taken back to a treatment
anywhere on the body - the hooks are pushed
facility where attempts to remove it can be more
forward, cut and then the shank removed.
controlled. Any length of line hanging from the
Any line wrapped around the wings, neck, body
beak will assist in attempts to remove the hook.
 O1 legs should be unwound and removed (Plate 18).
This should not be cut and preferably should be tied
The bird, howevel, should be monitored for a
to a stick or clamped so that the bird does not
week in case pressure necrosis prevents its imme-
swallow it.
diate release. All old fishing line should be burned
Back at the facility the presence of a blockage in
so that it cannot possibly end up back in the
the oesophagus may be suspected if there is a fetid
environment.
smell noticeable in the bird's mouth. A radiograph
will establish if there is a hook and where it is
situated.
HEAD TRAUMA
If there is no sign of a hook, check that the line
is not trapped around the base of the tongue O1
Species regularly affected: Spatrowhawks, king-
glottis, then gavage about 20ml of liquid paraffin
fishel, woodpeckers and pheasant.
into the oesophagus. You should then be able to
Head trauma can obviously affect any species of
pull the hookless line and any blockage out, gently
bid especially those in collision with motorcars.
but frmly.
However, the species that most regularly suffel are
If there is a hook then its distance from the beak
spatlowhawks, kingfishers and woodpeckers that
should be 1oughly marked on a plastic stomach tube
have fown into windows and knocked themselves
laid alongside the head and neck. The stomach tube,
unconscious.
suitably lubricated, is then slid down the fishing line
The key to successful head-trauma management
that comes out at the beak. When it reaches the
is to minimise secondary brain injury by relieving
hook it will stop. Now, keeping the line taut, a little
intracranial pressure. The old adage of reducing
push on the tube may dislodge the hook, which will
fluid intake to teduce cerebral oedema has now
then be held in the tube.Slowly pulling the tube out
while keeping the line taut should bring the hook
been superseded by the Tecommendation to main-
tain normal fuid levels, even inducing a slight
clea1 of the bid. Never try just simply to pull the
hypervolaemia.
embedded line or else you will only succeed in
On examination the veterinary surgeon may
pushing the hook deeper into the soft tissue.
prescribe very sophisticated treatiments and even
If the hook is not dislodged by the method
surgery. Howevel, at triage, a standardised 1outine
desctibed above, the veterinary surgeon may decide
will assist recovery by limiting the intracranial pres-
to operate, entering the oesophagus from the side to
sure. The standard routine we lse at The Wildlife
Temove the hook. To make it easier to find the hook
Hospital Trust (St Tiggywinkles) is based on proce-
during surgery, a second X-ray can be taken using a
dures to deal with head trauma cases drawn up
Tadio-opaque marker, for instance a sterilised safety
by Dr JC.M. Lewis of the International Zoo
pin lodged in the skin nea1 the hook. Sometimes a
Veterinary Group (Table 9.1).
strong magnet can be used to locate a steel hook in
a swan's neck (J. Lewis, pers comm.). There will be
a major jugular vein just below the skin surface.
METABOLIC BONE DISEASE (MBD)
One thing to remembel with barbed hooks is that
pulling them out against the barb will only cause
Species usually affected: Collared doves, pigeon,
further injury to the soft tissue. To Temove the
birds of prey and corvids.
hook, it has to be pushed further forward until the
point and barb are exposed. The barb and point
Metabolic bone disease (MBD) is a term rehabili-
are then cut off with wire cutters leaving the shank
tators lse when birds, o1 other animals, are suffer-
free to be pulled backwards and out. Sometimes
ing from an imbalance of calcium, phosphorus and
these hooks have three points and three barbs so
vitaminD in their diet.
92
PracticalWildlifeCare
Table 9.1 Wall chart of procedures to deal with head tauma in birds.
St Tiggywinktes
The Wildlife Hospital Trust
Avian Head Trauma Cases
(i.e. those cases that arrive unconscious)
(1) ABC: Carry out the usual resuscitation Airway, Breathing and Circulation checks and procedures.
(2) Oxygen: If the bird is comatose, attempt to intubate and begin slight hyperventilation with oxygen. This is
probably the most important measure to prevent the development of cerebral oedema. If intubation is not
possible, administer oxygen by mask or oxygen chamber.
(3) Immobilisation: Keep the bird immobilised. Do not manipulate the neck; do not take blood samples from the
jugular vein.
（4）
Check the head carefully for haemorrhage or evidence of CSF leakage.
(5) Apply anti-shock treatment.
(6) Monitor the respiratory pattern.
(7) Skull x-ray: Desirable.
(8) Release sensitive birds as soon as possible.
Products available to provide extra calcium
ing the correct intake of vitamins and minerals.
include:
However, birds are brought in from the wild
· Pet-CaJTM Tablets (Pfize1)
showing the classic clinical signs of bent or curved
· Stress calcium/phosphorus supplement (Phillips
Yeast Products)
 of poorly calcified bones.
Bids of prey in the wild receive the ideal 1atio
Sunshine is also essential for birds to metabolise
of calcium/phosphorus fromthe bones of the
calcium and phosphorus. The author believes that
animals they feed on. However, sometimes in cap-
collared doves, which are a reasonably new addition
tivity, a novice may try to hand-rea1 a bird of prey
to the British list, do seem to nest too ea1ly. Con-
and feed it on meat alone with no bones. These
sequently their young, in nests in March and April
biids never flourish and develop very poorly calci-
do appea1 to suffer MBD because of the lack of
fed bones that will bend and fracture sponta-
sunshine.
neously. Unfortunately, chronic cases cannot be
 Many young are picked up and taken into care.
Tectified and the birds have to be destroyed. Some-
We place these patients under ultraviolet lamps
times newer cases can be given a calcium supple-
designed for reptiles (PowerSun UVTM _ Zoo Med,
ment and recover but nothing can Teplace a
available from B.J. Herp Supplies).
balanced diet. It is crucial to remember that biids
 of prey do not feed just on meat, they feed on whole
POISONING
animals.
 Young collared doves (and pigeons) are brought
Species usually affected: Water birds, although
in from the wild suffering from MBD. Symptoms
include the classic thin bone cortex or curved long
biids of prey, corvids and pigeons are sometimes
the victims of illegal poisoning, which is invariably
fatal.
these respond to a calcium supplement in tablet
form followed by a calcium/phosphorus powder
Two types of poisoning are regularly seen in biids,
(Stress - Phillips Yeast Products) on their food.
and both seem to occur in water biids:
Avian WildlifeDisease
93
(1) Lead poisoning - this affects swans in paticu-
la1, who take in and digest lead fishing weights
and possibly lead shotgun pellets picked up as
grit for the gizzard
(2) Boulinum poisoning - gulls are the main
victims of this warm-weather phenomenon,but
all water birds are at nisk
Other poisonings may occur and if they have
been identified reference can be made to the Vet-
erinary Poisons Information Service (see Appendix
7), which may have records of bids suffering
similar trauma. There is a charge for the service
although the veterinary practice may already sub-
scnibe to the organisation.
Fig. 9.2 Red Kite found poisoned resulting in a police
Intentional poisoning or suspicion of man-
prosecution.
made deliberate or accidental poisoning should be
Teported to the Wildlife Incident Unit of the
Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs on Freephone 0800 321 600 (Fig. 9.2).
Lead poisoning (M. Beeson, pers. comm.)
Swans, like other birds, need to ingest grit and small
stones which provide their gizzard with grinding
stones to break up their food. To do this they sift
mud and silt through their beaks, swallowing the grit.
A swan's long neck allows it to reach further down
under the water and this is why more swans become
poisoned by lead than ducks or geese. Geese tend to
dn sd yo y ne a aie os pe ai a
gunshot lead rather than fisherman's weights.
Birds that have lead in their gizzard will always
Fig. 9.3 The aetiology ofthis limber-neck'in swans sug-
be suffening from lead poisoning and should be
gests there may be other causes as well as lead
treated (Harcourt-B1own, 1996). If not treated
poisoning.
promptly lead poisoning will kill. Legislation was
passed banning the smaller sizes of lead fishing
weight but there is a huge amount left on tiver
(the lower part of the neck lies across the biid's
banks and on niver foors.
back), although other factors may also be involved
Lead poisoning causes anorexia, which leads
(Fig. 9.3). Blood analysis can be used for diagnosis,
to emaciation, anaemia, muscle weakness, bright
but some swans have a naturally high lead reading
green droppings and general malaise. The gizzard,
and are not ill. Radiographs of the gizzard and clin-
a muscle, ceases to function and even if the bird can
ical signs are better guides. Lead shot will appear as
eat its foodstuffs are not processed and congeal in
Tadio-opaque (Fig. 9.4).
the proventniculus and oesophagus.
Once X-rayed the swan should be put on an
intravenous dnip using a 22 g catheter in the medial
tarsal vein secured with lots of adhesive tape. This
Clinicalsigns
means that if the bird wishes to stand or change
Clinical signs of lead poisoning include emaciation,
position it can do so, and it also eliminates the
need for constant supervision or sedation. Sodium
94
PracticalWildlifeCare
problems and may need to remain in care for a con-
siderable time or possibly be rehomed in a safe
environment where a good diet can be maintained.
It must be remembered, too, that in spells of
extreme cold weather swans may appea1 lead poi-
soned as the lead laid down in their bones is
Teleased; the same may be true of females at breed-
ing time. This is not usually severe enough to
Jequire treatment - if it is, a one-off injection as
described above is enough.
 It used to be common practice to remove the
lead from the gizzard surgically. This is now con-
sidered too traumatic and surgery on an already
debilitated swan is rarely a good idea. The only
exception to this is when a large plumb weight o1
sinker has been ingested, in which case it should be
Temoved through the proventriculus not the gizzard
- a procedure that is not to be undertaken lightly.
It is better to encourage both an extra intake of grit
through the bird's food and drinking to speedily
evacuate any metals.
Lead shot or pellets elsewhere in the bird's body
ale not considered a lead-poisoning hazard.
Botulinum poisoning
During hot or dry weather, when water levels fall,
mud becomes an ideal breeding ground for the
anaerobic bactelia Clostridium botulinum. Water
Fig. 9.4 Radiograph of a swan showing lead shot
birds, especially gulls, feed from this mud, taking in
trapped in its gizzard.
invertebrates and molluscs. The Clostridium pro-
duces a highly toxic poison that will kill many birds,
but some will survive long enough to be picked up
calcium edetate (Strong) (Animalcare) should be
and taken for treatment.
added at a rate of 5ml pe1 1l bag of Ha1tmann's
Clinical signs include faccid paralysis of the legs,
solution with 10ml of Duphalyte (Fort Dodge
loss of control of the nictitating membrane, a
Animal Health). A subcutaneous injection of 2ml
shallow itregular heartbeat and depressed breath-
vitamin Bz should be given. The thigh is the best
ing. The temperature may be low, 36.5-37.5°C, and
injection site, as it does not bruise as much as the
there could be non-smelly projectile diarrhoea.
breast.
Smelly diarrhoea may point to Salmonella poison-
The intravenous drip should be maintained for
ing needing antibiotics as a treatment.
48 hours, with a second bag of fuids and medica-
Sick birds should be given intravenous OI
tion running consecutively. A 48-hour break should
intraosseous fluids at a rate of 50 ml/kg, half being
be taken and then a daily subcutaneous injection of
given subcutaneously. Shock should be treated
1.5 ml sodium calcium edetate (Strong) (Animal-
with dexamethasone at 2-8 mg/kg. Gavaging with a
care) mixed with 1 ml of water should be given until
broad-spectrum antitoxin will start the process of
appetite has Teturned.
washing the poison out of the body. A simple broad-
 Swans that have recovered from lead poisoning
spectrum antitoxin can be made up as follows
very often suffer with absorption and digestive
(Greenwood, 1979):
Avian Wildlife Disease
95
10g activated charcoal - an absorbent
commonly known, is one of those naturally occur-
5 g kaolin - an adsorbent
ning conditions that can cause Iespiratory distress
5g tannic acid
in birds The culprit, Syngamus trachea, is a nema-
 5 g light magnesium oxide - an antacid
tode worm that infects the trachea of birds often in
Wate1 added to bring the total volume to 500 ml
such numbers as to completely block it. It infects
The antitoxin is gavaged at 2-20 ml depending on
the birds through an intermediate host, which may
be a slug, snail, beetle or earthworm.
the size of the bird.
Like many other Tespiratory problems, it can
Once the bird’s fuid levels are satisfactory, O1 at
least after 24 hours, it can be started on a gavage
cause the bird to breathe with an open mouth, but
Tegime of liquid food. Suitable foods are Poly-Aid
sometimes the calise can be suspected by the moist
Tales coming from the glottis. Also in severe cases
(Vetafarm Europe), Ensure (Abbott Laboratories)
the worms may be seen in the opening of the
01 Complan (Crookes Healthcare) also at 2-20 ml
trachea. The worms are ted and threadlike (Fig.
depending on the size of the bird. This should
9.5).
continue until the bird is feeding itself.
Control is with fenbendazole (Panacur?
Botulinum toxin is very poisonous so do not
Hoechst Roussel Vet) o1 thiabendazole (Mintezole
expect a 100% success tate but 50% success can be
-Merial Animal Health).
achieved.
SHOT WOUNDS
Shot wounds caused by air guns do seem to have
become the twenty-first century disease. In a
wildlife rehabilitation unit, all species of birds
Ianging from swans to finches are being presented
 injured or maimed with one or more air gun pellets.
Air guns are becoming more powerful and can
kill most of the smaller birds. But a great many
birds and, for that matter, other animals, are just
being wounded.
An ait-gun pellet will penetrate a bird and will,
typically, calry feather and other debris into the
wound. In most cases we see the pellet does not exit
the bird. On its way through, an air-gun pellet is
quite capable of shattering bone as well. Fractures
and the pellet will show up very well on X-ray.
Fractures are treated just as normal fractures but
the wound will have to be excavated to remove the
 pellet and the debnis carried in with it.
In wildlife 1ehabilitation, in Britain, it is useful to
have some knowledge of the law relating to the use
Of air guns. Then, if a bird is shot, referring the inci-
dent to the police may prevent more birds getting
shot in future (Appendix 4).
SYNGAMIASIS (GAPEWORM)
Species affected: All.
Fig. 9.5 Syngamus trachea - the gapeworm, male and
female.
Syngamiasis, or gapeworm infestation, as it is more
96
PracticalWildlifeCare
THIAMINE DEFICIENCY
The disease manifests itself by causing caseous
lesions that may be in the throat, crop, oesophagus
Species affected: Fish-eating birds.
and into the 1oof of the mouth, upper respiratory
The enzyme thiaminase occurs in whitefish, e.g.
tract and eye orbits. The lesions are typically deep
sprats, whitebait, turbot and white bass. Some birds
yellow to brown in colour and may be accompanied
by thick saliva and strands of a mucoid matenial.
taken into captivity have to be fed on fish, for
There is often a fetid smell. Infected birds often
instance kingfishers and grebes can be fed on white-
starve when the lesions block the throat o1
bait. The thiaminase in these whitefish breaks down
suffer respiratory distress if the lesions invade the
thiamine (vitamin Bl) in the bird leading to
trachea.
polyneunitis and death.
Clinical signs of thiamine deficiency include a
Attempting to remove the lesions before treat-
general lethargy and weakness, loss of appetite and
ment can result in massive life-threatening haem-
Ofthage. Howevel, provided an infected bid
constriction of the pupils followed by convulsions
Teceives fuid therapy and is gavaged with liquid
just pnio1 to death. To prevent this happening, all
birds fed on whitefish should be given a daily thi-
nutrition, the tnichomoniasis can be attacked with
medication and will be easily removed in 4-5 days.
amine (vitamin B) supplement.
 In fact most of the lesions will be swallowed as they
Vitamin B is available in tablet form for humans,
become detached.
but a more suitable mix of B vitamins is available
The drug to treat trichomoniasis is carnidazole
as Aquavits (International Zoo Veterinary Group)
(Spartrix - Ha1kers) at 10mg fo1 adult birds and
o1 Fish Eaters' Tablets from Mazuri Zoo Foods.
chronic cases and 5mg as a single dose for young
Produced for all fish-eating animals, the dose rates
birds.
are displayed on the container - a guillemot-sized
 Sometimes the infection will have eroded part of
bird would need one tablet per day.
the bird's beak o1 skull. Birds with major defects
Birds affected by oil, in particula1, are fed on
should possibly be kept in captivity.
whitefish to help clean thei1 digestive tract of
 So prevalent is the disease in colombids that
toxins. Each of these birds would need a thiamine
pigeons and collared doves should be treated pro-
supplement daily throughout their stay in care.
phylactically on admmission. Sometimes whole focks
of collared doves are noticeably infected with tri-
chomoniasis. One by one they will fail and be
TRICHOMONIASIS (*FROUNCE'
brought into care. It may be possible to treat a reg-
OR *CANKER')
ula1ly visiting fock with dimetiidazole (Ha1kanker
Soluble - Harkers) in a drinking bowl. To the
Species affected: Collared doves (Streptopelia
author's knowledge this has not been tnied but it
decaocto), pigeons and birds of prey.
may be a solution to mass mortality.
Thichomoniasis is caused by a fagellate protozoan
called Trichomonas gallinae. Trichomonads are
aerotolerant anaerobes that feed by phagocytosis,
WEST NILE VIRUS
absorbing bactenia, leucocytes and cell exudates. No
imtermediate host is required; trichomonads are trans-
West Nile Virus (WNV) is transfelled to birds by
mitted by direct contact. Because of this it is usually
mosquitoes and is particularly common in birds
 possible to estimate the source of an infection.
migrating north from Africa. In the USA, wildlife
Typically pigeons and collared doves regularly
rehabilitation groups are experiencing a lot more
casualties than is normal, together with the added
nestlings feed directly from the throat of the parent
threat that WNV is transferable to humans, some-
bids. Trichomonads are very common in the throat
times fatally.
area. The author has also seen trichomoniasis in
In Britain the disease is being monitored by the
tawny owls, sparrowhawks (Accipiter nisus) and a
Veterinary Laboratories Agency, which reports that
led kite, all of which could possibly have fed on
antibodies have been found in many non-migrating
infected collared doves o1 pigeons (Plate 19).
birds, meaning these birds have been exposed to the
Avian WildlifeDisease
97
disease. HoweveI the VLA has not found evidence
specific symptoms will leave no doubt as to the
of clinical WNV from surveillance of wild birds in
condition.
2001-2003. This is puzzling. It may mean that the
disease was present in the UK previously and that
Isolation
therefore we may not suffer the major epizootic
that is hitting the United States.
All suspect cases must be isolated from other
Earlier, in Chapter 1, the author discussed the
animals in care. People handling suspect biids
zoonotic potential of West Nile Virus and is also
should wear gloves, gowns or aprons and face-
indebted to Dr Erica A. Miller DVM of Thi-State
masks. Laundry, feeding implements and dishes fo1
Bird Rescue and Research Inc., for providing a
suspect birds should be washed and disinfected sep-
synopsis of Amenica's experience that we can take
arately from the rest of the facility's equipment.
on board in case the disease becomes a similar
Duning post mortem it is Tecommended to wear
problem in Britain.
two pairs of gloves and masks, to increase ventila-
tion and perhaps use respirators to protect the
handler.
Clinical signs
In general, birds present with some level of central
Treatment
nervous system abnormality, including mild head
tremors, ataxia, torticollis, stargazing, leg paralysis,
Treatment includes supportive care with fuids and
bilateral wing droop and full seizures. Most of
nutrition. Supportive drugs could be vitamin B
the biids also have gastiointestinal problems at
complex, itraconazole (see Aspergillosis pp 88-89)
some time, including diarrhoea (often projectile),
and parasite contiol, especially the Hippoboscid
anorexia and, in most advanced cases, regurgitation
flies and lice.
of food. Other signs include feather damage, failure
If a bird affected by WNV has a fit or regurgi-
 of new feathering and retinal damage. Nearly all the
tates it should be euthanased. Similarly if there has
bids have ectoparasites, Hippoboscid flies and lice.
been no improvement for several days then the bird
Others may have elevated body temperatures.
will not recover. Crows, in particular, may also
demonstrate bleeding from the mouth.
 If birds manage to overcome all these difficulties
Diagnosis
it may still take several months before they are fit
Diagnosis is strictly the province of the veterinary
to be teleased (Dr Enica A. Miller DVM, personal
surgeon. For diagnostic tests appropriate to WNV,
communication).
see the National Wildlife Health Center of
 Monitoring the progress, or not, of the disease in
America's website at www.nwhc.usgs-gov/research/
Bnitain can be via the Internet on the Veterinary
west_nile/west_nile.html. Some diagnostic tests are
Laboratories Agency website.
also run on cloacal swabs and feather pulp which
are the most reliable tissues tested to date.
Much of this chapter has discussed prophylaxis.
A differential diagnosis of any animal showing
This is not an altemative to diagmosis and treat-
neurological signs must now include the possibility
ment, but is just a precaution against regulaily seen
of a diagnosis of West Nile Virus. Howevel, if the
conditions. The ultimate decision on a disease must
disease does hit Bnitain then soon familiarity of
always remain with the veterinary surgeon.
10
Mammalian Wildlife Disease
Mammalian wildlife exhibits a wide 1ange of disease,
Periodontal disease should not occur in wild
and commonly seen conditions which can often
mammals especially the insectivores and camivores
be treated. The diseases highlighted in this chapter
that eat raw meat and invertebrate chitin as part of
are mainly those caused by trauma and metabolic
theit natural diet. However, hedgehogs in particu-
disorders, rather than infection with pathogens
lal, are regularly found with a chronic build-up of
calculus on theii upper carnassial and first mola1
teeth (Stocke1, 1987) (Plate 20).Animals have been
DENTAL AND JAW CONDITIONS
seen with their top jaws fiimly cemented to the
bottom jaws with this calculus build-up.
Companion animals that are given a soft food diet
Calculus consists of layers of minerals deposited
 aTe expected to develop dental problems, but surely
on the teeth from the saliva in response to the
animals in the wild, on a natural diet, should not
presence of plaque on the tooth surfaces. This
suffer dental disease. Howevel, some wild animals,
begins a vicious circle,in which bacteria accumulate
when admitted fo1 treatment for othel problems,
in the microscopic crevices of the plaque and cal-
are showing enough dental disease that it is a sound
culus, causing periodontal (literally ‘around the
protocol to give all mammals a complete dental
teeth') disease of the gums, which, in its turn, pre-
ovethaul before release.
disposes to more plaque and calculus build-up and
so on.
 In captivity, on a tinned food diet, long-stay
Treatment
hedgehogs can be expected to accumulate calculus,
Under the auspices of a veterinary surgeon an
but it has now been shown that some wild hedge-
animal needing dental treatment should be main-
hogs also suffer a similar build-up, so every One
tained on a course of oral antibiotics both before
taken in should have its mouth thoroughly checked.
any treatment and for at least a week after treat-
Ultrasonic scaling and a few extractions are usually
ment. An antibiotic preparation of spiramycin and
all that is needed to send a hedgehog on its way. In
metronidazole (Stomorgyl 2 - Merial Animal
captivity the addition of Whiskas Junio1 Dry (Mars
Health) can be administered at ↓ tablet per kg of
Inc.) will keep the levels of plague to a minimum
bodyweight once daily. Pain 1elief is provided with
and discourage the build-up of calculus.
carprofen (Rimadyl - Pfzer) at 4 mg/kg for three
Similarly, badgers and foxes should have theit
days post-surgery.
teeth checked for periodontal disease before
Telease. Untreated peniodontal disease can cause
infection to spread to other organs. The mouth acts
Periodontal disease
as a Teservoir for infection where the bactenia can
Species mainly affected: Hedgehogs (Erinaceus
easily pass through the gingival tissues into the
europaeus), badgers (Meles meles), foxes (Vulpes
blood. From here the bacteria can be distributed
vulpes) and otters (Lutra lutra).
and settle into the heart, lungs, liver and kidneys.
98
MammalianWildlifeDisease
99
Releasing an animal to this future without treat-
tinue to grow straight out in front of the mouth or
ment is not acceptable.
up into the roof of the mouth.
In wild animals there is usually one of two
Endodontic disease
reasons for this abnormal growth:
Species mainly affected: badgers, foxes, otters and
(1)Congenitalmalocclusion
-seen in infants
muntjac deer.
where a congenital deformity of the skull
Endodontic disease affects the interior of a tooth,
precludes the opposing teeth from meeting
properly
the pulp. The pulp is very sensitive and can be
(2) Traumatic malocchusion -where the animal has
damaged easily. Pulp exposure can be seen as a hole
in the tooth through which the pulp, either healthy
suffered an injury that either fractured its
imcisors or displaced the top or bottom jaw
O1 nectotic, can be detected.
Badgers are more often than not candidates for
Once the teeth are maloccluded there are no cor-
dental overhauls as their teeth often display great
Tective measures that can be taken to encourage
wear (attnition) or else fractures of the canines.
them to grow in alignment. Except, that is, where a
These fractures open the tooth to infection and are
single tooth is broken and the opposing tooth has
no doubt extremely painful.
to be kept short until the broken tooth regrows to
Foxes, otters and badgers all commonly exhibit
its normal length.
fractured canines (Plate 21). Whereve1 possible
A rabbit's maloccluded incisors can be extracted
damaged teeth should be Tepaired rather than be
but a wild rabbit could never be released with no
extracted. Root canal occlusion can provide a good,
incisor teeth and could not readily be kept in cap-
sound tooth that will stand up to the rigours of
tivity. A squinrel's incisors would be too traumatic
a wild existence. There is no place, however, in
wildlife treatment for cosmetic surgery such as
to temove. The only answer for all these animals is
to have thei1 teeth trimmed at regula1 intervals, for
bridges, crowns o1 implants. They would not last
example every month. To a wild animal, this is not 
very long and would leave exposures if they came
humane; the animal should be destroyed.
adrift.
There will be cases where trimming the teeth
A wild animal released with good,sound healthy
teeth stands a much better chance of a pain-free
might lead to a suiccessful outcome, however. Teeth
should never be clipped with nail clippers or cutters;
survival than does one that is released without
they should always be fashioned back to shape with
dental treatment.
a diamond dental bu1. This may even be possible
with an animal that is neither sedated nor
Malocclusion
anaesthetised.
Clipping with clippers causes major injury
Species generally affected: 1abbits (Oryctolagus
(Gonrel, 1996) because:
cuniculus), squirrels and other todents.
Teeth in 1odent and lagomorph species continue
Excessive force applied to the crown may
gTowing throughout their lives. They are aligned
damage tissues and the periodontal ligament
with teeth in the opposing jaw and are constantly
Longitudinal splits may occur in the teeth
being ground down. If, however, for any reason the
 The procedure is painful
opposing teeth do not meet, they will continue
The pulp is easily exposed
growing until the upper teeth puncture the roof of
●The teeth are left with sharp edges
the mouth and skull or the animal dies of starva-
tion (Plate 22).
Peter Kertesz, the dentist tenowned fo1 his pio-
In 1odents and lagomorphs it is usually the
neering work on animals’ teeth, says that ^The
incisors that caluise problems if they become maloc-
mouth is the gateway to existence'. Good healthy
cluded. Unchecked, the top incisors will curl undel,
teeth are essential for a longel, pain-free life so it
back into the mouth and will eventually pierce the
is cTucial that every wild mammal taken into care
Ioof of the mouth. The bottom incisors will con-
has a complete dental overhaul before itis released.
100
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 10.1 Typical avulsed skin of jaw of a muntjac deer.
Muntjac deer
Deer should not be treated with oral antibiotics and
generally their teeth, incisors and molars do not
present dental problems Muntjac bucks, howevel,
have modified upper canine teeth that extend
beyond the upper lips as tusks. They feel quite loose
Fig. 10.2 Diagrammatic representation of repair of skin
in the gum but are in fact anchored with extremely
avulsion of the jaw (courtesy of Jim Gourley).
long Toots that make it very difficult to use extrac-
tion as a method of treatment. The tusks have
sharpened edges and are sharply pointed. They are
used for fighting with other bucks during rutting.
·The damaged flap of skin and exposed gum area
However, muntjac have extremely thick and tough
are cleaned with disinfectant, debrided and
skin so senious wounds are comparatively tate.
finally fushed with saline solution.
●The skin flap can be repositioned against the jaw
and held in place by an assistant. Using monofil-
Skin avulsion of the jaw
ament nylon, a suture is passed through the skin
This type of injury is often seen in hedgehogs and
through the foor of the mouth just medial to the
Ioad traffic accident victims, especially muntjac
ramus and behind the symphisis.
deer (Fig.10.1). Cleaning and suturing the resultant
· The suture from the foor of the mouth is taken
skin flap in place generally resolves the defect
 to pass between a canine tooth and the adjacent
(Fig. 10.2).
lateral incisor.
MammalianWildlifeDisease
101
· The suture is next passed through the Teposi-
gentle, controlled attack with less toxic weapons
tioned buccal mucosa just below its edge, and
will provide a safer outcome.
then out through the skin. From here the suture
passes across to the other side of the lower jaw
Fleas
and follows a reverse course to its starting point
Species
usually  badlly affected:  Hedgehogs,
and then tied.
· Further sutures are then placed to hold the toin
squirels, badgers and rabbits.
fap at the level of the premolar teeth. The
Fleas are insects and feed on the blood of their host
sutures are first passed up through the foor of
animal. In wildlife most feas are host-specific
the mouth, just medial to the horizontal ramus
although the occasional stranget may cross hosts. In
and level with the second premolar.
particula1, the fox does not have a specific fea but
● The suture is then passed between the first and
may have the occasional badger fea (Paraceras
second premolars and passed through the tepo-
melis).
sitioned skin, then back between the second and
Wild animal fleas do not normally transfer to
third premolars, through the foor of the mouth
dogs, cats or othet mammals, with the exception of
and tied off nea1 to where the suture started.
the tat feas (Nosopsyllus fasciatus and Ctenoph-
· Similar sutures are inserted around the mouth
thalmus nobilis), which will interchange between
eventually holding the skin fap in position.
hosts, even humans. Also, the wildlife fea does not
●A course of broad-spectrum antibiotics is given
complete or start its life cycle in household carpets.
for five days. During the first three days all food
This is strictly the domain of the cat flea.
is withheld, the animal being allowed to drink
A massive burden of feas can lead to anaemia.
water and if necessary given dextrose/saline
The veterinary surgeon's assessment of that
imtravenously.
anaemia may suggest treatment with iron dextran.
· After those three days it should be given soft
Cuently blood transfusions for wild animals are
food until the stitches are lemoved three weeks
not really an option.
later (afte1 J. Gou1ley, 1999).
Control of feas has traditionally been with insec-
ticides in powder 01 pump spray formm. Aerosol
preparations do appea1 toxic to some animals and
ECTOPARASITES
are completely unnecessary. The author has lised
pyrethrum powder for the last 20 years and has
A wild animal can usually tolerate a normal burden
found it most successful, and has not been bitten by
of ectoparasites: fleas, ticks, lice 01 mites. Howeve1,
a wild animal fea.
given the tight circumstances, the ectoparasites can
In recent years fipronil (Frontline? - Merial) and
multiply out of contiol and seriously compromise
imidacloprid (Advantage? - Bayer) have become
the animals that are infested, for example:
available as spot-on preparations and first reactions
seem to be favourable. As with all uses of chemi-
· Foxes with chronic sarcoptic mange
cals, always follow the instructions to the letter.
· Young hedgehogs from the nest with massive flea
Please note: fpronil is not suitable for use on
burdens
Tabbits.
· Adult hedgehogs with heavy mite infestations
· Emaciated o1 debilitated badgers with enormous
lice burdens
Myxomatosis
By far the most damaging fea likely to be seen
When wild animals are taken into care they are
on a Tescued wild animal is the rabbit flea, Spilop-
sometimes treated for ectoparasites before even
syllus cuniculi. This is the main vector of the
first aid fo1 shock is provided. Often these attacks
myxoma virus, which can kill 40-60% of a rabbit
on the ectoparasites, particularly feas, are quite
population in an outbreak. In spite of popular
inappropriate and may actually kill the host as well.
opinion, myxomatosis is still common in the rabbit
Chronic ectoparasite infestation has been affecting
population, with wildlife Iescue centres seeing
the animal for a long time and therefore a more
many victims.
102
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 10.3 More than other mammals.
hedgehogs seem to carry heavy tick
burdens(ixodes hexagonus)
Whether a newly arrived rabbit casualty is sus-
pected of suffering from myxomatosis or not, any
feas it is cairying are suspected of being potential
vectors of the deadly virus. Consequently, every
Larval tick
rabbit that arnives at the Hospital is treated with
pyrethrum flea powder while it is receiving triage
Egg cluster
Nymph
and first aid. Then it is left isolated in its cardboard
box or carrying box for 15 minutes in order for any
Adult
feas to die. After that it is put into an isolated cage
male
for at least 24 hours ifit has no signs of the disease,
o1 19 days if it is suspected of being infected. Any
dultfemale
boxes or bedding used on its arlival are incinerated.
The suggested product for fea control is:
Fig. 10.4 Life cycle of a typical tick showing the six-
Whiskas exelpet (Masterfoods) - a safe pyrethrum-
legged larva.
based fea powder found also to be suitable for
birds.
Ticks
adult ticks, but they are much more mobile and can
easily be missed as they leave an animal (Fig. 10.4).
Species badly infected: Hedgehogs.
Luckily, once off the animal they can easily be seen
Ticks ale members of the Class Arachnida, Order
and killed by dropping in surgical spinit. Somehow
Acarina, in that the adults have eight legs. They
most ticks seem to be tesistant to chemical control
gorge themselves on the host animal's blood and
although fipronil is proving useful.
Ixodes hexagonus can cause anaemia, particularly
The adult tick will attach itself frmly to its host
 in heavily burdened hedgehogs (Fig. 10.3).
by penetrating the skin with its barbed proboscis,
Ticks are not normally seen in massive numbers
the hypostome. Clumsy 1emoval of ticks may well
but as they can transmit diseases, including Lyme
leave the hypostome bunied in the skin to become
disease, which can affect humans, they should be
a focus of infection. When Temoving a tick the
carefully contiolled and destroyed in a deep cup of 
hypostome must be cleanly plucked from the skin.
surgical spirit. There is a nisk of infection when
It can be seen as a proboscis at the front of a
CTushing ticks. Larval ticks are just as infective as
Temoved tick.
MammalianWildlifeDisease
103
CROCHET
GANCHO
DERHAKEN
WO1.0
2
HOOK
HAAK
Dorsal view of a
Dorsal view of
Fig. 10.5 The O'Tom Hook tick lifter.
biting louse (2 mm
a sucking louse
long, light to dark 
(approximately 2 mm long)
brown in colourj. If
There are many methods advocated for the safe
viewed from the side,
Temoval of ticks Artery forceps are ideal to get
this louse would
appear dorsoventrally
under the tick and remove it complete. Howevel,
flattened.
this takes many years of practice and there are now
two simple methods to make temoval that much
Fig. 10.6 Louse species.
easier:
(1) Fipronil, anaesthetic ethel, olive oil and surgi-
Mites cause mange. They are arachnids, like ticks,
cal spirit can all be dabbed on to the tick with
and have eight legs. Most of them are microscopic
cotton wool and will apparently render it dead
and can infest an animal in their millions. Because
 OI senseless, making its removal possible.
of the intense itchiness (pruritus) that accompanies
(2) Alternatively, there are gadgets on the market
a mite infestation, the animal will cause extensive
purely for tick removal. One of the cheapest
 skin damage when scratching itself. In turn, this
and most effective is the O'Tom Hook tick
damaged skin will become infected by secondary
lifter (Fig. 10.5).
bactenial invaders. If untreated, these infections can
become severe enough even to tesult in the death
Lice (sing. louse)
of the animal.
The mite that severely affects foxes is Sarcoptes
Species usually badly
yaffected: Badgers and
scabiei. It butrows into the skin, first at the base of
muntjac deer.
the tail and the hind feet. They proliferate and grad-
Lice are insects divided into two groups: biting lice
ually spread from the fump forwards until up to
OT sucking lice (Fig. 10.6). Lice, even more than
100% of the fox's skin is covered with mites,
feas, are very host specific.
affected by hair loss and encrusted with scabby
Lice infestations are usually just an iritant, but
lesions. On the face, the mites will spread to the
an animal may do itself injury trying to scratch the
eyelids almost completely closing the eyes. An
inmitation. Sometimes sucking lice may also cause
infestation sufficient to kill a fox takes four months
anaemia. Major infestations are seen on old o1
from start to finish (Corbet & Ha1nis, 1991). Unfor-
debilitated badgers o1 muntjac deer. Lice can be
tunately, by the time the fox is weak enough to be
controlled with fea powders.
caught, the infestation will be so severe that it may
have lost 50% of its bodyweight and will be close
to death. Initially,aggressive fluid therapy may keep
Mites
the fox alive long enough for it to receive the ben-
Species
usually
badly
affected:
Foxes
and
efits of treatment both for mange and for the
hedgehogs.
inevitable secondary infections.
104
Practical Wildlife Care
Thankfully the mites can be eradicated easily
Tecent outbreak (2001) all our wild deel calls for
with:
assistance had to be passed to another agency that,
unfortunately, had to destroy the animals as they
· Subcutaneous injections of ivermectin (IvomecTM
were found. The only leniency was for an injured
Injection for Cattle - Merial Animal Health) at
muntjac contained on the forecourt of a garage.
200mcg/kg
DEFRA, the Agency dealing with the foot and
· Intramuscular injections of doramectin (Dec-
mouth outbreak, sent a veterinary surgeon to assess
tomax Injectable Solution for Cattle and Sheep
the deer and luckily pass it clear for us to recover it.
- Pfizer Animal Health) at 300 mcg/kg
Hedgehogs were another matter: because they
were not a particular threat, as a hoofed animal
Antibiotics can be broad spectrum but the
would be, we were allowed to treat casualties as
animal will also beneft from a course of anabolic
long as they were not moved. Anybody referling a
steroids:
hedgehog casualty was asked to keep it confined
until a veterinary nurse could visit.
· Nandrolone (Laurabolin - Intervet)
 Each hedgehog was strictly bailier nursed at the
· Ethylestrenol (Nandoral - Intervet)
address where it was originally found. After the
initial visit when caging, food and utensils were pro-
Sometimes, with an infected fox regularly visiting
vided, the hedgehog was added to a rota for daily
a garden fo1 food, it has been possible to provide
visits for assessment and medication. To visit each
bait suitably laced with doses of ivermectin. This
and every hedgehog the nurse had to weal a wash-
has the advantage that the mange is attacked before
able set of overclothes, boots and surgical gloves.
the animal is weak enough to be caught. In this sit-
After each daily visit the overclothes and boots
uation it is worth mixing the ivermectin in the ratio
were sprayed with a particular disinfectant and the
1:9 with propylene glycol to provide a more stable
gloves discarded.
additive.
The other wild mammal regularly suffering from
mange-mite infestation, is the hedgehog. Generally,
HEAD TRAUMA
its mange is caused by the mite Caparinia tripilis.
This is often seen as a powdery mass emanating
Species affected: All tetrestrial mammals.
from the ears and down over the side of the head.
Mammals presented suffering with head trauma
It is confirmed by microscopic examination of the
have usually been in collision with a motor car Or,
powdery substance. Hedgehogs suffer from other
as sometimes happens, a train. Often the animal
mites but their incidence is much more irregular.
is comatose or those that are Tecovering show
Once again ivermectin is effective at a dose of
nystagmus. Nystagmus is a condition in which the
400mcg/kg (or 0.4 ml/kg when dissolved 1:9 in
eyeballs involuntarily show constant fine jerky
propylene glycol).
movements, usually regulat in rhythm and horizon-
around the eyes As with head trauma cases in birds,
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE
the aim is to minimise secondary brain injury by
limiting o1 reducing intracranial pressure. At triage
Foot and mouth disease is not generally a woTry
a 1outine fist-aid programme can be instigated
in wildlife unless there is an outbreak in domestic
(Table 10.1) but the veterinary surgeon should
livestock that prompts Government agencies to
assess the extent of the injury and prescnibe any
Testrict the movement of some animals. The types
necessary changes to the standard 1egime.
 of wildlife specifically affected are deer and, appa1-
ently, hedgehogs and moles together with that latest
edition to the British list, the wild boar, which are
METABOLIC BONE DISEASE (MBD)
susceptible to the disease.
In the event of an outbreak the rescue and reha-
Species usually affected: Red squirrels (Sciurus
bilitation of wild deer would be prohibited. In the
vulgaris) and grey squinrels (Sciurus carolinensis).
MammalianWildlifeDisease
105
Table 10.1 Wall chart of procedures for dealing with head trauma in mammals.
St Tiggywinktes
The Wildlife Hospital Trust
Mammalian Head Trauma Cases
(i.e. those cases that arrive in coma)
(1) ABC - Carry out the usual resuscitation Airway, Breathing and Circulation checks and procedures.
(2) Oxygen - If the animal is comatose, attempt to intubate and begin slight hyperventilation with oxygen. This is
probably the most important measure to prevent the development of cerebral oedema. If intubation is not
possible, administer oxygen by mask or oxygen chamber.
(3) Immobilisation - Keep the animal immobilised. Do not manipulate the neck; do not take blood samples from
the jugular vein. When necessary, use a flat board on which to move the animal.
(4) Check the head carefully for haemorrhage or evidence of CSF leakage.
() Assess the state and responsiveness of the pupils.
(6) Monitor the respiratory pattern.
(7) Anti-shock therapy - Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrone - Pharmacia) can be given at 20-50mg/kg at 4-6-
hour intervals.
(8) Fluids - Give Gelofusine (Millpledge Veterinary) or equivalent and crystalloid solutions as part of the usual
anti-shock treatment.
(9) Skull X-ray: Desirable.
(10) Dexamethasone: For slow-recovering patients administer for two weeks at 0.25mg/kg twice daily, followed by a
reducing dose to zero over the next two weeks. The patient's recovery should be assessed at regular intervals
and the dose adjusted accordingly.
(11) Antibiotics: A course of enrofloxacin (Baytril? 5% - Bayer) should be begun.
Metabolic bone disease (MBD) is very common in
To teat a young squirel that has started to con-
young or juvenile squirrels reared on the wTong
vulse from hypocalcaemia, provide diazepam to
diet. It should not happen to wild squirrels although
contiol prolonged fits and calcium borogluconate
(Calciject New Formula 40TM _ Norbrook Labora-
the feeding of peanuts and sunfower seeds can lead
 to a loss of calcium in a growing animal.
tories) at a rate of 0.5ml/kg subcutaneously to
Initially, bottle-fed squirrels should be fed the
coTTect the hypocalcaemia.
substitute milk formula Esbilac by Pet Ag, an
American company that makes milk supplements
POISONING
used for othel animals. At each feed a little Stress
(Phillips Yeast Products) should be added to
Poisoning of wild animals usually comes from one
provide an improved calcium/phosphorus balance.
of three sources:
Goats’milk is a Teadily available substitute milk but
will benefit from added Stress and vitamins.
(1) As a result of the approved use of a product for
Weaning should be onto good-quality dry puppy
its intended purpose - e.g. anticoagulant bait
food (such as Hill's Canine Giowth pellets) o1
put down, legally, for grey squirrels
Nutri-Bloc (Rolf C. Hagen). No peanuts o1 sun-
(2) As a tesult of the careless use or storage of a
fower seeds should ever be given to squirrels
product - e.g. a bank vole (Clethrionomys
these contain a calcium inhibitor, which, in a juve-
glareolus) taking bait intended for squinrels
nile squirrel, can lead to hypocalcaemia, which in
(3) As a result of a deliberate but illegal attempt
turn predisposes to fits and an early death. Pecan
to poison wild animals - e.g- poisoned bait used
nuts are more suitable.
to kill foxes or badgers
106
PracticalWildlifeCare
In dealing with wildlife casualties it is very often
available to the veterinary surgeon, but telephone
impossible to identify a poison with confidence
the poisons hotline at the same time. The Wildlife
unless the animal concerned is seen or found by
Incident Unit office may well have some advice Or
known sources of poison. Generally this occurs
instruction.
when a hedgehog or a mouse has found or fallen
The two poisons commonly encountered at a
into something toxic in a garden or garage. Specific
wildlife tescule centre are:
poisons such as these may or may not have specific
antidotes but if the veterinary surgery has alrange-
(1) Metaldehyde
This
affects
hedgehogs
ments with the Veterinary Poisons Information
predominantly
Service (see Appendix 7) their general library of
(2) The anticoagulants warfarin and hydroxy-
incidents may be able to help.
coumarins - These are poisons used against
Out in the field all three categories of poison
Tats, house mice and grey squirrels
(legal, accidental or illegal) can result in one O1
many animals being affected. Generally, poisons in
Metaldehyde
the environment, even legal ones, must be con-
trolled and be of no threat to anything other than
Metaldehyde is the poison used in slug pellets (mol.
the target species. Incidents do occur when wild
luscicides) commonly used in gardens and horticul-
animals are found dead or dying for no apparent
ture. It is usually coloured blue, supposedly to
Teason. With no evidence it is virtually impossible
prevent birds and other animals taking it. It is very
to categorically decide on poisoning. In fact many
toxic and in large amounts has been known to kill
panosiod Aipasoddns ul nuanoiq aie seue pim
cattle. Hedgehogs, howevel, are colour blind, and
but on close examination are suffering or have been
also have the tendency to lick or eat anything tasty.
killed or injured by some other cause.
This includes eating the pellets themselves.
Amongst all the false alarms there will be inci-
Classic signs of metaldehyde poisoning include
dents that do seem like genuine reports. In this case
increased heart rate, anxiety, nystagmus, panting,
adopt the guidelines of the Wildlife Incident Unit
salivating (probably not a sign in hedgehogs, which
(see Appendix 7), the relevant department of the
will salivate freely when they are self-lathering),
Department for Environment, Food and Rural
stiff-legged gait, ataxia and vomiting. The author's
Affairs (DEFRA) (Table 10.2).
experience with hedgehogs poisoned with metalde-
The quandary atises if there are live but suffer-
hyde is that they show severe hypersensitivity. The
ing wild animals in the vicinity. Taking all precau-
test is to click your fingers from the other side of
tions of protective clothing and driving with the car
the 1oom. A poisoned hedgehog will finch whereas
windows open, it may be humane to get the animal
a healthy one will not. It may also sometimes pass
to the veterinary surgeon immediately. Humane
faeces the colour of the slug pellets.
destruction may well be the only course of action
There is no straightforward antidote. Howevel, if
the hedgehog dies a post-mortem report with
chemical analysis will add fact to the campaign to
have these chemicals restricted. Particularly note-
Table 10.2 Guidelines issued by the Wildlife Incident
worthy is the colour of any gut contents.
pauosiod buiag jo papadsns siewjue bupuy uo nun
There is no definite treatment but as the chemi-
What to do on Discovering an Incident
cal may contnibute to metabolic acidosis the uise of
Hartmann's solution may help counter this. Further
● Note the locations, species involved, the purpose of
the veterinary surgeon may prescribe bicarbonate
suspected baits or other evidence. A photograph of
of soda.
the location is useful additional evidence.
 DO NOT TOUCH any carcasses or bait, as the
It may be helpful to fush the stomach with milk
+
quantity of pesticide in illegal baits is often large.
OT sodium bicarbonate, which are said to decrease
· If you can, without disturbing the evidence, cover it
absorption of the metaldehyde. Also a dose of acti-
to make it safe.
vated charcoal with a saline purgative may move
· Call Freephone 0800 321 600. Your call will be
any unabsorbed metaldehyde out of the intestinal
re-routed automatically to the appropriate office.
tract.
Activated charcoal
(Liqui-Cha1-Vet
MammalianWildlifeDisease
107
Arnolds Veterinary Products) may help temove the
(epistaxis). Vitamin K is the antidote in cases of
poison from the gut. The Wildlife Hospital Trust
anticoagulant poisoning. To start with, during the
(St Tiggywinkles) has not found the need to try
triage and fist aid, administer only crystalloid
these purgative treatments so cannot validate their
Huids, not colloids, as these may have further anti-
success or failure. They can only help, because if
coagulant properties. Also avoid corticosteroids,
there is metaldehyde poisoning without treatment
sulphonamide drugs, aminophylline and frusemide.
the hedgehog will die.
An animal under treatment for suspected anti-
coagulant poisoning should be kept on its own, kept
quiet and prevented from injuring itself. Any knock
Anticoagulants (warfarin, bydroxycoumarins)
can precipitate internal haemorrhage.
It is illegal to treat rats (Rattus norvegicus), house
mice (Mus domesticus) OT grey squirrels that
These have been some of the conditions regu-
have ingested any of these anticoagulant poisons.
larly seen in various species of wild mammal. There
However, there is always the chance that other wild
will be incidents that occur Tegularly in just one
animals may be incidentally affected. In particular
species and also many occasions when the veteri-
wood mice (Apodemus sylvaticus), dormice (Mus-
 nary surgeon will need to make a diagnosis. The tec-
cardinus avellanarius) or voles may take poison bait
       
from a hopper destined for squirrels.
complement the triage and first aid every casualty
Once again, clinical signs are hard to determine
should go through. None of the recommendations
but will usually include pale mucous membranes
is harmful if the diagnosis highlights an altemative
OT signs of bleeding, in particular from the nose
Tegime of treatment.
Garden Birds
Part I: Common Garden Birds
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
Species seen regularly:
It is very difficult to catch an injured bird even if it
Wrens, goldcrests, tits, spatrows, fnches, buntings,
cannot fy. Trying to catch it in the hands is even
wagtails, blackbirds, thrushes, warblers, hirundines,
more diffcult and if it can fly this becomes quite
starlings and woodpeckers.
impossible.
The only sure way to catch a small injured bid
is with a large fine-meshed net, the larger the bettet.
Vanious sizes of cage-bird catching nets are avail-
able at pet shops, but the most suitable for wild
NATURAL HISTORY
bids is an angler's landing net. These are usually
soft and fine meshed, and have a collapsible handle,
Allthese small birds legularly visit gardens
making them convenient to carry or store.
either to feed or to nest. They feed either on
 Small birds should be transported in a small,
live food, such as caterpillars, spiders, worms,
closed cardboard box with ventilation holes
snails, aphids and many other invertebrates, O1
 punched around the bottom edge. A piece of old
on dry food, such as seeds, buds and scraps All
towel on the bottom will give the bird something to
will take live food when they are feeding young
hold on to as it is carlied. The darker the box, the
in the nest.
quieter the bird will be.
Adult birds have specific feeding requirements,
Another useful carrying method is to use the
so it is essential that the species is identified or at
 small cloth bag with a drawstring closure favoured
least classified by its food preferences. A good, com-
by bird ringers.
prehensive book on Bnitish biids will assist in their
identification. If not available, a tough feeding
 guide can be taken from the shape of their beaks.
RESCUE AND HANDLING
Over time these small birds have evolved beaks
shaped specifically for theit type of feeding require-
It is comparatively easy to take a small bird away
ments (Fig. 11.1).
from a cat's mouth, but catching a free bird takes a
Most of these species are resident all the yeal
little more planning. The secret is to cut off the
Tound except for some warblers, hirundines, fy-
bid's escape Toute, which will generally be towards
catchers, thrushes and cuckoos (Cuculus canorus),
the most open space. Approach the bird from that
which ale migratory either for the summer Or
direction holding the net in front of you. Watch the
the winter. All except the summer
migratory
biid very carefully. When it is about to fee it will
Tedwings (Turdus iliacus) and fieldfares (Turdus
flex its body, often defecate and head off away from
pilaris) will nest in Britain during the summeI
your approach. Stand still and it may not move but
months.
if you are within reaching distance quickly bring the
108
Garden Birds
109
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 11.1 Beak shapes of garden birds according to preferred food source: (a) insects: (b) insects and nuts: (c) seeds;
(d) fruit and live food.
net down over the bird. Put the net to the ground
heart rate. At either of these signs put the bird into
so that the bird cannot escape and hold the bird,
the dark box or bag immediately.
through the net, with one hand. Slide your other
hand under the tim of the net and take hold of the
biid,making sure to grip it around the wings to stop
ADMINISTRATION OF DRUGS
them flapping.
To examine the bird, use the Tinger's holding
Injections
technique. Lay the bird, on its back, in the palm of
Most injectable drugs for bids have to be given
the hand. Bend the index finger and middle finger
intramuscularly. The easiest muscles to access in
to pass each side of the neck. These two fingers can
small birds are the pectoral muscles, lining either
then hold the bird gently but firmly while it is exam-
side of the keel. A bird's pectoral muscles overlay
ined (Fig. 11.2). Try not to keep the bird on its back
bone so an injection there should not damage any
for any length of time.
Organs unless it is pushed through the bone (Fig.
While handling the bird watch for any open-
11.3). Needle sizes should be small: 25 g, 27 g, 29 g
mouthed breathing o1 feel for any change in the
being suitable depending on the size of the bird.
110
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 11.2 How a licensed ringer holds a
small bird. In this case a great tit (Parus
majon).
Tablets or capsules
Tablets or capsules should be pushed down the
back of the throat with a cotton bud or a pill givel.
Take care to avoid the glottis (which is the opening
to the trachea and is situated just behind the
tongue, Fig. 2.1).
Liquids
Liquids should be gavaged (see Chapter 4) well
down into the oesophagus, once again making sure
that none fows back into the glottis.
Fluids
Fluids can be intraosseous Or gavaged if the bird is
Teally small.
COMMON DISEASES
Garden birds ale not very often found alive suffer-
ing from infectious disease. This is not to say that it
does not happen. There are many teferences to
disease in gaiden birds but most victims die before
they are found (Kirkwood et al., 1995).
There are two diseases Tegularly Tecorded in
Fig. 11.3 How to give an intramuscular injection to
garden birds. One, salmonellosis, is usually fatal,
a small bird. here a young pheasant (Phasianus
while the other, avian pox, is generally not even
colchicus).
debilitating (see Chapte1 9).
Garden Birds
I11
Salmonellosis
which generally include garden birds, may show
toxicity, if injected with ivermectin. Orally o1 topi-
Deaths of garden biids from salmonellosis have
been reported in the Veterinary Record (Kirkwood
cally are the best routes of administration.
et al., 1995; Routh & Sleeman, 1995). Apparently
this type of mortality is still occurring and is being
blamed on contamination and infection of bird
COMMON INCIDENTS
tables and biidbaths. Because these are now used
all the year round they should be cleaned at least
Cat attack
weekly with an ammonia solution. The increasing
The most common incident resulting in an injury
Occurence of ‘wild bird strains’ of Salmonella in
to a garden bid is being attacked by a domestic
humans is causing concein (Pennycott, 2003). All
cat. For many years it was accepted that a biid
handlers of garden birds and garden-biid equip-
caught by a cat was going to die of shock within 48
ment should bear this in mind.
hours. Since then Tehabilitators have discovered
Live casualties are not generally found but
that this is not the case and the ^48-hour syndrome',
a sick garden bird with no obvious injury should
as it was called, was in fact a septicaemia that
be suspect. Strict hygiene should be observed
killed the birds. This septicaemia was shown to
and the bird started on a course of a broad-
be caused by a bacterium, Pasteurella multocida,
spectrum antibiotic such as enrofoxacin (Baytril
5% - Baye1) at 5-15mg/kg twice daily, given
a bactenium normally carnied on a cat's teeth.
Because of this dangel, any biid that might have
intramuscularly.
been attacked by a cat, is assumed and treated by
These suspect cases and any other sick but unin-
us to have been so, even in the absence of obvious
jured garden bird should be referred to the veteri-
bite wounds.
nary surgeon for diagnosis.
 Modern-day practices provide medication for
biids both known to have been caught by a cat
and those thought to have been attacked by a cat.
Mites
A single intramuscular injection of long-acting
Garden birds will be found with mite infestations,
amoxycillin at 250 mg/kg has markedly reduced the
such as the Cnemidocoptes spp responsible for
mortality rate.
‘tassel foot', a well known condition of small biids
A single dose of antibiotics is not normally
(Fig. 11.4). Treatment is with one drop of diluted
Tecommended but it was found that to continue
ivermectin to the back of the head. Passelines,
a full course was often too stressful for these
small birds. Furthermore, rather than trying to
weigh these birds and calculate a precise dose of
antibiotics, a standaid dose fo1 a particula1 size of
bird is:
· Spatlow-sized
birds
15mg
long-acting
amoxycillin
· Blackbird-sized
birds
30mg
long-acting
amoxycillin
Caught in string or fruit netting
Aftel any ligatures are teased off the bird should
be maintained in captivity for a week in orde1 to
monitor fo1 any pressure necrosis (see Chapte1 6).
Preparation H" (yeast cell extract, shark liver oil)
(Whitehall Laboratories) massaged distally to any
Fig. 11.4 Tassel foot' mites on a chaffinch.
damaged tissue may help restore circulation.
112
PracticalWildlifeCare
COMMON INJURIES
holding masks in position on small biids is with
TransporeTM Surgical Tape (3M), which is easily
Fractures
stmipped to size and causes minimal feather damage
(Fig 11.6).
Garden birds do suffer fractures, which can be
Endotracheal tubes can be used very successfully
treated just like any other bird fracture (see
in all birds but the structure of avian tracheas dic-
Chapter 8). In particula1, a wildlife 1escue centre is
likely to see:
tates that only non-cuffed tubes should be used in
smaller birds.
· Blackbirds (Turdus merula) with bioken beaks
(Plate 23)
·Robins (Enithacus rubecula) with broken legs
ADMISSIONANDFIRSTAID
· Broken wings from cat injuries
Fluid administration to garden bids is quite
sttaightforward intraosseously, by gavage Or subcu-
Beak Iepairs may be attempted under anaes-
taneously (see Chapter 4).
thetic, which, as gaseous anaesthetic is not appr0-
priate, could be ketamine and xylazine (Rompun
Baye1) (Coles, 1997)
CAGING
Lacerations
ara saaeo u iday aq ueo spiq rapia Aeraa
three sides are solid. These are called breeding
Cat attacks may lead to lacerations, especially over
cages. The standard birdcage wire fronts will be suit-
the Tump. Most of the wounds will heal sponta-
able fo1 all birds except wTens, which can somehow
neously after they are cleaned. Larger and incised
get through the grills. A dry fish tank with three
wounds may need suturing under anaesthetic.
sides covered, 1/4-inch mesh wire top and sand over
The anaesthetic of choice is isoflurane (Abbott
the bottom will prove suitable for these small birds.
Laboratonies) by face-mask. Small face-masks can
be fashioned out of finger stools or plastic tubing
Animal protection legislation states that a bird
in a cage must be able to spread its wings in all
connections glued to an endotracheal tube connec-
directions unless confinement is stipulated by the
to1 of a suitable size (Fig. 11.5). The ideal way of
veterinary surgeon. A cage size of 600 mm wide
Fig. 11.5 An anaesthetic mask fash-
ioned to suit small birds.
Garden Birds
113
use a budgenigar water fountain but just to make
sure a shallow bowl of water should always be
available.
Transpore
Birds do like to bathe to keep their feathers in
tim. They will sully their drinking water very
quickly doing this. It is important to change the
water at every opportunity.
Dry food
For granivorous feeders like finches, buntings and
sparrows any good-quality wild-bird seed will give
the variety they need. A sprinkling of multivitamin
powder once a week will stand them in good stead.
Fig. 11.6 TransporeTM (3M) the most suitable type to
Foreign or Bnitish finch mix is also a good, easily
use with feathers.
acquired, seed food. Howevel, the biids will benefit
from a mixture of wild seed heads picked where
there is no danger of insecticide or traffc pollution.
x 380mm high x 300mm deep will suit all small
They will also need access to budgerigar grit for
garden bird species.
digestion of their food in the gizzard.
Perches made out of twigs about 10-15 mm thick
should be provided. Two perches mounted on
blocks about 30 mm above the foor will allow non-
Live food
fying birds to roost.
Some adult birds live wholly on a live food diet -
Woodpeckers should have vertical logs where they
these include all the thrushes, wagtails, wrens,
can hang perpendicularly and peck at the wood. To
goldcrests, tits, warblers, hirundines, starlings and
make this, a log about 70-100 mm thick is screwed to
woodpeckers. It would be wholly impractical to go
 a base of exterior-quality timber about 130mm square.
into the garden to collect their natural prey so
The foors should be covered with bid sand or
surrogate live food is the answer. The only natural
niver-washed sharp sand available from builders'
food that is easily collected and could prove to be
merchants.
a lifesaver for wTens and goldcrests are buds
covered in aphids that they can peck at.
AVIARIES
Earthworms should not be used as they appear
toxic to captive biids.
Before being released, all birds should have a
Other live foods that may attract these tiny birds
period of time in an outdoor aviary in which to
are baby cTickets available at pet stores Medium-
exercise and acclimatise to the cutent weather.
sized cnickets are also useful for house martins, which
As aviaries tend to be used ovet and over again,
may not naturally take other live food offered.
it is crucial that they are thoroughly cleaned on a
Cnickets are expensive and so are waxworm
Tegula1 basis. Cypermethrin (Dy-Sect, Deosan)
larvae, the other food that seems to suit martins and
diluted to 2% and malathion (Duramitex
swallows. Both waxworms and crickets should have
Harkers) diluted to 1% are ideal for clearing para-
a vitamin and mineral supplement, such as Cricket
sites from empty aviaries.
Diet Calci-Paste (IZVG), added.
Generally, feed insectivorous birds on clean
white maggots available from angling shops. The
FEEDING
food in a maggot's intestinal track can be toxic to
birds It shows as a black line along the side of the
Water
maggot. Clean maggots have been starved for some
Of prime concern in any cage is the availability of
days and the black mark should have gone. Do not
drinking wate1. Wild birds may be able to learn to
feed maggots that still have the black line. A
114
Practical Wilalife Care
vitamin and mineral supplement should also be
and Rural Affairs ( DEFRA), Bird Registration
provided with maggots.
Section (Fax: 0117 372-8206), within fou1 days 0f
All these live foods should be presented in a
taking the bird.The author has produced a standard
shallow straight-sided dish or else they will escape.
form that is used at The Wildlife Hospital Trust (St
Tiggywinkles) to notify DEFRA, and includes a
veterinary surgeon's statement of the biid's dis-
RELEASE
ability (Fig. 11.7).
If the bid has not been released after 15 days it
Once the biid has recovered, after just a few days
has to be registered with DEFRA and a fee paid.
in the case of a bird victim of a cat attack, it should
Once Iegistered, a DEFRA inspecto1 will arlive to
be released in a garden area. It is always a good idea
put a locked ning on the bird's leg. When the bird
to take the bird back to its original garden but if
is released the ting is cut off and returned to
there are resident cats it will probably get caught
DEFRA.
again. In these cases any safe garden will do.
Some birds, robins and blackbirds, are fiercely
telmitorial so releasing this species should be
Schedule 9
attempted in vacant territories where there are not
Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act
likely to be any adversanies.
1981 makes it an offence to release into the wild
Migratory birds, hirundines, fycatchers, some
animals that are listed on this Schedule.
warblers, redwings and fieldfares, should only be
Exotic bird species are now seen regularly in
Teleased in time to join the migration:
gardens. Should any of these be taken in as casual-
ties they should not be Te-released. The most com-
● Swallows, martins, warblers - end of summer
monly seen are:
●Redwings, feldfares - end of spring
·Budgeriga1 (Melopsittacus undulatus)
· Ring-necked parakeet (Psittacula krameri)
LEGISLATION
In the interests of the environment any exotic
It is quite legal to catch an injured or sick wild bird
species not on Schedule 9 or the British list should
and to tend it until it is fit for release (Wildlife and
also not be teleased.
Countryside Act 1981).
It is not legal to catch a fit and healthy wild bird or
keep a fit or healthy wild bird in captivity unless it is
Part II: Swifts and Kingfishers
close-ringed. Close-ringed means that it was hatched
 im captivity and ringed before it was three days old.
Among the vatiety of garden birds Tegularly
Other rings found on wild birds may give the
needing rehabilitation are two species that have
address of the British Museum. These are not close-
quite different requirements to the others men-
nings; they are put on by licensed bird tingers.
tioned in Part I of this chapter:
●The swift (Apus apus)
Schedule 4
·The kingfishe1 (Alcedo atthis)
Schedule 4 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act
1981 dictates that any bird on this Schedule found
sick or injured should be passed on to a Licensed
Swifts
a yo (-e) 1 qiid A pay e oiad
WLF 100099 or to a veterinary surgeon. The species
NATURAL HISTORY
on Schedule 4 that have to be reported are showm
in Appendix 3.
Swifts feed on the wing by trawling insects with
The Licensed Person or the veterinary surgeon
their wide-open cavernous mouths. Their beaks are
must notify the Department for Environment, Food
too soft to take food by pecking O1 picking up
Garden Birds
115
RECORD OF ADISABLED WILD BRED SCHEDULE 4 BIRD
TO BE NOTIFIED TO DEFRA WITHIN 4 DAYS (FAX 0117 987 8182)
·TheWildife and Countryside Act is the
● You must retum the DEFRA ring if you are
Act that applies to this form
going to release the bird or if it dies
·This form should be kept and every
· The bird must be registered before being
four months copies of all forms are
passed to any other person unless it is for
sent to the DEFRA
urgent medical treatment
 in BLOCK LETTERS
Y the appropriate boxes
1) Species:
2) Age:
3) Sex:
4)Number of any ring
found on bird:
5) When and where was it found?
6) Name and address of finder:
Postcode:
7) On what date did the bird come into your possession?
8) Describe the nature of the injuries to the bird:
 9) What is the date the bird should be registered?
This should be 15 days from the date in question (7)
10) Veterinary confirmation that the bird should be kept more than 15 days:
11) Name of Vet:
Signature:
12) If registered:
Give date of registration of bird;
Ring number of bird;
13) If the bird died or was released, state which and give date:
Fig. 11.7 A suggested version of the record form for notifying Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
(DEFRA) of Schedule 4 casualties
116
Practical Wildlife Care
insects, a major problem when they allive in a
lives in the nest and crawls onto the birds during
captive situation.
their annual nesting: Crataerina pallida, surely the
Swifts are migratory, fying here from South
 Imost repulsive of all bird parasites. Like a giant Hat-
Afica, for a short summer's season of breeding.
tened bluebottle with padded feet, it cannot fly but
They nest in high buildings from where the young-
CTawls in and out of the feathers Becauise they are
sters launch themselves on their maiden fights.
so large they are usually only seen in ones or twos.
They do not then land again for 2-3 years and caTry
They can be easily picked off and killed but there
out their feeding, sleeping and most of theit mating
will be others in the nest site waiting to infest a
 on the wing. When they do land, after three years
vacant host.
of aerial existence, they will pick a suitable nesting
site high in a building from where the next genera-
tion of swifts can launch themselves.
COMMONINCIDENTS
As mentioned, they are migratory and visit
Bnitain for the summer but they afTive after all the
The usual incident involving swifts is when they
other migrants and leave before they do. This
accidentally land on the ground. With their long
provides for a short nesting season, which does not
wings they are unable to launch themselves into the
give swifts the opportunity of annually rearing
ai1 and futter around almost helpless. They are
more than one brood. It also puts pressure on reha-
easily picked up and taken to rescue centres.
bilitation to get any casualties up and out before the
Provided there has been no involvement with
migration deadline.
cats, and there are no obvious injuries, the swift
should be released as soon as possible. Taken to a
grassy area where there are no hazards, like build-
ings O1 pools, the bird is literally tossed underarm
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
as high into the sky as possible. Most of the swifts
Swifts have very short legs with small clasping feet,
will fap, gather momentum and fy off, gaining
which have very sharp claws. They can climb walls
height as they circle upwards. Any that cannot fy
to gain height and like to hang perpendicularly
will come to ground again on the grass. These fail-
ures may just be weak and need feeding up for a
when they are in captivity. To give the tiny feet
day or two before trying again.
something to grip, drape a towel over the inside of
Swifts are diffcult to feed, so an added strength-
a carrying box. This gets the swift off the foor and
ener of anabolic steroid, nandrolone (Laurabolin?
gives some protection to its extra-long, extra-thin
wings.
-- Intervet) at 1 mg/kg, will help. The bird should
also be completely re-assessed for injunies.
RESCUE AND HANDLING
COMMON INJURIES
Rescue is just a case of picking the swift off the
Grounded swifts do not normally exhibit any
ground where its short legs and long wings make it
injuries. Sometimes, however, there may be damage
difficult for it to move around. With any handling it
to the wings which will stop them flying or being
is important to protect the wing feathers because
Teleased.
any damage might delay the release, which must be
 Feathers may be broken or dishevelled enough
as soon as possible.
to cause a problem in fying. Normal feather trauma
can be smoothed out with the fingers over a stream
of steam from a kettle.
DISEASE
Fractures are particularly bad news. It means
the swift will have to spend some weeks in cap-
There does not seem to be any disease seen in swifts
 tivity which may, in turn, predispose to feather
taken fo1 rehabilitation. The only minor problem
damage and contamination. Also, with serious
they have is with their own parasitic louse fy that
fractures or those that may not heal correctly, the
Garden Birds
117
longer the swift is in captivity the less are its
chances of ever being fit fo1 release. Swifts will not
survive in captivity so with a candidate for long-
term care perhaps euthanasia is the only humane
choice.
ADMISSIONANDFIRSTAID
Admission and first aid for swifts should follow the
same procedure as for any small bid, although
there is the distinct possibility that a swift can be
Teleased immediately without any need of treat-
ment. Even a swift caught by a cat should have its
injection of long-acting amoxycillin and be released
Fig. 11.8 Force-feeding a swift with a waxworm
within 24 hours.
CAGING
RELEASE
Swifts in captivity thrive much better if they
Swifts should be released as described earlier, with
can hang perpendicularly on a towel draped over
an underarm toss high into the air over a grassy
the inside of their container. Putting them in
area.
cages encourages them to climb the wire, which
Swifts should only be released duning the
can easily damage theil precious feathers. Keep
summel, when other swifts are still over Britain.
any swifts in a plastic stacking box covered with a
Unlike martins, swallows and othet migratory birds,
light wire mesh to stop them getting out over the
swifts cannot be kept for a year until the next
top.
migration. It is imperative that when taken into
Swifts, especially youngsters, find that a cat
care they are released within the shortest time
scratching post covered with carpet is ideal for
possible.
them to climb.
Kingfishers
FEEDING
NATURAL HISTORY
Adult swifts are only able to feed successfully when
they are flying. Their soft beaks do not have the
The kingfisher lives on streams and small pools,
strength to pick up the types of live food we can
diving for small fish, which it kills by banging them
offer them. Consequently, in captivity, it is neces-
on a branch and swallowing them head first. It
sary to force-feed swifts on waxworm larvae
usually favours one branch from which to dive into
(Fig. 11.8).
the water. It will sometimes raid garden ponds,
Quite simply, the little tufts of feathers unde1 the
which is why they can end up as garden-bird casu-
bottom beak are used to pull the mouth open
alties. They nest by digging a tunnelinto a Tiverbank
gently. A waxworm can then easily be put into the
back of the mouth, the mouth closed and the swift
the end of it. The young are fed on fish brought by
seen to swallow. This should be continued until the
the parents Eventually the nest becomes a smelly
swift refuses to swallow.
mess of fish parts and fishy faeces. Somehow the
The important thing with captive swifts is to keep
young birds emerge as the living jewels that are
their strength up so that they can be released.
kingfishers.
118
Practical Wildlife Care
EQUIPMENTANDTRANSPORT
three-close-sided rehabilitation cage will suffice,
with twig perches, about 5-10mm in width, set at
Kingfishers are just like any other small bird in their
least 40 mm off the foor.
lequirements, with just one exception: the king-
A sturdy stone water bowl will allow the king-
fisher has syndactyl feet, which means that two toes
fisher to stand comfortably on the 1im.
are joined. This makes it very diffcult for the king-
fisher to stand on a flat surface. When they are being
transported, one or two twig perches should be
FEEDING
placed in the calrying box off the foor.A cardboard
callying box allows the perches to be pushed
Kingfishers require small fish as their diet and will
through from opposite sides.
surprisingly take several at each feed. Feed king-
fishers on whitebait, obtainable individually frozen
from fishmongers. Force-feed the birds with freshly
RESCUE AND HANDLING
thawed whitebait if they appea1 reluctant to feed
themselves.
Treat the kingfisher just as any other small biid
would be treated.
with one hand while the whitebait, one at a time,
are slid headfirst down the bird's throat. It is nec-
essary to make sure that the kingfisher swallows
DISEASE
one fish before another is inserted. A thiamine
supplement is necessary with whitebait (see
There are no rehabilitation reports of any infec-
Chapter 9).
tious disease recorded in kingfishers.
 Just as with swifts, the secret of success is to get
them released as soon as possible.
COMMON INCIDENTS
RELEASE
The usual cause of a kingfisher being taken into
care is that it will, probably, have fown into a
Kingfishers in care probably have a favourite perch
window and knocked itself out. It should be treated
and a temitory somewhere by a 1iver, but invaniably
as an avian head trauma case (see Chapter 9).
COMMON INJURIES
Concussion is usually the only injury recorded in
kingfishers but the author has treated several
broken wings, especially where a cat is the first to
find the unconscious bird.
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
As with any other small bird.
CAGING
Caging for kingfishers should suit the special
Fig. 11.9 Injured kingfishers can legally be taken into
care
Tequirements of their syndactyl feet. A normal
Garden Birds
119
they have been found in gardens with no clue as to
kingfisher can be taken into care if they are sick o1
their origins To release them on any suitable stream
injured (Fig. 11.9). They must be released when they
O1 small 1ivel, preferably one that does not freeze
are fit enough to do so. It is illegal to keep a wild
in winter will enable them to forge out new teiri-
bird without a close ring in captivity if it is fit for
tories.
Telease. Mind you, these two biids are so difficult
to keep in captivity the question should not
atise.
LEGISLATION
Just like any other wild bird, both the swift and the
eons
Species seen regularly:
cTop cells that the young pigeons are able to suck
Feral pigeon (this includes tacing pigeons and
up directly from the parent bird's crop. The ability
(white doves'), wood pigeon (Columba palumbus),
to suck up fuids is peculia1 to the pigeon species -
collared dove (Streptopelia decaocto), stock dove
other birds take a mouthful of fuid and have to lift
(Columba oenas) and to a lesser degree, the migra-
their heads to swallow. This ability proves very
tory turtle dove (Streptopelia turtur).
useful as often the casualty pigeon can be encoui-
aged to drink merely by dunking its beak into a
bowl of water or rehydrating fluid.
NATURAL HISTORY
The young, usually two, are reared in very flimsy
nests made of sticks, twigs, string Of anything
Feral, or ‘townie', pigeons are too well known to
available from human Tubbish. I once had to rescue
need an introduction. Howevel, they originated
feral pigeons from a factory that were being reared
from the 1ock dove, which still breeds on the cliffs
on a nest consisting of just cable ties (Fig. 12.1).
on the northwest coast of Scotland. Rock doves
wele domesticated, first for food and then for
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
pigeon racing, with all the focks of feral pigeons
around towns being descendants or escapees from
Any cardboard box with ventilation holes will
this ancestry.
The wood pigeon and stock dove have always
suffice to calry pigeons or doves. However, small
cardboard carriers are made specifically for trans-
been native to Britain but the collared dove fist
porting single racing pigeons around the country.
started nesting here in the 1950s. Since then they
The pigeon racing suppliers (see Appendix 6) sell
have completely colonised the country and are
pigeon baskets which are an ideal way of carrying
nearly as numerous as wood pigeons.
many pigeons to release sites (Fig. 12.2), as well as
The diminutive colourful turtle dove is a summel
many just 'pigeon' items.
visito1 (Plate 24). Its numbers are now drastically
leduced, possibly because of persecution as they
migrate through Mediterranean countries.
RESCUE AND HANDLING
All the pigeons and doves live on seeds and corn
as well as any scraps the human race concedes to
Pigeons can be caught with a large net and even
them. Thei1 digestive system includes a widening of
with the bare hand. Wood pigeons are surprisingly
the oesophagus just below the throat (the crop) and
strong and will need extra care to control their fap-
a muscular gizzard, containing grit, where the food
ping wings (Plate 25).
 is processed before being passed into the rest of the
 Incidentally, pigeon feathers are designed to fall
digestive system.
out at the slightest provocation so do not be
While rearing young the adult pigeon produces
surprised if in handling one you leave a trail of
‘crop milk’ which consists of rapidly desquamating
feathers behind you.
120
Pigeons
121
DISEASES
These common diseases are discussed at length
while many of the other diseases to which pigeons
Pigeons and doves do seem to be receptive candi-
are susceptible do need diagnosis by the veterinary
dates for all manner of diseases. Some of these dis-
surgeon and so each is only accorded a few brief
eases, notably tnichomoniasis, are seen at casualty
notes.
centres on a regular basis Paramyxovirus, avian pox
and, to a lesser degree, but important because of its 
Paramyxovirus
potential as a zoonosis, ornithosis, are also seen.
Veterinary nurses OT Tehabilitators can probably
Paramyxovius (PMV-1), an infection of racing
treat these common diseases because they are seen
pigeons, has spread into the feral pigeon popula-
so regularly, although ornithosis suspects must be
tion. The disease is highly contagious although not
Tefelred to the veterinary surgeon for definite diag-
necessarily fatal if the bird can be supported
nosis and treatment.
throughout. Its morbidity is in fact 30-70% of a
population with a low 10% mortality rate.
The virus is mainly transmitted by direct contact
with the secretions and excretions of a sick bird. It
can also be carried on boots, clothing, boxes,
baskets and even in the air as a form of virulent
dust. It is not surprising that many pigeons suffer
from the disease and its transmission is widespread.
When a pigeon first comes into contact with
PMV-1 the virus multiplies around the eyes, nose
and mouth. From the second or third day the
pigeon starts to excrete virus into the environment.
After 5-6 days respiratory and ocula1 symptoms
should appear but in the current form of the disease
these symptoms are practically non-existent.
It is from the fourth day that the virus multiplies
in the gastrointestinal tract and from then can be
secreted in the droppings. It is not until watery O1
Fig. 12.1 Pigeon nest made of cable ties.
bloody diarthoea is seen that PMV-1 would even
Fig. 12.2 Pigeons being released from a
racing basket.
122
Practical Wildlife Care
be suspected. Only after the gastiointestinal tract
facility with other pigeons but should be passed to
has become involved are the neurological o1 cen-
the veterinary surgeon for confirmed diagnosis and
tral nervous system signs seen. These are very
 possible isolation in another building.
characteristic:
Those obviously sick are not the birds that cause
great concern. The pigeons that show no symptoms
· Head tremor
but are shedding virus are likely to pass by all the
· Torticollis - head held upside down (Fig. 12.3)
safeguards. It is only when they have been in for
· Loss of balance, tottering and a tendency to fall
some days and start showing neurological signs
Over
that you realise they have been spreading virus and
●Loss of coordination - pecking near food instead
have probably infected many other pigeons in your
of accurately eating
facility.
● Paralysis of one wing, then both
The way to avoid this is to isolate all new pigeon
· And/or paralysis of the feet
casualties and to vaccinate existing residents. New
pigeons can be vaccinated if they show no signs of
These may even occur after no signs of diarrhoea.
the disease after ten days in quarantine. The vaccine
The pigeon will then shed the virus until the
Colombovac" PMV (Solway Animal Health) is
disease Tuns its course, about six weeks. A bird can
available in 50 ml o1 100 ml multi-dose bottles. Each
be kept alive during that period by gavaging liquid
pigeon receives 0.2ml of the vaccine by subcuta-
food into its crop. Most will make a full recovery.
neous imjection to the side of the back of the neck.
Birds that have Tecovered are not considered to be
The reason for this is to provide local immunity to
ca1niers of the disease (Wallis, 1996).
the head followed by general immunity throughout
PMV-1 is not necessarily a fatal disease but an
the rest of the biid.
infected bird is an infectious bird and a threat to
Vaccination will also protect pigeons that are
any other pigeons in its vicinity. Birds showing
exercising in an aviary, prio1 to release, from wild
the nervous signs should not be taken into a care
 pigeons, which often alight on aviaties.
Ornithosis
Ornithosis is caused by the bacterium Chlamy-
dophila psittaci, which is responsible for psittacosis
in parrots. It is zoonotic so is a health hazard to
man. The infection is enzootic in feral pigeons and
has been reported in collared doves.
Symptoms can include ocula1 and nasal dis-
charge, in particular the ^one-eyed cold' desctiption
of a pigeon ailment could well be caused by
Chlamydophila.
Any signs of open-mouthed breathing, no matter
how slight, point to 1espiratory disease of some so1t
with omithosis being top of the list. Pigeons would
not normally open theit mouths to breathe except
during clinical examination or very hot conditions
(see below).
Any pigeon or dove with similar signs of respi-
Iatory distress or the ‘one-eyed cold’ symptoms
should be isolated immediately and barnier-nursed.
Any suspect bid should be refelred to the veteri-
nary surgeon for definitive diagnosis irnmediately
Fig. 12.3 A pigeon with torticollis caused by paramyx-
and a treatment regime instituted or euthanasia
ovirus.
caTTied out.
Pigeons
123
Respiratory problems
Most iespiratory problems have to be diagnosed by
the veterinary surgeon, but some conditions that
life threatening
Handling stress
It is fairly obvious when a pigeon or dove is
observed breathing heavily when it is very hot O1
has over-exerted itself. The Teally life-threatening
sign of respiratory distress, however, is when a biid
suddenly starts open-mouthed gasping and strug-
gling for breath. Taking the wood pigeon as a very
typical example of this phenomenon: if one is held
Fig. 12.4 Collared doves are particulary prone to suffer
in the hand, say for examination, and starts to gasp,
from trichomoniasis.
it must be put down on the table inmediately with
its head covered. Even then, within seconds, the
bid could be dead. Admittedly wood pigeons do
Adenovirus type I
seem to be one of the most nervous and excitable
Adenovirus type 1 is very much a disease of young
of all British birds but the situation could arise with
any species and only instant ‘unhanding' might save
and vomiting.
the bird.
s ra a a asd 
including trimethoprim and ronidazole can speed
Other respiratory conditions
up recovery (de Herdt & Devtiese, 2000).
Othel respiratory problems, particularly mechani-
cal, could be where the glottis, the opening to the
Aspergillosis
trachea is impeded with lesions such as those of t1i-
The mightmare of all bird rescue centres,
chomoniasis or with items the bind has attempted
Aspergillus fumigatus, can also affect pigeons
to swallow, such as whole nuts or bread crusts.
causing respiratory distress. Treatment is with itia-
All other disease-related respiratory problems,
conazole (see Chapte1 9).
such as air-sacculitis, 1hinitis, avian tuberculosis and
sinusitis, must be referred to the veterinary surgeon
Candidiasis
for advice.
Avian pox and tnichomoniasis are fully desctibed
The signs of candidiasis can include a thickened
in Chapte1 9 (Fig. 12.4).
cTop and lesions not unlike those seen with tri-
chomoniasis. Regurgitation of food can also point
towards infection with Candida albicans.
Other diseases
The diseases so far discussed are seen quite often
and can usually be treated by the nurse o1 rehabil-
Hexamitiasis
itator along general guidelines prepared under the
Pigeons and doves affected by hexamitiasis will
diection of, but not necessatily involving, the vet-
show weight loss, vomiting, diar1hoea, dehydration
and a great thirst as well as deep green, foul-
sis may be required.
smelling and watery faeces.
The other diseases in this section on pigeons are
Death can occur in 1-2 weeks. Treatment would
not seen as often and should be refeled to the vet-
be eithe1 metronidazole o1 1onidazole backed with
erinary surgeon for diagnosis and guidance.
antibiotics such as enrofloxacin or trimethoprim.
124
Practical Wildlife Care
Pigeon herpes virus (PHV)
Most of the pigeon population is positive for herpes
virus, which can be responsible for sudden deaths
in nesting pigeons (de Herdt & Devtiese, 2000)
Signs may include respiratory signs that need a
veteninary surgeon to diagnose.
There is no cullent treatment for PHV.
Salmonellosis
Infection with Salmonella typhimurium va1. Copen-
hagen is limited to pigeons, poultry, humans and
cattle. The typical signs of salmonellosis in pigeons
are arthritic wing and leg joints, diarrhoea, lethargy
Fig. 12.5 The two rings (one plastic, one rubber) that
and, possibly, small abscesses in the eyelids o1 neck.
show a pigeon is in a race.
Control of salmonellosis invaniably involves
cleaning and stenilising the pigeon holding areas
 and the euthanasia of infected birds.
COMMON INCIDENTS
It is sometimes impossible to tell the difference
 between somebody's racing pigeon and an escaped
Iacing pigeon living in the wild. Both can have Tings
PLEASF PHONE
on them.
Grounded pigeons
Quite often, during the racing season, a pigeon will
Auaiedde uapiea e ul punoie Sus panods aq
sick.
Fig. 12.6 The address or telephone number of a racing
Closer inspection may show a normal plastic ring
 pigeon's owner is often stamped on its primary feathers.
On one leg and a rubber Ting on the other (Fig.
12.5). This is a racing pigeon exhausted during a
race. It will just need a few days to rest and feed
the clutches of a sparlowhawk. These casualties
before it can be let go on its way.
should be treated as ^catted' biids.
There may be a name and address on the ting o1
else details may be 1ubber-stamped on the fight
feathers (Fig. 12.6). Some fanciers want their birds
Eggs
back; some just want to ‘wring their necks'. Con-
Pigeon eggs tum up from varying sources
tacting the fancier may give you a lead on the
including:
pigeon's likely future.
· Those found on the ground by members of the
public
Predated doves
· Those found in disturbed nests, particularly
Collared doves are the smaller members of the
where feral pigeons have been nesting in
pigeon family that live wild in this country. They are
buildings
often caught by cats and are regularly rescued from
· Those laid by birds in care
Pigeons
125
Generally, except perhaps in the unlikely event
of turtle-dove eggs being found, there really is no
need to bring more pigeons and common doves into
the world. Pigeon and collared dove eggs handed in
should be destroyed.
However if you destroy eggs that have been laid
by a bird in captivity the bird will just lay replace-
ment eggs. It is essential to keep the bird sitting, O1
so it thinks, on its oniginal eggs. Quite simply, to
prevent them hatching, any eggs can be given a
good shaking o1 replaced with artifcial eggs avail-
able from specialised dealers (see Appendix 6).
Road traffic accidents
Wood pigeons are regularly hit by motor vehicles.
They are large birds and often only lose a lot of
feathers Antibiotics and dexamethasone will help
them get over any concussion.
Shotwounds
Pigeons will be presented at rescue centres with
shot wounds, either shot gun pellets or ail gun
pellets. They cause a remarkable amount of
damage, including comminuted fractures of any
bone they are likely to hit. Treatment is the same
Fig. 12.7 Ruptures of the crop are regularly seen in
as for any other bird with a shot wound (see
pigeon casualties.
Chapter 9).
The laws about air gun ownership and their use
have Tecently been tightened so if necessary the
local police 1may be able to prevent recurling inci-
injury occurred. It could be severely dehydrated
dents in a given area (Appendix 4).
watranting extra fuids.
A cTop rupture involves two layers, the actual
Ruptured crop
lining of the crop and the fragile skin over the top
of it. Both have to be sutured in separate layers,
ul jou Auaiedde inq suoagid ul uaas Ainju au
preferably under anaesthetic. Broad-spectrum
othel species is Iupture of the cTop. This usually
antibiotics can be given, usually long-acting amoxy-
happens when the crop is so full that the slightest
cillin at 250 mg/kg daily.
knock seems to explode it. Injury may be obvious,
with corn seen coming from the defect, or it may be
Fractures
that the skin is notrupturedso that the corn coming
out of the ciop builds up under the skin. Sometimes
Many pigeons and doves are presented having
the injury is quite extensive and often contami-
fractures of the long bones of the wings or legs.
nated with food and, sometimes, the lesions of
Most will respond to standard fracture-treatment
trichomoniasis.
legimes. Howevel, we have found that wood
If the defects are thoroughly cleaned and sutured
pigeons with fractures that cannot heal properly are
most birds make a complete recovery (Fig. 12.7).
not suitable for retention in captivity. Theit nervous
Crop rupture should be treated as an emergency as
nature means they will never ever be comfortable,
the bird will have been unable to drink since the
even in an aviary.
126
PracticalWildlifeCare
Strangely, tinged pigeons often seem to fracture
the leg that is calrying a ling. To prevent unneces-
sary suffening a Ting on a fractured or injured leg
should be cut off.
Sunshine
Birds require sunshine on the non-feathered parts
of their skin in oider to convert vitamin Dz to an
active formm, vitamin D which, together with
parathyroid hormone, controls the absorption of
calcium from the intestinal tract (Macwhirtel,
2000).
Failure to receive enough sunshine can result
in vitamin D deficiency and decreased calcium
absorption, hypocalcaemia and bone defciencies,
including pathological fractures, bent bones and
 demineralised, soft bones.
This seems to be the case with collared doves,
which have only colonised Bnitain since the 1950s.
 Possibly immigration to Britain outstnipped evolu-
tionary changes, because every yea1 the doves seem
to nest far too ea1ly when there is not enough
sunshine to satisfy the vitamin D needs of their
 youngsters. Many youngsters are presented for
rehabilitation having the classic symptoms of
Fig. 12.8 Artificial sunlight for young collared doves.
vitamin D deficiency and hypocalcaemia.
 The remedy is to place these young bids under
ultraviolet lighting made specifically for reptiles
(Fig. 12.8) (Powersun, Appendix 6). Once hand-
them prophylactically against some conditions
reared and revitalised by the ultraviolet lighting,
(Table 12.1).
the birds do not seem to suffer further problems in
adulthood.
CAGING
WORMSAND OTHERPARASITES
Any large cage will be ample for pigeons. Wood
pigeons will need to be kept somewhere quiet o1
Pigeons do carry numbers of different worms
else they will panic. Perches made of twigs about
and other parasites. Any specific problem can
10-20 mm in diameter should be provided.
be referred to the veterinary surgery. In general,
A sand base is adequate.
worms can be treated prophylactically with fen-
 Caging a pigeon in an aviary after treatment will
bendazole capsules (Panacur Wormer for Pigeons -
provide exetcise pnior to release.
Intervet).
FEEDING
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
Pigeons and doves will eat almost anything.
After the initial first-aid treatments have been
Chicken growers’ pellets offer a complete diet.
provided, the pigeons and doves are so suisceptible
Mixed corn is teadily available at pet stores but
to so many diseases it is sound practice to treat
unless vitamins and minerals are added it cannot be
Pigeons
127
Table 12.1 Suggested prophylactic treatments for various pigeon species, to be given on admission.
Treatment
Feral pigeon
Wood pigeon
Collared dove
Stock dove
Turtle dove
Camidazole (Spartrix -
1 tablet (10mg)
1 tablet (10mg)
² tablet
1 tablet (10mg)
 tablet
Harkers) for
(5mg)
(5mg)
Tnichomoniasis
(10mg if infected)
PMV Vaccine
0.2ml
0.2ml
0.2ml
(Colombovac PMV -
(subcutaneously)
(subcutaneously)
(subcutaneously)
Solvay Animal
Health) Give after
10 days' quarantine
for new admissions
Worming (Panacur
1 capsule
1 capsule
1 capsule
Pigeon Capsules
Hoechst Roussel Vet)
called a complete diet.There are specialised pigeon
mixtures, which offer a vanied range of corns and
seed, available.
Pigeon grit should also be provided to aid
digestion.
orli
Enlive
PLUS
GAVAGING
Gavaging is feeding a bird liquid nutnition straight
into the crop. It is particulaily useful for pigeons
that are temporanily unable to feed themselves
through disease or injury.
Fig. 12.9 A selection of human liquid foods suitable for
A 25cm length of rubber or plastic tubing with
many birds.
an intemal diameter of 5mm is attached to a 20ml
syringe. Liquidised food is then sucked up through
the tube into the syringe. All air is expelled.
The tube is lubricated and then slid down the
Any coughing could mean that the gavage tube
throat avoiding the glottis. A small amount of the
has inadvertently been placed into the trachea. Stop
warmed food is then syringed directly into the crop,
administering immediately and 1emove the tube.
making sure that it does not come back up the
throat.The tube, still attached to the syringe,is then
withdrawn and the pigeon left, supported if neces-
RELEASE
sary, in an upnight position.
Suitable foods available include: Cnitical Cale
Wood pigeons, stock doves and collared doves can
Formula (Veta1k), Hill's a/d (Hill's Pet Nutrition)
be released in any park, common or country area.
and several human liquid food preparations similar
Turtle doves will need releasing before their migra-
to, and including Ensure (Abbott).Amounts should
tion at the end of the summer.
add up to the equivalent of 50 ml/kg given daily in
If feral pigeons are released locally they will stay
several doses (Fig. 12.9).
around your neighbourhood. Theit homing instinct
Of course, it may be that the pigeon can be
is phenomenal. Feral pigeons are descended from
encouraged to suck up this liquid diet on its
Iock doves that live on sea cliffs. Perhaps the best
ownl.
release site for pigeons is near sea cliffs at least
128
Practical Wildlife Care
200 km away from where they have been kept.
amendments, only a registered veterinary surgeon
Releasing just before dusk may break the homing
and in some cases a veterinary nurse can treat
     i    a
an animal belonging to another person. Racing
cliff environment.
and fancy pigeons often belong to a fanciel,
so any treatment on these pigeons should be
restricted to first aid, life-saving and prevention
LEGISLATION
of pain or suffering unless the person treating
is a Tegistered veterinary surgeon Or veterinary
Under the Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966 and its
nurse.
13
Game Birds
Species seen regularly:
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
Pheasant (Phasianus colchicus), grey
partridge
(Perdix perdix),red-legged partridge (Alectoris
Large nets and cat-sized calrying boxes are the
rufa)
and
occasionally
quail
(Coturnix
order of the day.
coturnix).
RESCUE AND HANDLING
NATURAL HISTORY
These birds are great runners and do not need to
fy to escape capture. A large net with an extra-long
Game birds’ means literally that - the birds
handle gives the catcher a chance of catching the
included in this chaptel, apart from the grey pa1-
biid before it has tun too fa1.
tridge, are bred and released for shooting.
Pheasants, especially, are surprisingly strong and
Often native birds, such as grouse (Lagopus
should be held firmly around the shoulders. They
lagopus), are managed for shooting but do not
are also extremely highly strung so should be
usually aftive for rehabilitation.
handled as little as possible. A dark box will quieten
More exotic species are occasionally found but
them.
are usually escapees from a collection. Although
In the treatment facility it may be nigh on impos-
some gamekeepers have been introducing Chukar
sible to evaluate a pheasant as it faps and kicks.
partridges (Alectoris chukar) for shooting, it is
This stress may well kill it. Diazepam at 10mg/kg
illegal to release them.
intramuscularly or intravenously should quieten
Exotic pheasant species seen include: golden
the bird enough for tniage and first aid.
pheasant (Chrysolophus pichus), Lady Amheist's
pheasant (Chrysolophus amherstiae),Reeve's pheas-
ant (Syrmaticus reevesi) and the silve1 pheasant
COMMON DISEASES
(Lophura nycthemera).
Quail are,in fact,a now very ate migrant species
There are well-recorded diseases of game birds in
that can be confused with the quail sold by pet
the shooting world. They are, however, not seen in
 stores as Japanese quail'.
Tehabilitation facilities, which normally see only
All the species are ground feeders, taking a
trauma victims.
mixture of seeds, com, shoots and insects. The three
Tegularly seen species tend to skulk in hedgerows
and open woodland venturing into fields to feed.
COMMON INCIDENTS
All their young are precocial and are fully feath-
ered, able to walk and run and feed themselves
Almost invariably a pheasant or partridge casualty
immediately after hatching.
will have been hit by a motor vehicle. The question
129
130
PracticalWildlifeCare
of ownership does arise but most of these birds
CAGING
have no identification tags o1 lings so can be treated
as any wild bird casualty.
Pheasants, in particulal, need a large cage with the
front covered to keep them calm. Once recovered
all game birds should be kept in a large aviary for
COMMON INJURIES
one or two weeks before release.
There may be occasional fractures of the tibiotar-
sus but the most common injury is varying degrees
of concussion, especially with pheasants.
FEEDING
Pheasants are regularly presented with no use in
either leg. Initially they can be treated like any
Game birds will eat corn, seed and game-bird
aie saeix pilq se inq aseo Ainfu [euds poadsns
pellets with the occasional insect supplement, like
hard to interpret it is often not possible to identify
mealworms, for the grey partridge.
a back injury (Fig. 13.1). If there is doubt, the pheas-
Just like the pigeons, game birds will need grit
available to be taken while feeding.
ant should be treated as a head trauma case (see
Chapter 9). Howevel, if no improvement of the
flaccid paralysis of the legs is seen in one week the
bid is probably not going to recove1. It should be
PARASITES
destroyed.
Pheasants are sometimes brought in with part of
Intestinal worms are often a problem in game biids.
theit top beaks missing. This will have been clipped
Suitable wormers include:
'rhio qoea guyoad mqi dois oi radaayaa e Aq
and should regrow without any problems.
·Mebendazole oral suspension (Wormex
Hoechst Roussel Vet): 13 mg/kg fo1 pheasant and
ADMISSIONANDFIRSTAID
partridges
·Flubendazole (Flubenvet Intermediate - Janssen
Standard triage and first-aid techniques apply, with
Animal Health): 60 g/tonne of feed for seven
the addition of diazepam for crazed pheasants.
days
Fig. 13.1 Radiographs of birds, this is
a pheasant, are difficult to interpret for
spinal injuries.
Game Birds
131
RELEASE
·Chuka1 partridge (Alectoris chukar)
· Rock partridge (Alectoris graeca)
Game birds should be 1eleased in a suitable habitat
·Golden pheasant (Chrysolophus pictus)
of fields bordered by hedges and woods. Be aware
·Lady
Amherst's
 pheasant
(Chrysolophus
of any shooting estates and avoid them or else your
amherstiae)
patient could end up getting shot.
· Reeve's pheasant (Syrmaticus reevesii)
·Silver pheasant (Lophura nycthemera)
·Bobwhite quail (Colinus virginianus)
LEGISLATION
·Capercaillie (Tetrao urogallus)
· Any othel species not indigenous to Britain.
Under Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and Countryside
Act 1981 it is illegal to release the following game
birds:
ryids
Species seen regularly:
As a family, the crows are omnivorous and will
CaTion or hooded crows (Corvus corone),
eat a variety of food including corn, insects, other
Took (Corvus fnugilegus), magpie (Pica pica),
birds, small mammals and 1oad kills.
jackdaw (Corvus monedula) and jay (Garrulus
Magpies Tegularly raid birds' nests especially in
glandarius).
 gardens. They will take any eggs or young birds,
The taven (Corvus corax) and the extremely Tate
as do gTeat spotted woodpeckers (Dendrocopos
chough (Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax) may also allive
major). Howevel, they do not generally take adult
at tescue centres occasionally.
biids, as do cats and sparrowhawks, so thei1 impact
It is also an opinion that the house crow (Corvus
on a breeding pair is not as great - the bereaved
splendens) will soon be resident in Britain (Pukas,
birds will simply have a second brood whereas the
1999).
loss of one of the pair would be impossible to
Teplace in that breeding season.
Generally the corvids are very intelligent and
quickly adapt to exploit any food source.
NATURAL HISTORY
The different vanieties of corvid in Britain have
established their own niches and do not generally
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
compete with each other:
A large net, with a long handle, is required to catch
any of the corvids because even if they cannot fy
· The gregarious Took nests in huge colonies high
   e e  r 
im trees around farmland
OveI quite large obstacles.
· The carlion crow establishes pairs on farmland in
They will need a sturdy cat-cafrying box to hold
a stnict tenritory
them and the taven is probably safer in a cat-
· The hooded crow is the same species seen in
caTrying basket.
Scotland
● The magpie hunts in bands, especially amongst
hedgerows and light woodland
RESCUE AND HANDLING
· The jackdaw often lives around cliffs or human
habitation where it nests in chimneys
The lescue of these fairly large birds is quite
·● The jay, the most colourful crow, is a bird of
straightforward, although a sturdy pair of gloves
broad-leaved woodland
will protect against biting or clutching with theit
· The raven is the giant of the family inhabiting
very sharp claws. Without gloves an elastic band
 moor and mountain
alound the end of the beak will prevent a painful
● The chough is now very rare; it lives on sea cliffs
bite. This should be monitored closely in case
on the Welsh and northwest coasts
the bird regurgitates or has diffculty breathing.
132
Corvids
133
  r s  s    
External parasites
unmonitored.
Mites are commonly seen on crows and 1ooks
(Fig. 14.1). Their control is with:
COMMON DISEASES
● Ivermmectin (Ivomec? Pour-on - Merial) at 0.1 ml
 Corvids no doubt cafty a Tange of diseases, none of 
 pe1 bird dabbed on to the skin at the back of the
neck
which seem to turn up in rescue centres. Routine
·A light spray with fipronil 0.25% w/v (Frontline?
hygiene should, however, protect other bind
- Merial) can also be effective against mites on
 patients if it does happen.
Corvids can carry a large burden of parasites
cOTvids
both intemal and external.
COMMON INCIDENTS
Internal parasites
Internal helminth parasites can be controlled by:
Apart from jackdaws falling down chimneys, adult
corvid casualties are usually victims of careless
· Ivermectin (IvomecTM Injection for Cattle
shooting or of road traffc accidents.
Merial) given orally at 200 mcg/kg o1 mixed 1:9
There will also be an annual influx of supposedly
with propylene glycol at 0.2 ml/kg
orphaned juveniles (Fig. 14.2). Beware, fo1 these a1e
· Doramectin (DectomaxTM Injectable Solution 
probably not orphaned. Young crows and 1ooks
for Cattle and Sheep - Pfizel) given orally at
leave the nest long before they can fly. They spend
300 mcg/kg 01 mixed 1:9 with sesame seed oil
some days hopping around on the ground but still
at 0.3ml/kg is the latest drug in this line to
being fed by their parents. Ideally these biids
become available
should be left where they are unless there is a real
danger from predators or human hazards. Rescued
In particular, choughs suffer with gapeworm
orphans can even be put back as long as somebody
which can be controlled with either fenbendazole
watches from a distance to make sure the parent
Or thiabendazole (see Chapter 9).
birds are still around.
Fig. 14.1 Typical avian mites.
134
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 14.2 Juvenile corvids are often ‘rescued' when
there is no need for intervention
Fig. 14.3 Young crows and rooks are found with white
and patchy feathers.
Other juvenile crows and rooks will be found
with obvious problems.
White or patchy white feathers
seem to have folded at the hocks and fused solid.
This probably happens in the nest, so when the bid
Many young birds are found with white or patchy
leaves it finds it cannot walk.
white feathers (Fig. 14.3). These feathers aIe
In care there is no Temedial treatment or surgery
weaker than the black feathers, breaking easily and
that could be effective so these birds will have to
preventing the bird from fying. This may be caused
be humanely destroyed.
by a nutritional deficiency or agricultural chemicals.
To date there seems to have been little or no
 Tesearch carried out on this problem.
COMMON INJURIES
When these birds are taken into care there is no
short-term solution. The damaged and white feath-
With adult corvids the commonly seen injuries are
eIs must be allowed to moult out and be replaced.
fractures of the long bones of the limbs caused by
This can take up to a year, but in that year the
gunshot wounds or road traffic collisions. Unfortu-
keeper can make sure that the bids receive a bal-
anced diet and so are able to produce sound feath-
nately, as these birds are capable of living on the
 ground for a while, without necessatily having to fly,
ers the next time around.
it can be some time before they are spotted, caught
One problem with keeping young corvids for any
and taken into care. By then any fractures may have
length of time is that they easily become imprinted
fused incolrectly o1 be totally contaminated, often
on humans. Every effort must be made to keep
with lengths of devitalised bone protruding from
these bids away from human company or it may
the skin (Plate 26). There will also be a build-up of
become impossible to release them.
fbrous tissue efficiently holding the bones in their
Deformed legs
new positions It is often hopeless to try to rectify
this, but the veterinary surgeon may elect to try
The other young cTows O1 Tooks found every
an osteotomy in an effort to get the bird fit for
summer are those with deformed legs Both legs
Telease.
Corvids
135
One problem seen at rescue centres is a build-up
of disabled corvids who were untreatable because
of this type of injury. Some centres destroy these
bids; those who have a different policy will even-
tually be overcrowded with these disabled corvids.
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
Standard first-aid procedures are adequate for all
the corvids who, generally, are very robust birds.
The only modification is that intravenous fluids may
be more suitable than intraosseous fuids for the
very large taven.
CAGING
Fig. 14.4 Choughs are specialised birds
Large cages and aviaries with many perches are
necessary for any of the corvid family. Even those
still unable to fly will want to climb ladders o1
author would recommend getting in touch with
sloping perches to the highest point, where they will
specialists who will be able to advise on the most
feel comfortable.
suitable way of keeping the chough while it is
They are particularly messy birds and require
treated.
constant cleaning to keep them hygienically sound.
Crows and ravens tend to be aggressive to each
other while being wary of each othe1. If there are
RELEASE
more than two to an aviary their defensive manner
never seems to allow them to relax enough to bathe
All the corvids are intelligent enough to cope with
OT preen. Consequently an aviary with three O1
being teleased directly into a suitable habitat.
more will become an aviary of birds with substan-
Howevel, cafTion cTows ale very terlitorial so
dard feathering which in turn prohibits them from
should be put back where they were found. If that
being released until they moult into a new set of
is not possible a vacant teritory should be found or
feathers the next year.
id juaisi e Aq payee aq na Aayi as
Rooks seem to be more sociable to each othel.
For choughs, once again, please refer to a spe-
Magpies and jackdaws will live together but jays
cialist for the most suitable Telease procedure.
should be kept away from their larger cousins.
There is a chough te-introduction scheme called
‘Operation Chough' which will be able to advise of
the best release site (Appendix 7).
FEEDING
Most of the corvids will do very well on a balanced
LEGISLATION
diet of dog food, either dry o1 tinned. They will also
take day-old chicks with a vitamin and mineral sup-
Apart from the normal wild bird and animal p1o-
plement added.
tection legislation, the only other Tegulation that
Jays will benefit from the occasional, once a
applies to corvids is that the chough is on Schedule
week, treat of mealworms. They also like small veg-
4 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. Any
etables suich as peas.
casualties should preferably be passed on to a
The chough is a specialised and mainly insect
licensed holder o1 Tegistered with DEFRA (see
feede1 (Fig. 14.4). If one is taken into care the
Fig. 11.7).
15
Water Birds - Ducks
Species seen regularly:
whereas the females have a very drab mottled
plumage to make them inconspicuous when they
·Dabbling ducks
Wigeon (Anas penelope),
are sitting on the nest.
gadwall (A. strepera), mallard (A. platyrhynchos),
The duck will lay one egg every one or two days
teal (A. crecca), pintail (A. acuta), garganey (A.
in a nest lined with her own down feathers. She will
querquedula) and shoveler (A. clypeata).
not sit and brood the eggs until the full clutch is
· Diving ducks - Pochard (Aythya ferina) and
laid. These unbrooded eggs remain cold and
tufted (Aythya fuligula)
dormant until all the eggs are laid, when she will
·Seaducks - Eider (Somateria mollisima), scote1
start to brood. In this way the ducklings will all
(Melanitta nigra), scaup (Aythya marila), shel-
hatch at the same time. Only after the duck has
duck (Tadorna tadorna), long-tailed (Clangula
'plo3 sias iI Jl pallly aq sea ue Im gupooiq pajieis
hyemalis) and goldeneye (Bucephala clangula).
 Ducklings are precocial, so once they are hatched
·Fish-eating ducks (sawbills)
Merganset
they can feed themselves and follow the duck to her
(Mergus sp-), smew (M. albellus) and goosander
chosen watercourse. When they are on the water
(M. merganser).
the duck makes sure they do not become water-
·Exotic ducks - Mandarin (Aix galericulata), 1uddy
logged. However, when separated from heT OI
(Oxyura jamaicensis), Carolina (Aix sponsa) and
taken into care they seem to become easily watel-
others, which will need to be identifed.
logged and hypothermic if they are on water. In
· Domestic and feral ducks - Muscovy (Cairina
captivity ducklings should not be allowed on water
moschata),Aylesbury,
all white ducks
and
until they are 16 weeks old.
mallard cTossbreeds.
In the wild, ducklings fall easy prey to gulls,
herons, large fish and even swans
NATURAL HISTORY
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
Ducks are aquatic creatures, with a wide variety of
adaptations to different environments and feeding
All ducks are large birds so a large catching net is
methods. Most find their food on the water but the
essential. Ducklings, even the tiniest ones, are also
less specialised dabbling and diving ducks will eat
easier to catch with a large net.
from the waterside, especially in parks.
Strange as it may seem, a loaf of sliced white bread
The male duck is called a drake while the female
is often essential equipment for catching ducks,
is the duck. She is the only one to ^quack'! Drakes
geese or swans. Latex disposable gloves are also
make only little ^quibbling’ noises and this differ-
essential to protect against polluted watel, oil or
ence makes it easy to sex the birds when they are
duck-borne infections such as campylobacteriosis.
both in their identical drab summel moult. In full-
Ducks can be carried comfortably in cardboard
breeding plumage the drakes are very colourful
cat-caTrying boxes OT cat-caTrying baskets. They are
136
Water Birds - Ducks
137
quite messy so a base of newspaper helps keep the
thousands of birds. These diseases include avian
box clean.
botulism, avian cholera, duck plague (or duck viral
entenitis) and others. Thankfully massive mortality,
seen in some American duck populations, does not
RESCUE AND HANDLING
often occur in this country. That is not to say that it
will not happen. Any mass mortality of ducks
Ducks are very diffcult birds to catch - unlike
should be thoroughly investigated, possibly under
geese Of swans they have perfected the art of
instant vertical take-off. If the net can be dropped
the auspices of the State Veterinary Service.
over them they will oblige and fly up and into it. On
water they have other escape methods like diving
Botulism
out of sight or swimming away at a surpnising
Avian botulism does occur in the duck population.
speed. Even on land a duck that cannot fly can
Clostridium boulinum type C is usually the bacte-
outrun most people.
nial culpnit. Temperatures above 20-23°C and
The technique for capture is to approach as close
anaerobic conditions are Tequired for the bactelia
as possible with the net held in front. Watching the
to p1oduce toxin (Wobese1, 1981). The optimum
bird will give a clue as to when it is thinking of
temperature is 28°C (Rosen, 1971), which fo1tu-
making its move and feeing. If you are within
nately is not that common in Bnitain. Consequently,
Teach, and very quick, it is possible to diop the net
even duning hot weathei, we do not see the mass
Ovet it. Howevel, mobile ducks are almost impossi-
mortality that botulism calses in Amenica.
ble to catch. Sometimes laying a trail of small pieces
Howevel, when water levels are low in summer
of white bread may entice the ducks, and all of its
botulism can still kill many ducks in a population.
contemporanies, to within catching distance.
Invertebrates, particularly maggots, feeding on the
An added problem is that ducks, geese and swans
carcasses of birds that have died, spread the toxin.
are very wary of anything resembling a fishing 1od
It only takes two or three toxic maggots to kill a
O1 landing net. Many will take one look and swim
duck. To prevent the cycle continuing any dead
the other way and there is nothing that can be done
pue paaoai aq pinous eaie joadsns e ul spi
about it.
incinerated. As long as protective gloves are wo1n
 Ducklings may appeat easy to catch; they cannot
when handling live or dead birds, then the botulism
fly and have nowhere near the power of an adult
will not be contagious or dangerous.
duck. However, ducklings can Tun at breakneck
Treatment generally given is antitoxin and fuids
speed across the top of the water, they can dive in
(see Chapter 9), although the Swan Sanctuary has
an instant and are superbly camoufaged to hide in
evolved its own treatment for botulism in swans,
the bank where they invariably surface. Try sliding
which may be applicable to othe1 wate1 birds (see
the large net undemeath ducklings to cut off diving,
Chapte1 16).
their normal escape method.
Other duck diseases are usually seen in wildfowl
Ducks on a beach, especially those that are oiled,
collections and these should be refelTed to the vet-
should only be approached from the seaward side
erinary surgeon for diagnosis and treatment.
of the beach. This effectively cuts off their escape
loute because once they are on the sea they are
Parasites
practically impossible to catch.
Handling ducks, always with latex gloves, should
Ducks suffer from the usual quota of helminth par-
involve holding them around the shoulders to
asites including gizzard and proventricular worms.
contiol their wings. They may try to bite but their
Worming can be with:
bites are harmless!
· Mebendazole (Mebenvet? - Janssen Animal
Health) as an oral powder for adding to the food
COMMON DISEASES
· Ivermectin (Ivomec? Injection for Cattle 
Merial Animal Health) at 200mcg/kg (or
Ducks are susceptible to major epizootic diseases
0.2 ml/kg when mixed 1 : 9 with propylene glycol)
that, given the right circumstances, can wipe out
given subcutaneously or orally
138
Practical Wildlife Care
Duck viral enteritis (duck plague)
Although not common in Britain, duck viral enteri-
tis (DVE) can strike causing the deaths of many
ducks, geese or swans. Thankfully these are the only
species affected by DVE (Bouine, 2002).
The disease should be suspected when many
waterfowl, particularly Muscovy ducks (Cairina
moschata), are found dead o1 dying. Muscovy ducks
appear to be highly susceptible to the disease with
their deaths giving the fist signs of an outbreak.
 Definite diagnosis would have to be by the veteri-
nary surgeon looking for typical DVE signs, which
could include:
· Bleeding from body onifices
Fig. 15.1 Radiograph showing fishing hook lodged in a
· An aversion to light
duck's throat.
● Diarrhoea including traces of blood
● Ruffled feathers
· Extended neck
hook can be assessed by radiograph (Fig. 15.1).
● Great thirst
·Difficulty breathing
Attempts can often be made to 1emove a hook O1
line, or the veterinary surgeon may need to operate
· Fluid, clear or bloody, from the eyes and nostnils
●Typical post mortem findings
(see Chapte1 9).
However the main warning sign is going to be the
Mating
number of deaths on a watercourse. All bodies
Every spring and early summer ducks launch into
should be Temoved and destioyed. The virus is
their breeding season. There always appears to be
spread by water so if possible any surviving biids
more drakes then ducks. Consequently ducks will
should be also removed and kept off water, in case
often be assaulted by a number of drakes and may
they are carniers and not necessarily affected by the
actually be drowmed by thein mass advances. Many
disease.
There is a vaccine (Nobilis Duck Plague - InteI-
survive the oideal but are often debilitated and are
taken into care.
vet UK Ltd) that is quickly effective and may be
The telltale sign of a mating victim is a bald patch
prescTibed to save unaffected birds.
at the back of the head where the feathers have
been pulled out by a servicing drake. Usually these
ducks just need supportive care and release into an
COMMON INCIDENTS
area with fewer drakes.
Before getting involved in any incident involving
ducks, it is worth remembering that somebody who
Road traffic accidents
is esponsible for their welfare owns the domestic
During the mating season ducks and drakes will
species. Interfering with owmed bids could have
venture away from their normal waterside haunts to
legal repercussions. It is safest to refer all domestic
find suitable nest sites. In doing this they will often
duck incidents to the owner.
CToss Toads together and motor vehicles hit both.
Fishing hooks and line
Family groups
Ducks are very often affected by anglers' discarded
The duck often secretes her nest far from any
fishing tackle. The extent of the involvement of any
watercourse. Once the ducklings hatch, all on the
Water Birds -Ducks
139
Fig. 15.2 Ducklings will follow their
mother and can be gently shepherded.
same day, the duck will attempt to lead them to
Oiled ducks
water. Consequently an adult duck with a line of
Ducks are almost always involved with any spillage
tiny ducklings following her can be seen in the most
of oil whether it be inland or on the coast. The
inappropriate places.
dabbling ducks inland are quite 1obust and will
Rather than trying to catch the group and carry
normally survive medication, cleaning and reha-
them to a watercourse, it is comparatively easy to
bilitation. The seaducks, however, are more sensi-
shepherd them in the Tight direction holding back
traffic and people until they have passed (Fig. 15.2).
tive and require more sympathetic handling. They
willalso benefit from prophylactic treatment
against aspergillosis (see Chapter 9).
Orphans
The rescue, treatment and cleaning of oiled birds
If the mother is killed or missing, the ducklings will
is covered fully in Chapter 19.
have to be taken into care. But what normally
 happens is that one of the ducklings either hatches
late or is slightly infenior and gets left behind. Its
COMMON INJURIES
high peeping call and the lack of any other duck-
lings around means that it does need rescuing.
Fractures of the legs and wings are fairly common-
Other adult ducks will not accept the ducklings
place, and being large birds they can usually be
of another brood and will very likely kill them, but
treated successfully. The pigeon-sized Colomboclip
unrelated youngsters do mix well.
(Boddy and Ridewood) is also suitable fo1 splint-
ing some tibiotarsal fractures suffered by ducks.
Eclipse
Beak fractures
All fit birds will moult their feathers once, twice o1
even three times a year. Normally they will moult
Ducks do occasionally fracture or lose their beaks.
two wing feathers at a time, one from each wing.
Fractures of the bony mandible can often be
Ducks, however, moult all the wing feathers at the
mended with wire sutures (Fig. 15.3). Howeve1, it is
same time and it is during this peniod, which is
impossible for a duck to continue with the complete
called the 'eclipse', when they will not be able to fy.
loss of a bottom beak. Without a bottom beak the
This will happen at vanious times between mid-July
tongue hangs uselessly and soon becomes necrotic
to the end of October.
if the bird does not first die of hunger.
140
Practical Wildlife Care
(4) Then, using a thermoplastic (Hydroplastic -
Tak Hydroplastics) material, the scaffold of the
bottom beak is fashioned with an depression
Tunning in the top to accommodate the tongue.
(5) Prosthetic netting (Ethicon) is then fixed into
the thermoplastic before it sets and is sutured
to the soft tissue and skin acToss the two origi-
nal fracture sites (Plate 27c).
With this prosthesis, ducks and geese can usually
start feeding immediately. Howevel, they may
gorge themselves so should only be offered dis-
solvable food like pellets O1 chick clumbs. Any
prosthesis like this should be regularly monitored
Fig. 15.3 Duck with typical broken beak.
and serviced.
Prolapsed phallus
Prosthetics for birds, especially for missing beaks,
In captive ducks, bullying will sometimes cause the
is an area that has hardly been explored. Most
victim drake to suffer a prolapsed phallus (Plate
efforts are unsuccessful but where a complete beak
28). Bullying can happen in the wild but this con-
is missing the bird can only die unless something is
dition is usually caused by road traffic accidents OT
tried. A prosthesis for a top beak is not really fea-
disease.
sible because it needs a good anchorage and the
The phallus usually sits at the bottom of the
bones in the region of the front of the skull are not
cloaca but when extended or prolapsed can cause
Teally solid enough. Prostheses have been fitted for
the bottom beak and have been temporarily suc-
obstruction to the evacuation of faeces. Try Teposi-
tioning the phallus using decongestant ointment.
cessful in ducks, although the biids were never
The only alternative is amputation and consequent
Teleased to the nigours of a wild existence.
systemic antibiotic treatment (Lierz, 2002).
Each case deserves an individual approach. Coles
(1997) tells of various methods using Steinmann
 pins or Kirschner wires placed in a cruciate pattein.
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
The Wildlife Hospital Trust (St Tiggywinkles) has
developed a number of methods (see below).
Fluids
Intravenous ffuids
The PKP method (Plate 27)
Ducks are normally large enough so that fluids can
Ducks have fairly substantial lower jaws. If a lowel
be infused through the medial tibial vein.
jaw is broken off just in front of the commisure of
the beak (Plate 27a), it could be worth trying to
Oral ffuids
fashion a prosthesis:
Oral fluids are called for in ducks with suspect bot-
(1) A scaffold conforming to the duck's bottom
ulism o1 else victims of oil pollution. Oral fuids
beak is fashioned out of a complete Kirschner
help fush toxic material out of the gut.
wire (Plate 27b).
(2) The two ends of the wie are then pushed
Amputees
through the medullary centres of the remaining
fragments of both mandibles.
Ducks can manage very well in captivity with the
(3) Where the wires exit the mandibles they are
loss of a wing. Howevel, a duck missing a leg will
bent and cut to form anchor points to prevent
nevel cope and should be destroyed. Nevertheless,
the wire slipping forward.
even if the leg bones are badly fractured, com-
Water Birds - Ducks
141
Fig. 15.4 Help double leg fractures to
heal by keeping the bird of the ground.
pounded and contaminated, it is worth attempting
treatment as many birds recover from this appar-
ently inretrievable condition (Fig. 15.4).
Vitamins
Vitamin Bi2
All water birds beneft from an intramuscular injec-
tion o1 oral dose of vitamin Bz once weekly at
250-5000 mcg/kg.
Vitamin B,
All fish-eating ducks should receive a thiamine sup-
plement (Aquavits - IZVG).
Fig. 15.5 A water fountain - this prevents ducklings
geting waterlogged and adult ducks making a mess
while in care.
CAGING
Injured ducks must be kept in large cages, at least
until any wounds have healed. Water is provided in
fully waterproof and have to be Tescued before they
a water fountain available from pet stores (Fig.
d1own.A wet duck is a cold duck so should be dried
15.5). If you give them a wate1 bowl, they will sit in
off in an inside cage. Each time it gets wet it will
it and bathe in it and generally make a complete
preen and the more times it preens, the sooner it
mess of every clean cage.
will be able to swim without sinking.
 It is better to use newspaper on the floor of the
cage because it can be changed regularly.
More than one duck in a cage may fight but it is
FEEDING
worth trying, just to keep the workload down.
Once they are healed, ducks must be given facil-
Dabbling and diving ducks will take white bread off
ities to swim and bathe. Sometimes they are not
water. Howevel, more goodness can be obtained
142
Practical Wildlife Care
from duck pellets o1 mixed corn with added vita-
A female that has been attacked by drakes would
mins and minerals. Duck pellets provide different
benefit from a site with fewer birds on it. A quiet small
and appropriate protein levels. “Maintenance'
niver Or lake is ideal for dabbling or diving ducks.
pellets, for general feeding of adult ducks, have a
Fish-eating ducks and seaducks should go back
protein level of 15% whereas ^grower’ pellets, O1
to their original haunts where there is going to be
cTumbs, have a protein level of 16% for young and
a reliable food source to suit their specialised
juvenile ducks up to six months old. Fish-eating
Tequirements.
ducks may take seaduck pellets, which are scattered
Never release domesticated ducks, not even on
 On the water. They may even take whitebait from a
to a protected stretch of water.
dish of water.
Seaducks can be offered clean mussels OT
shrimps. Howevel, although initially frozen, when
LEGISLATION
defrosted shellfish quickly spoil. Seaduck pellets
from Mazuri Zoo Foods are ideal if you can per-
There ale no ducks on Schedule 4 of the Wildlife
suade the ducks to take them off the surface of the
and Countryside Act 1981 but there ale some on
water.
Schedule 9, which means they should not be
Exotic ducks will have to be identifed so that
Teleased into the wild. The listed ducks ate:
suitable feed can be provided. Most of the ducks
are escapees from captivity so will be quite used to
· Carolina wood duck (Aix sponsa)
artificial diets.
●Mandarin duck (Aix galericulata)
●Ruddy duck (Oxyura jamaicensis)
RELEASE
It is also illegal to release, or allow to escape, any
duck that is not ordinanily wild in, Of a Tegular
It is best to release ducks where they were origi-
visitor to, Great Britain (Wildlife and Countryside
nally found, if the area is safe.
Act 1981, Section 15, pa1t (1)).
16
Water Birds - Swans
Species seen regularly:
population at The Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust at
Mute swan (Cygnus olor), occasionally migrant
Slimbridge has been closely studied and monitored
Bewick's swans (Cygnus columbianus), whooper
for many years.
swan (Cygnus cygnus) and escaped black swans
The black swan is an Australian species int10-
(Cygnus atratus).
duced to Bnitain into private waterfowl collections.
Many have escaped and joined mute swan popula-
tions in the wild and will occasionally turn up at
NATURAL HISTORY
Tehabilitation centres (Fig. 16.1).
The mute swan is the familiar swan of watercourses
all over Britain. It feeds on grass and water plants
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
but is fairly omnivorous and will take almost
anything including insects and small animals. In
Nets are generally too small for all but the youngest
particular they are regularly fed, by the public,
swans. The only piece of equipment that is of real
on scraps of bread, which many swans grow to
assistance, designed specifically foT catching swans,
Tely on.
is the ^swan hook'. This is like a shepherd’s crook
The male mute swan, with a large black protu-
fitted to a long, extending handle. It is used to catch
berance at the top of the beak, is the cob and the
the swan's neck and pull the bird towaids you. A
female the pen. Their pair bonding can be for life,
swan's neck is particulaily strong so if used briefy
a commitment that sometimes causes a singleton
and sensibly the swan hook will not cause any
that has lost its mate to pine and sometimes perish.
injury. But by far the most effective aid for catch-
A pair will be very territonial and will attack any
ing swans is a loaf or two of the ubiquitous sliced
swan that encToaches on their area. In particula1,
white bread.
when they have young (cygnets), the cob will attack
 Carrying boxes and cages are too small to accom-
anything that moves and has been known to kill
modate a grown swan. Swans need their own spe-
dogs on the waterside. When their young are growm
cially designed swan bag. Made of sailcloth, the
enough to fly, the adults will aggressively drive them
swan bag is like a conical tube with ties and handles
off to clear their territory of swans, ready for the
(Fig. 16.2). Once the swan is slid head first into the
next breeding season.
wider opening,its head and neck are guided out of
The mute swan is Bnitain's largest wild bird with
the smaller opening which will not allow the swan's
some cobs weighing in at over 12 kg.
shoulders through. With just the head and neck p10-
Bewick's and whoopel swans are winter visitors
truding from the bag the swan is incapable of move-
to Britain. Their nesting grounds are on the Arctic
ment or fapping its large wings.
tundra, especially in northem Scandinavia and
A more simple swan bag can be made by cutting
Russia. They have Tegular wintening sites in this
a 100 mm hole in the blind end of a sack (Fig. 16.3).
country and, in paticulat,the Bewick's swan wintet
 Just like the purpose-made swan bag, the bird is slid
143
144
Practical Wildlife Care
head first into the sack and its head and neck
RESCUE AND HANDLING
guided out through the hole. Tying the sack closed
behind the swan also ensures that the swan cannot
Unlike ducks and geese, swans cannot take off ver-
move.
tically. To get airbome they need a considerable
 Another variation is to use a strong plastic shop-
Tun-up whether they are taking off from water O1
ping bag, such as those available at Ikea stores for
from land. The need for a Tun-up often gives a
about f1.50. Eyelets are placed along the tops of
Tescuer that little bit of extra time needed to appre-
both sides of the bag then, once the swan is sat in
hend the swan.
the bag, cord is threaded through the eyelets and
By far the easiest way to catch a swan is to use
actoss the swan. When this is tied only the head and
sliced white bread. Scraps are throwm to the swan
neck will be exposed and the handles will make car-
gradually tempting it nearer to the bank. It will
Tying the swan so much easier.
probably come out of the water to pick up scraps
Fig. 16.1 The black swan now being seen on British
Fig. 16.2 A swan bag made of sailcloth by Ratsey and
waterways.
Lapthorn.
Fig. 16.3 Swans can be confined in
converted sacks.
Water Birds-Swans
145
thrown on the bank. When it is neai, the Iescuer
botulism in the summer. After a long, warm spell
simply grabs the bird's head and pulls the bid
when water levels have dropped, swans will dabble
towards them.
in the exposed warm mud, an ideal breeding ground
 The wings will be flapping and can be painful if
fo1 the bacterium Clostridium botulinum (see
they hit you, so the next priority is to grasp the
Chapte1 9).
swan's shoulders holding the wings folded to its
The Swan Sanctuary at Egham has evolved its
body.
Own Tegime for treating swans diagnosed as suffer-
Once the swan is under control, put it on the
ing from botulism (Goulden, 1995):
ground and kneel astride it, keeping the wings
firmly pinned to its body. Then it is comparatively
●Five-day antibiotic cover with a potentiated
simple to slide the swan bag over the bird and tie it
sulphonamide (Borgal - Hoechst Roussel Vet)
securely.
· Three-day administration of vitamin Bz as an
Cygnets can be caught in a similar mannel,
appetite stimulant
although small ones can be caught in a large net. Be
· Intravenous infusion of Hartmann's solution
aware when catching cygnets that the adult biids
laced with 10% Duphalyte (Fort Dodge Animal
will not hesitate to attack,using their wings as
Health)
weapons.
· Caution is needed with bowls of food and water
The swan hook can be used for fully-grown OT
as the weaker birds can easily drown
adult swans that will not fall for the bread trick. The
·A cool, quiet environment is needed
One drawback is that swans, like ducks and geese,
●Recovery can take several weeks
have been driven away so often with anglers' 1ods
and nets that they are often very wary of anything
Bumblefoot
Tesembling a 1od or a pole.
The swan hook really comes into its own when a
Swans are particularly heavy birds and place a great
swan can only be caught from a boat. Some swans,
deal of pressure on the plantat region of the feet.
if compromised, will not venture anywhere nea1 the
The epithelium can cope with this unless the swan
bank. An inflatable dinghy with an outboard moto1
spends time out of the water on hard surfaces like
is then the only option if the bird must be caught.
concrete. Then a coin can build up or the skin can
It takes two people, one to drive and steer while the
be grazed allowing pathogenic bacteria, such as
other kneels in the prow with the swan hook
Escherichia coli,Staphylococcus aureus or Proteus
extended and teady to catch the biid. Once the
species, to ente1. Fibrous tissue builds up around
swan is hooked and pulled to the boat its wings
the bacteria and as an abscess forms it becomes
must be controlled as it is picked out of the water
 and put in the bottom of the boat.
inspissated pus may be obvious under a scab.
Handling swans is just a question of firmness and
Before any treatments are started a swab for bac-
keeping their wings under control. Even without a
teriological testing should be taken.
swan bag the biid can be tucked under the aim,
Chronic bumblefoot can invade and erode bony
which is held around the bird's shoulders. Gener-
tissues and can only really be treated by the veteri-
ally swans do not bite, although occasionally one
nary surgeon removing all necrotic and caseous
might try, but their bite is insignifcant.
material. A prolonged treatment regime can be
When a swan is being cartied it will usually, if it
instituted with the bumblefoot lesions being
can, hold its head straight out in front of it.
debrided and cleaned using Dermisol Multi-
cleanse Solution (Pfzer) and the systemic antibiotic
enrofoxacin (Baytril 25% - Baye1) (Breed & Di
COMMON DISEASES
Concetto, 2002).
Initial fist aid consists of placing a wad of surgi-
Botulism
cal swabs under the foot over a non-stick o1 paraf-
Swans are susceptible to the usual range of bird dis-
fin-tulle pad. The whole foot is then wTapped in a
eases but like other birds do tend to be relatively
cohesive bandage (Co-Flex - Millpledge Pha1ma-
free of disease. The only condition regularly seen is
ceuticals) and then a waterproof covering to keep
146
Practical Wildlife Care
the dressing clean and dry in the mess that any swan
will make of a dry pen. The swan should not be
allowed on to the water until the foot has com-
pletely healed.
the ligours of bumblefoot. They respond well to
surgery even when lesions are extensive (J. Lewis,
personal communication). In a captive situation the
use of calf mats and artificial turf will help prevent
bumblefoot forming on other swan inmates.
COMMON INCIDENTS
Lead poisoning
Swans have regularly been the victims of lead poi-
soning from anglers’ weights (Fig. 16.4). The inci-
dences of this are now reduced but birds are still
being found with the classic “limberneck' where the
swan cannot lift its head. Lead poisoning and its
treatment were covered eailier (see Chapter 9).
Anglers? tackle
This is probably the most common cause of swans
needing care, with practically every swan on well-
Fig. 16.4 A radiograph of a swan poisoned by lead shot
fished waters being taken into care at one time OT
the other. Like lead poisoning, the treatment of
fishing-tackle injuries was covered eallier (see
passed Suaq sl piny io pooy Aue jl Io sseu Aue
Chapter 9).
th1ough the gizza1d (Fig. 16.6). A lubricated 1ubbeI
stomach tube can also be used to measure the
extent of the blockage.
Blocked oesophagus
Once the swan is stabilised with fuids the vet-
A condition often found in swans as a Tesult of lead
erinary surgeon can calculate whether the blockage
poisoning, the ingestion of fishing line or plain,
can be dissolved without any intrusive intervention.
simple gorging on feed such as com, is the complete
Two options for treatment are available:
blockage of the proventriculus and oesophagus
(Fig. 16.5). Eventually an affected swan will die, but
 The swan can be anaesthetised using propofol
before that they may be seen getting weaker Or an
(Rapinovet - Schering-Plough Animal Health)
unusual swelling in the neck may be spotted by an
by induction with an intravenous injection and
 observer. It is then that they are rescued and taken
then maintenance on isofurane through an
into care.
endotracheal tube. The swan is laid on its back on
 Sometimes, if a blockage is suspected, opening
a sloping surgical table. Its head should be at the
the swan's beak may reveal a fetid smell from the
lowest point. A stomach tube is passed until it
food and vegetation totting in the oesophagus.
stops at the blockage. Warm water is then
Radiographs are essential when dealing with swans
stomach pumped under pressure to loosen the
and, of course, can be used in all species of biid
debris.
(Cracknell, 2004). In addition, the use in swans of
● Surgery is the other option and may even be nec.
barium sulphate and X-rays will show the extent of
essary after flushing if a mmass of fishing line is still
Water Birds -Swans
147
frmly embedded in the oesophagus. An endo-
Ting swans regularly fy into power lines in their
scope could confim its presence and may also be
panic to escape the fusillades of shotguns killing
used to try to remove it.
ducks and geese.
Injuries can be severe and include fractures of
Throughout the treatment of a swan with
the legs and wings, major lacerations and burns, and
oesophageal obstruction the uise of batium sulphate
damage to the face and neck. The fractures and
and radiographs will monitor any progress.
abrasions usually Iespond to treatment but often-
massive lacerations or burns lead to nectosis of
parts of the wing which then requires amputation
Starvation and emaciation
01, in severe cases, humane destruction (Fig. 16.7).
If there is no evidence of electric trauma after five
Once a swan has been unable to feed for any length
days, it can be assumed that electrocution did not
of time it will gorge itself at the first opportunity. If
occu1 (Routh & Sanderson, 2000).
the first meal is corn, or some other insoluble feed,
it may well block its own crop and oesophagus with
the quantity taken.
Crash landing
The safest way to feed a hungry swan is with dis-
 Swans often mistake icy wet roads for safe landing
solvable duck or chicken pellets offered in small
sites on water. They will fy in and land often
amounts at regular intervals. Plenty of drinking
causing themselves injury; a swan's landing is
water will make sure the feed is dissolved and
always a heavy, half-controlled affai1.
digested.
The Tescue call is usually from the police because
a swan is blocking the 1oad and people or officers
do not want to approach it. The swan can usually
Overhead wires
be caught easily with a swan hook or will run and
The incidences of swans flying into overhead cables
take off giving the Iescuer no chance to see if it was
are just as common as fishing-tackle injuries in
injured. Thankfully, apart from a few bruises, the
some parts of the country. At reservoirs near to
 only thing injured is usually the swan's pride.
Fig. 16.5 A blockage removed from this cygnet's throat.
148
Practical Wildlife Care
Field swans
Calls will be received from the public reporting
swans sitting in the middle of a field.*They can't fly,
is always the reason for the call. In fact swans often
land in fields to graze. The response to the calls is
to tell people who are 1eally worried to approach
with caution and ring back if the swan does not
move off as they go near.
Rings
Swans often have Tings put on their legs by the
Bnitish Trust for Omithology (BTO) and other
Teseaichers monitoring swan populations. The BTO
rings are metal and engraved with the address of
the British Museum. The other largeT Tings are
Darvik tings made from a sort of linoleum. They
usually have just a consecutive number inlaid into
them.
The Tings can cause complications if there are
any injuries to the swan's legs In particular a frac-
tured leg may swell and become constricted if the
ning is left on. BTO nings especially have been
known to become snagged and then slide up and
into the hock joint (Plate 29). Similarly, Darvik
nings can become brittle, break and cut into the
swan's leg.
If there is a possible danger from the tings, they
Fig. 16.6 How barium sulphate will outline a swan's
should be cut off.
digestive system.
Fig. 16.7 A swan injured and burnt after
colliding with electric power lines.
Water Birds - Swans
149
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
can be given a whole toom to themselves. Calf
mats should always be provided to piotect the
On admission, any swan casualty should be put on
swan's feet as these can be easily hosed down and
 to an intravenous dnip infused through the medial
cleaned.
tarsal vein using a 22 g × 300 mm over-the-needle
Howevel, rescue centres that take in quite a few
type catheter. If there is a problem inserting the
swans have to make other atrangements to accom-
cathete1 then a 21g 01 23g butterfly infusion set
modate them.
might be more suitable.
The Wildlife Hospital Trust (St Tiggywinkles) has
Long-acting amoxycillin at 250 mg/kg intramus-
a separate swan intensive-care facility that is fully
cularly should be provided and 1 ml of vitamin Biz
tiled and drained so that it can be easily washed
given as a boost to the appetite.
and hosed down (Fig. 16.8). Individual swan pens
The swan's nostnils, choana and eyes should be
are used that are easily accessible and also easily
checked for leeches. These can be Temoved with
washed and hosed down. These give each swan an
forceps or by flushing with fresh water.
area of 1.0 m x 1.2 m while itis in intensive care. The
Because fishing tackle is such a hazard to swans,
pens are made from components manufactured for
each new admission should be X-rayed to see if
materials handling in warehouses (Fig. 16.9). This
there is an underlying problem of a hook, blockage
also makes them easy to move or store outside if
O1 lead shot. Swans can be easily X-rayed conscious
they are empty.
by using tape or small sand bags to hold them in
Even if regularly cleaned, swans out of watet
position. Three dorsoventral X-rays are needed:
soon become soiled and lose feathel condition. It is
imperative to get them on to water as soon as pos-
(1) Covering the gizzard forward to the top of the
sible. Large pools that are easily cleaned are ideal,
sternum
especially if they also have access to short grass
(2) Covering the upper torso and most of the neck
where they can graze.
(3) Including the rest of the neck and head
FEEDING
CAGING
Many swans, especially cygnets, are used to taking
Swans are enormous, messy birds that are far too
bread from the general public. In care many of
large to be held in normal cages. In many cases they
them do not seem to recognise other foods and will
Fig. 16.8 An easily-cleaned intensive
care facility for swans.
150
Practical Wildlife Care
Once they Tecognise corn, it and pelleted food can
be offered dry next to a clean bowl of water. Swans
like to dabble each mouthful of dry food in water
before they swallow it.
Large grit should always be available and could
be mixed with feed for swans recovering from lead
poisoning.
The initial 1ml of vitamin Bz they receive at
triage should be repeated weekly to improve their
 appetites and general well-being.
If it is possible, swans should have the facility to
graze on short grass before they are released.
RELEASE
Swans must
be waterproof before they are
released.
One of a pai1 o1 a cygnet from a family group
should be taken back to its oniginal teiritory. Othel
swans with no history of a family should only be
Teleased where there are no other swans o1, alter-
natively, where large flocks of mixed adult and
young swans are forming.
LEGISLATION
All swans ale protected under the Wildlife and
Countryside Act 1981.
Fig. 16.9 A swan pen made from materials handling
Mute swans in the Thames basin between
equipment.
London Bridge and Henley-on-Thames are seen as
 Crown property. Hence any offences against these
swans may be prosecuted as offending against the
take only bread. To offer it, break it into small
Crown.
pieces and foat it on a bowl of watel.
Gradually they can be weaned on to lettuce Or
cabbage in the water and then on to mixed coin.
17
Geese and Other Water Birds
Species seen regularly:
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
·Geese - Canada goose (Branta canadensis),
Equipment and transport used for geese would be
geylag goose (Anser anser),Brent goose (Branta
similar to that recommended for swans.
bernicla) and Barnacle goose (Branta leucopsis).
· Other water birds - Moorhen (Gallinula chloro-
pus), coot (Fulica atra), grebe (Podiceps spp),
heron (Ardea cinerea), bittern (Botaurus stel-
RESCUE AND HANDLING
lris) and water rail (Rallus aquaticus).
Would be similar to that tecommended for swans,
except that geese can take off instantly. They can
Part I: Geese
often be caught using a large net.
NATURAL HISTORY
COMMON DISEASES
Only the greylag goose and the Canada goose are
Ordinarily resident in Great Britain. Howevel, these
Like swans, geese seen in care very tarely show
have either been introduced or have escaped from
symptoms of disease other than botulism.
collections. The Egyptian goose (Alopochen aegyp-
However, there is a tange of epizootics that
tiacus) is another introduced species but is not
can affect geese: goose virus hepatitis, goose
nearly as widespread. The other goose species are
influenza and goose plague. The author has never
winter visitors who migrate to the high Aictic in
Tecorded any of these in our localised intake of
 summer to nest and rear their young.
casualties.
Geese feed mainly on grass and aquatic vegeta-
tion and can often be seen, in winter, in large flocks
feeding on farmland.
COMMON INCIDENTS
In the London parks the Canada goose has now
become abundant and, being of an aggressive
Fishing line and flying into power lines place geese
nature, is said to be displacing other water biids.
in the same hazardous existence as swans. Geese,
All manner of control methods are being tried
however, have the added hazard in that they are
Tanging from shooting to pricking the eggs of any
Tegularly targets of organised shooting with shot-
nest found. The Canada goose is the most Tegular
 guns (Fig. 17.1). Radiographs will, for instance,
visitor to Iescue centres but other species may
show practically every Canada goose to have
turn up, especially those vagrants from parks
OT
pellets embedded somewhere in its body (Fig.
collections.
17.2).
151
152
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 17.1 Geese are oten the victims of shotguns. This
 greylag goose has suffered fractures of the humerus.
Fig. 17.2 A Canada goose with a ball-bearing shot into
its head.
COMMON INJURIES
alranged if there is a distinct possibility that a
Most injuries seen commonly are fractures caused
fishing hook or tackle has been ingested.
by gunshot. The trouble is that often the bird was
injured long before it was spotted, caught and taken
into care. Many of these fractures will have healed
CAGING
in the wrong place. Unless the veterinary surgeon
thinks that osteotomy is possible, the bird will never
Geese can be kept singly in large cages. The open
be fit enough for release.
pens we use for swans are not suitable as geese can
Broken legs if they heal are fine but if they do
usually get out of them.
not or are already fused incorrectly then the goose
The same provisions as alranged for swans
will not be able to cope with one functional leg.
should also apply to geese. Namely calf mats, artifi-
These birds should be humanely destroyed.
cial turf and access to swimming as soon as
Broken beaks have been Tepaired with a mixture
possible.
of healing and inventive metalwork (see Chapter
15).
FEEDING
TRIAGE AND FIRST AID
Similar food to that provided for swans is adequate
and especially access to short grass for grazing
Standard triage protocol is all that is needed. A
will help bring a goose to a condition suitable
radiograph study at this stage should only be
for release.
Geese and Other Water Birds
153
RELEASE
walking along the bottom until it is out of sight by
a bank. It can also sit partially submerged keeping
Geese should be teleased where they were found.
one step ahead of your every move.
Howevel, 1eference to the appropriate legislation
Most moorhen Iescues take place out of the
may prohibit the release, in this country, of many
water giving a better chance of catching an injured
species.
bird.
Migrant geese should only be released when
Handling each biid is different:
their species are in this country. This will generally
be during the winter months.
● The coot will scratch with its powerful feet, which
should be kept wrapped in a towel
· The moorhen squirts evil-smelling excrement out
LEGISLATION
 of its cloaca with some force. To prevent being
splattered always hold a moorhen with its rear
Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act
pointing away from you.
1981 prohibits the release or escape of some non-
indigenous species. Geese on the list are: Canada
goose, Egyptian goose (Alopochen aegyptiacus)
COMMON DISEASES
and any other species that are not regarded as on
the British list.
Apart from individual diagnoses, coots and
moorhens seem to be telatively disease free.
Part Il: Other Water Birds
COMMON INCIDENTS
Coots and moorhens
Fishing line affects both species (see Chapter 9).
NATURAL HISTORY
Other than that coots are relatively accident
free whereas moorhens in their more wandering
Coots and moorhens are widespread on waterways
lifestyle do get hit on the Toads.
all over Britain. The coot, with the bold white fash
at the base of its bill,is a bird of open water on lakes
and reservoirs. The moorhen, with the red and
COMMON INJURIES
yellow bill, is fa1 more secretive and skulks in the
bank-side vegetation of small rivers and canals.
The moorhen Tegularly suffers from fishing-line
Both birds eat a vaniety of aquatic plants and
injuries Apart from that it is very often found
some animal matenial. The moorhen will often
on the Ioad with a fractured tibiotarsus. Most
leave the water to feed in neighbouning fields.
Toad casualties need treating for this injury. In
ou1 experience moorhens cannot cope with just
one leg.
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
The usual bird-catching nets and standard carrying
ADMISSIONAND FIRST AID
boxes ale all that is needed to catch and transport
either of these birds.
A standard admittance protocol is all that is needed
for these birds.
RESCUE AND HANDLING
CAGING
On the water, rescue of coots and moorhens would
follow the same procedures as for ducks. The
Standard, fairly large cages with newspaper on the
moorhen, however, is quite capable of diving and
foor are suitable for both species. The moorhen,
154
Practical Wildlife Care
however, is extremely nervous and should have the
ffont of its cage covered with a towel.
FEEDING
Both biids will take corn and growers' pellets. The
moorhen will appreciate Tegula1 supplies of live
food like clean maggots, mealworms o1 waxworms.
RELEASE
Both birds should be released back to where they
were found.
Fig. 17.3 Grebes find it hard to walk on dry land.
LEGISLATION
The usual bird protection legislation and animal
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
CTuelty legislation applies to both birds.
Standaid bird-catching nets and cat-calrying boxes
are ideal for grebes. Boxes should have a folded
Grebes
towel at the bottom to protect the bird's keel.
Baskets are not suitable for the larger grebes, as
Species usually seen: Great cTested grebe (Podiceps
they will constantly stab at the wire sides and cause
cristatus) and little grebe (dabchick) (Tachybaptus
damage to their beaks.
ruficollis).
Species rarely
seen: Red-necked grebe (P
RESCUE AND HANDLING
grisegena), Slavonian grebe (P. auritus) and black-
necked grebe (P nigricollis) who are winter visitors.
It is hard to catch a grebe on the water. It will auto-
matically dive and re-surface some distance away.
Driving the bird into shallow, clean water is some-
NATURAL HISTORY
times successful if it is possible to see which way
they are going so that they can be caught under-
The great crested grebe and the little grebe ale the
water with a net.
two grebes most likely to be encountered. The
On land they cannot move very well and are
larger of the two, the great crested grebe, is a biid
easily picked up.
of open waters, like lakes and reservoirs. It dives fo1
The larger grebes should be handled with stout
small fish.The little grebe, O1 dabchick, is more sen-
sitive and keeps to the bank-side of open wate1. It
gloves, as they do not hesitate to stab with their
pointed beaks. The great crested grebe is particu-
can also be found on small rivers and canals. It dives
la1ly aggressive (Fig. 17.4).
for small fish but in the summer it will take insects
and crustaceans from the water.
The grebe's legs and feet are designed for fast
diving and swimming. Its legs are fattened laterally
COMMON DISEASES
and its feet have lobes along the toes for propul-
sion. Because its legs are set so fa1 back on the
Grebes are not usually presented for rehabilitation
body, the grebe finds it hard to walk on land and
through disease. Like all birds, they are reasonably
impossible to take off when not on water (Fig. 17.3).
disease tesistant.
Geese and Other Water Birds
155
Fig. 17.4 The great crested grebe is
particularly aggressive.
COMMON INCIDENTS
course of itraconazole (see Aspergillosis in Chaptel
9).
Apart from fishing line problems, the usual rescue
is of a grebe that has landed in the wTong place. It
cannot take off from land. All that is necessary, if
CAGING
there are no signs of injury, is to take the bird to the
nearest suitable watercourse and release it.
Grebes should be kept on water for as long as pos-
sible. Out of water their keels will become damaged
Preening
and infected, sometimes leading to euthanasia as
the only option. Thick foam 1ubbel should be used
Grebes in captivity for any length of time may
under the birds when they are in cages and this
develop a blockage in the alimentary system. The
should be cleaned or changed every few hours.
Teason is that when they preen they actually
 For swimming and feeding of little grebes, fibre-
swallow any small feathers that come out. These, in
glass garden pools are ideal because they usually
time, will cause a blockage in the gizzard. Liquid
have ledges onto which the birds can pull them-
paraffn given by gavage should alleviate any
selves, especially if the grebes are not fully
problems.
waterproof.
A bird in for care should not be left swimming
when it is not being monitored, especially
COMMON INJURIES
overnight.
Apart from those with fishing line problems, grebes
are not usually found injured.
FEEDING
The largel grebe will take whitebait out ofa shallow
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
bowl of water. Little grebes may take whitebait
dropped singly into clean water when swimming.
Most grebes can be turned round and released
They can be persuaded to dive and take the fish.
immediately. Any that are injured should receive
 Any fish will deteriorate rapidly unless frozen o1
the standard first-aid measures.
kept under cold running water. When feeding biids
Migratory grebes, Ted-necked, Slavonian and
On fish, the birds will reject the fish if it is warm. Out
black-necked, should be started on a prophylactic
procedures with fish are as follows:
156
Practical Wildlife Care
·A few fish are removed from the freezer
bird of the Teed beds where its ^boom' is an easily
· These are put into a shallow dish or bowl and put
Tecognised call.
mto a refnigerator to thaw
The little egret is somehow starting to colonise
· When the fish are just defrosted they are offered
Britain. There are already small groups on some of
to the bird
the estuaries in Devon and Cornwall.
● After 30 minutes any uneaten fish are taken out
and disposed of. Any fish that appea1 to have
deteliorated are discarded.
EQUIPMENT AND HANDLING
 In addition a thiamine supplement is fed to the
A non-fying heron is comparatively easy to out run
bid (e.g. Aquavits - IZVG or Fish Eaters' Tablets
and net. Howevel, a heron that can fy will often
-- Mazuni Zoo Foods).
evade capture. This can be so frustrating when a
heron is seen with a broken leg dangling uselessly
RELEASE
and it cannot be caught.
Handling is rather like grappling with a noisy
Release of grebes should be to suitable water; great
octopus - legs, wings, neck and beak all over the
CTested to open lakes and reservoirs, and little
place. The most important patt of a heron to control
grebes to small nivers OT canals with plenty of bank-
is its beak. This can be a lethal daggel, which the
side cover.
heron will not hesitate to aim at the face and eyes
Migratory grebes should only be released during
(Plate30).
the winter when they are nomally resident in an area.
With a heron, always get control of the head first
and then tuck the harmless wings and legs all under
one arm. Covering the bird's head, while still
LEGISLATION
holding on to it, will tend to quieten it.
Grebes are legally covered by the biid protection
legislation of the Wildlife Countryside Act 1981 and
COMMON DISEASES
the usual animal protection laws.
Herons taken into care tend to be trauma cases
Tather than cases of disease.
Herons and bitterns
Species usually seen: Grey heron (Ardea cinerea)
COMMON INCIDENTS
and the very 1are bittein (Botaurus stellaris).
Exotic species: Night heron (Nycticorax nychicorax)
In common with the other water birds, herons
and little egret (Egrettra garzetta).
suffer from fishing line accidents, and because of
their gangling legs often get tangled into line on
bank-side trees and bushes.
NATURAL HISTORY
Similarly, they will often get tangled in the nets
people put over their garden ponds to keep them
All these heron-like birds feed mainly on fish,
at bay. Sadly, and illegally, more and more herons
although they will take small mammals, birds, Iep-
seem to be being shot with airguns as they visit
tiles and amphibians.
ponds. It has been said that a plastic heron stand-
The grey heron is reasonably common and nests
ing by a pool may discourage wild heron visitors. It
communally in long-established heronries at the
would be worthwhile trying this where there are
tops of clumps of tall trees. It feeds on most watel-
Tegular incursions by wild herons Another deter-
courses and will raid gardens to take fish from
lent could be a 'trip wire' strung about 25 cm off the
garden pools.
 ground all around a pool. This may stop the heron
The bittem is one of Bnitain's most endangered
wading into the pool from the bank where it will
birds, bordening on extinction in this country. It is a
have landed.
Geese and Other Water Birds
157
Fig. 17.5 A heron's legs are often caught and fractured
Other incidents include fying into overhead lines
peripheral nutrition or gavaging liquid nutnition
and, after prolonged cold spells, many are picked up
(see Chapte1 3).
starving and emaciated.
Other first aid includes stabilising fractures that
otherwise would be further displaced by the bid
fapping and running about.
COMMON INJURIES
CAGING
Apart from fishing line injuries, other trauma seems
to result in fractures of the long bones of the legs
A heron in care should be kept, initially, in a cage
and wings (Fig.17.5)
Fractures of the upper beak do occur and are
where it can stand up. As soon as possible it should
generally nigh on impossible to repair. However John
be put into an aviary where it can spread and exer-
cise its wings before release.
Chitty, a zoo veterinary surgeon, describes the repair
Generally, herons should be transported or kept
to the beak of a red-cTowned crane (Chitty, 2003):
with their legs extended. If they are kept for any
quite basically the fracture is supported by a sturdy
length of time with their legs folded they may not
pin placed transversely through the frontal bone and
be able to recover the full use of them.
sinus, which is the main support for the whole struc-
ture. A much thinner pin is passed through the solid
bone and keratin at the tip of the beak formming a U-
FEEDING
shape to be cemented to the transverse pin with
moulded Hydroplastic (TAK Systems).
Initially herons will take fish such as sprats and her-
Tings. They can, however, soon be weaned on to
day-old chicks which are more convenient to use. A
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
Teluctant feeder may be encouraged to feed if it can
see another heron tucking into its chicks.
Herons can usually be provided with intravenous
Force-feeding with whole fish or chicks is possi-
therapy and, if emaciated, can also beneft from
ble but herons are one of those species that can
158
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 17.6 A red-throated diver cannot
move on dry land.
easily Tegurgitate if they become distressed.
Divers
Also gavaging with liquidised food or Poly-Aid
(Vetafarm Europe) can be useful, if the biid
There are three species of diver on the British
keeps it down.
list:
·The Ted-throated dive1 (Gavia stellata)
RELEASE
·The black-throated dive1 (Gavia arctica)
· The great northem diver (Gavia immer)
Because herons live and nest in specific areas, it is
important to release any back to the watercourse
Not unlike large grebes, they are even more
nearest to where they were found. Herons with one
specialised for swimming and diving and cannot
leg or one eye should not be released. A disabled
move at all on land (Fig. 17.6). They sometimes
heron will live quite comfortably on an enclosed
cTash land a long way from the sea and cannot
lake or pool.
take off again.
Divers are a nightmare in captivity and even spe-
LEGISLATION
cialist centres in Amenica can only stnive fo1 a 50%
suiccess rate.
The major problems are damage to their keels
Apart from standard animal legislation the only
and aspergillosis. Prophylaxis with itraconazole
Tegulation is to prevent the Telease or escape of
might herons under Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and
might control aspergillosis. The keel may
be
protected by foaim Tubber Or air cushions but
Countryside Act 1981.
Little egrets have no specific legislation so can
even that is unlikely to prevent keel damage. If
the bird is kept for any length of time it will
apparently be considered as any other wild biid.
deteriorate tapidly and euthanasia will have to
be performed.
Water Rail
The secret with divers is to get them on to the sea
with no delay whatsoever.
Water rails (Rallus aquanicus) are not uncommon
In captivity divers will take thawed frozen fish
Tehabilitation candidates. They can be treated as if
such as sprats, herring Or sand eels coupled with a
they were moorhens.
thiamine supplement.
18
Birds of Prey
Part I: Owls
The tawny owl is the commonest of the owls
and the species most likely to be presented for
Species seen regularly: Tawny owl (Strix aluco),
rescle.
little owl (Athene noctua), bain owl (Tyto alba),
long-eared owl (Asio otus) and short-eared owl
(Asio flammeus).
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
Possible escapees: Eagle owl (Bubo spp) and snowy
Owls can be caught with nets and carried in pet
owl (Nyctea scandiaca).
calrying boxes but with a major difference to other
birds: to handle owls safely a pair of thick gloves is
essential. Welders' gloves Or motorcyclist gloves are
NATURAL HISTORY
ideal.
Owls are predominantly nocturnal, mainly hunting
The calrying box should include an old towel,
which can double as a base for an owl to stand on
by catching small mammals in their razor-sharp
O1 as an object into which it can sink its talons.
talons. The short-eared owl and the little owl will
also hunt during the day, the little owl diet con-
sisting mainly of invertebrates like beetles and
earthworms.
RESCUE AND HANDLING
 Although their eyesight is very good in low light
levels, the unique asymmetry of theil ears enables
An owl that needs rescuing is not going to be as
them to locate prey even in full darkness. An owl's
evasive as some of the brighter biids such as crows
ears are set at different levels on each side of its
and magpies. A large net is the best and safest way
head. They can be found under the feathers as two
to catch an owl. The mesh of a net will not damage
large scrupulously-clean onifices, one level with the
the fine soft feathers essential so an owl can fly
eyes and the other a little lowe1. The long-ears' and
silently over its prey.
'short-ears', which describe the two owls of the
Once it is caught the owl will probably attack
genus Asio, are in fact only feather tufts on top of
with its talons. Often a bird of prey will throw itself
the head.
 On to its back and strike upwards. Without stout
Owls, like other birds, cannot move the eyes in
gloves the razor-sharp talons can easily penetrate
their sockets, but they do have the ability to turn
the skin in a vice-like grip. Either the gloves o1 the
their heads through 180°. This probably assists in
towels from the box should be offered to the bird,
locating their prey without having to move their
which will hold them securely. At all times Temem-
bodies. One other difference from most other
ber that the owl is concentrating on attacking you
species is that owls do not possess a crop in which
s0 do not let it go until it is safely in the carrying
to hold food as they are eating.
box.
159
160
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 18.1 Tawny owls can often be
calmed by laying them on their backs.
Owls do have hooked beaks but like othe1 biids
but treatment for tnichomoniasis is still called for,
of prey most will not attempt to bite. Howevel,
as this can be a secondary invader. Trichomoniasis
some do bite so be aware that it can happen and
is discussed more fully in Chapter 9.
keep your hands, arms and face away from the bird.
Pick up the owl by holding its two legs in one gloved
hand and its shoulders in the other to stop it flap-
Parasites
ping its wings. In fact tawny owls will often become
Capillaria worms are often visible at the back of the
trancelike if they are laid on their backs (Fig. 18.1),
throat. Treatment is with ivermectin (Ivomec?
but still keep a hold on the legs.
Injection for Cattle - Merial Animal Health) at
Back at the care facility the stout gloves should
200mcg/kg (or 0.2ml/kg when mixed 1:9 with
 always be used for handling conscious birds of prey.
Even the smallest, the little owl o the hobby, can
still infict painful wounds with their talons.
ously Or orally.
Syngamus trachea is the most likely species of
gapeworm seen in birds of prey.
These ale two specific nematodes. No doubt owls
COMMON DISEASES
will be calrying a whole range of species but, unless
the veterinary surgeon prescnibes some othel
Trichomoniasis
method of control, the ivermectin should be effec-
Tawny owls have been recorded as showing the
tive against most species.
typical lesions of trichomoniasis (Plate 19). This was
always assumed to be the Tesult of eating infected
pigeons or collared doves taken from their nests.
COMMON INCIDENTS
Spariowhawks also contract trichomoniasis and
have been reportedly taken off the nest by tawmy
Road traffic accidents
Owls.
Coles (1997) reported that the necrotic foci in the
All the species of Bnitish owl are regularly the
Oropharanx might in fact be lesions of owl herpes
victims of 1oad traffc accidents. Cooper (1993)
vius (infectious hepatosplenitis). The veterinary
Jeported that 44.7% of barn owl deaths could be
surgeon may be able to confirm one or the other
attnibuted to vehicle collisions.
Birds of Prey
161
The vast majority of adult casualty owls seen at
Orphans
The Wildlife Hospital Trust (St Tiggywinkles) are
There appea1 to be more orphaned tawny owls than
Toad traffic victims.
any other species of bird of prey. Often a young
tawny owl is found walking around or lying in a
Fence accidents
wood. The parent birds are not going to support the
youngster in this situation and it will starve if not
Tawny owls and little owls are fairly tegularly
Tescued.
caught on barbed wire fences. Usually there ale
The ideal remedy would be to put the youngster
major lacerations to the underside of one wing (Fig.
18.2). It is often not possible to suture the tears but
back into its nest, usually a hole in a tree. Howeve1,
applications of IntraSite? Gel (Smith & Nephew)
it is often impossible to trace the nest and even if it
were possible there may be legal implications of
will encourage granulation. As with other victims 
approaching a wild bird's active nest (Wildlife and
of wiring or netting accidents, owls should not be 
Countryside Act 1981). These potential orphans
Teleased immediately they are freed. They must be
should not be left alone but should be taken into
kept for at least a week to allow traumatised tissue
care (see Chapter 20).
to repai1.
Barn owls
Bain owls will usually ainive at a tescue centre for
one of two Teasons: either they have been in a
collision or else they are starving.
Over the years there have been many misguided
attempts to boost the British population of bain
owls by breeding them in captivity and then releas-
ing them. It was found that many of these captive-
bred barn owls could not cope with a wild existence
and many of them starved.
There is now legislation to control the Telease
of bam owls but starving bain owls still do tuin
up. True it may be a truly wild bam owl but some
signs will establish whether it is or not. Any one
of these tell-tale signs will point to a captive-bred
bird:
· The bird is comfortable in the presence of
humans
· It has a closed ting (a solid circle rather than a
split British Museum Ting) on either leg
· It recognises and readily takes day-old chicks
Emaciation
Barn owls and the juveniles of other birds of prey
can be found starving. The breast muscles of any
biid can be felt 1ound and plump on either side of
the keel (sternum). A hungry biid will lose these
muscles so that the keel can be clearly felt as being
Fig. 18.2 Owls can severely injure themselves when
very prominently sharp without any muscle mass
caught on fences.
on either side of it.
162
Practical Wildlife Care
First aid and treatmentofemaciation
(11) Leave the mice intact but split open for a
The automatic reaction on the presentation of a
week
(12) Feed as normal healthy biid
starving biid is to feed it as much food as possible.
However, because the digestive tract has been
empty for some time it will have shut down. Any
COMMON INJURIES
solid food given at this time would remain undi-
gested in the gut leading to an overgrowth of bac-
Apart from the lacerations inficted by barbed-wire
tenia and a build-up of toxins This could eventually
fences, most injuries seen with owls are the result
kill an already weakened bird.
Neff (1997) 1ecommends the following:
of road traffic accidents. Injuries seen include frac-
tures and eye injuries.
(1) Assume the bird is 10% dehydrated and
Fractures
provide warmed 1eplacement and mainte-
nance fuids ove1 two days (see Chapter 4),i.e.
Fractures of the long bones of the wings and legs
day one 50% of the deficit plus 50 ml/kg main-
are common, as is head trauma, which is normally
tenance
Tecognisable by a variation in the size of the pupil,
(2) Provide iron dextran at 10 mg/kg intramuscu
by head tilt, unconsciousness o1, of course, history.
la1ly weekly fo1 two weeks
Refe1 to the head trauma section in Chapter 9 fo1
(3) Provide B vitamins at 10mg/kg thiamine
the emergency protocol.
content subcutaneously weekly for two weeks
It is absolutely essential that any bird of prey
(4) Give enrofloxacin (Baytril-
Bayer) at
must be 100% fit to be Teleased. Thei1 legs have to
15mg/kg twice daily for two weeks in oral
Kaid yieo oi rapio ul paieuioo pue poaad a
programme to protect the muscles from
Their wings, down to the smallest feathers on the
needle trauma; do not inject enrofloxacin
alula, have to be absolutely symmetrical or else the
mtramuscularly as it could be irritant (Chitty,
finer movements needed by a hunting biid would
2002)
not be available to them. Similarly any ankylosis of
(5) After 24 hours of fuids, liquid nutrition can be
any joint would condemn a bird of prey to starva-
provided either orally with Poly-Aid (Veta-
tion. Any bird of prey with a deviation in the sym-
farm Europe) or Ensure (Abbott Laborato-
 metry of its wings or stiffness of a joint must not be
nies) or intraosseously with Nutriflex Lipid
Teleased. Without peifection the bird would quickly
Peli? (B. Braun Medical); remember that,
starve.
unlike other birds, owls do not have crops
(6) Once the biid's digestive system stabilises and
 noTmal droppings are formed it can be offered
Eye injuries
chopped mice, about 2-4 pieces for a barn owl.
Boydell (1997) examined 615 1escued owls and
These should be sprinkled with a multivitamin
found that 189 (30.7%) had some form of ocula1
powder (VET-AMINTM + Zinc - Millpledge
lesion. Cousque1 (2002) found that of the 1oad
Veteninary)
and
acalcium/phosphorus
traffic accident victim tawny owls examined, only
supplement such as Stress (Philips Yeast
8% showed ocular abnormalities. Many owls do
Products).
appear to have suffered eye trauma of one form
(7) Continue gavaging liquid feed for two days in
Or another and many may actually be blind in one
the morning and afternoon and give chopped
eye.
mice in the evenings
It is commonly assumed that an owl with only
(8) For two days gavage in the mornings, with
 one eye can be released and will adequately cope
chopped mice in the afternoons and evenings
in the wild (Fig. 18.3). There a1e no records of a
(9) For two more days feed all three meals of
totally blind owl surviving but totally blind owls in
chopped mice
captivity seem to spend a life of feeling around with
(10) Resume normal feeding but crush all the
 the vibrissae and feet, a completely inappropriate
bones in the mice
lifestyle.
Birds of Prey
163
Fig. 18.3 Many owls thrive with only one eye functioning.
All eye injuries and eye disease, in fact all eye
questions, must be the province of the veterinary
surgeon. If any eye has to be removed then note
should be taken that an owl has bony tings (sclera)
ossicles) supporting the eye in the orbit and these
should be preserved to maintain the contours of the
face.
At triage and first aid an injured eye may have a
smea1 of chloramphenicol eye ointment put along
the lower lid. Eye ointments with steroids should
Fig. 18.4 A simple perch made from a stout branch is
not be used at this stage.
ideal for many birds.
ADMISSIONANDFIRSTAID
perch to keep the birds clea1 of the foor. The foor
can be covered with newspaper.
At tniage, owls will benefit from the standard
Perches can be made easily from scraps of wood
intraosseous fuid infusion coupled with antibiotic
that can be discarded and replaced when they are
coveI and, if necessary, corticosteroids.
no longel able to be cleaned. A straight stout
branch about 30-40 mm thick is cut to the width of
the cage. It is then drilled and screwed to two cubes
of wood 100 mm square by 60 mm high. This can be
If the bird is likely to be in care for some weeks, it
sctubbed easily and kept scrupulously clean to
is a good preventative measure just to clip the tips
avoid any chance of pathogens getting into the feet
of both hind talons. This will prevent either of them
puncturing the epithelia of the bottoms of the feet
of the bids (Fig. 18.4).
Once their treatment has lun its course, owls
and causing bumblefoot infection.
An owl should not be released with clipped
should be put outside in skylight aviaries to exel-
talons. It must be maintained in captivity until they
cise and acclimatise for release. A skylight aviary
gTow back to their original lethal sharpness.
has no wire mesh on which the bird can climb and
damage its feathers. If it cannot fly, the perches,
which should be natural branches, can be atranged
Caging
 to provide a ladder to the highest perch.
Owls can be best maintained in intensive care in a
x t x g a     
typical veterinary cat kennel with at least one thick
2m high. At 2m high planning consent is not
164
Practical Wildlife Care
necessary. The framework should be
 fairly
the dexterity of those minor wing movements
substantial, 100 mm × 50 mm TanalisedTM timber
necessary for a change of direction. In fact if
covered on all sides by feather-edge timber laid
the heights of the perches vary, the act of flying
vertically. The top should be covered with 50mm
upwards to a peich adds even more strength to
wire mesh.
those vital muscles of flight.
A hinged opening at the top of one end will allow
for hacking back (see below under Release) if the
owls are to be Teleased in that area. A peephole
FEEDING
at one end or closed circuit television will allow
monitoring of the bird's fying expertise without
Like all camivores, owls feed not only on meat but
disturbing them.
on whole animals. In captivity it is crucial that they
The addition of baffle bainiers down each side of
Teceive the bone and fur or feathel with theil meat
the aviary makes sure that the bird has to fy much
in order that they can produce pellets, which are the
further and has to negotiate comers (Fig. 18.5). All
indigestible parts of the food animal regurgitated
this will add to the strength of the fight muscles and
up at regular intervals.
Baffles
 Original
flight
path
Extended
flight
path
Perches
                  
Birds of Prey
165
Day-old chicks with a vitamin and mineral sup-
If the bird is to be teleased in the vicinity of the
plement added are easy to obtain frozen. They can
aviary, it should be fed regularly in the aviary on a
be defrosted as needed.
platform level with the release fap high at one end.
When a wild owl is taken into care it will have no
Then, as it is fed on the evening it is to be released,
idea what a day-old chick is. It will have been used
the release fap should be opened as the food is put
to eating small mammals and, at first, will only
on the platform. The fap is then left open and, as
accept similar food. Frozen mice are obtainable but
before, food continues to be put on to the platfoim.
it is no good offering wild birds white mice. They
The bird may or may not avail itself of the food but
will not recognise these either. When buying frozen
can return if it fails to kill. The food should continue
mice, always buy dark mice which will be readily
to be put out until the bird has definitely left the
accepted by most new patients Aftel a few days set-
area.
tling in, the owl can be weaned onto day-old chicks,
With a tellitonial species it is preferable that it is
which are a lot cheaper.
Jetumed to where it was found. A similar method
Road-killed animals that are fresh and unpol-
of release should be adopted but with a hack box
luted will also supplement feeding of larger owls
rather than an aviary. All this is really is a scaled
like snowy o1 eagle owls if they are taken in.
down version of the aviary being made portable to
the telease site.
Barn owls lsed to be Ieleased in wired-over
RELEASE
barns where a nest box was provided for a pair of
owls. They were fed on a hack platform. Barn owls
The life of a hunting bird is not easy. For every prey
Teadily breed in captivity and so as soon as they had
animal it manages to catch many more will have
dependent young the telease flap was opened
eluded those lethal talons.
relying on the parental bond to keep the adults
When a bird of prey has been seen to exercise
retuming to feed their off-spring. It is now illgal to
without distress in a skylight aviary it may be con-
release captive bred owls unless a licence is fiist
sidered ft to release. However, there is no guaran-
obtained from the Department for Environment,
tee that it is going to survive those first tremulous
Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA).
days of freedom. An attempt to provide for the
initial release is to ^hack' the bird back to the wild.
What this in fact means is that food is made avail-
LEGISLATION
able for some days after release in the hope that the
bird tealises it is there.
Apart from the usual bird protection laws, there is
The bird should be fne. It has been able to
specific legislation relating to bam owls. They are
exercise from dusk till dawn in its aviary and will
now included on Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and
have gained enough muscle to face the rigours of
Countryside Act 1981 and cannot be Teleased
flying.
without a licence.
Much is said about using falconry techniques as
Barn owls do still turn up at rescue centres. In
opposed to aviary flying to bring a bird to fitness.
order to make sure that genuine wild barn owls
The author sees drawbacks to this view:
were not kept in captivity the now-obsolete
Licensed Rehabilitation Keepel could release any
● The bird is handled frequently and may become
casualties that were truly wild. The Licensed Reha-
too used to humans
bilitation Keeper is now teplaced with a Licensed
· The amount of exeicise it can be given is minimal
Person under Licence No. WLF 100099. Presum-
compared with the exercise it could get in a long
ably the same safeguards for wild bain owls still
aviary
apply.
· Many biids escape with jesses still attached to
As usual it is an offence to release a species not
their legs; these are death traps to a free-living
usually Tesident in Bnitain. This certainly applies to
bird and can snag on branches or fences
eagle owls but as there are snowy owls resident on
●Most owls do not relish flying during daylight
Fetlar in the Shetlands the provision probably does
hours
not apply. It would be foolish, however, to release
166
Practical Wildlife Care
any snowy owl other than the very occasional,
neck speed on to larger birds such as wood
genuine wild casualty.
pigeons. It is also recently moving into towns and
power stations where it uses the high buildings as
Part II: Diurnal Birds of Prey
convenient nest sites.
· The red kite is still resident in Wales and is the
subject of a re-introduction programme 1un by
Species seen regularly:
English Nature in England. It is slowly becoming
Kestrel (Falco tinnunculus), spallowhawk (Accip-
established in some parts of Britain where it can
iter nisus), buzzard (Buteo buteo), hobby (Falco
be seen majestically 1iding on air currents. Red
subbuteo), meilin (Falco columbarius) and pere-
kites are thought to be purely scavengers but
gTine falcon (Falco peregrinus).
here in the Chiltein Hills they have been seen to
Other species:
take small prey and, often to their detriment,
Red kite (Milvus milvus), hainiers (Circus spp),
regularly visit some gardens for the inappro-
goshawk(Accipiter gentilis),eagle (Aquila chrysae-
priate offerings of some householders (see
tos) and osprey (Pandion haliaetus).
Metabolic bone disease below).
· Harriers, goshawks and eagles are birds of the
Temotest areas and are not likely to need rescue
NATURAL HISTORY
· Ospreys are highly specialised fish eaters with
The diurnal birds of prey hunt or scavenge for theit
only one ever having been presented for
food during the hours of daylight. Like the corvids,
rehabilitation in this country, as far as the author
they have evolved in their own environmental
is aware. There is a wealth of experience in
miches and tend not to compete with other species
Amenica if one should fall sick or injured.
in their hunting areas:
· The kestrel hovers while hunting for small
mammals and the occasional bid in open areas,
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
especially along roads and motorways
Very similar equipment to that needed for owls is
· The sparrowhawk hunts biids up to the size of a
suitable fo1 most diurnal bids of prey. However, if
wood pigeon by fast acrobatic fying in wood
eagles, goshawks and ospreys are involved then
edges and hedgerows It will also hunt over
much thicker gloves and larger catrying boxes are
garden bird tables.
essential.
· The buzzard, at the moment plentiful in the West
Country, Wales, Scotland and the North, is
spreading Tapidly over the rest of Britain. It is a
large bird that will hunt large mammals like
RESCUE AND HANDLING
rabbits but will also scavenge 1oad kills and
follow the plough for any invertebrates turned
Once again simila1 to that required for owls but
up.
sometimes some of these birds are escapees. These
● The hobby is a true migrant that hunts bids,
may often respond to a day-old chick being waved
mainly swallows and martins. It follows these
in the air.
hirundines to Britain in the summer and to South
Extreme care is needed in handling these birds,
Afnica for the winter. It will also hawk insects
especially the larger ones It is said that a strong
such as dragonflies.
man cannot dislodge the murderous grip of a
· The merlin is now very scarce and confined to the
goshawk. Hold the legs of all these birds so that
high moo1land of Wales, Scotland and Northein
Ainful Aue asneo oi Aiumoddo aui iae jou op Aan
England
Sparrowhawks, goshawks and ospreys are par-
● The peregrine is said to be the fastest of all biids.
ticularly nervous and fare better if their heads
It is a bird of the mountains, moors and sea cliffs
are covered and they are canTied in darkened
where it will stoop from a great height at break-
boxes.
BirdsofPrey
167
COMMON DISEASES
In the wild these biids are resistant to disease but
in a Tescue situation the conditions commonly seen
can include:
 Syngamiasis in all species
 Trichomoniasis in spallowhawks and red kites
● Helminth parasites in all species
· Avian pox in all species
Other diseases in the wild are comparatively rare.
Metabolic bone disease
Sometimes people misguidedly find and take on the
learing of young or neonate biids of prey. Often
they will feed a pure meat diet without the bone,
fur and feather necessary for the building of a fim
bony skeleton. The Tesult is an imbalance of calcium
and phosphorus, which leads to poorly calcifed
Fig. 18.6 This kestrel has been hand-reared on an inap-
-sip io paaino se Aei-x uo uaas aq ueo siuL sauoq
propriate diet.
torted long bones and even spontaneous fractures
of the long bones.
The condition
1 is probably not Teveisible
although early cases may respond to a balanced diet
police Wildlife Liaison Officer and poisoning to the
with an additional calcium/phosphorus supple-
Wildlife Incident Unit of DEFRA on Freephone
ment. However, by then the biid is usually inca-
0800 321 600.
pable even of standing and should be destroyed on
humane grounds (Fig. 18.6).
Starvation
Sadly, as the red kite population increases, pa1-
ticularly around the Chiltern Hills, many birds have
In autumn, sub-adult kestrels are often found starv-
taken to responding to bird-table offerings. Unfor-
ing and weak. This is probably because they have
tunately, some of these ale merely meat without the
not mastered the technical skill of hunting for live
essential fur, bone or feather. Evidence that this
prey. On admission they should receive the stan-
poo1 diet is affecting the kites is now starting to
dard protocol to deal with starvation used for owls
emerge (Fort, 2003).
in a similar predicament.
It is probably best to keep the Tecovered birds in
a skylight aviary until the spring when the wild food
COMMON INCIDENTS
available is on the increase. Hacking back from the
skylight aviary will give them a chance to return if
As seen in owl casualties, there is the usual range
they have not been able to kill.
of collision traumas from kestrels being hit by cars
and spalrowhawks fying into windows to red kites
and peregrines getting caught in barbed-wire fences
COMMON INJURIES
(Fig. 18.7).
Most other incidents are the result of illegal
There will be the usual range of fractures and lac-
activity, with casualties being intentionally shot or
erations as those expenienced by the owls. Spa1-
poisoned. Any such incidents should be reported to
Towhawk casualties, however, are almost invaniably
the authorities immediately: shooting to the local
head trauma cases from fying into windows. Even
168
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 18.7 Red kite with wing destroyed on a barbed wire fence
if the bird is found unconscious with a faccid neck.
A broken feather can be extended by cutting a
it will still be classed as head trauma since necks are
V shape in the broken end of the feather. A small
not usually damaged in this type of collision (Klem,
sliver of wood, the diameter of the inside of the
1989).
feather shaft, is then glued into the shaft with half
 Particularly crucial in birds of prey is that they
of it exposed. Another feathel, which may be an old
Tecover 100% of thei1 plumage and 100% of their
moulted feathel, a feather from another species O1
ability to fy and manoeuvre. In captivity they ale
even a chicken feather, is found to match the size
very likely to damage their feathers, making their
and shape of the original feather. The proximal end
rehabilitation programme a priority to get them
is cut off in a V shape to match the existing frag-
Teleased as soon as possible.
 ment on the bird. The prosthesis is then glued over
the exposed wooden peg. This make do’ feather
Feather damage
will then serve the bird until the next moult
(Fig. 18.8)
Sometimes feathers, which must be perfect in birds
of prey before their release, are broken o1 bent.
Bent feathers
Missing feathers will grow fairly quickly but a
broken or bent feather will be an impediment to the
A bent feather will have a weakness where it is
bird's hunting capability until the next moult. Tail
CTeased. Pulling the feather stiaight and applying
feathers of in-patient birds of prey can be protected
glue from a hot glue gun to the crease will give
by sheathing them in heavy paper or X-ray film
the feather enough stability until the next moult
taped to the feathers above the tail (Arent &
(Plate 31).
Martell, 1996).
Bumt feathers
Broken feathers
More incidents of birds of prey fying into power
There is a system of repairing bird of prey feathers
lines and getting burnt feathers are being seen par-
called imping, which can sometimes help to get a
ticularly as the buzzard population spreads (Plate
bid released with an adequate feather covering.
47). Bumt feathers can be plucked under anaesthetic.
BirdsofPrey
169
A piece of stick is glued
into the shaft of the broken feather
Fig. 18.8 How to repair a feather by imping
Eye injuries
Injuries to the eyes must be refenred to the
veterinary surgeon for immediate diagnosis and
treatment.
A diurnal bird of prey should never be released
aftet the loss of one eye or any impairment of its
binocular vision (Fig. 18.9).
Leg injuries
2q l0u pnom Aaid jo pq e jeqi Aom e s are
Fig. 18.9 A kestrel with one eye is not suitable for
able to cope with the loss of one leg. True,it would
release.
lose its hunting capability but even in captivity the
pressure placed on the surviving leg would predis-
pose to bumblefoot. Coles (1997) assured us that
the smaller birds, kestrels and merlins, cope very
Following treatment in the smaller species there
well. With the larger species it can be tried but if it
may be a Tisk of local thrombosis leading to a
fails the bird cannot be left to suffer the chronic
vascula1 necrosis of toes Aspirin can be given at
implications of bumblefoot.
10mg/kg daily to avoid this problem (J. Lewis,
Sadly we are also seeing wild birds of prey falling
pers. comm.).
to the chronic affects of bumblefoot. Sometimes
there has been injury to the bird's other leg, pre-
disposing to excess pressure on the remaining leg
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
(Plate 48). If the injury to the non-affected leg
cannot be overcome, or if the bumblefoot itself
Admission of diurnal birds of prey is very much the
cannot be cleared, then the bird should
be
same as for owls. However, intravenous infusion of
euthanased.
fuids is much more practical in some of the larger
All cases of bumblefoot must be refelred to the
birds.
veterinary surgeon to identify the causative agent
LO
admission
spallowhawks benefit
from
and a treatment protocol.
diazepam at 10 mg/kg intramuscularly.
170
Practical Wildlife Care
CAGING
RELEASE
Caging is similar to that required for owls with,
The same techniques of hacking lsed for owls are
obviously, much larger skylight avianies required
 also appropniate for diumal birds of prey. Howevel,
for the largest species.
particula1 attention must be paid to the location of
Spalrowhawks will fare better if the fronts of any
local species and concurrence with the migration
cages are 75% covered to give them the privacy this
timing of hobbies or ospreys. Red kites should be
excitable species needs.
Teleased through English Nature's Te-introduction
p1ogramme (Appendix 7), except if they have
been lescued from a specific area Tecently
FEEDING
(Plate 49)
These tequirements are similar to those of owls
in that whole animals are necessary to provide a
LEGISLATION
complete diet. Eventually it is convenient to wean
all species onto easily-obtained day-old chicks 01
All birds of prey are protected by the Wildlife and
chickens and rabbits for the larger birds. In order
Countryside Act 1981. Some are on Schedule 4
to get the birds eating in the first place, give them
which means they should be passed to a Licensed
food they will recognise. For instance:
Person who then has to notify DEFRA within four
days and tegister the bird if it is likely to be in
· Kestrels - dark mice
captivity for longe1 than 15 days (Plate 50).
●Spatrowhawks, hobbies, merlins 
drug-free
Species likely to be involved are: hobby, merlin,
small garden birds that have died from trauma
Ted kite, peregrine, goshawk, golden eagle, harniers
not disease
and osprey. Fo1 rarer species please Tefe1 to the full
●Buzzards - rabbits, including Toad kills
list of Schedule 4 species in Appendix 3, and to Fig.
· Peregrine - frozen pigeons or pheasants
11.7 fo1 1egistration with DEFRA.
● Red kite - rabbits, including road kills
It is illegal in this country to offer live vertebrate
 prey to birds and mammals in captivity.
19
Seabirds
Most incidents affecting sea-going birds are gener-
all wildlife rehabilitation was plagued with a low
ally Telated to contamination with oil. Other
success rate, but by keeping thei1 minds open and
incidents do occur but their impact is occasional
challenging preconceived notions about the care of
and most are beyond our intervention, e-g. massive
wildlife, the Tehabilitators have succeeded in
die-offs with starvation through dwindling fish
Teversing the trend.
stocks.
More Tesearch into the treatment of oiled biids
is still needed. Reviews of the American experi-
ence, certainly with the Exxon Valdez spill in
PART I: OIL AND OTHER POLLUTION
Alaska (1989) with a great deal of medical investi-
gation into pre-release conditioning of the birds
Major oil spills affecting hundreds, o1 even thou-
affected with oil, has firmly established the rehabili-
sands, of seabirds are highly documented and
tation of oiled birds (or mammals) as a medical
Teported in the media. The 1esponse to this type of
procedure not just a cleaning process In this
disaster is the province of highly organised rehabil-
se spiq palo piegai lms op sdnoia Aueu Arjunon
itation groups and, although based on the same pro-
simply requining cleaning, but now, with the input
tocol discussed in this chapter, is beyond the remit
of this book.
veterinary surgeons, the medical issues are statting
Many people do not realise that the treatment of
to be given their deserved prionity.
oiled biids is not just an occasional media circus.
Before any oiled bird can receive the treatment
Birds are falling foul of oil every day of every yeat
it needs, there has to be in place a sequential pr0-
and each one of these birds needs the specialised
tocol and a set of suitable equipment and medica-
treatments developed by rehabilitators since the
ments (Table 19.1).
Torrey Canyon disaster in 1967 when only 2% of
the casualties were cleaned, treated or released.
It is not just seabirds that become contaminated
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
with oil: here, in the centre of England, we have
seen robins, kestrels, pigeons, swans, ducks, wagtails,
The protocol fo1 dealing with birds affected by oil
spalrows and even hedgehogs covered in oil. Each
O1 other pollutants can be established by means of
was treated using the same protocol used on marine
a fow chart that is easily accessible and can even
biids such as auks and seaducks.
be incorporated into the bid's record card. The
Britain is still evolving a truly successful oiled-
suggested flow chart (Fig. 19.1) can be printed on
biid rehabilitation p1ogramme. In 1991, the late
the back of the individual card so that every biid
Chnis Mead, the Senior Ringing Offcer with the
has with it a record of its progress through the
Bnitish Trust for Omithology (BTO), said: ^All ou1
system. The letters denoted in brackets in the head-
experience with the Tehabilitation of oiled biids
ings below refer to the various procedures given in
points towards a low success rate'. In the beginning
Fig. 19.1.
171
172
Practical Wildlife Care
Table 19.1 Suggested equipment and drugs list for
therefore, to wea1 protective gloves and observe
birds affected by oil.
health and safety regulations.
All seabids have sharp beaks and some, like
Equipment
Cloacal thermometer
those of gannets (Fig. 19.2) and cormorants, can
Haematocrit centrifuge
cause serious injury. Whenever handling seabids
Haematocrit reader
do take extreme care to contiol the heads and
Scales
therefore the ability of the bird to bite, stab or slash.
Heat lamps
Oil on a bird's feathers predisposes to:
Disposables
Intravenous infusion sets
·Destruction of the waterproofing and insulating
 [ntravenous catheters and butterfly sets 20-27g
Spinal needles 20-26g
properties of the plumage
Hypodermic needles 21-27g
· The birds will be chilled, unable to stay afloat or
Syringes 1-20ml
fly
Feeding syringes 50 ml
· They will have been unable to feed due to thei1
Urethral catheters
disabilities and the effect of oil on their food
Paper bootee covers
Plain capillary tubes
Cardboard boxes
For these teasons the bird must be taken to a
Gauze swabs
fiust-aid facility without delay. The chemistry of
Plastic numbered rings assorted sizes
hypothermia is little understood, so if this can be
Record cards
prevented, o1 at least caught early, the bird may
Tie-on labels
Clinical waste bags
stand a chance of overcoming all the inteinal prob-
Sharps bins
lems that oil can cause.
Vinyi gloves and aprons
Drugs
Field first aid (C)
Oral rehydration salts - Lectade (Pfizer)
Hartmann's solution
Field first aid is that first response to steady a bid
Amino acids and vitamins - Duphalyte (Fort Dodge
almost while it is still at the waterside. Apart from
Animal Health)
Vitamin B, (Thiamine) - Fish Eaters' Tablets (Mazuri
the exteinal deprivation of oiling, the inteinal
Zoo Foods), Aquavits (IZVG)
damage is far more life-threatening and needs to be
 Kaolin and neomycin - Kaobiotic? tablets (Pharmacia
Teversed, or limited as soon as possible, to give the
Animal Health)
bird any chance of recovery.
Activated charcoal and bismuth - Forgastrin (Amolds
The bird with oil on its feathers is going to preen
Veterinary Products)
Salt tablets (IZVG) - Slow Sodium (Novartis)
in a vain attempt to restructure the feathers and
Water-based eye drops - Hypromellose (Millpledge
thei1 waterproofing and insulating properties. All it
Veterinary)
will succeed in doing is ingesting oil and oil fumes.
Iron dextran - Veterinary Iron Injection (Armolds
The effect on the bird can be catastrophic and may
Veterinary Products)
include:
Liquid nutrition - Poly-Aid (Vetafarm Europe)
Liquid nutrition - Ensure (Abbott Laboratories)
· Haemorthage and ulceration of the gastroin-
testinal tract with a severe loss of digestive and
absorptive ability
●Inmitation and ulceration to the eyes
· Damage to the trachea and even oil aspiration
Rescue (B)
are not uncommon
Rescue of oiled birds should be with large nets. It
· Kidney damage can be severe and fatal
is important to approach the casualty from the sea
Affected birds have weakened immune systems
Or water edge to cut off any escape route.
that can allow the progress of fungal and bacte-
The birds will be contaminated with some sort of
nial infections
petroleum product or crude oil which could have
The destruction of red blood cells leading to
toxic, o1 at least irnitant, properties. It is important,
debilitating anaemias
Oiled bird
B
Rescue
Clean nares, eyes,
mouth with swabs
C
Gavage warm
Field first aid
rehydration fluids
D
Apply paper poncho
Keep wam to avoid
Transport to
hypothermia
 medical facility
 Put in individual
cardboard boxes
At Medical Facility
Identification
F
Record card and
G
identification ring
Dead on arrival
H
Triage by
Freezer
experienced person,
veterinary nurse or
surgeon 
Priority 2
Priority 1
Priority 3
Birds with signs of
Those birds with the
Those birds with
toxicity or additional
best chance of survival
severe injuries and
injuries
little chance of survival
Wipe off nares, eyes,
Initial treatment 
Intensive care
 mouth with swabs
Veterinary surgeon
Infuse intravenous fluids
K
Euthanasia
Weigh
Place birds in
warm recovery area
Take cloacal temperature
Apply water-based eye
In 4-6 hours when
Gavage warm fluids and
drops
(M
nutrition
Report to
bird is stable
GiveKaobiotic(Pharmacia
veterinary surgeon
Take PCV
Animal Health
 Start prophylactic
Monitor total plasma
N
protein
Cleaning station
itraconazole for marine
birds
Fig. 19.1 Flow chart for emergency procedures to deal with birds affected by oil or other pollutant.
174
Practical Wildlife Care
facility. If the weather is cold, hot water bottles
covered with towels will prevent hypothermia
affecting the coldest birds. Hot water bottles
can be improvised out of empty plastic lemon-
ade bottles filled with warm watel.
Transport to the main medical facility (D)
After the birds have received their fist aid they
should be taken to the main medical facility as
quickly as possible. This main facility is not neces-
sarily the cleaning station,as any washing should be
delayed until the birds are pronounced stable and
fit for handling.
Fig. 19.2 The gannet, like the cormorant, has a poten-
Many oiled biids succumb to hypotheimia
tially dangerous beak
during this transfer from the waterside to intensive
care. Hopefully the fist aid they should have
Teceived will piovide strength fo1 the journey, but
even then, if the vehicle is cold, there will be less
All of these processes will have to be dealt with
biids to receive intensive care unless extra warmth
at a treatment facility, but first aid at the waterside
is provided.
will start the treatment process and will help any
If the journey is longer than one hour the hot
bid survive until it can get more intensive assess-
water bottles should be teplenished and the birds
ment and treatment.
checked every 60 minutes.
Simple procedures should be callied out on
every live bid presented for first aid:
Identification (E)
(1) The bird's mouth, nares and eyes should be
wiped clean with gauze swabs
At the medical facility the birds should be admit-
(2) A few drops of aqueous eye drops, Hypromel-
ted quickly. They must be identified by a person
 lose (Millpledge Veterinary), will help lubricate
with knowledge of the different species even if
the eyes
their distinguishing plumage is heavily disguised
(3) Gavage
with
warmed ehydration
Huid
with oil.
(Lectade
Pfizer)
at10%
estimated
Species of seabiid normally seen include: gulls
bodyweight
(Larus sp.), seaducks, guillemots (Uria sp.), 1azor-
(4) Gavage bismuth and activated charcoal solu-
bills (Alca torda), puffins (Fratercula arctica), little
tion (Forgastrin - Arnolds Veterinary Prod-
auks (Alle alle), gannets (Sula bassana), shags (Pha
ucts) at 5ml/kg, or a new product consisting
lacrocorax aristotelis),cormorants (P carbo) and
of liguid activated charcoal - Liqui-Char-Vet
petrels (Hydrobates pelagicus).
(Ainolds Veterinary Products), could comple-
 ment a bismuth preparation - Pepto-Bismol
Record card and identity ring (F)
(Procte1 & Gamble): (3) and (4) can be com-
bined in one sytinge
Each bird should be given an admittance code
(5) To prevent the biid ingesting more oil through
number that coincides with a consecutively num
preening it can be covered with a poncho
bered plastic leg ling. For each bird a tecord card
fashioned from disposable paper
surgical
(Fig. 19.3) should be made out recoiding the date
theatre bootees. Anything thicker may lead to
and time of arrival, the species, its consecutive
hyperthermia.
number and the leg on which the Ting is fitted.
(6) The bird is then put into an individual card-
The Tecord card will remain with the bird until
board box fo1 transport to the main treatment
either its demise o1 telease.
Seabirds
175
 St Tiggywinkles Oiled Bird Record Card
Date:
Time:
Alive/Dead
Consecutive no.
Species:
Name of rescuer:
Place of rescue:
Triage examined:
Priority 1
Priority 2
Priority 3
Medical record:
Has First Aid Been Provided:
Yes/No
Initial examination
Time
Examiner
Degree of oiling:
None/Light/Moderate/Heavy
Respiration:
Shallow/Laboured/Normal
Neurological signs
Mucous Membranes
Other injuries
Treatments
Intravenous fluids:
Yes/No
Quantity
Date
Time
Drugs
Weight
Cloacal
PCV
TPP
temperature
On admittance
Veterinary Surgeon Certificate
Bird is to be:
Washed/Continue treatment/Euthanased
Signed
Date:
Time:
Fig. 19.3 Record card suitable for an oiled bird.
176
Practical Wildlife Care
Dead on arrival (G)
with 10% Duphalyte (Fort Dodge Animal
Birds which are pronounced dead on arnival should
morants are particulaily susceptible to dehy-
still have record cards made out and a tie-on label
dration and should receive twice as much fuid
giving a consecutive number. They will be stored in
as other species
a deep freeze for future reference or post mortem.
(4) Its cloacal temperature is recorded; normal
Often in oil spills where there are multiple deaths
temperatures are 39-41°C
and casualties some immediate post-mortem Te-
(5) Any bind is given Kaobiotic? (Phaimacia
sults may provide guidance on the physiological
Animal Health) in tablet format a rate of one
effects of the pollutant.
whole tablet per 4kg, continued daily until
there is no trace of blood or oil in the droppings
Triage (H)
(6) All oiled seabids are going to be more sus-
ceptible to the Iavages of aspergillosis. Along
Tiage should be by an expetienced person who will
with other daily treatments should be the
Joughly assess the condition of the bird.A bird, o1
prophylactic administration of itraconazole
bids if there are more than one, can then be cate-
(Sporanox? - Janssen Animal Health) (see
gorised as Prionity 1, 2 or 3:
Chapter 9) or Itrafungol? (Janssen Animal
Health) at 10mg/kg daily as a preventative
· Priority I - Biids with the best chance of survival.
and 20 mg/kg twice daily.
They can be passed straight on for their initial
teatments.
· Priority 2 - Birds with signs of toxicity and addi-
Recovery (K)
tional injunies. They will take a little more time
The birds are then placed in a recovery area with
to treat and stabilise but should respond to the
Overhead heating. They must be able to get away
standard initial treatment protocol.
from the heat if they wish (Plate 32).
● Priority 3 - Birds with little chance of survival.
They can be monibund and have severe injuries.
These are candidates for intensive care under the
Second treatment and assessment (L)
After 4-6 hours of recuperation:
supervisor. A trauma team should be kept on
standby just for these, almost hopeless, cases.
· The birds should be gavaged with warm fuids
Birds in this category may also be beyond help
(Lectade - Pfze1) and liquid nutrition (Poly-
and can be destroyed humanely under the
Aid - Vetafarm Europe or Ensure - Abbott
imstruction of the veterinary surgeon.
Laboratories)
· Blood samples should be taken to calculate the
packed cell volume (PCV) and total plasma
Initial treatment (J)
protein (TPP)
On being passed through from triage, the Priority
1 and Priority 2 birds will receive standardised
The PCV is useful in assessing whether the bird
treatments:
is anaemic. Initially, when the bird is dehydrated, it
will show an elevated PCV which may be disguis-
(1) Initially their nares, mouth and eyes will be
ing anaemia.As the bird is rehydrated the PCV will
checked and cleaned again with
1galize
drop sometimes as low as under 10%. Depending
swabs. Aqueous eye drops (Hypromellose -
upon the PCV:
Millpledge Veterinary) will be diopped into
both eyes to keep them lubricated after they
· Birds with a PCV of 25% o1 less are not washed
have been flushed with warm sterile saline.
until it tises back to normal
(2) Any bird is now weighed
· Birds with a PCV of 16% o1 less would beneft
(3) Any biid will be provided with intravenous OT
from blood (USA) or plasma transfusions, if
imtraosseous fuids, Hartmann's solution laced
these were available
Seabirds
177
· Any bird showing signs of anaemia should be
● Constant hot running water at 42°C
given an intramuscular injection of iron dextran
·Fairy Liquid (Procter & Gamble)or Co-op
at 10 mg/kg every 5-7 days
Green washing-up liquid
The TPP for birds is usually 30-50 g/l and simi-
Fairy Liquid (Procte1 & Gamble) is the tried and
larly no bird should be washed if its plasma solid
 tested product for use in washing oiled birds. Co-op
values are below 20 g/l.
Green washing-up liquid is as useful. Any other
Weight, temperature, PCV and TPP are from
product will not work as well. Invariably during any
then on monitored every day.
major oil spill people will turn up with their
'wonde1 product' to try on oiled birds. They neve1
Veterinary surgeon (M)
seem to work, so you may lose valuable time in
experimenting with them.
The information gained is then passed to the vet-
erinary surgeon for assessment and direction as to
The theory behind washing
the next course of treatment.
The purpose of washing an oiled bird is to remove
the oil, or other product, from the feathers with
Cleaning (N)
Fairy Liquid. However, the detergent is as detti-
After the assessment the bird will be passed on to
mental to the feathers as the oil is. So once the oil
the wash station to be cleaned. It should be alert,
has been removed any Tesidual detergent has to be
Tesponsive and stable.Any doubts must be refelled
ninsed off with clean, hot water. Only then will the
back to the veterinary surgeon.
feather structure fall into place once more.
Structure of feathers
Washing procedure
 Jo saradoid suensu pue suyooidiaien a
In preparation fo1 washing just one oiled bird, set
feathers are provided by the structure of the
up two tubs of hot water (42°C), with a 2% solu-
feather. The feather barbs are held together by
tion of Fairy Liquid in each. Next to them have
small hooked structures called barbules. The barbs
another tub of hot watel at 42°C but this time it is
are situated along the shafts of the feather. When
clean water. After these three tubs should be a
the feathers overlay each other the whole con-
Tinsing facility with a spray nozzle of constant, clean
struction provides an impenetrable layer that keeps
hot watel, again at 42°℃.
water out and body heat in. A bird has to lose heat
 It will take two people to wash birds the size of
through its open mouth or by futtering the gular
guillemots or ducks but a third person should assist
Tegion in its throat.
with larger bids such as gannets or swans (Fig.
There is no natural oil involved, so a bird that has
19.4). The procedure to follow is:
lost its waterproofing has not lost the oil ofits feath-
ers as is often supposed. The preen oil a bird takes
(1) Place the bird in the first tub of hot wate1,
from its preen (uropygial) gland is more of a con-
holding all but its head underwater for ten
ditioner than anything else.
seconds. Then, while one person holds the bird,
The effect of crude oil o1 petroleum products on
the other ladles the hot water over it, rubbing
the feathers is to break down the structure of the
it in in the direction of the feathers.
barbs and barbules allowing water and cold to pen-
(2) The head can be cleaned with a toothbrush
etrate the coat of the feathers. Hence many birds
dipped in detergent
affected by oil are not waterproof, cannot swim and
(3) When the water is totally fouled the bird is
are often hypothermic.
lfted into the second tub and the procedure
repeated
Washing
(4) Finally it is doused in the third tub for a pre-
liminary tinsing, taken out and held while the
Equipment needed:
hot wate1 spray, at 42°C, is jetted up unde1 all
178
Practical Wildlife Care
the feathers on each part of the bird. This is the
because any drop of detergent left on the feath-
cTucial part of the operation as, slowly, the
ers will be a weak point allowing water in and
detergent is rinsed away and the feathers start
under the plumage.
to Iegain their properties. After a while the
feathers will become drier and the water will
 If at any time the bird appears stressed it should
bead up and run off (Fig. 19.5). The ninsing has
be quickly dried off with a towel and returned to its
to proceed until the whole of the bird is dry.
 pen. Another attempt at cleaning it could be made
This can take some time but it is essential
on the following day.
Fig. 19.4 Washing an oiled guillemot.
Fig. 19.5 The water will bead on feathers
as they are rinsed dry.
Seabirds
179
Drying period
involved in dealing with cleaning the victims of oil,
Elf Aquitaine has designed a machine that can
The birds can then be put into a room with over-
provide washing of oiled birds without unnecessary
head lamps under which they can preen. Drinking
handling (Fig. 19.6).
water should be available and they must be able to
The system is designed to clean Alcidae (auks)
move away from the heat if they wish.
Spueis e ul shes e ul paoe[d st pq aul Aoajiad
All water birds are susceptible to bumblefoot
position with opened wings Its head is kept outside
and will benefit from soft fooring such as foam
of the cleaning area. The cage is then put into the
Tubber or calf mats.
cleaning and rinsing tank in which the cleaning
Many of the birds will eat at this time and can be
solution and then Tinsing water are programmed to
offered suitable diets, mostly fish.
suit particular birds. The cleaning is by nozzles,
The United State Fish and Wildlife Service, through
which are mounted on 1otating shafts, spraying
a coalition of expenienced Amenican oiled bird reha-
liquids under pressure.
bilitators, has p1oduced (Novembe1 2003) the com-
The process is very similar to hand-washing an
prehensive ‘Best Practices fo1 Migratory Bird Care
oiled bird but takes only ten minutes, a fraction
during Oil Spill Resource'. The 82-page document
of the time normally taken and does not involve
can be downloaded from the US. Fish and Wildlife
handling by two or more people.
Service web site at www.contaminants.fwsgov.
This author hasn't seen the machine in use, but it
would seem to be less stressful to the birds than
hand-washing and rehabilitators find that the fnal
ElfAquitaine bird-washing apparatus
ninse leaves a totally oil- and detergent-free bird
In view of the man-hours and stress to birds
(J. De Boer, personal communication).
Fg. 19.6 The washing machine for
birds designed by Elf Aquitaine (photo:
日f Aquitaine)
180
Practical Wildlife Care
RECUPERATION
sardines. Howevel, any small whole fish are
suitable.
Feed
Most of the seabirds encountered are fish eaters
Swimming
and can be maintained in captivity on a fish diet as
The next stage is for the birds to swim, which in turn
long as they also receive supplements of Fish
will encourage them to preen, which in its turn
Eaters' Tablets (Mazuni Zoo Foods) o1 Aquavits
Te-aligns their vital feather structure.
(IZVG). Stoskopf and Kennedy-Stoskopf (1986)
Tecommended the provision of salt to prevent
Indoorswimming
atiophy of the salt glands in some susceptible
species (see Salt, below).
An indoor pool is most suitable for the first swims
Initially all birds will need force feeding, but
as at one end, over a climb-out platform, heat lamps
some will leain to take fish straight from a bowl of
can be suspended where any birds feeling cold can
cold water or from thei1 swimming area (Fig. 19.7).
stand and preen.
Generally, a bird's body temperature should be
A simple pool of any size can be made from sheets
38°C before it can digest whole fish properly. As a
of 30mm plywood as a frame overlain with a butyl
general rule a seabird's proventriculus has the
pond liner. Steps can be made at one end to form a
capacity to accept whole fish at 50ml/kg of the
haul-out platform as initially the birds will not want
bird's bodyweight (Stoskopf & Kennedy-Stoskopf,
 to spend that much time in the water (Fig. 19.8).
1986). Whole fish ale the most suitable fo1 force
feeding.
Outside swimming
Once again it is a two-person task; one holds the
biid while the other pulls open both halves of the
Once the birds look comfortable in the inside pool
beak. The fish, cold, is then pushed head first into
they can be introduced to an outside pool on similar
the throat and the beak held closed. The bird should
lines. The overhead lamps should no longer be
be seen swallowing. The Fish Eaters’ Tablets
needed.
(Mazuri Zoo Foods), Aquavits (IZVG) or any
The birds will swim but regularly climb out to
other medication can be secreted in the gills of the
 preen. It is important to keep a close watch on the
fish.
bids at this stage in case any of them becomes
Suitable for most seabirds, and easily obtainable
waterlogged o1 cold. These should go back to the
from fishmongers, are: sprats, sand eels, herring and
indoor pool for a few more days.
Fig. 19.7 Common scoter (Melanitta
nigra) will take fish, shrirmps and mussels
from a bowl.
Seabirds
181
Overheadheat lamp
Haul-out shelf
Butyl liner
Wooden sides
Fig. 19.8 A simple pool design.
Eventually the birds should be able to swim for
+Cormorants
at least 30 minutes without any sign of getting wet.
Gannets
● Some gulls
▪Pelicans
Salt
·Penguins
Marine birds in captivity are generally kept on
·Petrels
freshwater pools. These birds have salt glands which
· Some phalaropes
will atrophy if there is no salt for them to excrete.
·Shearwaters
To maintain the integrity of the salt glands these
· Storm petrels
biids should receive doses of salt tablets specially
formulated for marine animals. Only birds with salt
Release
glands should be given salt supplements as the sup-
plements would be toxic to othe1 birds (Salt Tablets
Much has been cniticised about the lelease of
- IZVG). Below is a list of birds with salt glands:
cleaned birds. The author's opinion is that they are
often released too early. Judging by the severe
·Auks
damage inflicted on a bird's intemal organs by oil
·Albatrosses
ingestion, birds should be kept until the veterinary
182
PracticalWildlifeCare
surgeon can confirm by blood tests that as far as is
Table 19.2 Guide weights for regularly-stranded pelagic
possible the bird is fit for release. It is very difficult
species (Perrins, 1987).
to keep seabirds even as long as six weeks and with
Bird
Bodyweight
divers it is impossible, but the longer they are
monitored and remaining comfortable the more
Red-throated diver (Gavia
1500 g (f)-1750 g (m)
chance they have of surviving in the wild.
stellata)
However, in captivity, these birds’ feet are going
Black-throated diver (Gavia
2500g (f)-3500g (m)
arctica)
to deteniorate. Giving them constant access to clean
Great northerm diver (Gavia
3800g
water and a fresh grass base will give them a better
immer)
chance of maintaining foot condition. Any creams
Fulmar (Futmarus glacialis)
700-900 g
put on to the feet must be water based and easily
Manx shearwater (Puffinus
350-450g
soluble or else the feathers will become contami-
puffinus)
Gannet (Sula bassana)
2800-3200g
nated all over again.
Shag (Phalacrocorax aristotelis)
1750-2250g
When the veterinary surgeon finally declares
Guillemot (Uria aaige)
850-1130g
them fit for release they should be taken to a suit-
Razorbill (Alca torda)
500-750g
able waterfront and be allowed to walk into the
Black guillemot (Cepphus grille)
340-490 g
Little auk (Alle alle)
130-190g
water. Do not throw them off cliffs and do not cast
Puffin (Fratercula arctica)
320-550g
them adrift from boats.
The South Devon Seabird Trust is having good
Tesults for their released seabirds, particularly
these birds, are grossly underweight with some of
guillemots, the most regularly-oiled of all seabirds.
Their attitude is positive in that every bird should
them having lost their waterproofing.
Also being pelagic birds they are
be given a chance to tecover and should not be
primecan-
Teleased until it is fully fit, inside and out, even if
didates for aspergillosis and should be treated
that means a long time in captivity (Bradford, 2001).
prophylactically with itraconazole (Itrafungol?
Janssen Animal Health) at 20 mg/kg twice daily.
The 1outine for a crashed pelagic bird should be,
PART II: OTHER INCIDENTS
on admission:
INVOLVING SEABIRDS
● Weigh the biid and compare with mean weights
for that species
Apart from gulls (Larus spp) being injured and sus-
●Provide fluid therapy
taining fractures, the only other regular incidents
· Dose with itraconazole
involving seabirds are crashes.
Black-headed gulls often fracture a wing with
Then put on a regime of:
disastrous consequences as they will continue to
use it until it is hopelessly mangled (Plate 51). It is
· Daily force-feeding if necessary to bring the
essential to deal with their fractures on admittance
weight up
as any delay may mean that even the few who could
● Twice daily dose of itraconazole
Tecover might not.
· Salt Tablets (IZVG)
Crashes tend to occur (
duning the autumn or
●Fish Eaters’ Tablets (Mazuri Zoo Foods) OT
when there are particularly stormy gales. They seem
Aquavits (IZVG)
to affect the pelagic birds, which are not normally
● Regular swimming to keep plumage in service
seen inland, but these crashes can occur anywhere
in Britain. The birds affected seem to crash land and
When the bird is waterproof and of a weight
are unable to take off again (Plate 52).
simila1 to a normal wild bird (Table 19.2) it should
Expelience has shown that most, if not all of
be teleased off a suitable coastline.
20
Hand-rearing Orphaned Birds
Even before contemplating
hand-rearingan
· The fedglings are of a species known to be
orphaned wild bird it is absolutely crucial to estab-
ignored once they have left the nest prematurely,
lish that it really is an orphan and it does need help.
e.g. tawny owl, heron or swift
before they can fly. The parent birds encourage
Only if one of these conditions occurs is it app10-
their young to disperse into different hideaways
priate to intervene and pick up the fedgling fo1
where they will calry on feeding them. This is
hand-reating-
nature's way of spreading the nisk of the youngsters
getting taken by a predator. Clustered in the nest
they would be easy prey for any bid or other
animal that has detected it.
NATURAL HISTORY
This dispeisal ploy has worked for millions of
years so any youngsters in this situation should be
There are two types of baby biid, altricial o1 preco-
Jeft for theit parents to tea1. Howevet, this strategy
cial. More commonly it is the altricial birds, those
takes no account of man-introduced hazards like
that are hatched with few or no feathers, with their
cars, cats and humans themselves. Sometimes the
eyes closed and entirely dependent on their parents 
for food and warmth, that require rescuing.
fedgling bird is in even more danger out of the nest.
This is when it is wise to intervene and take on the
The other type of baby bird, the precocial chick,
task of hand-rearing.
hatches with a good coat of down feathers and an
So there are times when to intervene and times
ability to leave the nest immediately and follow its
when to leave well alone. Watching an apparent
parents. Some, like ducklings and pheasants, are
orphan from a distance, the parent biids can be
able to feed themselves while others, like moorhens
observed returning to feed their youngsters. In pat-
and partridges, will need some encouragement to
ticular young crows, 1ooks or gulls spend a lot of
feed or have food supplements from their parents.
time on the ground or beach being fed by their
Once again a precocial chick on its own is not
parents. This is perfectly natural behaviour and the
necessarily an orphan. Watching from a distance
fledglings should be left alone, except if:
the parents can be seen returning to brood their
youngsters.
· There is imminent danger from a predator
As always, however, there are exceptions to the
· There are nearby environmental hazards like
bland “leave them alone’ tule. Occasions when we
Joads o1 pools
can intervene with precocial chicks include:
· Aftel observation of about one hour the parents
do not return
● There is imminent danger from a predator or the
●The fedgling is injured in any way
environment
· The parents have definitely been
1killed OT
● There is an obvious injury to the chick
imcapacitated
●There is a straggler
183
184
Practical Wildlife Care
With large hatchings of precocial chicks, seen in
heartbreaking, work to take on the hand-reating of
clutches of birds such as ducks and pheasants, the
an orphaned wild bird. The parent biids make a
mother bird will lead the chicks away from the nest
o e l on   os l go qof rq o
to other areas. Often there appears to be a ‘tunt
adopt an orphan if there is no other way.
chick that cannot keep up with the rest and is leff
behind. This situation is very similar to the ‘starve
out' recognised by poultry pathologists occurring in
EQUIPMENT
focks of artificially-reared waterfowl (Routh &
Sanderson, 2000). This straggle1 chick is the o1phan
When taking on an orphaned wild bird it is
that is often taken to rescue centres. However, it
absolutely essential to have a stock of supplies and
appears that being left behind by the mother may
equipment to complement any of the species that
not have been an accident: these stragglers often
may turn up (Table 20.1, Appendix 6). Once people
have no idea how to feed or look after themselves.
know that you have adopted one baby bird then
Perhaps there is a genetic problem we know
many, many more will land, literally, in your lap.
nothing about. But the author knows that it is very
difficult to keep them alive.
There are three suggested stimuli that might
CAGING
encourage any ‘starve-out’ youngsters to feed
(Routh & Sanderson, 2000):
Various species Tequire different forms of caging.
Howevel, every cage should have an overhead heat
(1) Yellow and green feeds, such as grass, can be
lamp of the ceramic type that does not emit any
mixed with othe1 food offered
light. The exception to this is young collared doves,
(2) The presence of other siblings, especially if they
which must have an ultraviolet emitter (Powersun,
are eating well
see Chapte1 12). The cages should be open topped
(3) Physical  stimuli for  off-the-ground cavity
so that the birds can be fed from above, and the
nesters who might require tossing into the ait
heat should be directed to one end of the cage,
and letting fall to the ground (Kea1, 1986)
allowing mobile youngsters to move away from the
heat if they so wish (Fig 20.1).
Whatever happens, it must be remembered that
Cages available at pet stores for other animals
it is a long-term commitment to hard, and often
ale suitable for bird nurseries. Zoo Zone 1 and 2
Utensils
Supplies
Electronic or diabetic scales (increments of 1 g)
Tropican Rearing Mix (Rolf C. Hagen) available in pet stores
Shallow plastic food bowls with lids (Ashwood
Pedigree Chum Puppy food (Pedigree Masterfoods)
Timber & Plastics)
Prosecto dried insects (Haith)
Teat cannulae (.lorgensen Laboratories)
Avipro Paediatric (Vetark Animal Health)
Non-sterile syringes 1-20ml
Waxworm larvae (Mealworm Company)
Coffee stirrers (plastic)
Pancrex-Vet (Pharmacia Animal Health)
Used clean giving sets to make gavage tubes
Chick crumbs
Various mixing jugs
Paper kitchen towels
Food processor
Fridge/freezer
Plastic forceps
Feather dusters
Ceramic heat lamps
Plastic pudding bowls (for nest pans)
Clockwork alarm clock
Plastic numbered leg rings (must be removed
before birds are released)
Hand-rearingOrphanedBirds
185
i   s o   s      
Fig.20.2 Zoo Zone and Ferret Cages
by Rolf C. Hagen provide facilities for
many species of orphaned birds.
are part of the Hagen range (Rolf C. Hagen). They
Nesting altricial birds
are enclosed, with clear plastic sides and grilled top.
FeTret Cage (Small) by PetPlanet is completely
Old nests should never be used as they are likely to
metal and suitable for older orphans (Fig. 20.2).
be infested with many parasites In theit place, small
Use Tiver-washed sharp sand on the foors OI
plastic feed bowls or pudding bowls, lined with
the cages. This is easily obtainable from builders'
paper towelling, make ideal nests. Placed in an
merchants and can be changed regularly.
  o      d-
186
Practical Wildlife Care
birds with the least feathers get the most benefit
from the heat lamp (Fig. 20.3).
As they start to develop, the altricial birds will
 often get out of their nests. The sand base is going
to cause them no harm, but a few twig perches,
placed just above the sand, will give them some-
thing to stand or 1oost on.
Once they have most of their feathers they can
be moved out to a wire-topped cage without the
need for extra heat. A selection of perches will
provide exercise for both their feet and their wings.
Precocial birds
Precocial birds will not need nest pans. They will be
able to walk around and find their own food. Scat-
tering some of their feed on the sand may encour-
age them to peck at it. Howevel, a shallow bowl for
their feed will allow an estimate of how much they
are taking.
 Initially, when they are very small, a heat lamp at
one end of the cage will give them somewhere to
huddle together.
There are two tips that often encourage preco-
cial chicks to settle:
Fig. 20.3 Nest bowls for altricial species need to be
under a heat lamp.
(1) A feather duste1 stood on the feather end will
act as a sunogate mothel, especially to duck-
lings (Fig. 20.4)
Fig. 20.4 A feather duster will serve as
a surrogate mother to ducklings.
Hand-rearingOrphaned Birds
187
(2) Game bird chicks and other terrestrial biids
may well home in on a clockwork alarm clock
ticking under a feather duster
COMBINATION WATER
FOUNTAIN or FEEDER
As they move away from the heat lamp more, the
with plastic adapter
birds can be moved into wire-top cages without any
additional heating. Their feather dusters and alarm
RESERVOIRpourle
GRAIN ou TEAU
clocks should go with them.
avec agrafe en
plastique ajustable a
toutes les cages
Water
FUTTER-und
WASSERAUTOMAT
Even young water birds should not be allowed to
PASSEND fur alle
bathe until they have a substantial plumage of adult
VOGELHEIME
feathers. Giving them water to drink in a bowl may
lead to drowning o1 hypothermia. Fa1 more suitable
are budgeligar drinking fountains and, for duck,
geese and swans, the larger water bird fountains
(Fig. 20.5).
Grit
When the birds start feeding thermselves they
should have access to vanious suitable sizes of grit
HAGEN
fo1 their gizzaids. Sizes are available to suit small
bids (budgerigar grit), large bids (pigeon grit) and
Teally large birds (chicken grit). These can be pur-
open bowl and topped up as necessary.
Quarantine arrangements
Fig. 20.5 Drinking fountains (Rolf C. Hagen) prevent
small birds from drowning.
Cross infection, if there is an infection, in baby birds
is easily transmitted in the warm, humid atmos-
phere of a rearing cage. Also the use of the same
feeding utensils for different birds will readily
transmit infection from one bird to another.
ingly introduced only one day's orphans will be
In an ideal world each bird would have its own
affected. The time petiod is flexible and can be birds
cage, its own food and its own feeding utensil.
brought in ovel a week.
However, with the number of baby birds that can
The birds are then kept in the same groups all the
alTive to be reared, it is impossible to provide these
way through the system until they are weaned and
optimum conditions Some quarantine can be pro-
ready to go into outside aviaries for acclimatisation
vided,though,so that if disaster does strike its impact
before release. During their stay they will be kept
will be minimised. Being thus highlighted, emer-
to their own food supplies with their own utensils.
gency diagnosis and treatment can be altanged.
This stops infection spreading from another group.
As birds are admitted they should be split up into
groups of similar species, i.e. small garden biids
togethel, ducks togethe1, birds of prey together and
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
so on. By splitting these groups further, for instance
the garden bids into those received on a certain
At the admission stage baby birds should receive
day into one cage and those teceived on another
the same first-aid treatments as adult birds.
188
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 20.6 A fledgling long-tailed tit has almost a full
quota of feathers.
Howevel, the lse of intravenous or intraosseous
fuids is usually out of the question. Instead gavage
OT subcutaneous fuids will provide some stability
before introduction to the nursery.
At this stage the bird should be identified and
categorised into one of the following groups:
Fig. 20.7 A fledgling robin has almost a full quota of
· A hatchling with little or no feathering (we call
feathers.
these plastics)
· A nestling, a little older with its eyes open and
some feathering
· A fedgling with almost a full quota of feathers
Small garden birds
(Figs 20.6 & 20.7)
Species seen regularly: Tits (Parus spp), spallows
· A precocial species
(Passer spp), finches, wagtails (Motacilla spp), fy-
catchers (Muscicapa spp), buntings (Emberiza spp),
A numbered plastic leg ling should also be fitted
goldcrest (Regulus regulus), wTen (Troglodytes
and referred to on the admission card. Any biid
troglodytes), warblers, swallows (Hirundo rustica)
with suspected disease or injury should be isolated
and house martins (Delichon urbica).
and highlighted for treatment.
Food mixture
These small birds are fed on the proprietary
FEED
Tropican Reaning Mix (Rolf C. Hagen) available at
pet stores Each group will have its own mix freshly
Altricial birds
made each day. Keep refrigerated between feeds.
Young altricial birds pass through two stages of
hand-rearing. Initially they are fed a prepared
Larger garden birds
mixture to suit a vaniety of species. Once they are
more mature and starting to peck at the feeding
Species seen regularly: Thrushes, corvids, wood-
utensils they can be offered a more appropriate
peckers, cuckoos, nuthatches (Sitta europaea) and
adult diet.
stallings (Sturnus vulgaris).
Hand-rearing Orphaned Birds
189
Food mixture
susceptible to imprinting. It very important to form
'St Tiggywinkles Bird Glop' provides a balance of
as loose a bond as possible with any orphaned biid
meat, roughage, pro-biotic and digestive enzyme.
that is being hand-reared. Imprinting occurs when
Mixed in bulk it is made up of:
a bird identifies itself as your offspring. It, in fact,
becomes tame and will never more interact with its
· One tin of Pedigree Chum Puppy Food (Pedigree
Own species.
Mastetfoods)
● One dog-food tin of water
It is therefore essential that contact with these
orphans should be kept to a minimum and on no
· One dog-food tin of dried insects (Prosecto -
account should they be picked up to be fed afte1
Haith)
· One pinch of Pancrex-Vet (Pharmacia Animal
they are in care. This is particularly important with
biids of prey or waterfowl, which are easily tamed.
Health) enzyme
An imprinted or tamed wild bird should never be
· One pinch of Avipro Paediatric (Vetark Animal
Teleased.
Health) pro-biotic
This is liquidised to the consistency of soft ice
Altricial birds
CTeam and frozen in shallow dishes with lids
(Jonipax - Ashwood Timber & Plastics). The
These birds ale usually fed in a nest and will readily
mixture is not used until it has been frozen to kill
raise their heads, open their mouths wide (gape)
any pathogens and then allowed to defrost at 4°℃
and call to elicit feeding.
as it is needed (see Fig. 30.3). It should not be
Those on Tropican Rearing Mix will have it
defrosted with heat o1 a microwave.
gavaged, via a syringe and teat cannula,directly into
Once again each group of birds will have its own
their cTop (Fig. 20.8). They should be observed
dish of glop which will be discarded after 24 hours
swallowing it.
and a fresh one defrosted. In between feeds all the
The glop-fed birds are given, into their crops OT
glop dishes should be kept in the refnigerator. It has
their throats, a ^spatula-full' of the glop mix. Plastic
been proven that feeding chilled mix to baby biids
coffee stirrers are ideal for feeding the thrush-sized
has no adverse effect whereas warmming or allowing
biids while tongue depressors serve the larger help-
it to warm only encourages the proliferation of
ings demanded by the corvids.
harmful bacteria.
At the first cropful of a session the baby bird will
The use of shallow glop dishes is to discourage
turn round, point its tea1 1oughly over the edge of
the growth of deadly anaerobic bactenia that can
the nest bowl and pass a faecal sac. This should be
thrive in the bottom of a deep dish. Similarly, any
a sealed little packet that can be taken with forceps.
food processors must be thoroughly washed and
It gives a good indication of the suitability of the
the bowls soaked in a bactenicidal cleanel such as
ThiGene (MediChem Inteinational).
Other tearing diets, though using American
ingredients, can be found in Orendorff (1997).
Precocial birds
These birds should be offered an adult diet of a
manageable size, e.g. mini-mealworms or foreign
finch mix.
FEEDING
Imprinting
ayi yim Aiea spiq Aqeq suaay jo snsol a
Fig. 20.8 Altricial birds are fed by gavage.
different species involved. Howevel, all species are
190
Practical Wildlife Care
diet. If the diet is not suitable the faeces will not be
(1) Seed eaters -Sparrows, finches and buntings are
contained in a sac. The baby bird will then proba-
offered either British finch mix, foreign finch
 bly turn and gape again. More food can be given
mix O1, as a last resort, budgeniga1 O1 canary
until it stops gaping. Repeat cropfuls will not
mix. They will also appreciate mixed wild seeds
produce more faecal sacs at that session.
collected from the garden or, preferably,
The smaller birds should be fed as often as pos-
Organic fields.
sible but at least every ten minutes from dawn till
(2) Insect eaters - Tits, wagtails, fycatchers and
dusk.The corvids will cope with 30-minute feedings.
warblers can be fed on clean white maggots Of
As the birds open their eyes they will gradually
 pinkies, mini-mealworms or waxworms.
stalt pecking at their food supplier. They can then
be offered a mmore appropriate adult feed and be
Swallows and martins will take any of these but
supplemented by the hand-feeding. Generally allow
can also be offered middle-sized crickets if they
two weeks for garden birds to become weaned.
prove to be reluctant feeders.
The faces and beaks of the birds should be kept
Thrushes, woodpeckers, cuckoos, starlings and
nuthatches will take similar food, especially the
to bacterial infection.
cheaper clean white maggots.
Corvids (crows, 1ooks, jackdaws, etc.) will thrive
on tinned dog food but can also be offered occa-
Pigeons and doves
sional day-old chicks or mice.
These birds will not gape but may well respond to
a short gavage tube being offered up to their beaks.
If they take the tube in, it should be slid into the
Swifts
CTop and a measured amount of Tropican Reating
Swifts offer a diffcult challenge for hand-rearing
Mix syringed in. Birds that are reluctant to take the
(Fig. 20.9). They are strictly insect eaters but can be
tube have to be assisted by opening the beak and
hand-reared on either the Tropican Reaing Mix,
then sliding the tube into the crop. Feeding every
the glop or on whole waxworms with a vitamin and
30 minutes should be ample.
 mineral supplement added.
As swifts get older they will never be able to pick
Birds ofprey
up theit own food; they naturally feed on the wing.
These birds can be taught to peck and take quite a
o d e og ao no yo jo ood s1
forceps. It will be swallowed whole so should not
have any sharp bones protruding from it. A reluc-
tant feeder can be encouraged to take the morsel
by touching it to its beak or wiping it across its feet.
As they mature, the birds will pick up whole food
from the floor and tear it themselves.
Precocial birds
These species should be feeding themselves from
the time of hatching
WEANING
Garden birds
As they wean, garden birds are split into two
Fig. 20.9 Swifts are particularly difficult to rear.
categories of adult diet:
Hand-rearingOrphanedBirds
191
Thein forced diet of waxworms Or glop can continue
should be provided as it should with all birds. As
all the way to release.
they mature these biids will feed on mixed corn O1
a proprietary waterfowl mix. They will always need
a bowl of water near to the feed.
Pigeons and doves
In the wild these Columbids feed thei1 young on a
Grebes and sawbill ducks
milk substance produced in the throat of the adults.
Grebes and sawbill ducks can be offered cold
We cannot reproduce this but the Tropican Rearing
whitebait from forceps until they will take them
Mix gavaged into the crop of young pigeons and
from a bowl of cold fresh water (Plate 54). Remem-
doves serves to bring them up to weaning.
be1 to add the vitamin supplement. These birds will
At weaning, collared and turtle doves will take
remain on a fish diet, with vitamin supplement, until
small seed or chick crumbs and pigeons and larger
their release.
doves require either a proprietary pigeon mix O1
mixed com Oof pellets. All the seed and com feeders
Moorhens and coots
will need an added bowl of grit, of suitable size, to
facilitate digestion.
Moorhens and coots will often feed themselves on
waxworms, clean white maggots or mini-meal-
worms. Some may take a little time to get the hang
Birds of prey
of it and should be offered live food in forceps.
All bird of prey chicks require a whole-animal diet
Painting the tips of the forceps red and yellow will
which includes meat, bone, fur o1 feathe1. Orphans
often encourage moorhen chicks to peck at them.
can be Teared successfully on chopped day-old
When they mature moorhens and coots will take a
chicks or mice with added vitamins and minerals.
variety of foods including mixed com, clean white
Larger birds (Plate 53) can be offered chopped
maggots and watet plants.
Iabbit ol chicken.
old chicks or mice. Once again the larger birds can
Seabirds
be offered rabbits or chickens.
Most seabirds should be offered larger fish like
Birds of prey must not be offered live food
 sprats, sand eels and hetTings. Vitamin supplemen-
(Protection of Animals Act 1911).
tation is required with sprats and sand eels. Like
the grebes and sawbills, these birds will remain on
 a fish diet, with vitamin supplement, until they are
Precocial birds
Teleased.
Precocial birds will peck at seeds and chick crumbs
Gulls can be offered the cheaper options of dog
scattered on thei1 sand substrate. Howevel, some,
food o1 day-old chicks.
such as partridges, may only start pecking at live
food. Waxworms and mini-mealworms can also be
scattered on the sand. However, at weaning they
RELEASE
can all be fed on corn or a propnietary game-bird
mix.
All these species of young bird should, on weaning,
be encouraged to fy in an aviary, or swim in a pool,
for one or two weeks. They can be released into a
Water birds
suitable habitat with methods similar to those used
Ducklings, goslings and cygnets
for theit adult counterparts.
 Ducklings, goslings and cygnets will feed on a mix
of corn and chick cumbs, offered in a bowl nea1 to
a water fountain so that they can dabble in between
Eggs
beakfuls of dry food. It is best to vary the feed
between corn and pelleted food, to slow the 1apid
This chapter has dealt primanily with the hand-
growth that may lead to slipped carpal joints. Gtit
rearing to release of orphaned wild birds. Yet in
192
PracticalWildlifeCare
offering a facility to handle these orphans there ale
shake o1 break the egg to stop it hatching; if it
always going to be half-hatched or unhatched eggs
is the egg of a precocial bird, i.e. duck, pheas-
of wild birds presented for 'Tehabilitation'.
ant, etc. that feeds itself, then put the egg in an
incubator.
·A wild bird in care lays an egg
NATURAL HISTORY
o If it is an altnicial species, destroy it but by all
means allow a precocial species to hatch. Do
See Wate1 Birds - Ducks (Chapte1 15).
 not leave the egg with the dam.
· Any other queries about becoming involved with
the eggs of wild birds should be dealt with along
LEGISLATION
with the local Police Wildlife Liaison Officel.
There are very strict laws pertaining to the eggs and
 nests of wild birds. A sound rule of thumb is to keep
EQUIPMENT
well away and have nothing to do with them. But
sometimes you have no alternative but to get
To care for any egg, and possibly to bring it to
involved. An essential safeguard when dealing with
hatching, it is essential to have an automatic incu-
the eggs of wild birds is to have the finder of the eggs
bator. These are available for cage-bird eggs and
sign a declaration that they have legally come into
can be adapted to suit wild-bird eggs.
possession of the eggs and are signing over the care
Eggs need to be turned regularly and be kept at
of them to you for rehabilitation or destruction.
a set temperature and humidity. Automatic incuba-
Also, before you get involved please consider the
tors will provide the night facilities.
following situations and my advice as to how to deal
Never put a wild bird egg under a fostel mother,
with them:
chicken or bantam. Any bird that might hatch could
imprint onto the foster mother and never be suit-
· A nest of wild-biid eggs is seen to be unattended 
able for release.
for any period of time
o Leave well alone - usually if the nest is aban-
 doned for any reason then the eggs will have
HOUSEKEEPING
to perish
· A nest falls from its position and may contain
A housekeeping routine should be in place:
eggs
o Rig up an artifcial nest as near to the original
· The temperature of the incubators should be
as possible. Put the eggs in and hope the
maintained at 38°C
parents return. If they do not, leave the eggs to
· All eggs should be sponged lightly with warm
perish.
water before being placed in an incubatoT
· A wild-bird egg is found on the ground away
· The species should be noted, if necessary after
from any nesting site
Teference to a book on Bnitish bird eggs
o Establish the type of egg and then decide on a
· The date the egg was expected to hatch can be
course of action: if it is the egg of an alticial
written on the shell with a fibre-tip pen
biid, i.e. starling, blackbird, pigeon, etc. that
·Any eggs oveidue for hatching should
be
would need hand-rearing if hatched, then
Iemoved from the incubator and destroyed
21
Small Mammals
Part I: Mice, Voles and Shrews
The water vole is the mammal most Tapidly
disappearing from our countryside, so its care and
Te-establishment ale absolutely cTucial (Fig. 21.2).
Species seen regularly:
Wood mice are different from house mice:
·Mice - Wood mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus),
· They have much largel eyes
yellow-necked mouse (A. favicollis), harvest
·A mid-brown coat rather than a brownish-grey coat
mouse (Micromys minutus) and house mouse
· A white chest and abdomen
(Mus domesticus).
· Its hind legs are very long, allowing it to hop a bit
·Voles - Bank vole (Clethrionomys glareolus),
like a miniature kangaro0
field vole (Micronus agrestis) and water vole
Wood mice can be found in houses so identifica-
(Arvicola terrestris).
tion is essential.
●Shrews - Common shrew (Sorex araneus), pygmy
Shrews are incessantly eating so in care or cap-
shrew (S. minutus) and water shrew (Neomys
tivity must always have a constant supply of food
fodiens).
and water. Their metabolism is so highly charged
that they could die quickly if they cannot feed.
NATURAL HISTORY
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
These are the small mammals that live in the woods,
hedges and fields under the leaf litter or under any-
If these small, very fast mammals have to be caught,
thing that gives them cover from predators. In par-
then a small-bird catching net will suffce. Howevel,
ticula1, voles are probably the major prey item of
with practice they can sometimes be caught manually.
foxes, owls and kestrels.
They will escape from cardboard boxes and any-
Features that help to identify different species
thing that is not secure. Ideal carrying containers,
are (Fig. 21.1):
and, later on in their rehabilitation, suitable cages,
are the Hagen range of plastic aquaria available in
● Mice have long naked tails, large eyes and a semi-
pet stores. They have a small trapdoor in the lid
pointed snout
which allows food and water to be put in without
· Voles have short tails, small eyes and a very blunt
the animal shooting out (Fig. 21.3).
snout. The water vole is as large as a rat, but has
the typical vole blunt nose and short tail. In con-
 trast the brown rat has a pointed snout and long
RESCUE AND HANDLING
tail
● Shrews are dark grey in colour and have a very
With these small mammals, rescue is just a question
 pronounced long snout
of being able to get hold of them. Some of them will
193
194
Practical Wildlife Care
Dark fur.
Small eyes
Pointed snout
CFive toes on front feet
Shrew
Snub nose
Short tail
Large ears
Fourtoeson
front feet
Vole
Large eyes
Four toes on front feet
Fig. 21.1 The main differences between
Mouse
the three most commonly seen small
mammals.
Long bald tail
Fig. 21.2 The water vole is now very
scarce and should not be confused with
the brown rat.
bite, so lightweight gloves give the catcher more
balanced that any pathogenic disease will kill them
confidence to hold the animal in a clenched hand.
before they are found.
This is the best way of holding these little, speedy
escape artists. The secret is to get the animal into a
container as soon as possible afteI capture.
COMMON INCIDENTS
COMMON DISEASES
By far the most common reason for getting these
small mammals is capture by a cat. Most of them
We do not normally see disease in these small
ale killed, but cat owmers will often tescue a live
mammals. Probably their metabolism is so finely
One and bring it in for care.
Small Mammals
195
A new worrying phenomenon in this country is
be splinted, and prolapsed intestines which can
the use of glue traps for house mice. In America,
sometimes be suiccessfully treated.
where glue traps are widely available, the rehabili-
tators are seeing all manner of small bids O1
mammals stuck to these devices. The author has
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
seen glue traps covered in struggling, still very
All these species should be given subcutaneous
much alive, house mice. These traps are not selec-
fuids, as othet Ioutes of vascular access are proba-
tive in which animal they catch (Fig. 21.4). The glue
bly impossible to use.
is hard to remove so the live animal has to be gently
prized off the trap and kept long enough to grow
The cat-injured mammal should receive an initial
injection of amoxycillin at 100 mg/kg to counteract
new fur or feathers.
the Pasteurella multocida tansmitted from the
cat's mouth. Given subcutaneously the amoxy-
COMMON INJURIES
cillin should be lepeated daily for a further two
days when it should be superseded by long-acting
Usually resulting from an encounter with a cat, the
amoxycillin for the rest of the week.
injuries seen include fractures of the legs, which can
Analgesics can be given, e.g. buprenorphine
(Tengesic? - Schering-Plough Animal Health) at
0.1 mg/kg subcutaneously (Or1, 2002). The weight
Lewis, personal communication).
CAGING
These mammals are so small that they will easily
escape from most cages. The Hagen animal aqua-
nium is ideal because it has a latticed top with a
hinged trapdoor in the centre.
Sand or clean wood shavings can be used as a
substrate. All of the small mammals like to hide and
mammal house can be the cardboard tube centre of
a Toll of kitchen towel. This will also make moving
the animal much easier as with a hand over each
Fig. 21.3 Various sizes of small plastic aquaria (Rolf C.
end it is effectively trapped. The tube and the
Hagen) are ideal for small mammals
animal can then be moved easily.
Fig. 21.4 Glue traps - but house mice
are not the only animals to become stuck
to them.
196
Practical Wildlife Care
FEEDING
animal of the ancient Caledonian pine forests
which have now virtually disappeared. It is very
Mice and voles will eat dry food such as seeds, dry
slow at adapting to deciduous woodlands, especially
po1lidge oats, crumbled digestive biscuits o1 a p10-
as it is not easily able to digest the acorns and other
prietary mouse food. Voles take some green food
 nuts on which the grey squirrel thnives. There has
 p s  s  pr aq u 
also been quite a lengthy history of disease not nor-
Shrews have to have a constant supply of insect
pai aul lanbs aia isnqoi aiou ayi u uaas A
food. Clean white maggots, mini-mealworms OT
squinel is now confined, in England and Wales, to
waxworms are suitable.
small pockets of population. Its main stronghold is
in Scotland.
The hazel dormouse is a small arboreal animal
RELEASE
that rarely descends to the ground. It prefers to live
at about 5m above the ground in coppiced hazel
All of these small mammals can be Teleased into
woodland. With the demise of ancient forestry prac-
clean hedges O1 even gardens. Harvest mice appre-
tices, such as coppicing, the habitat of dormice is
ciate being neal a field edge with tall grasses to
disappearing o1, at best, becoming islands with no
enable them to build their spherical nest suspended
overhead connecting pathways. Like all dormice the
off the ground.
hazel dormouse hibernates in winteI when,it is said,
Water voles should be released in good water
vole habitat at the side of small rivers or canals.
Both animals ale the subject of concerted con-
Contact the Mammal Society (see Appendix 7) for
servation and re-introduction programmes which
any water vole projects in your area.
should be considered before either is released.
'anbs isnqoi ano yon e st [ainbs Aaie au
weighing in at 500-600 g compared with 270-321 g
LEGISLATION
for the red squirrel, and is now widespread through-
out Britain. Introduced from America in the nine-
Shrews are protected under Schedule 6 of the
teenth century this squirrel has a reputation with
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.
forestry workers for damaging trees and is actively
In 1996 the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act
trapped, shot (Fig.21.5), poisoned and killed. Black
came into force. This was the first British legislation
(melanic) (Fig. 21.6) or white (albino) grey squir-
to protect all wild mammals from acts of cruelty.
Tels are not uncommon.
The edible dormouse, also known by its Latin
name, Glis glis, is rather like a small version of a
Part II: Squirrels and Dormice
    (  s 
Hertfordshire at the turn of the last century it has
Species seen regularly:
not spread more than about ten miles. It is accused
) [anbs Aara (suogina snnis) [ainnbs pay
of causing damage to trees but is most often
carolinensis),
hazel
dormouse
(Muscardinus
encountered when it moves into houses in order to
avellanarius) and edible dormouse (Glis glis).
hibernate in the winter. In particular, hibemating
Glis glis have often been found in switchgear instal-
lations and, on one occasion, in a Royal Mail post
NATURAL HISTORY
box.
Dormice have noctumal habits while squinrels
Of these four species only two, the ted squirrel and
ale active during the hours of daylight.
the hazel dormouse, are true natives of Britain. Both
are now in setious decline, not necessanily from the
competition of the two introduced species, but from
EQUIPMENT AND CAGING
 Other factors that are not yet fully understood.
The red squirrel was in decline even before the
The most important equipment when dealing with
grey squirel was introduced to Britain. It is an
squinrels or Glis glis is a pair of extra-thick gloves.
Small Mammals
197
These animals do have a dangerous bite that
usually reaches the bone. Nets and cat carrying
baskets are also needed. These animals will quickly
gmaw their way out of cardboard or wooden
containers.
RESCUE AND HANDLING
Rescue is not usually needed with squirrels o1 Glis
glis. But if one has to be rescued then the net fol-
lowed by controlling the animal with thick gloves is
Fig. 21.5 This squirrel has been shot and wounded by
an air gun.
Fig. 21.6 Black squirrels, including babies, are now
seen.
Fig. 21.7 Edible dormice (Glis glis) are
not unlike small grey squirrels.
198
Practical Wildlife Care
the Tecommended procedure. Quite often though
ratio has too high a phosphorus content. Affected
grey squirrels or Glis glis are inside the 1oof space
led squirrels may show lethargy, weakness, loss of
of houses and have to be caught in humane cage
weight and curvature of the spine (Sainsbury, 1997).
traps.
Prevention in captivity should be with a more
Handle with great care and remember that a
balanced diet, such as a 1odent pellet (Mazuri Zoo
grey squirrel is a surprisingly strong animal. It is
 Foods) and a small amount of fruit and nuts. In
extremely fast and will not hesitate to bite o1 rake
 America, where many squirels are raised, it has
an arm with the long sharp claws of its back feet.
 been found that peanuts and sunfower seeds pre-
The hazel dormouse, on the other hand, is hardly
 dispose to MBD. On no account should peanuts o1
ever aggressive and is easily picked up and put into
 sunflower seeds be fed to any wild bird or other
a calrying box. Give it warm towels in the box and
animals, especially squirrels that, as a species, seems
it will probably go to sleep.
to be particula1ly susceptible to MBD. Grey squir-
Tel juveniles that have had access to peanuts and
sunflower seeds may develop fits and seizures and
COMMON DISEASES
die. Immediate calcium supplementation by injec-
tion seemms to be the only way to prevent fatality.
Following on the work of Sainsbury and Gurnell
A suitable diet for squirrels and Glis glis is a
(1995) and Duff et al. (1996) disease in the 1ed
good-quality dry puppy food supplemented with
squirrel is now being documented. Disease Tecords
spinach, curly kale and pecan nuts. Glis glis is par-
of the other three species are sparse and in need of
ticularly fond of apples.
more investigation, although, occasionally, infected
animals are found and require treatment (Plate 33).
The three main diseases discussed in red squii-
Coccidiosis
Tels are a parapox virus, metabolic bone disease and
Most red squirrels seem to be hosts to the Coccidia
infection with Coccidia species.
Eimeria spp. It may o1 may not be debilitating but
In grey squinels in Britain only one parapox
can be identified by faecal parasitology and treated
infection case has been confirmed. The other
with sulphonamides.
diseases seen are Tingworm and malocclusion
(Plate 22).
There is little or no reference to disease seen in
Dental malocclusion
either dormouse species.
Although malocclusion should not occur in the
wild, it has been seen in all rodents including the
grey squirrel (Plate 55a and b). Generally if there
Parapox virus
is a genetic or skeletal problem the condition
Parapox virus is seen as pathogenic in red squinrels.
cannot be tectified.
Characterised by pox-like lesions around the eyes,
face and other parts of the body, the author can find
no reference to treatment for the condition.
COMMON INCIDENTS
However, if the veterinary surgeon suspects the
parapox virus then Teference could be made to
Grey squirrels and Glis glis are Tegularly taken
other veterinarians with expenience of the disease
from houses Amazingly they are also often caught
in live animals. In particular Tony Sainsbury at the
by cats, although an adult grey squirrel could infict
Institute of Zoology, Regent's Park, London has
selious injury even on a master predator like the
been calrying out research for some years.
cat. Sadly hazel dormice are also caught by cats but
Teports of Ted squirrels suffering a similar fate have
not been found.
Metabolic bone disease
Grey squirrels are often seen with limb or spinal
Metabolic bone disease (MBD) is also Tegularly
fractures caused by falls or Toad traffic accidents.
Tecorded in wild red squinrels and is calsed by an
Younger squirrels regularly fall from trees and are
imbalanced diet where the calcium/phosphorus
 often seen with epistaxis This can be as a result of
Small Mammals
199
a fall or spontaneous haemorrhage caused by
The Mammal Society will be able to provide
ingesting warfarin-type baits.
details of the nearest re-introduction programme
Ghis glis adults are sometimes accidentally
(see Appendix 7).
disturbed while in deep hibemation. These can be
Where grey squirrels are permmitted, i.e. the USA,
calTied easily and allowed to wake up in captivity.
there are two situations in which squinrels should
not be released:
(1) They do not seem to be able to cope in the wild,
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
O1 in captivity, after the loss of the tail (S.
Harris, personal communication)
On admission all these species will benefit from
(2) A tame squirrelis potentially a very dangerous
subcutaneous fuid infusion. Only if the animal is
animal that will not hesitate to attack even
comatose will an intravenous or intraosseous infu-
humans
sion be tolerated.
Squirels may have heavy fea burdens that
These considerations should be applied to
can be contiolled with pyrethrum-based powder
British squirrels, even if they are not grey but red.
(Whiskas Exelpet? - Pedigree Masterfoods).
If any of these animals is prescribed antibiotics
fo1 any reason then a pro-biotic (Avipro - Vetark
LEGISLATION
Animal Health) will regulate the sensitive gut fora.
The red squinel and hazel dormouse are fully p10-
tected unde1 the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981
CAGING
and the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996.
Glis glis and the grey squirrel are also protected
All of these animals are Todents with tremendous
from illegal cTuelty. Howeve1, Glis glis, by a slip of
gmawing ability Metal cages with a mixture of logs
bureaucracy, is protected under Schedule 6 of the
and branches to climb and gnaw are essential.
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 from being
Hazel dormmice will appreciate clumps of leafy hazel
killed or taken by certain methods It is also on
OT sycamore branches.
Schedule 9 which states that it is an offence to
Telease one or allow one to escape.
The grey squirrel has all manner of legislation
FEEDING
enacted against it:
● Destructive Imported Animals Act 1932 - Grey
As mentioned in the section on diseases, a balanced
diet is absolutely crucial. Good-quality dry puppy
Squirrels (Prohibition and Keeping) Orde1 1937
food, pecan nuts, curly kale, spinach and hazel nuts
makes it an offence to keep a grey squirel and
to release one or to allow one to escape without
for dormice and red squirrels will be ideal.
a licence
Never feed peanuts or sunfower seeds.
· Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act
1981 makes it an offence to release one or to
allow one to escape into the wild
RELEASE
· Grey Squirrels (Wa1farin) Orde1 1973 allows for
The only two of these species allowed to be
warfarin poisoning in areas where red squinels
Teleased in this country are the red squirrel and the
are not at risk
hazel dormouse. Because of the endangeled nature
 And still the grey squirrel keeps surviving. In fact
of these animals any release, if at all possible,
it has been stated that no matter how many squir-
should be included in one of the Te-introduction
rels are killed in a year the same number will
programmes where ideal habitat will give them a
be there the following year (S. Cartel, personal
much better chance of survival.
communication).
NATURAL HISTORY
·Is it obviously injured?
· Is it out during the day?
The hedgehog (Erinaceous europaeus) is the most
·Is it underweight in winter?
Tegularly seen of all British mammals. It regularly
· Is it trapped?
visits gardens where it feeds on beetles, worms and
other invertebrates, including many that gardeners
On most occasions the hedgehog can simply be
see as pests. It is also the mammal most often seen
picked up and put into a calrying box. Handling
in need of rescue and rehabilitation (Stocker, 1999).
should be with some form of glove which will
The hedgehog follows a nocturnal lifestyle and
protect against the sharp spines.
has the ability to hibernate during cold winter
They do, howevet, also regularly get trapped, for
spells. In this country it has only one major preda-
which the various scissors and pliers that are patt
to1, the badger, although dogs do account for many
of the hedgehog rescue kit are necessary:
of the injuries seen.
As far as anybody knows, the hedgehog has only
· Hedgehogs will get trapped in bean netting,
one litter each yea1, which may produce four O1
tennis court nets, cticket nets, in fact any kind of
five uichins, between May and September. These
soft net they can find (Fig. 22.1). It is usually
stay with the mother and are independent at
impossible to unravel the hedgehog without
eight weeks. After mating, the male hedgehog has
anaesthetic, so they have to be cut free with scis-
nothing to do with the females or the urchins.
sors. After cutting them free they should not be
released immediately but should be monitored
fo1 at least seven days, in case there is evidence
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
of pressure nectosis from constriction injuries.
· Similar, but more difficult to deal with, is the
The equipment needed to tescue hedgehogs will
hedgehog that gets trapped in wire netting or
include:a pair of stout gloves, a pait of scissors, fencing
fencing (Fig.22.2). This time the fencing pliers will
pliers and two pairs of ordinary bull-nosed pliers.
cut most metal strands. The precaution of moni-
Carrying hedgehogs is fairly simple and only
toring in case of pressure necrosis also applies.
Tequires a cardboard box or pet carrier and an old
The third type of rescue is the hedgehog who has
towel.
fallen down an uncovered drain. Curled into a
ball the hedgehog exactly fits most garden drains.
It is often impossible to get undemeath the
RESCUE AND HANDLING
hedgehog in order to lift it out. This is where the
pliers are useful. By clamping the pliers on to
Hedgehogs are generally easy to rescue. The crite
some of the hedgehog's spines it is possible to use
nia to consider when deciding if a hedgehog needs
these to lift the hedgehog free. There seem to be
Tescuing are:
 no ill effects after this rescue technique.
200
Hedgehogs
201
Fig.2
22.1 Hedgehogsmayrequire
anaesthesia to be unravelled from
netting.
shed buouay buisn no pno anq Auo ueo yu ueyo u! padden shoyabpah z'zz b
Hedgehogs in the garden o1 on the Toadside at
hedge (S. Hairis, personal communication). Simi
night, unless they are obviously injured or tiny, ate
larly, hedgehogs only ever hibemate in nests. They
behaving perfectly naturally and should not be
do not hibernate on a lawn, in a hedge or anywhere
Tescued. Howevet, a hedgehog apparently asleep
out in the open. Hedgehogs in these situations need
and not in a nest may be in trouble and needing
Tescuing.
Tescue. During the summer most hedgehogs still
Hedgehogs seen cTossing a Toad can be helped to
build nests in which to sleep. Many, howeve1, do not
the other side but they should not be picked up and
taken elsewhere. A female hedgehog may have a
202
PracticalWildlifeCare
dependent family nearby which will be left to starve
autumn is a victim of lungworm. The Wildlife
if she does not return.
Hospital Trust (St Tiggywinkles) and Mean (1998)
have over the years carnied out studies of the
efficacy of various anthelmintics and have now
COMMON DISEASES
Tecommended a course of pro-active treatments,
which includes corticosteroids and antibiotics
There are some conditions so Tegularly seen in
(Table 22.1). Corticosteloids are lised becalise when
hedgehogs that their treatment regime, once insti-
the lungworms are killed an infammatory reaction
gated by the veteninary surgeon, can become part
can result and become an even greater problem.
of a standardised protocol. Some demand treat-
The corticosteroids are to Teduce the inflammation.
ments that are well recognised in saving lives.
Pneumonia
Lungworm infestation
Hedgehogs are often found suffering from severe
Probably the most insidious of hedgehog com-
Tespiratory distress. Apart from the lungworm,
plaints is lungworm infestation with Crenosorna
there are also going to be pneumonias caused
striatum and Capillaria aerophila. Starting before
as a direct result of heavy parasite burdens and
bith by crossing the placental barrier, Crenosoma
other factors. Various drugs are at the veterinary
spp seem to affect most hedgehogs and particularly
surgeon's disposal and here are some of those we
juveniles during the autumn. Symptoms are not
have used without seeing any adverse side effects
always obvious but a moist chesty cough in some
(Stocke1, 1998):
cases does point to lungworm problems. Sometimes
there is respiratory distress, usually when pneumo-
·Enrofoxacin -Baytril? 5% (Baye1)
mia has set in.
●Bromhexidine - Bisolvon?(Boehringer Ingelheim)
 The lungworm infestation can be verified by
·Etamiphylline
camsylate -
Millophyline-VTM
 parasitological examination of the faeces of on
(Ainolds Veterinary Products)
post-mortem examination (Fig. 22.3). Practically
Clenbuterol
VentipulminTM
(Boehringer
every hedgehog that dies of natural cauises in the
Ingelheim)
Table 22.1 Hedgehog worming regime.*
StTiggywinkles
The Wildlife Hospitat Trust
Drug
Dose
Frequency
Effect
Levamisole (Levadin - Univet Ltd)
10mg/kg
 3 subcutaneous injections,
Wormer
1 week apart
Etamiphylline camsylate (Millophyline-VTM
28mg/kg by
One dose on admission, then 
Bronchodilator
Amolds Veterinary Products)
subcutaneous
with each dose of levamisole
injection
and the day following it
 Methylprednisolone (Depo-MedroneTM V
Up to 4mg/kg
One-off injection with
Corticosteroid
Pharmacia Animal Health)
first levamisole
Amoxycillin (long-acting)
150mg/kg
Given with methylprednisolone
Antibiotic
and every other day after
throughout the course
*Should the hedgehog still be coughing after the third dose of levamisole then another dose together with etamiphylline
and amoxycillin should be given one week later.
Hedgehogs
203
Fig. 22.3 Lungworm (Crenosoma striatum) can be confirmed on post mortem.
Hedgehogs with respiratory distress can be kept
in plant propagators fed with oxygen. There is,
however, an intensive care unit ideally suited fo1
hedgehog Tespiratory treatments It is the Brinsea
TLC-4M Intensive Care Unit (Fig.22.4) which has
Brinsea
TLC-4
well as having thermostatically-contiolled heating.
Respiratory drugs can also be nebulised if the
patient is setiously distressed.
In severe cases of respiratory distress OT Tespira-
tory failure, especially during anaesthesia, it is possi-
ble to attach the hedgehog, via a 2.0 endotracheal
tube, to a small ventilator, the Vetronic Small Animal
Ventilato1 SAV03, which will p1ovide intermittent
positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) (Fig. 22.5).
Balloon syndrome
Anothel, possibly respiratory, condition seen in
hedgehogs is descnibed as “balloon syndrome*
(Plate 34) (Stocke1, 1987). With this condition, the
hedgehog's normally flexible skin covening is
inflated like a balloon. The skin is stretched taut and
the hedgehog cannot reach the ground with its legs.
It is helpless.
Fig. 22.4 The Brinsea TLC-4M Intensive Care Unit.
204
Practical Wildlife Care
in Amenica. There seems to have been little pub-
lished on neoplasia in European hedgehogs and
scant information on any tumours found and inves-
tigated (Stidworthy, personal communication). The
Wildlife Hospital Trust (St Tiggywinkles) has
seen mammary carcinomas and lymphosarcomas.
Any histopathology results to add to our existing
Tecords would be most welcome.
Spondylosis deformans
Some older hedgehogs will show paralysis o1 reluc-
tance to use their back legs. In the absence of a
history of trauma there may be bony overgrowths
(osteophytes) around the intervertebral joints.
Fig. 22.5 Hedgehog being supported on Vetronic Small
Treatment with corticosteroids and analgesics can
Animal Ventilator.
be attempted but the condition is irreversible.
Dental conditions
No reasons have been found for this condition,
Hedgehogs do suffer from dental disease, which is
seen in both wild and captive animals. All hedge-
allowed inspired air to escape and fill the subcuta-
hogs should receive a dental examination on admis-
 e a P si   o
sion and, if necessary, be treated before they ate
surgeon either making a scalpel incision over the
Teleased.
back of the animal, or aspirating the air, with a
A pre-treatment and post-treatment course of
large-gauge needle, syringe and a three-way tap,
antibiotics is always to be Tecommended. Oral
between its spines. Release of the air may need to
 medicines are difficult to administer to some hedge-
be repeated several times but eventually the condi-
hogs but we have found it useful for dental cases.
tion will resolve itself.
The antibiotic of choice is daily metronidazole
Antibiotic cover by long-acting amoxycillin is
and spiramycin - Stomorgy]TM 2 (Merial Animal
usually adequate.
Health), at a dose of ↓ tablet/kg given orally.
Intestinal fukes
Paraphimosis and penis trauma
Hedgehogs, especially juveniles, will occasionally pass
The hedgehog has an extraordinarily large penis.
 green, mucus-like faeces In most cases this seems to
Occasionally it becomes protruded and because of
be caused by the fuke Brachylaemus erinacei in the
its size is often seriously damaged. Urethrostomy
intestines (Mean, 1998). Treatment can be p1ovided
may be necessary, so all cases should be referred
by a one-off injection of praziquantel (Droncit?
immediately to the veterinary surgeon.
Injectable - Baye1) at 5.68mg/kg (0.1 ml/kg).
Skin conditions
Tumours
All these conditions will require definite diagnosis
but three of them are regularly seen in hedge-
Hedgehogs are seen with quite extensive tumours,
hogs and can possibly be subject to standardised
especially around the throat and within the
treatments.
mammary glands. The veteninary surgeon will
decide whether to operate or lse euthanasia.
Zinc deficiency
Neoplasia (tumours) is relatively common in
pathological surveys of the African hedgehog,
Zinc deficiency may leave a hedgehog with no
Atelerix albiventris, which is regularly kept as a pet
spines and no hair (Fig. 22.6). A completely bald
Hedgehogs
205
Fig. 22.6 A hedgehog without spines
could be suffering from zinc deficiency.
hedgehog can be given a vitamin and zinc supple-
ment (VetaminTM + Zinc - Millpledge Veterinary)
which might just encourage regrowth of pelage.
Ringworm
A fungal condition, Tingworm, in hedgehogs usually
Trichophyton erinacei, does not fuoresce. Lengthy
dermatophyte tests may or may not confim the trj-
chophyte. In the meantime, any hedgehogs with
faky skin and debnis at the base of the spines can
be started on antifungal treatment using enilcona-
zole (ImaveroJTM - Janssen Animal Health) in the 
form of a spray mixed 1:50 with sterile water and
applied on a daily basis.
Mange
Mange, caused by mites, in particular Caparinia
nipilis (Fig. 22.7), can be identified unde1 the mic10-
scope. Visually,in hedgehogs,it occurs as a powdery
deposit a1ound the ears and cheeks (Fig. 22.8).
Fig. 22.7 Caparinia tripiis -a mite found on hedgehogs.
Treatment is with ivermectin (IvomecTM Injection
for Cattle - Menial Animal Health) at 400 mcg/kg
 OT mixed 1:9 with propylene glycol at 0.4 ml/kg.
provided with one or two drops in each ear of
Ear mites
neomycin and permethnin (GAC Ear Drops
Ear mites are very common and seem to be resis-
Arnolds Veterinary Products) o1 iveimectin mixed
tant to ivermectin. Relief for the hedgehog can be
1: 9 with propylene glycol.
206
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 22.8 Hedgehog mites may show as
powdery deposits.
Ticks
Footandmouthdisease
The tick commonly seen on Bnitish hedgehogs is
Usually foot and mouth disease is not a problem in
Ixodes hexagonus or occasionally the sheep tick I.
Bnitain, but because of an outbreak in 2001 there
ricinus. A few ticks would not be a problem but a
were restnictions imposed on the movement of
heavy infestation could cause difficulties.
some species across the country. Because hedge-
Removing them with chemicals or fire, Or any
hogs are at Tisk of natural infection by foot and
other ‘old wives’ method, could cause even more
 mouth disease the movement of hedgehogs, espe-
t1ouble. There are propnietary tick removers, such
cially to rehabilitation centres and veterinary
as the O'Tom? Tick Twister?, which are designed to
suigeries was forbidden.
Temove ticks without leaving the mouthparts still
Duning the ctisis any injured hedgehogs were
embedded in the skin (see Chapter 10).
treated at the homes of persons who had found
Any ticks or tick larvae should be completely
them. Daily visits were arranged during which a
destroyed or they might crawl off and attach them-
visiting nurse had to cover he1/himself with pro-
selves to an unwary human or another animal. If
tective clothing, 1ubber boots and surgical gloves
one should attach itself to a human then it should
before attending each hedgehog. All utensils, food
be carefully Temoved and destroyed. Any Tedden-
bowls etc. were treated as clinical waste. Aftel each
ing of the skin, local infammation, headache Or
visit the protective clothing, boots etc. were sprayed
feve1 up to 30 days afte1 the tick bite should be
with suitable disinfectant.
Tefelled to a general practitioner.
All visitors to rehabilitation centres already
holding hedgehogs, or deer had, on arrival, to dip
Fleas
their feet up to the ankles in suitable disinfectant.
Hedgehogs are very well known for having notice-
Preferably during a foot and mouth disease out-
able fea burdens. The hedgehog fea Archaeopsylla
break all visitors should be discouraged from sen-
erinacei is very host specific and will not tolerate
sitive areas.
other species, including humans. Generally feas
are not a major problem for the hedgehog, but an
Other diseases
extraordinarily heavy fea burden can cause death.
The feas can be removed by using a pyrethrum
Some conditions have been reported in hedgehogs,
based fea powder. Aerosols and stronge1 chemicals
but very little work has been done on treating them.
should not be considered.
These include:
Hedgehogs
207
·Protein-losing nephropathy, causing dramatic
Dog attacks
oedema on the ventral surfaces
Hedgehogs are often attacked by dogs, both large
· Avian tuberculosis in the mesentenic lymph
and small. The hedgehog under attack will curl up
nodes
and manage to deter most dogs with its spines.
· Salmonellosis
Some dogs howevel, do press home theit attack and
There are, undoubtedly, many more diseases to
cause the hedgehog senious injury, usually resulting
in major skin wounds o1 snout damage (Fig 22.9).
be found in hedgehogs. The database of informa-
The dog owmers, full of remorse, tend to bring the
tion on this most regularly rehabilitated mammal is
hedgehog in for treatment.
constantly growing. Any more data, new informa-
tion or news of treatments is always going to be
welcomed.
Poisoning
Slug pellets
COMMON INCIDENTS
 Hedgehogs eat slug pellts, which contain metalde-
hyde, for which there is no antidote. The main sign
Already mentioned earlier in this chapter ale
is hyperaesthesia, where the hedgehog finches at
the incidences of trapped hedgehogs. There are,
the slightest sound. It may also pass blue/green
however, many more situations in which the unfor-
faeces from the dye in the slug pellets.
tunate hedgehog will find itself.
The hedgehog is probably going to die. Treat-
 ments can be tried including:
Road traffic accidents
● Fluid therapy using Hartmann's solution (metal-
Hedgehogs are tenowned for getting into trouble
dehyde does lead to metabolic acidosis waTant-
on the 1oads. Most of them are killed outright but
img the administration of bicarbonate of soda)
some do survive and are brought in as casualties.
· Milk or sodium bicarbonate, administered
Their injuries are usually peripheral, to legs and
directly into the stomach by stomach tube, may
head, so many of them do survive after treatment.
dectease absorption of the metaldehyde
Fig. 22.9 Dog attacks can leave
extensive wounds.
208
Practical Wildlife Care
· Activated charcoal (Liqui-Char-Vet - Ainolds
the weight of 450g have less chance of surviving
Veterinary Products) may absorb some of the
hibernation than one of 600 g. For this reason many
metaldehyde
juvenile hedgehogs weighing less than 450g at the
end of November are taken into care and fed
Other than these measures, supportive treatment
through the winter.
and warmth may help overcome the toxicity, but do
If they reach 600 g they are given the opportunity
not be too hopeful.
to hibemate in an outside pen. They are closely
monitored with food available if they come out of
Other poisonings
hibernation. Eventually they are released in April
01 May.
Hedgehogs will often entet garages or garden sheds
Experience has shown that hedgehogs generally
and help themselves to any concoction lying
hibernate between January and March,but in some
aTound. They have been known to drink weed
years, in warmet parts of Britain, they do not hiber-
killer, lick acid from ca1 batteries or fall into tubs
nate at all.
of oil or tar. The latter can be treated as you would
an affected bird but other poisoning will require
the veterinary surgeon's input and possibly the
COMMON INJURIES
Veterinary Poisons Information Service (see
Appendix 7). Ta1 can be 1emoved with warm water
Fractures
after it has been softened up with the hand cleanser
Analgesia for all fractures can be provided with:
Swarfega (Deb).
· Carprofen (Rimady]? - Pfze1)
Out during the day (ODD)
● Flunixin (Finadyne? - Schening-Plough Animal
Health)
By far the most common incident that warrants a
·Buprenorphine (Temgesic? - Schering-Plough
hedgehog being rescued is that it is out during the
Animal Health)
day (ODD), i.e. it has been seen out and about
during the daylight hours.
Leg fractures
Hedgehogs are very strictly noctumal. They will
only venture out during the day if:
Hedgehogs are often presented with fractures of
 one or more legs. Often the fracture is compound
● They are juveniles and have not been able to find
and grossly infected.
enough food. This happens especially near the
A simple fracture of the tibia, radius and ulna,
onset of winter.
metatarsal or metacarpal bones can be stabilised
● They are sick or injured and have been unable to
using old-fashioned plaster of Paris casts. Plastet of
feed and build a nest
Paris seems to be more manageable in hedgehogs
· They are young and have lost contact with their
than the more modern materials. Of course, a
mother
general anaesthetic will be required to put on even
● They are blind and have lost the ability to tell day
the simplest of casts. A small face mask fashioned
 
out of a sphygmomanometer bulb is ideal for
administering isofurane and oxygen (Fig. 22.10).
All the hedgehogs in these situations will fail if
Fractures of the femur or humerus may be
they are not taken into care.
needles as pins. Compound fractures, usually of the
tibia or radius and ulna, can be stabilised with
Too small to hibernate (TSTH)
extracutaneous fixation even while the wounds are
Nobody knows why a hedgehog picks a time to
being treated. This method is also useful as a last
hibemate. It may be day length, it may be tempe-
Tesort when an infected compound fracture will not
rature, it may be food shortage or some other
lespond to treatment. With an extracutaneous
Teason. What we do know is that hedgehogs under
fixator in place the wound can be left open and
Hedgehogs
209
Fig. 22.10 A face mask for hedgehog
anaesthesia can be fashioned from a
sphygmomanometerbulb.
treated topically with hydrogels like IntraSiteTM
Gel (Smith & Nephew) (Fig. 22.11).
Most antibiotics have no adverse effects on
hedgehogs, although cephalexin has not been
proven with Tegular use. Soluble antibiotics for
addition to the drinking water have been found to
be a complete waste of time.
Often, after a hedgehog's fractures have healed,
the animal may still be reluctant to use its injured
leg or legs Simple daily hydrotherapy in a bowl of
 oi i jo  is  r 
their afflicted limbs (Fig. 22.12).
Jaw fractures
Often caused by dogs, fracture of both the top and
bottom jaw are fairly common. The top jaw can be
wired and usually the palate is torn and needs
sutuning. The bottom jaw and symphysis can be
wired.
Spinal fractures
A hedgehog with a fractured spine will not be able
to use its back legs and is usually presented with its
hindquarters protruding from beyond its spiny
coat. These are exactly the same signs seen in a
hedgehog with another condition I have called
Fig. 22.11 Extracutaneous fixation of an infected com-
‘pop-off syndrome’ which can be cured (see below).
pound fracture.
An X-ray is needed to confirm that a spine is
fractured. At the veterinary surgeon's discretion,
210
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 22.12 A hedgehog being
given hydrotherapy.
the hedgehog may have to be humanely destroyed
fo1 is a solid foot. The leg may have to be ampu-
by euthanasia.
tated and the hedgehog kept in captivity.
 The teim euthanasia is from the Greek mmeaning
painless death', but it is impossible to provide a
painless death to a hedgehog unless first it is
Skin wounds
anaesthetised and then given intracardiac barbi-
Major wounds
turates. Without anaesthesia, and certainly without
unrolling the hedgehog under anaesthetic, there is
Usually as victims of 1oad traffic accidents o1 dog
no way the lethal injection can be given painlessly.
attacks, hedgehogs are often admitted with exten-
However, if a vein could be accessed then an
sive skin wounds sometimes covering 60-80% of
intravenous injection of barbiturates would not
the back spiny coat. It is probably because the
cause the hedgehog unnecessary suffering as would
hedgehog has a very loose skin covering that the
an injection into a sentient hedgehog.
skin is lipped away with very little damage to
unde1lying tissue. The wound may look hotrendous
but if the hedgehog is kept on continuous fuids the
Crushed foot disease (CFD)
loose skin can be pulled ovet and sutured. There is
Hedgehogs may appear with injuries that defy
very seldom any skin lost. Usually these wounds are
explanation. A hedgehog will often be presented
freshly inficted and are clean but contaminated
with just one foot injured - all the bones crushed,
making treatment that much more feasible.
full of infection and leaking pus (Plate 35). It is
To prepare the wound for suturing it should be
often a mystery how these injuries happen and why
filled with hydrogel (IntraSiteTM Gel - Smith &
no other part of the hedgehog is injured.
Nephew or K-Y? Lubricating Jelly - Johnson &
Treatment is very difficult as the infection will
Johnson) while the spines sulrounding the edges
have spread right through the foot to be almost a
are cut back and the wound fushed with stenile
cellulitis. Bacterial sampling of any exudate may
saline. It is important that any fur or spines sur-
indicate a suitable antibiotic, but, even when the
 Jounding a wound are cleaned away. Spines can be
infection is cleared,the best the hedgehog can hope
cut back with diessing scissors while fur o1 hair is
Hedgehogs
21I
Fig. 22.13 The Wahl Trimmer is ideal for clipping up hedgehogs
adequately clipped with a Wahl Pocket Pro
 maggots. These will kill the hedgehog unless they
Timmer Kit (Wahl) (Fig. 22.13). The edges can then
are controlled.
be sutured or stapled together (Plate 14).
Fly eggs
These may look like grains of tice and can be any-
Facewounds
where there is a likelihood of moisture. The eyes,
Just as alarming as the massive skin wounds are the
ears, nose, mouth, face and underarms are all
face wounds that hedgehogs seem to suffer, pre-
favounite laying sites. They can be picked off with
sumably from lawn mower/strimmer injury or dog
forceps or brushed off with a stiff washing-up
attack.
brush. Those in the eye sockets can be expelled by
Usually the skin is intact but pulled out of place
gently manipulating the eye from around the lids,
exposing the nasal bones and soft tissues. After
pushing the eggs out of the eye socket. Filling the
preparation the skin can often be sutured carefully
eye sockets with bland chloramphenicol eye oint-
back into place using fine Vicryl (Ethicon) with
ment will smother any eggs that may have been
swaged-on needles.
missed.
It is important that as a starting point the skin
Sometimes the eggs will recently have hatched
suTrounding the eyes, simply a hole in the skin, is
into the same places. Brushing them off will remove
put back in place and held while the rest of the face
the larvae and the chloramphenicol in the eye
is reconstructed. Daily dressing with IntraSiteTM
sockets will suffocate them. The mouth can be
Gel will speed the healing process.
flushed with a proprietary mouth wash. One or two
drops of GAC Ea1 Drops (Amolds Veterinary
Products) in each ear will cover any maggots
Fly strike (myiasis)
missed.
Duning the summer months every hedgehog
An effective larvicide that can be used topically
casualty is likely to have been the victim of attack
in small amounts on hedgehogs is ivermectin
by blow flies. The evidence may be in the form of
(IvomecTM Injection for Cattle - Merial Animal
eggs or larvae from fresh hatches up to full-grown
Health) mixed 1 :9 with wate1. It is not very stable
212
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 22.14 Maggots can cause
deep wounds.
once mixed and should be used immediately.
As yet it is unproven in Britain but can be dosed
Restrict the topical use of this mix to a maximum
undiluted at:
of 1.0 ml/kg.
 Hedgehogs with fly strike should also be given a
↑ tablet (2.85 mg) per 100 g hedgehog
subcutaneous injection of ivermectin at 400 mcg/kg
 tablet (5.7 mg) per 250g hedgehog
to cover any straggler maggots not discovered.
 tablet (8.55 mg) per 500 g hedgehog
●whole tablet (11.4 mg) per 700 g hedgehog
Maggots
The fy eggs hatch into maggots often within hours
The tablets will take up to four hours to kill all
of being laid (Fig. 22.14). Contrary to popular
the maggots successfully.
opinion, maggots will attack sound flesh as well as
Topically, crushed tablets can be diluted with dis-
necrotic material. As they grow the maggots will
 tilled water and applied to a patch of healthy skin,
burrow into the animal and are seen as groups
 not directly onto the maggots. Any unused can be
buried deep in the tissues with only their hindquar-
 given orally as a syrup up to the recommended
ters showing.
dose.
 Each maggot should be picked off with forceps
Any unused patts of tablets should be disposed
and destroyed. Large infestations covering massive
aeis aq ol readde jou op Aaqi se Aaneipa jo
areas of the body can be fushed out using warm
once removed from their foil wrapping.
saline in a Water Pik (Teledyne).
 Once again any results of using the product could
 A covering injection of ivermectin will deal with
be useful to pass to othel rehabilitators and nurses.
the occasional straggler maggot. Broad-spectrum
Maggots do create toxins that can be taken up by
antibiotics, such as long-acting amoxycillin, should
the affected animal. If there is a massive maggot
be provided.
build-up then a drug with antitoxin, anti-infamma-
Rehabilitators in America are having success in
dealing with maggot infestation of small mammals
hog recover. The drug we have found to be suitable
by using, both orally and topically, nitenpyram
is funixin (Finadyne? Solution - Schering-Plough
(Capstar? 11.4 mg - Novartis Animal Health UK
Animal Health) at 2mg/kg intramuscularly for a
Ltd) (D. Congel, personal communication).
maximum of three days.
Hedgehogs
213
Other injuries
Ligatures
Prolapsed eyes
Ligatures from garden string, netting OT anything
hazardous are found on lame hedgehogs. Usually it
Presumably caused by collision, prolapse of the
Tequires anaesthesia to Telease them. Pressure
eyes is far more common in the hedgehog than in
necrosis is always possible so any afflicted hedge-
other animals. The hedgehog's eye seems to be a
hog should be tetained and monitored for at least
very simple structure and when prolapsed withers
seven days.
almost immediately. Hedgehogs in semi-captivity
Sometimes a ligature will have removed a leg
can manage adequately without eyes. In cases of
completely. Hedgehogs can manage very well on
prolapse, the eye stalk can simply be ligated with
three legs but it is best to keep them in semi-cap-
absorbable suture material and the ball cut off.
tivity where they cannot find another hazard to
Broad-spectrum antibiotic  eye ointment  will
cause them even more injury and where they can
control any infection.
be tegularly checked for soreness.
Pop-off syndrome
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
This is one of those hedgehog-only conditions
encountered in the mid-1980s (Stocke1, 1987). With
On admission all hedgehogs should receive fuid
this condition the main orbiculanis muscle, which is
therapy either intraosseously, subcutaneously or, in
Tesponsible for curling the hedgehog, seems to slip
large cooperative hedgehogs, intravenously. Venous
ove1 the top of the pelvis (Fig. 22.15). This is usually
access in hedgehogs can be via the superficial veins
self-induced particularly in hedgehogs’ struggles to
of the hind legs.
escape after getting stuck in fences. It renders the
 It is sometimes impossible to assess a hedgehog's
hedgehog helpless and produces the same symp-
injuries because it curls up into a tight ball. Holding
toms as the paraplegia of a fractured spine. X-rays
and rocking the hedgehog may encourage it to
will confirm the diagnosis one way or the other. If
open up suffciently for its undeineath to be
the orbicularis has popped off, it will not be possi-
checked. However, if there is any suspicion of a life-
ble to pull it back over the pelvis without the assis-
threatening problem the hedgehog should receive
tance of anaesthesia. Once it is replaced ‘pop-off
its fluids, be left to stabilise for 30 minutes and then
should not recur.
quickly anaesthetised with isofurane and oxygen
Fig. 22.15 Pop-off syndrome should not
be confused with spinal injury.
214
Practical Wildlife Care
so that the full extent of any problems can be
will receive a suitably balanced diet by being
realised.
offered tinned dog o1 cat food. Fishy cat food is not
All hedgehogs once stable and not on any further
suitable.
medication should receive the full regime for lung-
Each hedgehog will consume at least a third of a
worm treatment.
tin of dog food each night. In captivity they can
Hedgehogs with more than one leg missing
overeat and become obese. Their weight in capti-
should be humanely destroyed (Plate 56).
vity should be Testnicted to about 1200g. The
problem with a long stay on a soft diet is the
inevitable build-up of calculus on their teeth.
To combat this, add to their soft food a dog o1 cat
CAGING
pellet that is palatable to hedgehogs. In particular
hedgehogs relish Whiskas Junior Dry (Mars Inc)
Adult hedgehogs are solitary animals that will often
while often rejecting other dry foods. The pellets
fight or attack others. During a stay for treatment
seem to be particularly favoured by juvenile hedge-
they should be kept on thei1 own if possible, o1 at
hogs and those reluctant to take the normal dog Or
least until they are well enough to defend them-
selves. Provide newspaper on the foor and a clean
cat food.
Adult hedgehogs should only ever be offered
towel each day for them to get underneath. Hay,
straw and shredded paper do not suit hedgehogs,
water to dnink. Milk is likely to cause intestinal
problems and should never be considered for any
which will often circle and end up with ligatures
adult animal.
alound their legs.Any that is classed as seriously ill
Hedgehogs with mouth problems or other disa-
should be provided with a metal heat mat at one
bilities can be offered complete liquid nutrition.
end of its cage.
Vanilla-favoured Ensure (Abbott Laboratories) is
Once they have Tecovered they should be kept in
suitable especially for animals recovering from
much larger outside pens for at least two weeks
food deprivation.
before being released. If the pens are large enough
Biscuits, nuts, cheese o1 vegetable matter should
more than one hedgehog can be kept together, but
not be offered to hedgehogs. They are insectivores
be aware that they well might fight. A large sleep-
without the intestinal 1efinements to cope with
ing box, this time with hay as bedding, will be used
by all the hedgehogs.
these inappropriate foods.
For overwintering youngsters that have been
cleared of illness and disease, we provide indoor
RELEASE
cages (Ferret cages - Rolf C. Hagen) with three to
four hedgehogs in each cage. These are kept in a
Hedgehogs are not territonial and need not be
Ioom with an ambient temperature of 18°C. Once
Jeleased specifically where they were found, that is
these hedgehogs reach a weight of 500g, and
unless the particular hedgehog is obviously a
because of the numbers involved, they are put into
nursing mother and can be eturned within 24
large outside pens with other hedgehogs of similar
weight. They are provided with communal sleeping
hours. Hedgehogs do seem to prefer to forage in
boxes with hay bedding. They are all physically
gardens around houses and in wasteland (Kampe-
examined each day. Food and water are provided at
Persson, 2002). Hedgehogs can be released in
gardens subject to the following conditions:
all times. The hedgehogs are maintained in these
 pens until theit release in April or May.
●That there are hedgehogs in that area - showing
good habitat
· That they have unfettered access to at least ten
FEEDING
 other gardens
· That there are no badger colonies in the imme-
In the wild, hedgehogs feed on all manner of inver-
diate vicinity
tebrate prey. In captivity it is neither feasible nor
· That there is a reasonable chance of the hedge-
affordable to provide this type of diet. Hedgehogs
hogs avoiding 1oads - complete avoidance of
Hedgehogs
215
Joads is not possible in this country but major A
On Telease hedgehogs should weigh at least
and B roads are the greatest hazards
450g during the summer, 500g up to the end of
· That generally the neighbouring gardens are rea-
alppu ayl [gun dn soo9 iseal 1e pue 1aquaaoN
sonably free of molluscicides and dangerous dogs
of December. Hedgehogs would benefit from not
● That any ponds should have escape ladders for
being released from the middle of December to the
hedgehogs
middle of Apnil.
Following rescue work of hedgehogs removed
The hedgehogs should be released via a suitable
from the Outer Hebnides to be Teleased on main-
nest box where they can return if they so wish.
land Bnitain it was found that animals released
Marking the hedgehogs with cofrection fuid will
immediately took a long while to adapt. Animals
identify any that do return.
that were kept in captivity for two weeks or more
Studies have shown that reared or rehabilitated
before release coped very well and quickly adapted
hedgehogs do comfortably make the transition
to translocation (S. Moloney, in preparation).
from captivity to freedom (Mo1ris, 1999). However,
Tecent blood assays taken from hedgehogs due
fo1 1elease from The Wildlife Hospital Trust (St
LEGISLATION
hedgehog may be disguising internal problems
In the wild, the hedgehog, like all wild mammals, is
(J.C.M. Lewis, personal communication).
protected from some kinds of cruelty by the Wild
We are now considering that each hedgehog
Mammals (Protection) Act 1996. In captivity
should be given a clean bill of health by the veteri-
it is completely protected from cruelty by the
 nary surgeon before it is released. In patticulat:
Protection of Animals Act 1911.
Unde1 the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 it
· Teeth should be cleaned and overhauled
is on Schedule 6 which prohibits its taking by certain
· Blood samples should be taken and assessed
 methods, including trapping, snaring and poisoning.
12
Rabbits and Hares
Species seen regularly:
The mountain hare is smaller than the brow
Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus), brown hare (Lepus
hare and favours higher ground in Scotland and
europaeus) and mountain or Irish hare (L. timidus).
Ireland, where it has replaced its larger cousin.
There is also a scant island population of mountain
hares on the fells in Derbyshire. The mountain hare
NATURAL HISTORY
adopts a pure white coat in harsh, winter conditions
and can regularly be seen glaringly dead by the
These three species are very similar to rodents in
sides of winter 1oads.
that they have open-iooted teeth that grow con-
Rabbits and hares are noticeably different in
tinually throughout life. They are, however, not
that adult hares are much larger than rabbits and
classed as rodents but as a totally separate ordel,
generally have a more athletic gangling physique.
the lagomorphs.
Hares also give birth to young that are fully furred
 Rabbits are well known and live underground in
and have theit eyes open. In contrast baby rabbits
groups of burrows called warrens. They will eat a
'payeu aie Aau 'sdois, u punoiarapun uoq aie
wide range of herbage and, in particula1, have been
helpless and have their eyes and ears closed.
Iesponsible for keeping the grass of open areas
CTopped short, therefore moulding much of the
landscape.
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
However, within two years of the introduction of
the viral disease myxomatosis, in 1953, 99% of the
The only equipment that is functional for catching
population had died, causing much of the grass
these animals is a large net with a long handle.
landscape to grow longel and eventually revert to
Calrying boxes should be enclosed, with ventila-
scTub. The change had drastic consequences for
tion holes low down, and made of cardboard o1
many species of wildlife, the most severe of which
wood. Both rabbits and hares will remain quieter if
was the extinction of the large blue butterfy
(Maculinea arion) as a breeding British species.
they cannot see out of the box.
Hares were one species that may have benefited
from the longer grass as it offered more cover for
their open nests, their ‘forms', which are no more
RESCUE AND HANDLING
than shallow depressions in the ground.
More recently, the rabbit population has showm
It is generally rabbits that have to be tescued. These
an increase, probably due to an increasing immu-
fall into three categories:
nity to the vanious strains of myxomatosis. Browm
hares, on the other hand, are showing a rapid
(1) Those injured in road traffic accidents
decline in numbers, possibly due to modein arable
(2) Young rabbits caught by cats
farming methods (Corbet & Ha1nis, 1991).
(3) Rabbits infected with myxomatosis
216
Rabbits and Hares
217
All these incapacitated animals are still going to
myxomatosis is spotted on the road and there is no
be elusive and need the long-Teach net to be sure
net available. Its eyes may be closed but it can still
of catching them.
have some hearing and sense of smell and will run
The difficulty often occurs when a rabbit with
blindly if anyone approaches it. The thing to do is
to creep up on it from the 1oad, so that if it does
Tun it will not run into other traffc. Then when near
enough to teach it, it should be grabbed securely
around the body.
It will not bite but will struggle and possibly
scratch with its hind legs It is crucial that both
Iabbits and hares are controlled, as they are very
susceptible to damage of the spine. Holding them
should be with one hand clutching the scruff or
around the shoulders. The other hand must be used
to support the rump and stop the animal struggling
(Fig. 23.1). The animal can then be put into a box
gently and covered with a towel or blanket.
 Rabbits and hares must nevet be picked up by
their ears.
Both hares and rabbits have been known to die
of cardiac alrest brought on by stress o1 fea1 of
being caught. Diazepam, given at 1 mg/kg intra-
muscularly, will calm the animal during transpot to
the medical facility.
 Hares are generally road traffic victims, although
some do survive being shot. More usual though
is the amival of supposedly Orphaned young
hares, leverets, which have been found sitting in the
middle of a field (Fig. 23.2). This is quite normal
Fig. 23.1 It is important to support their backs when
behaviour, the leverets would remain unattended in
handling rabbits and hares.
their form until the female hare retums once during
Fig. 23.2 Leverets should not generally
be 'rescued'.
218
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 23.3 Rabbits with myxomatosis will
continue eating and drinking and may
recover.
the night to suckle the youngsters and to stimulate
The viius is spread from 1abbit to rabbit by
and clean any faeces or utine.
fleas or biting flies. The incubation period is 2-8
Unfortunately it is not always possible to find the
days, after which the eyelids become swollen and
form and replace the leverets; they then have to be
closed. A purulent conjunctivitis further infames
hand-reared, a particularly daunting task with such
the eyes and periorbital tissue followed by subcu-
a sensitive animal. This is where the advice to
taneous swellings and abscesses around the ears,
‘Leave them alone’ teally does hold true.
neck, head, nose and anogenital region (Fig. 23.3).
Although the affected rabbits will continue feeding
and mating as normal, death usually intervenes
COMMON DISEASES - RABBITS
within 11-18 days. Howevel, some rabbits do
survive to pass on any acquired immunity to future
Although infectious diseases in wild mammals
generations.
should be natural phenomena, the two diseases that
Myxomatosis is the most common teason that
Tegularly kill wild rabbits are present in Bnitain
rabbits ale caught and taken into care. Euthanasia
solely through the action of man.
has always been the lecommended treatment for
affected rabbits and, certainly, if we receive an
Myxomatosis
animal exhibiting extreme suffening or having fits
The myxoma virus is found naturally in the South
we will euthanase it. Some rabbits, though, can
Amelican forest 1abbit Sylvilagus brasiliensis. In
Tecover from the disease and can be given sup-
this species it causes only mild, non-lethal disease.
portive treatment to bolster their active immune
However, when the virus was introduced to Bnitain
systems (Fig. 23.4). Many of the animals in care
in 1953,its effect was devastating. Within two years
show no distress and continue feeding and drinking
99% of the rabbit population had penished.
normally until they recover, die or are humanely
Since that initial onslaught there have been
destroyed.
frequent outbreaks of the disease, but with fewer
After the stabilising treatments offered on
animals dying. These survivors are passing on theit
admission, when all rabbits should receive fuids
immunity and gradually the mortality rate has been
and fea control, any apparently infected rabbits are
teduced to 40-60%. If this trend continues, the
started on an intensive course of treatment (Table
tabbit will eventually enjoy the resistance to the
23.1). If they survive for 19 days they are presumed
virus seen with the forest rabbit. The myxoma virus
to have survived the infection and are prepared for
does not affect any other British species.
Telease or retention in semi-captivity.
Rabbits and Hares
219
Those animals with irretrievable damage to theit
eyes requining enucleation will have to be retained
in captivity. It has been found those blind wild
Tabbits, having survived 19 days of intensive care, in
fact become very steady and thrive with similar
rabbits in open pens proofed against foxes (Fig.
 23.5). They exhibit no signs of stress but should be
neutered so as not to needlessly increase the rabbit
population.
Viral haemorrhagic disease (VHD)
This is a comparatively modein ho1lo1 inficted on
Tabbits. The viral disease emanated,in around 1984,
from domestic rabbits in China, and took ten years
finally to be confirmed in Bnitain's wild rabbit
population (Anon, 1994).
Transmmission of the virus is by direct contact with
infected rabbits or by contact with rodents, insects
Or biids. Once an infected animal is in captivity the
virus can be transmited mechanically on equip-
ment, feed or clothing. It is not transferable to
humans Or othet species.
The signs of the disease include:
· Sudden death
● Loss of appetite
· Depression
Fig. 23.4 A rabbit that has recovered from myxomatosis.
· Signs of respiratory distress
Table 23.1 Routine treatment for rabbits affected by myxomatosis.
St Tiggywinkles
The Wildlife Hospital Trust
Drug
Dose
Frequency
Effect
Hartmann's solution
50 ml
Twice daily for seven days
Fluids - rehydration
Enrofoxacin (Baytril 5% Injection - Bayer)
0.2ml
Daily for seven days
Antibiotic
Etamiphylline camsylate (Millophyline-V 
0.2ml
Daily for seven days
Bronchodilator
Amolds Veterinary Products)
Bromhexine hydrochloride (Bisolvon
0.3ml
Daily for seven days
Mucolytic
Injection - Boehringer [ngelheim)
Flunixin (Finadyne - Schering-Plough
0.15ml
Daily for 3 days
Anti-toxin
Animal Health)
Avipro (Vetark Animal Health)
Pinch
Daily on food
Pro-biotic
Multivitamins (Norbrook)
up to 0.5ml
Weekly
Multivitamins
Bisolvon? powder (Boehringer Ingelheim)
On food
 One sprinkle daily
Once course is finished
220
Practical Wildlife Care
· Incoordination
Some proprietary rabbit foods contain a coc-
· A blood-stained mucous discharge from the nose
cidiostat which may prevent the disease but are
·Death within 1-2 days
unlikely to cure it.
Generally
entenic problems, particularly in
The disease has a high morbidity and a mortality
labbits, are more complicated than simple coc-
rate in domestic rabbits close to 90% (Capucci
cidiosis. Any other symptoms will require an urgent
et al., 1997). The incubation period is 24-72 hours fol-
lowed soon after by death. The effects of VHD a1e
veteninary surgeon.
devastating and probably too severe to be treated.
As it is there have been no confimed cases being
Endoparasites
offered for rehabilitation, but stnict precautions
should be taken if any sick rabbit is taken into care.
Both rabbits and hares will carry an endoparasite
A quarantine system similar to that used for
burden and may benefit from being treated with
animals affected by myxomatosis would be suitable,
ivermectin (IvomecTM Injection for Cattle - Merial
with extra precautions to prevent mechanical trans-
Animal Health) at 200 mcg/kg. Hares in particu-
fe1 of the virus. Vaccination is available (Cylap 
la1 may have a problem with the nematode
Fort Dodge Animal Health).
Graphidiumstrigosum.
Coccidia
Fly strike (myiasis)
Both rabbits and hares may be infected with coc-
 Rabbits produce two types of faeces in pellet form.
cidia, especially Eimeria spp, which may cause diar-
The caecal pellets, called caecotrophs, are moist and
Thoea, especially in young animals Confirmation of
expelled at night to be re-consumed by the rabbit.
their presence can be from identifying oocysts in
 If they are not cleared they may leave a damp area
faecal samples.
which in daylight will be attractive to flies.
Treatment can be provided in drinking water by
Simila1ly a rabbit with loose or diarrhoeic faeces
mixing in sulphadimidine to give a 0.2% solution.
may also attract fies to its anal region, where most
However, this may only be effective if the animal
fly strikes in rabbits occur. The anal region on both
is willing to dnink. Sulphamethoxypynidazine
newly-admitted and captive rabbits should be
(Bimalong - Bimeda Chemicals Ltd) may be a
checked for evidence of fly sttike. If there is a
useful injectable to treat coccidiosis.
history of diarrhoea o1 an obviously damp area
Fig. 23.5 Rabbits surviving myxomato-
sis may be blind but can settle to a full
existence in captivity.
Rabbits and Hares
221
then the whole hindquarters can be protected with
not many othet regular occasions when lagomorphs
an insect powder (Whiskas Exelpet - Pedigree
may be presented for care. The only other situation
Masterfoods) o1 Rea1 Guard? (Novartis Animal
likely to occur is the rescue of a survivor after being
Health UK Ltd), the only product licensed in 
shot either with a shotgun from long range or an air
Bnitain particulaily to prevent blow-fy strike in
nife, when one pellet may cauise injury.
Iabbits. Being a prescription-only medicine it does
Malocclusion can be seen in wild rabbits or hares.
have to be prescribed by a veterinary surgeon.
If it does occur it can be treated as it would in a
domestic animal. Howevel, the affected animal
Mycobacterium avium subspecies
should never be released and may need regular
paratuberculosis
treatment making a life in captivity untenable.
Spinal fractures Tequiring euthanasia are the
Greig et al. (1997) found evidence of this disease in
67% of a batch of wild rabbits killed on Tayside in
most regularly seen fracture injunies in both rabbits
 and hares (Fig 23.6). However, young animals in
Scotland. There is no evidence that this high inci-
particula1 may Teceive treatable fractures of the
dence is repeated throughout Britain but, as there
long bones in the legs (Fig. 23.7).
is a possibility, handlers should be even more aware
Other injunies ale likely to be particula1 to a
of the essential hygienic conditions necessary when
situation and should be evaluated as and when
handling any wild animal.
they arise.
Antibiotics fo1 rabbits should be supplemented
COMMON DISEASES - HARES
with a pro-biotic to reinstate the gut fora.
Entofoxacin (Baytril - Baye1) and amoxycillin
European brown hare syndrome
with clavulanic acid (Synulox - Pfzer Animal
Health) have both been used systematically without
European brown hare syndiome (EBHS) is a viral
any adverse side effects. Lincomycin, howevel, has
disease of hares It is apparently extremely virulent,
been shown to be toxic in rabbits (Flecknell, 1991).
Tather in the mould of VHD in rabbits The author
has no record of wild hares ever being presented for
treatment at rescue centres suffering from EBHS.
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
Just like VHD in rabbits, death is fairly rapid afte1
contracting the disease. This is probably why nO
Initially Tabbits and hares should receive fuids
living, affected animals have been found and rescued.
intravenously. Access to a tabbit's cardiovascular
system should not be through the ear veins as this
Treponema
can be painful and cause sloughing. Preferably use
Scabby lesions around the mouth, noses and geni-
the lateral saphenous or jugular veins (Kellehel,
2003). A butterfy infusion set can be glued into
talia of brown and mountain hares, in central and
southern Scotland, have been recognised for some
place with tissue glue (VetbondTM - 3M). The veins 
years. During 1995, sections from 9 out of the 11
can be dilated by applying digital pressure. Hares
caicasses collected in the peniod 1992-93 were
are large enough to allow access to the cephalic
Ie-examined (Mun1o et al., 1995). Spirochaetes
veins as well.
were found in the epidermis of one brown hare and
Diazepam at 1 mg/kg is helpful in calming down a
hare and a vitamin E/selenium intramuscular injec-
two mountain hares. This was probably the first
Tecord of treponema-like organisms in wild hares.
tion (Dystosel - Intervet) will help combat post-
More examples of hares showing scabby lesions are
capture myopathy, a condition common in sensitive
needed to establish the extent of the condition.
wild animals like hares and deer (see Chapter 27).
The
broad-spectrumantibiotic long-acting
amoxycillin can be provided as a cover for the
COMMON INCIDENTS
effects of shock.
All rabbit admissions are potentially carliers of
Apart from the three examples - road traffic
myxomatosis or infective feas, whether they are
victims, cat victims and disease victims - there are
 obviously diseased o1 not, and could pass infection
222
PracticalWildlifeCare
 On to othet rabbits An admission protocol will keep
Masteifoods) or treated with the spot on
disease transmission under control:
Advantage?(Bayer). In 1997 Cooper and Penaliggon
jeported that Rhone Merieux, the manufacturer
· After fuid administration a rabbit must be dusted
of fipronil (Frontline° Spray) recommended that
with fea powde1 (Whiskas Exelpet - Pedigree
the spray was unsuitable for lise in this species.
Fig. 23.6 Many hare casualies have
spinal fractures.
Fig. 23.7 A rabbit with a plastered fractured leg.
Rabbits and Hares
223
● The rabbit should then be put into a cardboard
 Rabbits affected by myxomatosis do respond to
box for 15 minutes so that the fleas can die off
alfalfa.
● The rabbit is then put into a quarantine cage
Three to eight hours after feeding, rabbits expel
where it is held for ten days
mucous-covered faecal pellets from the anus, the
● Myxomatosis victims, after their initial medica-
caecotrophs. These are eaten by the rabbit directly
tion, are put into bird-holding facilities where no
from the anus in a process known as caecotrophy.
fit rabbits are kept
Keeping rabbits on wie mesh floors may cause dif-
●Any catrying boxes, hay or bedding used in
ficulty fo1 the rabbits to access the pellets (Slade &
admitting the animals are incinerated
Forbes, 2004). Howevel, as s0on as possible, abbits
Ae ul seaie Apa 1o sa oi o 1nd aq pion
case.
CAGING
Rabbits can be kept in any large cage. The use of
RELEASE
wooden rabbit hutches should be avoided as it is
almost impossible to keep them sterile.
There is obviously going to be confict with farmers
Once they have recovered, rabbits should be put
about releasing rabbits on to farmland. We over-
out on grass inside a wire pen with housing at one
come these objections by finding release sites
end. A chicken ark without any foor is ideal.
with no farming interest. In particular, upland
However, it should be moved every day or else the
areas with open grassland and other rabbits tend to
Tabbits will bulrow out.
be amenity areas that welcome natural lawn
Hares should be kept in isolated sheds well away
mowers.
from the hubbub of general practice. They are, like
Hares ale more suited to farmland but can be
deel, suisceptible to post capture myopathy fo1 some
persecuted if they are not welcome. They do not
time afte1 being taken into care (Rendle, 2004).
damage crops on the scale of rabbits, so many
farmers will be only too pleased to allow the release
of hares on their land.
FEEDING
Rabbits blinded by myxomatosis should always
be kept in semi-captivity. They settle really well
Rabbits and hares will appreciate fresh grass (but
(Fig. 23.5).
not lawnmower clippings which tend to ferment
when freshly cut), chickweed and, favourite of all,
dandelion leaves. For a more balanced diet there
are propnietary foods available at most pet stores
LEGISLATION
and agricultural merchants.
Rolf C. Hagen produces two rabbit products:
There is no formal protection specifically for these
three species. They are, howevel, protected from
· Rabbit pellets in a 5lb bag
cTuelty by the Protection of Animals Act 1911 and
● Gourmet rabbit mix in 1 kg packets
the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996.
Red Fox
NATURAL HISTORY
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
The red fox is the only canid native to and resident
Foxes are likely to bite anyone handling them.They
in Britain. It was never a plentiful predator until its
Aaqi inq aueieadde ui hop e oi res Aiaa aq Ae
numbers wele artificially swollen by Scandinavian
behave quite differently; whereas a dog will snarl
and other European foxes introduced for hunting
and let a handler know it is going to bite, a fox will
in the nineteenth century.
just bite with no advance warning.
Since the demise of the wolf, the fox is seen as
The equipment needed to handle a fox safely is
the foremost predator and top of the food chain in
just like that used for a dog, but it has to be used to
Britain. After the scourge of myxomatosis in the
its full purpose; any short cuts o1 lack of concen-
1950s, the field vole has replaced the rabbit as
tration will result in somebody getting bitten:
its chief prey item but the fox is very adaptable
and will take other small mammals and birds as
· A large net with a long handle and a padded rim
well as insects, carnion, fruit and other vegetable
can still be very useful. Added to this should be
matter.
a walk-toward net which is like a high tennis net
 Its adaptability has seen the fox move into and
 used to trap a mobile animal
thrive in urban areas in recent years. Here there is
· A dog grasper with a quick-release noose is the
 less disturbance and persecution and a ready supply
safest way of holding a fox (Fig. 24.1)
of food ranging from rats and mice to pigeons,
· A stout pair of gloves will offer a modicum of
hand-outs and fast-food waste. Foxes do not usually
protection if the hands are exposed
attack cats but will take advantage of the situation
The ideal tool used by many keepers, and still
if it finds one already dead.
essential even with a caged fox, is a soft-headed
Contrary to public opinion, the fox is a very clean
broom with which the fox's head can be pinned
animal, although its strong odour may be experi-
down
enced by some as unclean. It lives in family groups,
●Fimally, a cafrying basket made out of substantial
ay Aq paned Aenar Kioal paxr e u!
wire mesh preferably with a crush facility to
dominant dog fox. Both members of the alpha pai1
make it easier to give injections either for seda-
make loyal parents often assisted in teaning by the
tion or anaesthesia
non-breeding vixens in the group. The cubs are
usually born underground during March and April.
They stay with the group until late summer when
RESCUE AND HANDLING
the male cubs and some of the females will disperse
to find their own territonies.
If a fox can stand, and even if it has only three func-
tional legs, it will still be very diffcult to catch. It
will be able to outrun even the fastest person so
tactics are the only sure way of capturing a casualty.
224
Red Fox
225
Fig. 24.1 A typical dog grasper with
quick-release noose used to catch a fox.
Before any attempt can be made to contain a
With the walk-toward net there is less control of
casualty fox the catrying basket must be opened
the fox once it has been caught. This is where the
and ready. Once the fox is caught there will be no
heavy gloves can be used to control the fox through
time to mess around trying to open the basket.
the netting until it can be scruffed. It is better not
A mobile fox is best caught using either of the
to wear thick gloves when actually scruffing a fox
nets. The idea is to cover any escape routes and then
as they make it diffcult to maintain a good grip.
to give the fox no opportunity to go any other way.
Where a fox is in a confined area, say under a
It is worth remembering that a fox is as agile as a
shed, the dog grasper is slid over its head and closed
cat and will think nothing of scaling a 2m fence to
around its neck. The fox is a fragile animal so
evade capture.
jsnr Xinju snoles asneo Aeu ainssaid qonu ool
One person, with a long-handled net, should stay
enough pressure to control it is all that is needed.
out of sight on the proposed escape loute. The other
With the fox under control, it is then pulled into a
person approaches the fox from the opposite direc-
position where it can be scruffed. As soon as the
tion. If that person also has a long-handled net it
scTuff is held the grasper should be released. Do not
Mmay be possible to capture the fox before it runs. If
use the grasper to pick up the fox by its neck. Once
not, as it runs through the intended escape route
it is safely scruffed the fox can easily be put into the
the other person, in one quick movement, brings
open basket and the lid closed.
the net down in front of the fox so that its impetus
Never ever tryjustto reach out and grab the scruff
carnies it into the net. The net is then held firmly on
of a fox that is not under control. It will bite.
the ground.
Scruffing a fox will generally make it relax rather
The other person then approaches and pins the
as it does with cats. Howevel, whenever the fox
fox's neck to the ground, through the net, with the
is picked up, its rump must be supported either
soft-handled broom. It is then possible to scruff
by clutching fu1 ove1 the 1ump (Fig. 24.2) o1, once
the fox through the net and pick it up carefully. The
scTuffed, by supporting the Tump with the free
fox and net can then be put into the caying basket
hand.
and the lid closed down. The fox is then teleased,
No animal, especially a fox, should ever be
the lid closed further and the net pulled out through
picked up by its tail.
the gap. The lid is then bolted shut.
Throughout all these capture and handling p1o-
At all times it must be stressed that the fox can and
cedures the fox temains a very frightened animal.
will bite through the net ifit is given the opportunity.
Even when ternified it will still be concentrating on
226
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 24.2 A fox should be carried by the
scruff and the rump.
escape and will not hesitate to bite as this is its only
 of broad-spectrum antibiotics, long-acting amoxy-
means of defence. Always temember that a fox is
cillin, should be begun together with administration
fal quicker at biting you than you can ever be in
of an anabolic steroid, nandrolone, 1-5mg/kg,
avoiding a bite. Take care.
either daily (Nandoral Tablets - Intervet) or every
21 days, 1-5 mg/kg (Laurabolin - Intervet). Once
the animal is stable, treatment to control the mange
COMMON DISEASES
can be started:
Sarcoptic mange
●Initially a subcutaneous injection of oral dose
of ivermectin (IvomecTM Injection fo1 Cattle 
One of the most common diseases that affects
Merial Animal Health) at 200 mcg/kg, or
foxes, and one of the most obvious, is mange, caused
· An intramuscular injection of doramectin (Dec-
by the mite Sarcoptes scabiei (Plate 36). The mite
tomax? Injectable Solution for Cattle and Sheep
is spread by contact. It burrows into the skin and
- Pfzer Animal Health) at 300 mcg/kg
multiplies rapidly causing extensive hair loss and
· The daily provision of essential fatty acids to
inmitation usually starting at the base of the tail
 ameliorate any allergic reactions to the mites can
and hind feet and quickly spreading over the 1ump,
be supplied with EfaCoatTM (Schering-Plough
back and finally to the head. As the fox scratches
Animal Health) at 10 drops per 5kg
itself, tissue fuid is released and forms an extensive
· The ivermectin or doramectin is repeated after
CTust up to 1 cm thick (Plate 37). The fox may lose
two weeks and then again, after another two
50% of its bodyweight and most of its hair, its eyes
weeks
and face will become encrusted and, if untreated,
the fox will die in about four months (Corbet &
The nandrolone and EfaCoatTM should be con-
Ha1Tis, 1991).
tinued throughout the fox's stay in captivity.
The disease is usually well advanced when the
It is possible to treat a specific fox without
affected fox is debilitated enough to be caught.
catching it. This method can be used if a particular
However, once it is caught it can be treated easily
suffering fox can alone be targeted with food
(Fig. 24.3)
baited with ivermectin. The dose is calculated at
For the first few days, any affected fox should be
200mcg/kg. The ivermectin is mixed 1:9 with
given only supportive treatment, such as aggressive
propylene glycol to make it more stable and given
Auid therapy followed by liquid nutrition. A course
at a dose of 0.2 ml/kg. Foxes are generally in the
RedFox
227
Fig. 24.3 Foxes
can recover from
sarcoptic mange.
Tegion of five kilograms so we have had success by
suffering from inteinal haemorrhage. Only occa-
lacing Walls Microwave Sausages with 1 ml of the
sionally will jaundiced foxes be infected with infec-
ivermectin mix. This is given on three occasions,
tious canine hepatitis or leptospirosis.
each two weeks apatt.
Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH)
Zoonotic considerations
 Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH) is a viral disease
Sarcoptic mange is contagious to humans (and their
of dogs and foxes. Most dogs are vaccinated against
dogs). In humans it is described as scabies and
ICH and it has now become uncommon to see the
should be refelred to a general practitioner for
disease in veterinary practice.
 treatment giving details of a possible contact source.
It is, however, fairly common in foxes, although
Dogs should not be treated but should be
the source of infection is as yet unproven. There is
Tefetred to the veterinary surgeon.
Scabies itself is, in humans, slow in progress.
a range of signs seen early in the disease but, as with
mange, the fox has to be severely ill before it can
However, there is another condition allied to sar-
be spotted and caught.By then it is usually showing
coptic mange that spreads rapidly across the body.
jaundiced gums and 
mucous membranes and
There appears to be, in some humans, an allergic
neurological signs.
Teaction either to the dust or the mites involved. Its
The veterinary surgeon will require a blood
onset is rapid and within 2-3 days most of the torso
sample to confirm the disease. This should be taken
is covered by an inmitating rash. Treatment includes
at triage before fuids are administered.
controlling the itching with soothing creams and
Antibiotics and B vitamins will assist in the treat-
proprietary antihistamines. The skin lesions usually
ment of the disease, which is not always fatal in
cleal spontaneously after about three weeks.
older animals. After the disease, foxes may develop
To avoid both of these conditions, everybody
a characteristic ‘blue eye’ caused by corneal
handling a fox suspected of suffering from mange
should wear a surgical mask, apron and gloves
oedema (Plate 38). This will usually clea1.
The virus is shed in the saliva, urine and faeces
(Fig. 24.4).
 of infected foxes. If a strict hygiene protocol is in
Jaundice
place, there should be no cases of cross infection
between cages, howevet, it is important to remem-
Most foxes that are brought in showing jaundice, a
ber that the virus once shed is viable for up to six
yellowing of the gums and mucous membranes, are
months.
228
Practical Wildlife Care
Zoonoticconsiderations
Any nursing of suspect animals should be under
tight control and hygienic regimes. Some veterinary
Infectious canine hepatitis is not contagious to
surgeons will regard the treatment of an infected
humans, but the clinical signs of jaundice could also
fox as too great a nisk for the staff involved.
be caused by leptospirosis, which is communicable
However, to some, barrier nursing and antibiotics
to humans. Strict barnier precautions should be
taken with any sick fox until the veterinary surgeon
may be feasible.
With a confirmed diagnosis,the finders of the fox
has a confirmed diagnosis.
and anybody involved with its handling Or care
should be advised that if they develop any flu-like
symptoms they must report to their general practi-
Leptospirosis (Weil's disease)
tioner with details of the possible exposure. Identi
Canine leptospirosis is dangerous to humans,
fied and treated early enough, Weil's disease can be
causing Weil's disease, which is potentially fatal.
controlled.
In the wild, leptospirosis is spread mainly in the
uine of rats. In particulai, Leptospira, the Gram-
Endoparasites
negative bacteria involved, survives well in wate.
Foxes may contract the infection through killing
As with all wild animals, a normal burden of para-
and eating rats, through cuts and abrasions O1
sites should not be a problem. Howeve1, by the time
contact with infected foxes. The main clinical
a fox is caught and brought into care it is usually
sign in foxes is jaundice, which is particularly visible
seriously debilitated, with a growing parasite
in the gums and mucous membranes. Confirmation
problem. Treatment with ivermectin or doramectin,
of the disease can be by blood samples taken
as in the mange treatments, will redress the
forlaboratory testing. There is also a canine
problem.
antibody test kit, (ImmunoComb? - Biogal), which 
 Foxes will also harbour the tapeworms Taenid
will give a guideline for the veterinary surgeon
serialis and T. pisiformis as well as Echinococcus
to follow.
granulosus, which can lead to hydatid disease
Red Fox
229
in man. Control is with praziquantel (Droncit?
Injectable - Baye1) at 0.1 ml/kg.
Dental disease
Wild animals should not normally suffer with peri-
odontal disease. Endodontic disease, however, is
seen, and is usually caused by broken teeth, espe-
cially the canines. Often the pulp is exposed, leaving
it susceptible to invasion by bacteria and further
infections. These could possibly include:
·Local infection to the jaw bone
· Systemic spread to the kidneys and healt
valves
●If chronic, amyloidosis of kidney, liver, heart and
spleen and death
A fox's teeth ale sharp but fragile and easily
broken.To release a fox with broken teeth and pulp
exposure is tantamount to abandoning it. Before
any fox is released, therefore, it should receive a
complete dental overhaul including Toot filling,
extractions and general cleaning. Crowns, bridges
and any cosmetic repairs are totally inappropriate.
Other conditions
Fig. 24.5 Being caught in a fence may lead to pressure
Other conditions seen in fox casualties include
necrosis
hydrocephalus in cubs and bacterial pneumonias in
adults.
immediately, but should be monitored for signs of
pressure necrosis, which would mean the need for
COMMON INCIDENTS
long-term care.
It is amazing how foxes suffering from the
Snares
advanced stages of a disease appea1 to seek out
Unfortunately, some snares are still legal in this
human habitation and are regularly found in sheds,
country (Fig. 24.6). Foxes are a 1egula1 target and
garages or barns. Foxes on the toads do tend to
are often found by people out walking. Once again
be killed outright or else struggle off neveT to be
the snare can be cut with fencing pliers but the fox
found. They appear to be less susceptible to 1oad
should not be released until it has been monitored
accidents than badgers, otters o1 deer.
for several days in case of pressure nectosis at the
site of the injury.
Entrapment
Fences
Poisoning
A fox will quite often be found where it has tried
It is illegal to poison foxes but it does happen.
to negotiate a fence but has got one leg caught in
Unfortunately it is not always possible to identify
wire 01 chain link (Fig.24.5). It usually has to be cut
the poison used so treatments, other than support-
loose with fencing pliers It should not be released
ive therapy, are probably going to be ineffective.
230
Practical Wildlife Care
Free-running
Dual-purpose
Dual-purpose
Self-locking
(legal)
(free-running)
(self-locking)
(illegal)
(legal)
(illegal)
-a) asodind-inp (a) :(ibe) buuuni-a (e) pasn s ing jeba pue jebai yog ae jeun aneus jo sad1 g'tz bi
running) (legal): (c) dual-purpose (self-locking) (illegal);: (d) self-locking (illegal)
If poisoning is a distinct possibility:
are stabilised with external fixation. External fixa
tion is particulaily useful in foxes, as the fox cannot
· The Wildlife Incident Unit of the Department for
chew them off and it is comparatively easy to keep
Environment Food and Rural Affairs should be
the injured area clean of contamination.
informed on Freephone 0800 321 600
 Pelvic fractures will usually respond to cage Test
·If the poison is identified then the Veterinary
 although vixens may need to be spayed before they
Poisons Information Service (see Appendix 7)
 are released if the pelvic canal is compromised.
may be able to advise on treatment
Back in the wild, foxes should be able to manage
adequately if they have a hind leg or their tail ampu-
tated. They could not cope with the loss of a front
leg, a course of action where possibly euthanasia
COMMON INJURIES
 may be the best option. A fox, even in a cage, uses
its front legs to dig, without one leg it would be
Fractures
deprived of this essential part of its behaviour.
Fractures from road traffic accidents are of the long
bones of the legs, the pelvis or the spine.
Bite wounds
Long-bone fractures can be treated as one would
treat the same injury in a dog. The main difference
As with other debilitating conditions, the fox with
is that a fox will not tolerate a leg cast if it can
bite wounds is not going to be seen or caught until
manage to bite it off. Even an Elizabethan colla1
the wounds are infected and the animal is probably
will be nipped off and destroyed. From the outset
suffering from potentially life-threatening tox-
all leg fractures should be cast in either resin OT
aemia Or septicaemia. Toxaemia can be caused by
fibreglass materials, and this includes temporary
toxins being released from abscesses formed at the
splints More often these days, animal limb fractures
site of the bite wounds.
Red Fox
231
Initially the fox should receive fuids coupled with:
stainless steel and spill-proof (Hagen Non-Spill -
Rolf C. Hagen).
· An intravenous infusion of a broad-spectrum
Old logs will provide something to gnaw which
antibiotic, e-g. enrofoxacin (Baytril 5%
will not damage their teeth.
Baye1) at 5 mg/kg daily
 Once out of cage care and prior to release the
●Corticosteroids, e.g. methylprednisolone at 20-
foxes should be kept separately, in solid pens with
50 mg/kg intravenously
balred gates. A hut will provide shelter. No bedding
●Drugs to counter endotoxaemia, such as flunixin
 other than a raised platform is necessary.
The wounds will have to be drained and treated
as open abscesses.
FEEDING
Other injuries
In the wild, the prefeled diet of foxes is whole
Usually as a tesult of road traffic accidents, foxes
animals. In captivity, these can be provided by
have also suffered ruptured diaphragms, livers OT
buying frozen rabbits, chicks, mice o1 rats. Clean,
spleens.
fresh 1oad kills of all species except hedgehogs will
also be taken Ieadily. If this diet is not available
then any good-quality dog or cat food is adequate
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
in the short term.
At triage it is generally safe to muzzle the fox but
be very aware that any bleeding in the mouth or
RELEASE
vomiting could be life-threatening.
Intravenous fuids and corticosteroids can be
Adult foxes are strictly territorial and should be
administered easily through the cephalic veins O1
Teleased exactly where they were found. If there is
lateral saphenous veins. The latter may be prefer-
any doubt as to the exact location the author has
able, as even the most debilitated fox will chew
known foxes travel ten miles to get back to their ter-
through its giving set in a matter of minutes. For
ritory. So just releasing in a suitable area near to
this reason, a fox should be given as much fuid as
where they were found would seem to be acceptable.
possible while it is being controlled and observed.
Obviously, some areas with gamekeepers are
Once it is in a recovery cage it will destroy the drip.
going to be unsuitable for returning foxes To relo-
A very excited or unmanageable fox can be
cate them to a safer area, try to pick the outskirts
sedated using diazepam at 1mg/kg given intra-
of a large town with a known fox population, like
venously or intramuscularly.
London or Bnistol. Here a release pen with a sheltet
should be erected where the fox can be kept for a
few weeks. After that the door can be opened sur-
CAGING
Teptitiously and the fox allowed to make its own
way out. Food and water will continue to be put in
Foxes ale very destructive and will constantly try to
the pen so that the fox can return if it needs to.
dig or bite their way out of any cages. Wooden cages
Tame foxes, blind foxes and toothless foxes
are not suitable. Solid kennels with batred gates are
should not be teleased.
preferable. The use of wire mesh is not lecom-
mended, as foxes will often fracture their canine
teeth in thei1 effort to escape. Howevel, in the pres-
LEGISLATION
ence of humans the foxes will usually lie undis-
turbed. They will become active at night, when they
The fox enjoys some protection against cruelty
are left alone.
under the Protection of Animals Act 1911 and the
Foxes do not need bedding, but plain newspaper
Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996. Although,
is ideal for the bottom of their cages. They will tip
unfortunately, it can still be snared or shot, hunting
food and water bowls, which should preferably be
with dogs has been declared illegal.
25
111
Species covered:
· Similarly useless with badgers seem to be nets of
Eurasian badgel (Meles meles)
any sort. Badgers can easily become entangled
and are extremely dangerous when trying to
extricate them without getting bitten
NATURAL HISTORY
●As with any animal in a carrying basket, make
sure that in the car or transport there is a poly-
The badger belongs to the mustelid family, which
thene sheet in a tray on which to stand them.
are an advanced group of carnivorous mammals.
The badger, the largest and most numerous of
Bnitain's mustelids, is an extremely powerful animal
RESCUE AND HANDLING
with a 1otund shape (unlike its more sinewy
cousins). Its omnivorous diet consists mostly of
With any badger that needs rescuing, whether it be
earthworms and, in drier weather conditions,
a Ioad traffic accident victim, a snare victim o1 a
vegetable matter. The badger is the mustelid most
vagrant, then it is crucial to judge the state of the
often in need of rescue (Stocke1, 1994a).
animal before any attemptis made to handle it. This
is where the soft broom comes into its own. Just
touch the badger lightly on the head. If it does not
EQUIPMENTANDTRANSPORT
Teact then it may be possible to scruff it into a car-
rying basket, which should already be opened and
Badgers are the most poweiful of the British
Teady to hold the animal.
mustelids and consequently demand the most
Badgers have very little sctuff available for han-
Jobust of equipment in ordet to handle them safely:
dling, but in an unconscious or very weak badger,
with the broom holding the head securely the scruff
· Calrying baskets for badgers should be made
can be clutched with the strongest hand. The badger
especially strong and have a ‘crush’ facility in
can then be lifted safely into the carrying basket
order to allow injection of the animal with seda-
being aware, all the time, just in case the badger
tives o1 anaesthetics
suddenly comes round. If it does,it will struggle and
· First contacts with an injured badger should be
try to bite. Ifit is too stiong then it rust be released
with a soft broom that can be used to control the
and another attempt at capturing using the dog
head of a comatose or semi-conscious badger
grasper made.
· Thick gloves offer no protection against the
Should there be any doubt about being able to
CTushing bite of a badger, so all handling of a con-
control the badger then the dog grasper must be
scious badger should be with a dog grasper
used to capture it: slide the noose over the head and
· The locking mechanism of some dog graspers
around the neck trying to include a front leg. If
can be a dangerous hindrance when handling
previous attempts have been made to capture the
badgers so should be temoved
badger then it may adopt a head-down posture
232
Badgers
233
Fig. 25.1 Badgers are robust and
g um dn payoid aq pingus Aaul buons
grasper and the rump supported.
Fig. 25.2 Badgers will often fall into pits
and not be able to climb out. This one fell
 into a dry swimming pool.
making it impossible to get the grasper over the
Badgers are not as agile as some other animals
head. If this is the case, touch the 1ump with the
and are tegularly found in holes into which they
broom o1 a stick. The badgel will instinctively lift
have fallen and cannot get out. These have been dry
its head. Then the noose can be slipped ovel and
wells, corn cellars, slury pits and even dry swim-
pulled very tight.
ming pools (Fig 25.2). Provided the badge1 has only
The badger willfight and writhe to escape. If the
been trapped for a few hours, o1 since the previous
grasper is secure, take hold of the badger's 1ump
night, and is not injured, it can simply be rescued
(Fig 25.1) and put the animal into the carrying
and immediately released. In these situations the
basket and close the lid. Do not release the grasper
 dog grasper really is the handling method of choice.
until the badger is safely held in by the lid of the
Any badger that is returned to a facility for
basket. Do not use the tail to help lift the badger.
medical treatment should be muzzled at all times
234
PracticalWildlifeCare
when it is handled at the medical centre. Badgers
have a telatively short snout but can be easily
muzzled with a Mikki muzzle although they will try
to tear off any muzzle with their long front claws.
Special attention should be made in case the badger
vomits or has marked respiratory distress.
As they are so dangerous they should always be
fitted with two muzzles, one of which should be
a cotton open weave bandage (Fig. 8.2) (Vet-
W.o.WTM _ Millpledge Veterinary) tied tightly. Thei
front legs will also have to be controlled.
Badgers will not use their formmidable front claws
in attack.
COMMON DISEASES
Like most mustelids, badgers are relatively free of
Tecognisable diseases. Any that may be suspected
should always be referred to the veterinary surgeon
fo1 diagnosis and advice on treatment.
Dental disease
Badgers regularly show teeth that have suffered
trauma, excessive wea1 and disease (Fig. 25.3). Thei1
 teeth are often very worn, possibly being eroded by
the main food on theit menu,earthworms with theit
Fig. 25.3 Badgers' teeth often show major wear and
guts full of abrasive grit.
tear
Pulp exposures in their canine teeth are common
and along with other dental maladies should be
tieated before the animals are considered for
Telease.
of England in Gloucestershire, north Avon,
Many of the diseased or damaged teeth can be
Cornwall and sometimes in Devon.
excavated and filled. The fewer teeth removed the
Common effects of the disease are tuberculous
better itis. Possibly the only animals that should not
pneumonia and nephritis. The lesions found include
be teleased are those that have had all four canines
acute pleurisy, pelicarditis, hepatitis, encephalitis,
extracted.
arthnitis, osteomyelitis and general enlargement of
Prosthetic or cosmetic teeth repairs are com-
the lymph nodes (Gallaghe1 & Nelson, 1979). In
pletely unsuitable for wild animals and should
advanced stages of the disease changes in behav-
never be considered o1 condoned.
jour have been noted and a tendency to move into
Failure to deal with dental disease
O1 dental
the environment of humans, often settling into
problems generally can ultimately lead to the death
barns and outhouses.
of the badger through starvation Or septicaeimia.
It is important to establish whether badgers in
an area are likely to be infected with bovine tuber-
culosis. The veterinary surgeon will be able to
Bovine tuberculosis
advise and give direction on how to deal with
Very much a disease plagued with controversy,
suspect casualties Take all precautions as the
bovine tuberculosis can infect both badgers and
disease can be spread by aerosols from an infected
domestic cattle. It is centred around the southwest
 animal, in unine and with discharges from wounds
Badgers
235
Fig. 25.4 There will often be a runt in the litter - arrowed is the runt of the family.
(Lewis, 1998). It is thought the disease is passed
either orally or subcutaneously or an intramuscular
to other badgers through bites Or respiratory
injection of doramectin (Dectomax? Injectable
aerosols.
Solution for Cattle and Sheep - Pfzer Animal
Health) at 300 mcg/kg.
Growth problems
External parasites
Occasionally in the wild, one cub from a litter may
be abnormally small (Fig. 25.4). Such animals
Badger external parasites are easily seen and are
seldom live long, but there are lecords of these
usually in vast numbers.
gence above ground (Neal, 1986).
These‘no-hopers’ are usually the failing badgers
Fleas
that are Teported to tehabilitation centres. Some of
The badger fea, Poraceras melis, is probably the
them may have deformities but all of them will be
largest fea to be encountered on British wild
weak and incapable of surviving in the wild. Some
mammals. Excessive flea burdens can cauise setious
        
debilitation (J. Lewis, personal communication)
expectancy is short and this should be taken into
and should be controlled. Badgers with heavy fea
account from the moment they are admitted.
burdens should be examined for anaemia and
treated for this if necessary.
Pyrethrum-based fea powders are safe and easy
Internal parasites
to administer. There is howevel a pill available to
Just like all wild animals, badgers will have a load
treat dogs and cats for fea problems, nitenpyram
of inteinal parasites. After faecal samples have
(Capstar? 11.4mg and 57mg tablets - Novaitis
been examined any parasite loads out of the
Animal Health), which is as yet untried in badgers.
ordinary can be controlled with standard worming
 It is being trialled for the destruction of maggots by
Tegimes such as ivermectin (IvomecTM Injection
 some centres and could be useful against both
for Cattle - Menial Animal Health) at 200 mcg/kg
parasites.
236
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 25.5 Mass infestation of lice on an old badger
Lice
the ratio of 1:9 poured over the maggots will kill
them. They will still need to be fushed out. This
Badgers also suffer with infestation by biting lice,
ivermectin-water mix is not stable and should be
Trichodectes melis (Fig. 25.5). These can be con-
 used immediately it is made up.
trolled with pyrethrum-based fea powders.
· The third choice is still very much going through
tials but is proving very useful to American
Maggots
lehabilitators: nitenpyram tablets (Capstar?
11.4 mg - Novartis Animal Health) can kill all
The third major external parasite of badgers, which
maggots within 3-4 hours.
will kill the animal, are the larvae of the blowfy -
o As an altemative the tablets can be mixed with
maggots. These are particularly prevalent in hot
sterile water and sprayed on intact skin unaf-
damp weather and around the typical rump bite
fected by the maggots. Any not used can be
wounds most badgers seem to exhibit. Removal of
given orally as syrup.
fy eggs and maggots is a hands-on process, for the
o As Negasunt, the only effective larvicide is no
present, and so every precaution must be taken to
prevent the badger biting.
longet available, perhaps Capsta1? can produce
similar effectiveness.
Any fly eggs can usually be shaved off by stan-
dard clippers or brushed off with a stiff washing-up
brush (Fig. 25.6). Maggots will need much closeI
COMMON INCIDENTS
attention but there are vatious ways of coping with
them:
Delayed implantation
· A Water Pik producing a stream of soapy water
Some species of mustelid, namely badgers, pine
 that can be pumped into the wounds to fushing
martens, stoats and mink, employ the reproductive
out the maggots
strategy of delayed implantation. In this phenome-
· A mixture of ivermectin mixed with tap water in
non, which is still not fully understood, the animals
Badgers
237
Fig. 25.6 All fly eggs must be
removed.
Table 25.1 Estimated time period for delayed implantation seen in some mustelids.
Mating
Approximate date of implantation
Length of gestation
Probable month
(beginning of gestation)
for parturition
Pine marten
July-August
February-March
30 days
March-April
Stoat
May-.luly
March-April
4 weeks
April-May
Mink
March
April
28 days
May
Badger
February-Autumm
 Late December-early .January
7weeks
February
can mate and fertilisation take place at almost any
Road traffic accidents
time of the year. However, on reaching the uterus,
Road traffic accidents are by far the most common
the blastocysts do not implant in the usual way.
cause of unnatural death in badgers. It is estimated
Instead they remain free within the uterus before
that 20% of Britain's badge1 population is killed on
eventually becoming embedded in the uterine wall.
the 1oads every yea1. Those that are not killed are
At the appropriate time, implantation will take
eithel Tescued and taken for Tehabilitation O1 else
place followed by a normal gestation peliod.
 This phenomenon particularly affects rehabilita-
drag themselves off to an uncertain end. However,
badgers are very tough and many of them do survive
tion efforts in that any of these species could be
Ioad traffic accidents and even collisions with trains.
fertilised long before gestation begins, and may be
Whenever a badger is seen on the toad, always
1al 0i dn 1oy Aandeo ul qanoqi uaaa jueugaid
Tecommend that a vehicle is parked in such a way
months (Table 25.1). The young may then be born,
as to protect the casualty from further traffic.
even if the female has had no access to males of her
Sometimes animals understand more than we
 r  i   a s
give them credit for. For instance, if the badger
made to facilitate her to bring up her young as nat-
casualty on the 1oad is found to be dead, then it
urally and undisturbed as possible. Release should
should be secreted in a nearby hedge or ditch. Any
be as a group, into a new territory, once the young
companions or dependants seem to understand
are grown.
death and will not then, having seen the body, con-
tinue searching for the live badger.
238
Practical Wildlife Care
Bitten or ousted badgers
trapping badgers, but badgers, along with other
Diseased badgers will often seek out human habi-
non-target species, regularly get caught in them.
A badger caught in a snare is a formidable sight
tation, probably just for shelter above ground. Sim-
ila1ly, many badgers who have been involved in
struggling violently to free itself, in the process
twisting and fraying the snare until it is no longer
fights with others o1 who seem to have lost their
free-running and locks tight around the animal.
place in the colony will be found in barns, sheds o1
Sometimes the snare-keeper will simply cut the
garages. The latter are commonly old badgers, often
anchor point and let the badger trundle off, snare
with chronic dental problems and a general loss of
still strangling it, until it eventually dies. Luckily,
condition, together with typical but extensive bite
wounds over theit Tumps.
many badgers caught in snares are spotted and
Although rescued badgers should be released
Teported before the keepel teturns.
 If the rescuers get to the badger while it is still
where they were found, these old badgers should
alive, the snare will need to be cut away from the
not be eleased. After their teeth have been sorted
 anchor point with fencing pliers, the only tool that
will cut a snare. On no account let the badger go. It
be kept in a semi-captive colony.
should be put in a carrying basket with the snare
If the badgers are young and fit they can be intro-
still around it and taken to a facility where the snate
duced to similar badgers and released via an artifi-
can be temoved in its entirety.
cial sett (see Sunrogate family, below).
At the rescue facility, whether it be a veterinary
practice Or a rehabilitation centre, the badger will
Vagrant badgers
have to be sedated or anaesthetised, once it is
Similarly, candidates for release through an atifi-
stable, as there will be wounds where the snare has
cut it and these will need to be properly cleaned
cial sett are the vagrant badgers that are found,
and managed.
often with no injuries, completely lost in the centre
 of towns where there is no recognised population
Badgers have also been found hopelessly entan-
of badgers. They may have been ousted from a
gled in football nets, tennis nets, pig fencing and the
colony or simply lost, but whatever the reason for
occasional washing line. They all have to be hospi-
talised and anaesthetised so that the offending
their predicament they cannot be released where
they were found. Any of this class of badger will
materials can be removed (Fig. 25.7).
Badgers can be anaesthetised with isofurane
have to be included in a group brought together just
fo1 release into an artificial sett.
and oxygen via a face mask, but if the badger
is lively and dangerous then combinations of
medetomidine (Domitor? - Pfzer Animal Health)
Orphaned badgers
paioau sy/a gz-s ie aueiay pue gy/aou oo1 1e
Often badgers found in strange circumstances are
intramusculaily is a suitable alternative. Profound
freshly weaned cubs that appea1 to have strayed
lespiratory depression is a hazard the veterinary
from their home terlitory. There is no way of
surgeon
should be aware of Atipamezole
knowing which badger colony they belong to and
(Antisedan-Pfzer) is the antagonist to teverse the
to release them in the wrong place would result in
medetomidine.
their being severely bitten or killed.
Obviously, those with growth problems should
Pressure necrosis
not be included in a release programme, but any
others can be supported and subsequently joined
With all these types of snare injury or entanglement
with other hand-reared orphans in an artificial sett
there is the distinct possibility that there will be
(see SuTrogate family, below).
pressure necTosis.
Not always evident on admission, the ligature
will have damaged already the tissue under its pres-
Snares, netting and other hazards
sure. Over the days following its removal there can
Some snares are stil legal for use in trapping some
be a breakdown of necrotic tissues along the line of
animals, like foxes and rabbits. They are illegal for
the ligature. The wound may end up being very
Badgers
239
Fig. 25.7 Badgers trapped in neting will
need to be anaesthetised to be extracted
safely.
deep indeed and the author has seen badgers fall in
Tesort to some type of orthopaedic fixation. The
half ten days after a snare injury.
bones of these animals have evolved for their
All that can be done is to manage the wound
 specifc lifestyles and are unusual compared with
like any chronic infected wound. Clean it daily with
cats or dogs. Reference to a skeleton, or at least a
Dermisol Multicleanse Solution (Pfzer Animal
diagram, does help (Fig. 25.8).
Health), suture if possible and treat the badger with
With fractures, analgesia is going to assist the
antibiotics.
healing process We have records of the use of flu-
Every animal that has suffered some sort of
mixin, carprofen and, if there is no head trauma,
ligature Or constriction should be observed for at
buprenorphine with no ill effect.
least seven days before being released.
Fractures in badgers seem to take much longer
to heal than in, say, foxes, often meaning the casu-
alty has to be kept in for 2-3 months. In cases of
COMMON INJURIES
paralysis or pelvic fracture, the animal's bladder
   e   
Fractures
expressed or catheterised if it is not emptying
Badgers and otters that survive Toad traffic acci-
naturally.
dents may well receive fractures. However, becauise
Female animals that have recovered from a
of the heavy bone and thick muscle of these
pelvic fracture will usually have to be spayed
animals, fractures are not as common as they might
because of trauma to the birth canal, which passes
be. This hefty make-up may also make fractures
through the pelvis. Badger sows would have the
hard to detect by palpation. Usually a casualty is
same problems even though the cubs are very tiny
Teported to be lame on one or two back legs - X-
at birth. The veteninary surgeon will be able to
Iays will pinpoint the fractures and give the veteri-
assess whether Or not hysterectomy is necessary.
nary surgeon a starting point in trying to treat them.
The long bones of the legs, the jaw and the skull
Amputations
have all been Tecoided as susceptible to fractures.
Spinal or pelvic fractures can also occur in serious
Badgers are notorious for fractures that do not heal
accidents It is usually the leg bones, however, that
known as non-unions. Sometimes amputation is
are fractured and, being difficult to immobilise with
the only remedy. Each animal requiring an ampu-
casts, the veterinary surgeon will probably have to
tation should be assessed for its suitability to cope
240
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 25.8 Reference to a mounted skele.
ton of a badger will assist the veterinary
surgeon with orthopaedic anomalies.
in captivity. All the mustelids would fail in the wild
The wounds should be washed everyday in
if they were to lose any leg. The hunting species
Dermisol? Multicleanse Solution. A course of anti-
rpeq e pue seiuesip ionsip e ie aq pinom
biotics, cephalexin (Ceporex? - Schering-Plough
without a front leg could not dig for food and
Animal Health) should be started and completed.
without a hind leg would find it difficult to negoti-
The author is very teluctant to teturn bitten
ate backwards out of tunnels. Therefore, any animal
badgers to their oniginal ternitory, having seen the
not suitable for maintaining in captivity should be
ternible outcome of strange, often young badgers
euthanased on humane grounds.
straying into others’ ternitory. For this reason, all
bitten badgers or orphaned young are Teleased via
the sulrogate family method (see below).
Bite wounds
Many badgers that are casualties for Teasons
Badgers often fight with each other inflicting exten-
other than bite wounds, do have scars on theil
sive but, usually, shallow bite wounds on each
Tumps from previous skirmishes These bites seem
other's 1umps above the tail (Plate 39). They will
to be just one facet of the badger lifestyle that we
also bite around the head and neck. This is normal
do not fully understand.
badge1 behaviour and usually, metaphorically, ends
in the badgers shaking hands and retuming to the
Concussion
same sett (S. Hanris, pers. comm.).
Badgers are sometimes weakened by these skir-
Badgers in particulal, are often found unconscious
mishes, howevel, and because of the infected
after being hit by a ca1 o1 sometimes a train. There
wounds may end up being found ill and taken into
 may be no apparent injunies but concussion is a pos-
care. In the summei, the wounds will often be full
sibility. Treated as head-trauma cases, these animals
of maggots and other debris which should be
can be concussed for several days and will need to
fushed out using a Water Pik filled with dilute 1%
be maintained on carefully managed fuids. Most
triclosan (MediScrub - MediChem), which causes
will, howevel, make speedy tecoveries.
less skin teaction than chlorhexidine.
A drug that is helpful for increasing blood fow
The maggots themselves should be killed. Reha-
to the brain and the heart is propylxanthine/
bilitators are doing trials of dosing with nitenpyram
propentofylline (Vivitonin - Intervet).
(Capsta1? 11.4 mg - Novartis Animal Health) to kill
maggots. Alternatively, the maggots can be killed by
dousing them topically with ivermectin mixed 1:9
Internal injuries
with tap water. This mix is unstable and should be
With the sort of trauma these casualties experience,
used immediately. A covening injection of iver-
there are going to be injuries to the internal organs.
mectin will counter any straggler maggots and
On post-mortem examination, Tuptured spleens,
provide cover against internal parasites.
livers and diaphragms are fairly common.
Badgers
241
It is very much up to the veterinary surgeon to
establish whether there are internal injunies and
decide which course of action to take.
ADMISSIONANDFIRSTAID
Badgers should be given emergency intravenous
juapiu aul rae alqissod se uoos se Adereni pi
that disabled them. Because of the often chronically
debilitated state of the casualty, every effort should
be made to set up the drip before the badger is even
tiansported back to the medical facility. Often the
initial 1ush of fuids is enough to bring the badger
back from the brink. A prepared site on the cephalic
o1 lateral saphenous veins would be suitable.
Remember that even weakened animals can be
dangerous and bite and should be muzzled, as long
as they ale closely monitored to make sure they do
not choke. Like the foxes, they will also bite O1 gen-
erally destroy any intravenous drip. It is essential
that any casualty Teceives 40 times maintenance
Tate in the first 30-60 minutes and then is closely
monitored during any joumey back to the medical
facility. Any muzzle fitted during the insetion of
the drips should be removed as soon as it is safe to
do so.
When observing vital life signs it is worth noting
Fig. 25.9 Badger pen with vertical bars
that beneath the badger's tail is a subcaudal scent
gland (the subcaudal gland) that can easily be mis-
taken for the anus. Operatives have been known to
try to take the core temperature here. The actual
 ground. Howevet even the sturdiest wooden struc-
anus is just below the gland.
ture will eventually succumb to the power of the
badgel and are difficult to keep clean.
CAGING
FEEDING
Badgers, being extremely powerful, demand the
most robust of cages. The stainless steel cages
All the mustelid species are carnivorous and feed
manufactured by ShorLine are ideal. Available in
on whole animals, not just plain meat. Readily
various sizes, those that ale 48 in wide have two
available and readily taken by badgers are day-old
doors and provision for a divider to be slid in to
chicks, mice o1 tats. Be careful, howevel, with old
make cleaning easier. Once out of intensive care
OT young badgers who might try to swallow their
badgers should be kept in a brick built kennel area
mouse o1 chick without chewing it. They have occa-
with vertical stainless steel bars instead of wire
sionally been known to choke on a whole animal.
mesh (Fig. 25.9). Unlike foxes, badgers do appreci-
If in doubt chop the food before giving it to the
ate hay as bedding and will use a raised platform as
badger.
a bed.
Any casualties that seem reluctant to start
-ins seaie ul io spays ul iday aq ues siaaea
feeding or are not strong enough to feed themselves
Tounded by wooden fencing sunk 0.75m into the
 can sometimes be tempted with human liquid nutri-
242
PracticalWildlifeCare
tion products (Ensure - Abbot Laboratories) in
SURROGATE FAMILY
valious favours - it can even be fed with a 50ml
syTinge to animals that are particulaily weak
Some badgers taken into care have been found in
(Plate 10).
areas where it is not advisable to release them. All
As part of any weaning programme, bringing
these, young and old, but still releasable, can be
a casualty from Ensure to whole-animal food,
familiarised into a surogate family and be gradu-
standard tinned dog food can be offered in the
ally released through a controlled programme.
transition.
The circumstances of badgers suitable for a sur-
Jogate family rehabilitation scheme could be:
RELEASE
· Those ousted from original setts
●Those found in totally unsuitable release areas,
The golden tule with any badgel Telease is to set it
such as the centres of towns
down exactly where it was originally found. This, of
· Any orphaned cubs
course, applies only to badgers that you feel could
● Any female badger that has given birth in cap-
Teturn to their oniginal sett. There is no point in
tivity and her cubs
simply locating the nearest sett, as it may be the
●Solitary Orphans raised by other groups
WTong one. In most cases the badger will show
Tecognition of an area by standing all its hait on end
In the ea1ly months of the year, it is worthwhile
(piloerection) and showing general excitement at
contacting others involved with badgers asking if
being somewhere it recognises.
there are any to join the surrogate family. Through-
Providing the time of day and the vicinity is
out the summer months, as badgers recover enough
safe, the badger should just be let out to go its own
to be released, they can be introduced to each other
way.
gradually. Fighting does not seem to be a problem
Fig. 25.10 An artificial sett based on the design of Naylor pipework.
Badgers
243
in the strange situation in which these badgers find
new home and are gradually extending their forag-
themselves.
ing territory further afeld.
A large, solid pen with a concrete base and
One word of warning about releasing badgers:
secure tops and sides is an ideal area to start the
there is an ongoing debate about badgers and
introduction. A garden shed, inside the pen, will act
bovine tuberculosis. Because of this, never consider
as a good sleeping area. As the autumn approaches
moving badgers far from their original surround-
and all the cubs and dependant young reach full
ings and certainly never move badgers from suspect
size, an area free of other badgers but easily main-
tuberculosis areas into disease-free areas.
tained and monitored should be selected as a
Telease site.
A badger sett can be dug on the site along the
LEGISLATION
lines of the sett designed by Naylor in their badger-
friendly campaign of a few years ago (Fig. 25.10).
All the mustelid species are protected from cTuelty
Following these principles, a large sett was recently
by the Protection of Animals Act 1911 fo1 captive
built at the St Tiggywinkles Field Centre. The
animals and the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act
chambers and tunnels were dug out with an exca-
1996.
vator, the chambers 1oofed with railway sleepers
Badgers benefit from the more blanket protec-
and linked together and to the outside with 15 in
tion of the Protection of Badgels Act 1992, which
pipes.
prohibits killing, taking, disturbing o1 possessing a
A sulrogate family of nine badgers - three adults,
healthy badge1. Legislation, though, allows for the
three cubs and a mother and two cubs - were intro-
possession o1 humane killing of a sick or injured
duced to the tunnels and kept inside for 24 hours.
badger. The legislation was innovative in that the
After that, food and water were regularly supplied
badger sett is also protected - the fist time that
and the badgers were left to come and go as they
a wild mammal's home had received this type of
pleased. So fa1 the family seem to appreciate theit
cover.
26
Other Mustelids
Species seen regularly:
take kindly to being picked up. Its stronghold is in
Weasel (Mustela nivalis), stoat (Mustela erminea),
Wales but gradually it too is recolonising, in its case
mink (Mustela vison),otte1 (Lutra lutra) and occa-
the West Midlands, and the author has had casual-
sionally polecat (Mustela putorius) and pine marten
ties from eastern Oxfordshire.
(Martes martes).
Domestic species:
Felet (Mustela furo) and polecat-fellet.
Otters
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
NATURAL HISTORY
Otters are among the largest of the mustelids, and
have a commensurate poweiful bite. Thick gloves
The mustelids are an advanced group of carnivo
offer no protection and can be a hindrance except
Tous mammals recognisable by theii long, sinewy
if dealing with small cubs. A secure net with a
bodies.
padded tim, a wallaby net (Harvey, see Appendix
The weasel, stoat, polecat and pine marten hunt
6) is ideal although if held for any length of time an
and take all species of small mammal, bird, amphib-
otter could shred the netting.
ian and reptile. The ottet and, to some degree, the
Carrying otters in wire baskets suitable for other
mink subsist on a diet of fish and aquatic cius-
poweiful animals, such as badgers, could result in
taceans. Both species will also readily take frogs
an otter damaging its teeth. For this reason it is a
and small birds and mammals.
good idea to have made a stout wooden carrying
The polecat and pine marten are very rarely
box with a plastic-covered wired lid that could be
brought for rehabilitation, whereas the otter is
used as a crush facility (Fig. 26.1).
becoming a more frequent casualty as it recolonises
its former haunts in inland Bnitain. The weasel and
the stoat are occasionally casualties.
The domestic ferlet has evolved from wild
RESCUE AND HANDLING
polecat stock. It is used to hunt rabbits and fre-
quently escapes from captivity. It has generally
As the number of otters increases, more need
failed to establish a viable feral community as
Tescue and rehabilitation, especially in the West
escaped ferrets are usually easily found, picked up
Country, Scotland and the Scottish Islands. Many
and taken to tescue centres.
otters are Ioad traffic victims and are found seli-
The polecat-ferret has similar, if somewhat paler
ously injured or unconscious by the Ioadside.
markings than the truly wild polecat and it can
An otter is not always as unconscious as it seems,
usually be approached and picked up. The wild
howevel, and a seemingly comatose otter can
polecat is a much finer specimen and would not
suddenly turn and bite savagely, and at lightening
244
Other Mustelids
245
Plastic covered 12g
weldmesh
50mm ×50mm
timber ~
115 cm
45cm
 20 mm exterior
ply
120cm
Fig. 26.1 Design for a wooden 'crush basket' suitable for otters.
Fig. 26.2 An otter can be scruffed with
both hands.
speed so any handler should take the utmost care
rying box and the lid closed. If the otter suddenly
to avoid being bitten. This is where a soft-headed
comes to life before it is safely in the box, it should
broom will come in handy.
not be handled by the sctuff but by a padded net.
 First, as always, set down and open the catrying
1 so lmn pusns si kq dn iao u yoid ia
box. Touch the soft head of the broom to the otter's
could be permanently damaged leaving the otter
head. If it does not react then the broom is used to
unreleasable.
pin the neck and head to the ground securely. A
Once in captivity an otter is very diffcult to
tentative attempt can now be made to scruff the
muzzle because of its short snout. In order to carry
otter: discard the broom scruff with both hands
 out initial examinations and provide frst aid and
(Fig. 26.2).
lifesaving procedures, diazepam can be used to
Then lifting the otter it can be put into the car-
make the otter more manageable.
246
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 26.3 This otter has four fractured canines needing attention.
COMMON DISEASES
Bacterial pneumonias
Otters seem to be prone to bacterial pneumonias.
Notably in Britain, there is little evidence of infec.
tious disease in wild otters and they do not cally
As the otters tend not to show signs of pneumonia
obvious to observers, these can present as sudden
any significant zoonotic infections (Simpson &
deaths. This has been observed within 24 hours
King, 2003).
of moving otters. If moving otters to a new
environment, particulaily where there could be
considerable stress during O1 after transport, it is
Dental disease
useful to give broad-spectrum antibiotics for 24
An otter's teeth are easily damaged, and many
hours before, during and for several days after the
casualties have b1oken 01 diseased teeth (Fig. 26.3).
move.
All otters should receive a complete dental ovel-
haul before they are considered for Telease
Hypothermia
(Fig. 26.4).
In the wild, otters have to catch highly elusive fish
Otters do not have the insulating layers of fat that
s0 should not be released if their canines are
some water-going mammals, such as seals, rely on
to help retain their body heat. Otters have a very
Jemoved o1 shortened after fractures and dental
treatment.
dense underlay of fur that holds air in and ade-
quately insulates against the cold water.
In spite of this, hypothermia is common in
injured otters, many of which have thoroughly wet
Skin infections
fu1 and have been immobile for several days before
Otters seem to be affected by chronic skin infec-
discovery o1 rescue. The normal rectal temperature
tions (Fig. 26.5). Given that there are anaerobes -
of the Eurasian otter is thought to be 37.5°-39.0°C.
give metronidazole as well as other antibiotics to
Special care should be taken, however, when bring
chronically infected cases.
ing an otter casualty to an acceptable body tem-
Other Mustelids
247
perature. If an otter overheats, the thick fur under-
lay effectively prevents it losing excess body heat,
making hyperthermia a problem.
COMMON INCIDENTS
Road traffic accidents
Otters are regularly the victims of road traffic acci-
dents. In fact, 80% of the otters found dead and
passed to the Goveinment Veterinary Investiga-
tions Service in Co1nwall 1988-2003, wele the
victims of 1oad traffic accidents (Simpson, 2003).
Orphaned otters
Otter cubs are often left unattended by their
parents but do not normally leave the holt until
about eight weeks old. At this age they should
weigh about 1.5 kg. Therefore, any cubs found out
in the open, and weighing less than this, are in
selious trouble and should be treated as intensive
care patients.
Contamination with crude oil
During the environmental incident on the Shetland
Fig. 26.4 The otter receives a full dental overhaul from
Islands caused by the sinking of the oil tanker
Mr Peter Kertez.
Braer, Dr Lewis set in place procedures to imple-
Fig. 26.5 Treating chronic skin
lesions with a medicated sponge
fixed to a stick.
248
Practical Wildlife Care
ment when otters were found contaminated by oil
area but rather become part of a release pro-
(Appendix 8).
 gramme in a safer spot.
Internal injuries
COMMON INJURIES
Obviously, with the sort of trauma these casualties
experience, there are going to be various injunies to
Fractures
the intemal organs. On post-mortem examination,
Tuptured spleens, livers O1 diaphragms are fairly
Fractures of any bones are possible in a 1oad traffc
common. It is very much up to the veterinary
accident but the cheekbone, neck and pelvis are
surgeon to establish whether there are internal
common fracture sites. Progressive hind limb (and
injuries and decide which course of action to take.
forelimb) ataxia following a 1oad traffic accident
may result from fracture of the odontoid process of
the second cervical vertebra. This underlines the
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
care that should be taken in handling an ataxic otter
and ensuring that neck X-rays are of the highest
All the mustelids, no matter how awkward, must be
quality.
given fuids on admmission. They will bite so every
Fractures of the long bones of the legs are rela-
 precaution must be taken to prevent injury to staff.
tively unusual. If there is a fracture then reference
Otters can be subject to post-capture myopathies
to the skeleton of an otter will give indications of
and would benefit from the intravenous infusion of
how to immobilise the relevant leg. Because their
Hartmann's solution and administration of vitamin
legs are so short, plastening is out of the question.
E and selenium (Dystosel - Intervet).
To stabilise the fracture the veterinary surgeon may
have to insert intramedullary pins Or external fixa-
CAGING
tors, although the latter may not be tolerated by the
otter.
Otters should be kept, like badgers, in brick pens
with doors with vertical metal bars so that they do
Amputations
not damage their teeth.
Inevitably, there are going to be otters who 'soldier
Provide a draught-free wooden bed or box with
on' in spite of having a fracture o1 fractures of the
some bedding (hay o1 straw). Do not use wood
shavings as these could be ingested and cause major
 legs or tail. Sometimes, chronic infection means the
problems. No supplementary heat is needed unless
leg or tail does have to be amputated. Otters cannot
the otter is newly admitted and is cold, wet and a
candidate for hypothermia. Even then, excepting
tion and should be euthanased if the situation arises.
for smalljuvenile otters, which will appreciate some
heating over their bedding area, the extra heat
Bitewounds
should only be provided for 24 hours.
Drinking water should be provided. A heavy tip-
Otters regularly fight with each other, leaving bite
proof metal bowl is ideal. It is not necessary for a
wounds Most of the bites are to the head and feet
captive otter to have a facility for swimming but
and in the penineal area around the anus or involv-
once its treatments are finished the ability to swim
ing the vulva or scrotum. The prevalence of bites
will aid its recovery.
seems to be on the increase (Simpson, 2003).
Generally keep otters away from noise, bright
 Perhaps there are just more otters about to vie for
lights, draughts and cunious visitors.
teTitories and females.
Bites can be treated with antibiotics via a pole
syringe, and regular fushing with a cleansing
FEEDING
solution (Dermisol Multicleanse Solution - PfzeI
Animal Health). If the wounds are especially severe
Otters, like all mustelids are camivorous, specialis
then the otter should not be returned to its original
ing in fish. They do not need to be fed live fish but
Other Mustelids
249
should be given whole defrosted fish, especially
Smaller baskets, of 10mm mesh, are suitable for
trout. A white fish diet will have to be supple-
 weasels or stoats. For the other species, a heavier
mented with thiamine tablets (Fish Eaters' Tablets 
 gauge mesh to a maximum size of 30 mm will be
- Mazuni Zoo Foods o1 Aquavits - IZVG) but
 needed. These heavier baskets should also have a
otters tend to spit these out. Crush them into 
CTush facility in order to be able to inject the animal
powder and 1ub into the fish before giving them to
without opening the basket.
the otters. Half a tablet daily is sufficient.
Apart from the power of these animals, many of
them can emit noxious smelling liquids when cap-
tured. It is a good idea, therefore, to put a polythene
RELEASE
sheet under the basket as it is transported in a car
OT van. The skunk (Mephitis mephitis), though not
Otters should be released where they were found
Bnitish, is also a mustelid and gives you some idea
of the power of these protective scents.
inficted by other otters In these cases, and where
Orphans have been hand reared, they will need
introducing and becoming familiar with a new,
COMMON DISEASES
otter-free but otte1-friendly, territory. Finding a suit-
able habitat is not easy in these times when otters
Most of the mustelid species are comparatively free
are extending theit range, but The Mammal Society
of 1ecognisable diseases. Any that may be suspected
will usually be able to 1ecommend one of their
should always be tefelred to the veterinary surgeon
members currently working in the field of otter
for diagnosis and treatment.
biology.
FeTrets and polecat-felrets are domesticated ver-
sions of the oniginal wild polecat. They are fre-
quently found in the wild, but for some reason do
not seem to be able to cope with the nigours of a
LEGISLATION
wild existence. This is probably why ferrets will
make their way to the company of humans.
Otters are protected from cruelty by the Protection
of Animals Act 1911 for captive animals, and the
The ferret is normally albino pale coloured but
Wild Mammals (P1otection) Act 1996 fo1 otters in
the polecat-felet has markings more like its ances-
tors (Fig. 26.6). Thele ale howeve1 marked diffe1-
the countryside.
ences between felrets, polecat-ferrets and wild
polecats that are essential to recognise before any
attempt is made at handling an animal (Table 26.1).
Pine Marten, Polecat, Mink,
Stoat, Weasel, Domestic Ferret
and Polecat-Ferret
RESCUE AND HANDLING
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
The mink, polecat and pine marten ale all poten-
All species of mustelid have a very poweiful bite.
handled with the utmost care. Initially their reac-
To handle the smalle1 species, the weasel and stoat,
tion to being handled can be tested with the soft
thick welders' gloves are just about bite proof. The
broom. If the animal does not react to being
larget species will penetrate these easily and should
touched then carefully, while still holding the head
only be handled with the aid of a net. Sometimes a
with the broom, grip the scruff securely, lift and
soft-headed broom could be lsed to immobilise a
place the animal in its carrying basket and close the
medium-sized mustelid while it is sctuffed.
lid. On no account should any mustelid be picked up
Mustelids not only have power, they are also
by its tail.
extremely agile and very difficult to contain.
 Should the mustelid casualty be too lively o1 dan-
Containers in which to carry these animals must
gerous to be controlled by the broom, then it has to
be robust and constructed of heavy-gauge wire.
be caught by using a net. These smaller animals are
250
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 26.6 A true polecat is a far larger animal than the ferret.
Table 26.1 Distinguishing characteristics of ferrets and polecats
Ferrets or Polecat-ferrets
Wild Polecats
Pale in colour, or much lighter than a polecat
Very dark markings
Will not flee from humans and may even seek
Will generally be found only in wild areas
out human company
Can be approached and often handled
Could not be approached unless seriously injured or compromised
May bite but not as severely as a wild polecat
Would bite if the opportunity is given
Very strong to handle compared with a ferret
Much larger than a ferret or polecat-ferret
more fragile than the larger species and should be
Aleutian disease. Othe1 species, pa1ticularly pole-
handled more sympathetically. The weasel and stoat
cats, may be at nisk. All mink should be serologi-
ale small for handling, use stout gloves which will
cally tested on admission and,if registering positive,
give adequate protection.
should be humanely destroyed. Quarantine in
Once in captivity, mustelids should be muzzled
the intervening period is crucial. In this country it
 before any procedures are even attempted, although
is illegal to release a mink and a licence is needed
this is difficult to do. As always, an animal with
to keep one in captivity. Mink casualties may be
bleeding in the mouth or in danger of vomiting
taken by zoos as long as the animals have a cer-
should not be muzzled. Diazepam at 1 mg/kg can be
tificate indicating a negative result for Aleutian
used to quieten the animal for first-aid procedures.
disease.
There may be no symptoms if an animal is posi-
Aleutian disease
tive for Aleutian disease, but the disease itself can
be very setious causing recuTrent fevers, weight
Some mustelids, notably mink and ferrets, are
loss, thyroiditis, postenior paralysis and then death
Tecorded as being susceptible to the parvovirus
(Oxenham, 1991). There is no specific treatment so
Other Mustelids
251
it is essential that the disease is not passed to other
weasels and stoats. In fact, it is not uncommon for
mustelids.
domestic cats to bring home live weasel o1 stoat
kittens.
Parasites
Treated with a course of long-acting amoxycillin
to counter the bacteria from the wounds inficted
Apart from the normal ectoparasite burdens, the
by the cat, these tiny mustelids are simple to rea1
only notable nematode is Skrjabingylus nasicola,
and release. They are also easily tamed, which
which can infest the nasal cavity of most species,
would prohibit their release, and so precautions to
especially the stoat. Control of nematodes is with
avoid taming must be taken.
ivermectin or doramectin.
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
COMMON INCIDENTS
All the mustelids, no matter how awkwaid, must be
Road traffic accidents
given fuids on admission. They will all bite so every
Road traffic accidents are by far the most common
precaution must be taken to prevent injury to the
cauise of premature death in polecats. In fact, 80%
handler.
 Stoats and weasels will benefit from subcutaneous
of known deaths of polecats are on the Ioad.
Possibly other mustelids, like pine martens, mink,
fluids, but an intraosseous infusion would be more
weasels and stoats, also lose great numbers to
quickly effective. It should be possible to access the
motor vehicles. Sadly, the smaller animals are
larger veins, cephalic and lateral saphenous, of a
usually killed outnight but sometimes pine martens
co-operative pine marten, polecat o1 mink.
OT polecats do survive to be rehabilitated.
CAGING
Cat attacks
The domestic cat is a prime predator and it will
The smaller mustelids, weasels and stoats, can be
attack smalle1, usually juvenile (Fig. 26.7) o1 infant
kept in small mesh cages. A small plastic aquarium
NC
MT
Fig. 26.7 A juvenile weasel rescued after a cat attack.
252
Practical Wildlife Care
with a hinged lid would make an ideal bedding site.
RELEASE
The hinged lid could be closed to contain the weasel
OT stoat during cage cleaning or to catch it on a
The golden tule for all these species is to return
Tegula1 basis, say for treatment. The larger species,
them to exactly where they were found. They will
mattens, polecats and mink, should be kept in strong
Tecognise that area and can simply be let free, with
metal cages, preferably with dividers, to make it easy
no other provision other than it being a safe time
to clean out these very difficult animals.
of day o1 night, depending on the species.
Once any member of these species has Tecovered
Mink, of course, should not be 1eleased (Wildlife
it should be kept outside to acclimatise to the pre-
and Countryside Act 1981). Neithe1 should fe1Tets,
vailing weather. All of them can climb, so any pens
which are domestic animals. They should be found
should be coveled or have an unclimbable over-
suitable homes.
hang. The sides of the pens must be stood on solid
 Polecats and pine martens do need to be released
concrete o1 sunk 0.75 m into the ground to stop the
in suitable areas already colonised by their species.
animal tunnelling out.
Advice on such sites can be obtained from The
Mink should be given facilities to swim.
Mammal Society (Appendix 7).
FEEDING
LEGISLATION
All the mustelids are carnivorous and should be fed
All the mustelid species are protected against
on whole animals, such as day-old chicks, mice O1
cTuelty by the Protection of Animals Act 1911 for
Tats available frozen from specialist suppliers.
captive animals and Wild Mammals (Protection)
Any casualties that seem reluctant to start
Act 1996.
feeding or are not strong enough to feed themselves
 Mink can only be held with a licence under the
can sometimes be tempted with vanilla-favoured
Destructive Imported Animals Act 1932. The
Ensure (Abbott Laboratonies). It can be fed to
release or
escape of mink is prohibited by
animals that are particularly weak and approach-
Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act
able with a 50ml syringe.
1981.
27
Deer
Species seen regularly:
below the upper lips in a muntjac and below the
Fallow dee1 (Dama dama), 1oe dee1 (Capreolus
bottom jaw in a Chinese water deer (Fig. 27.1).
capreolus),muntjac (Muntiacus reevesi)
and
Terminology to describe the various sexes of the
Chinese wate1 dee1 (Hydropotes inermis).
species is:
Species seen occasionally:
· A male red deer is a stag; a female a hind; the
Red deel (Cervus elaphus) and sika dee1 (Cervus
young are calves
nippon).
· In all the other species the male is a buck; the
female a doe; the young are fawns; and a male
NATURAL HISTORY
who does not grow antlers is a hummel
Only the ted deel and toe deel are true natives of
The red deer is found mostly in remote areas of
Bnitain. Fallow deer were introduced during the
wildemess such as the Scottish Highlands and high
Roman occupation, whereas muntjac and Chinese
moo1 land in England. It rarely, if evel, is presented
water deer only established a feral population in
fo1 rehabilitation. The fallow deer and 1oe deer are
the eally part of the twentieth century. The sika is
widespread, being especially numerous locally in
very much a deer of parks and collections, but
deciduous woodland. Muntjac are becoming more
escapees do occu1 especially after high winds bring
numerous but seem now to be restnicted to ten core
down fences.
counties in the south and east of England where
The led, fallow and sika deel are all deer that
they are often found in or around human habita-
form herds whereas the 1oe, muntjac and Chinese
tion especially in gardens. Chinese water deer have
water deer tend to live either solitary or in pairs.
established a small stable feral population in south
They all have a Tutting season in late summer Or
Bedfordshire and north Buckinghamshire.
autumn except the muntjac, which have no defined
season and appea1 to practise oppotunistic rutting
at any time of the yea1. Consequently, all the other
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
species give birth to their young in the summer
months, while muntjac will give birth at any time -
All deer are large, or reasonably large, and require
including the dead of winter.
suitable equipment in order to catch them, trans-
All the male deel, except Chinese water deel,
port them and control them while at a medical
gTow antlers each year after the previous yeal's
facility or rehabilitation centre.
have been shed. While they are growing, they are
covered in ‘velvet', which is highly vascular and
 bleeds copiously if damaged.
Rescue and capture
Muntjac bucks and Chinese water deer have
The equipment needed to rescue and capture all
elongated upper canine teeth, which protrude,
types of deel, except red deel, includes long-
253
254
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 27.1 The tusks of a Chinese water
deer can be dangerous.
handled large nets, walk-toward nets and, possibly,
fo1 larger mobile deer such as fallow, the facility to
sedate an animal with a tranquilliser dart. Howevet,
the use of tranquillser darts to capture free Tunning
deet is fraught with danger. Many anaesthetics take
some minutes to become effective. In those few
minutes, an injured, but mobile, deer could run off
and not be found.
Red deer will definitely need tranquillising but
will need a horse box for transporting. The veteri-
nary surgeon should be summoned to decide the
course of action and whether there is a possibility
of treatment at a veterinary equine facility.
Carrying
One person can usually canry small deer like
Fig. 27.2 Pattern for cloth masks suitable for various
muntjac, Chinese water deer and 1oe deer if they
deer species (after Rudge, 1984).
are not too lively. As soon as possible, howeve1, they
should be masked with a cloth mask, a range of
which can be made to a pattem copied from the
old Nature Conselvancy Council publication The
Capture and Handling of Deer (Rudge, 1984) (Fig.
bottom of each will assist the deer to maintain a
27.2). Non-adhesive cohesive bandage, e.g. Co-Flex
foothold.
(Millpledge Veterinary), can also be used to blind-
Fallow and 1oe deer should be masked over the
fold a deer to keep it calm.
eyes and can be safely caltied strapped to a
Muntjac and Chinese water deer should
Ibe
stretcher. If these animals can be caught, they are
put into carniers, either a large pet carlier
OT
probably suffering from fractures and bruising
a small wooden box especially
designed
for
calrying small deer (Fig. 27.3). Hay on the
inflicting unnecessary suffering.
Deer
255
In care
Muntjac and Chinese water deer do appea1 to be
the most diffcult to handle once they are at a
medical facility. In order to calm them and provide
fiust aid, a trolley that allows access to every part of
the casualty has been designed (Stocke1, 1996). It is
simply made from a stretcher fixed to the top of a
medical trolley with four holes cut to take the legs.
Two Velcro? straps secure the deer.
While the animal is suspended, each leg can be
examined and treated if necessary. An intravenous
?
infusion can be introduced into either of the legs
and an oxygen mask, if required, can easily be put
Over the muzzle. Deer often need suction to clear
the saliva or, in a casualty, blood from their mouths.
Notably, deer may produce copious amounts of
saliva during anaesthesia. Atropine is not effective
s0 suction should always be available. Being sus-
pended in the trolley, deer will even tolerate this
stressful procedure, which can then be carnied out
without undue restraint and discomfort to the deer
(Fig. 27.4).
80
Roe deer can be comfortably accommodated in
a slightly larger trolley. Fallow deer adults are really
too large to be lifted up and into a trolley. These can
be safely treated, still on a stretcher, but at foor
level.
Fig. 27.3 Diagram of a wooden crate suitable for trans-
porting small deer.
Fig. 27.4 A tolley/harness will greatly
assist in the handling of small deer.
256
Practical Wildlife Care
RESCUE AND HANDLING
Fallow deer
Fallow deer are probably going to be the largest of
With deer, it is important to establish whether one
the deer needing rescue. They are often injured
actually needs rescuing or whether it should be left
paddei suiaq Aq io siuapioe syen proi Aq rau
well alone. For example, one situation that is frus-
in fences. The Toad traffic victim will either make
trating to those involved in wildlife rescue is when
off at uncatchable speed or be so severely injured
a fawn is found sitting quietly in a sheltered spot
and is picked up. Female deer will leave their very
that it cannot move more than just a few metres.
Even to rescue a fallow deer that cannot move
young fawns, for most of the day and night, in
secluded spots. They will only return to suckle
will take two people. First, throw a blanket ove1 the
deel's head, then one person will hold the head and
them. This is perfectly normal, so young deer found
neck while the other controls the hindquarters. A
sitting quietly should be left alone and the scene
deer with antlers is easier to control as sound
vacated as quietly as possible.
antlers make ideal handles for controlling the head
When a fawn is picked up it can still be teturned,
and contiolling them stops them being used to
up to 48 hours latel, to the spot where it was found.
A watch should be kept from a considerable dis-
injure anybody.
With the blanket over its head, the fallow can
tance, preferably from a ca1, just to make sure the
then be 1olled or lifted on to a stretcher and
female doesTeturn.
strapped down. It is not practical to try to lift a large
The other situation in which it is best to leave
deel without a stretcher. All deel should be main-
well alone is when a fit adult deer, especially
a
tained on their keels or altematively lying On
muntjac, is seen in the garden. It will have managed
their night-hand side. These deer can be kept and
to get into the garden and will manage to get out if
handled on the stretcher throughout their transpott
left alone until nightfall. Attempts to catch it will
usually result in the animal or somebody being
to, and duning initial treatments at, the medical
facility (Fig. 27.5).
injured.
Fallow deer caught in fences are usually much
livelier than the 1oad traffc victim and can be very
Fig. 27.5 Fallow deer should always be carried on a stretcher.
Deer
257
Fig. 27.6 A young fallow deer is rescued from a fence
diffcult to handle. A deer caught by its antlers that
IOe is smaller and easier to handle though the
has no injuries can have the wire cut away from the
buck's antlers can be wickedly sharp (Fig. 27.7).
antlers and then be let free. However, any deer
Roe deer do not seem to tolerate diazepam well,
caught by the legs will have to be held and taken for
s0 sedation is not really an option with a casualty;
treatment (Fig. 27.6).They must be cut free and then
full anaesthesia could be used.
strapped to a stretcher for carrying. They are nOt
going to be willing participants in this and should
teally be sedated before they are even cut free.
Muntjac
A blanket over the head will help calm an animal
Muntjac are increasingly common casualties in the
as will one of the masks. Sedation can be with
counties north, east and west of London. Road
diazepam injected at 1 mg/kg intramuscularly; this is
traffic accidents are tesponsible for most of the
the only way to handle a large fallow deel safely.
casualties although the incidences of being trapped
Any fallow deer that cannot be approached but
in fences or attacked by dogs are on the increase.
needs capturing will need the services of someone
The victims of road traffc accidents will usually
with a rife or blow pipe that fires tranquillising
be held or remain in the locality until a rescue team
darts. Remember that it can take some minutes for
arrives. Some do manage to make off, in which case
an anaesthetic to have any effect. A range of
they are not often found. A muntjac that has been
injectable anaesthetics is available to veterinary
held or cannot move after an accident can be
surgeons for use in this type of equipment and can
masked, carefully lifted and laid in the carrying box.
be effective on the occasions that this method of
Muntjac can, howevel, be very lively and being
capture is the only option.
very agile and strong can present problems for
capture even if they have fractures to one or more
legs A mobile muntjac can often be intercepted and
Roe deer
caught with a long-handled large net. Once caught
Roe deer should be Tescued and treated with
they will scream but one person can usually manage
simila1 methods to those used for fallow deer. The
to control them and get them into the caying box.
258
Practical Wildlife Care
the legs. They will kick with their legs and having
sharp hooves can tear clothing and injure people. A
buck will also throw up its antlers, hence the reason
for holding the head. The secret is to get it into the
carrying box as quickly and quietly as possible.
At the medical facility, the muntjac is put into the
deer harness-cum-trolley. In here it cannot cause
damage either to itself o1 to anybody treating it. Its
legs will be hanging free, and can be treated, sta-
bilised, if fractures are present, sutured or held fo1
intravenous cannulation. It can be maintained in
the harness until put into an intensive care unit.
Without a trolley, two, three or four people are
going to be needed just for first-aid procedures.
Diazepam will help but after the third or fourth
intravenous cannula has been kicked out, even
a makeshift hainess will save much time and
aggravation.
Muntjac are also tegularly caught in fences O1,
peculiar to them, in between the bars of wrought
iron gates (Fig. 27.9). They usually have to be cut
free, put into the carrying box and taken into care
for treatment and monitoring.
Chinese water deer
These ale somewhat uncommon casualties but
Fig. 27.7 A roe buck's sharp antlers should be padded
are usually road traffic accident victims. They are
and wrapped for safety.
slightly larger than muntjac but rescue, transport
and handling are all very similar.
Sometimes the muntjac cannot be approached and
Hobbling
will flee at the fist opportunity. With these casual-
ties a strategy involving the use of walk-toward nets
Although hobbling, that is strapping a casualty
can usually be alranged (Fig. 27.8).
deel's legs together, has been tried and advocated,
The nets are put up actoss a possible escape
it is now deemed unnecessary and can, in fact, be
Toute. A catcher hides nearby. The deer is then pan-
damaging to the delicate structure of a deel's legs.
icked to 1un into the nets If it is allowed to dawdle
it may notice the nets and veer off to one side. The
chasers should run at it shouting and make it un
COMMON DISEASES
towards the nets. Once it hits the nets, it should
become entangled enabling the catcher to get an
Post-capture myopathy
initial hold ofit. The chasers will by then be able to
 assist in getting the deer untangled and into the car-
Post-capture myopathy, O1 exertional rhabdomyoly-
Tying box. This system of capture using walk-toward
sis, is a nectosis of skeletal and cardiac muscle,
nets can be used to testrain 1oe and Chinese water
which occurs aftel stressful physical exertion
deer as well as muntjac.
(Ba1low, 1986). Catching and handling dee1 is
Usually one person can carry a muntjac b
by
stressful and tiring for the animals so deer are par-
holding it under one arm around its body while the
ticula1ly suisceptible to post-capture myopathy,
free hand controls the head. Do not try to control
especially if they have been chased.
Deer
259
Field
Grass verge
Hedge
Beaterswho herd the
deerandpanicit into
the walk-toward net
不
Dee
Ushers to make
sure the deer does
not veer into the road
cm fence
120.
Walk-toward net
Catcher remaining
hidden until deer
hits the net
Rescue vehicle
   s       s   
260
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 27.9 Muntjac often get caught in wrought iron gates
It is fair to assume that any wild deer taken into
If another outbreak should occur then liaison
care is a candidate for capture myopathy for up to
with the local animal health officers will allow
foul weeks aftel capture. Symptoms include torti-
allangements to be made to cover all susceptible
collis, depression, convulsions with a high fever.
species including deer, moles and hedgehogs.
Death almost always follow once signs become
Do not take in suspect animals or else an order
apparent.
could be made to destioy all animals, that is all
To prevent it, handle the deer sympathetically
species, on the premises.
and keep it in quiet, darkened outhouses. Drugs
allied to treatment for shock such as fuids, corti-
Internal parasites
costeroids, vitamin E, selenium and sedatives can
help allay the onset of the condition.
All deer will have a burden of endoparasites and
should be routinely dosed with anthelmintics. The
stress and trauma a deer experiences in being
Foot and mouth disease
injured, rescued, treated and confined can predis-
Foot and mouth disease is a highly infectious
pose to an overburden of parasites. Treatment
disease of cloven-footed animals including deer.
with ivermectin (IvomecTM Injection for Cattle
Should there be a case amongst farm or other
Merial Animal Health) at twice the normal dose,
animals then the movement of susceptible species
ie. 400 mcg/kg given subcutaneously, is usually
such as deel would be forbidden. During the Tecent
effective.
outbreak in 2001, the Wildlife Hospital could not
move deer casualties but had to make arrange-
ments to have all casualties euthanased where they
Lyme disease
were found and their bodies disposed of through
Caused by the spirochaete Borrelia burgdorferi,
Goveinment channels.
Lyme disease is transmitted by ticks, particula1ly
Deer
261
ticks of the deel, and Ixodes ricinus, also knowm
arthnitis even in young animals. In some cases, the
as the sheep tick. The disease is a zoonosis and
 arthnitis is so far advanced that the muntjac cannot
can cauise senious disease and even death in
walk (Fig. 27.10). In cases like this o1 in trauma
humans.
cases, where joints on separate legs are damaged,
Luckily, the deer casualties that we see do not
the question of euthanasia must be considered.
seem to calry many ticks. Howevel, a tick can climb
on to a person and lock its bite into the skin without
the person feeling a thing. If one is found it should
COMMON INJURIES
be removed making sure the barbed proboscis, the
hypostome, is completely temoved. To 1emove a
Fractures and luxations
tick, anaesthetise it with local anaesthetic and pull
Deel, especially muntjac, have a delicate bone
it out with a twisting motion. Alternatively, a p10-
structure which predisposes them to fractures,
prietary tick remover such as the O'Tom Hook will
particularly as a result of road traffic accidents
make its removal much easier.
(Fig. 27.11).
Any skin reaction or swelling (a typical Lyme-
disease Teaction is a circular area of reddened skin)
Leg fractures and luxations
details of the fea1 of Lyme disease. Antibiotics can
treat the disease in its early stages.
Deer are very susceptible to major leg damage
especially fractures. Below the elbows and the
stifles there is little soft tissue covering the bones
whereas the humerus and femur have thick muscle
Arthritis
cover which gives them some protection. In 1oad
Arthritis is one of the more lasting effects of Lyme
traffic accidents, which are the main cause of injury
disease in humans. There seem to be no tecords of
to deer, the legs are often fractured, as are the pelvis
Lyme disease causing arthritis in deer. Howevel, we
and the spine.
are seeing a large number of muntjac casualties
The leg factures are often compound and
with chronic arthritis of the limb joints. The proba-
should, if possible, be temporanily splinted at the
ble source of this, apparently endemic, arthritis
scene of any incident. In triage and first aid, any
could be the joints themselves. Muntjac leg joints
 compound fractures should be irrigated with sterile
are prone to luxation, which in itself can lead to
saline and, along with any closed fractures, should
Fig. 27.10 Many muntjac_are being
seen with arthritic lesions. This female
muntjac could not move either of her
stifle joints.
262
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 27.11 A muntjac skeleton shows the
fragile bones that are so susceptible to
traffic damage.
be aligned and immobilised until the veterinary
Stabilisation of leg fractures by the veterinary
surgeon decides on a course of management.
surgeon can be by all methods including in-
It is possible to provide a temporary reduction in
tramedullary pinning and the use of external fixa-
a conscious deer. It will soon let you know, by
tion. Casts can tend to slip or cause pressure sores
kicking, if the procedure is at all painful. The tem-
and so are not the chosen course of treatment.
porary reduction should be immobilised with a
Often fractures are accompanied by compound
synthetic casting tape laid over two stirrups of
dislocation of joints and epiphyses with many of the
2.5 cim adhesive tape. A Robert Jones bandage O1
ligaments involved being shattered and inreparable.
any padding usually results in the cast falling off.
Initially again these should be cleaned, reduced,
 Rememmber that with a synthetic cast an oscillating
dressed and cast with resin plaster until the veteri-
saw is going to be needed to remove it.
nary surgeon can attend. Treatment may involve
Any open fractures, which are unfortunately very
arthrodesis of the joint or amputation, both of
common, should be covered with an initial dressing
which can lead to problems fo1 1eleased animals.
of IntraSiteTM Gel (Smith & Nephew) whose bac-
teniostatic propeities are active even before the
Amputation
wound is cleaned and dressed.
A male deer has to be able to combat othel male
deer. With a leg amputated it would be at a distinct
cleaned off with lavage and the exposed bone
disadvantage. It may realise this and not get
covered with skin and temporary sutures until the
involved in rutting head-to-head but there is no
veterinary surgeon attends. The cleaned wound
 guarantee this would be the case. It should not be
should be covered with a moist dressing such as
Teleased.
paraffin-tulle (Grassolind?
Millpledge Veteri-
However, keeping it in captivity can cause as
 nary) before temporarily casting in order to immo-
many problems. One o1 more bucks will lead to
bilise the fracture.
fighting in the Tutting season and a captive fallow
Immobilisation of most fractures will prevent
OT Ioe deer buck can become a very dangerous
further damage to tissues until the veterinary
animal duning the tut.
surgeon intervenes Most will await the veterinary
Castration will usually calm an animal's instincts
surgeon's attention but Monteggia fractures, where
but this would cause a drop in the level of testos-
there is a fracture of the ulna and a dislocation of
terone. Without a fuctuation in testosterone the
the head of the radius, can deteniorate if not
antlers will not shed with the following year's
attended to immediately (see Fig. 7.3).
growth erupting undeineath them every yeal.
Deer
263
Castrated bucks end up with massive deformity of
Skull fractures
their antlers known as perruques. Perruques are
Major skull fractures involving the cranial cavity
especially problematic in Toe deer.
can occur but are not very common. More common
The prognosis for deer buck casualties should be
is the situation where a muntjac buck will have frac-
made with all these points taken into consideration.
Female deer with amputated legs are less of a
tured the stem of an antler. The fracture will usually
problem in captivity. With a hind leg missing they
be below the pedicle in the stem, which is part of
usually cope very well but sometimes the lack of a
the skull (Fig. 8.1). It can be stabilised by binding it
with 2.5 cm resin casting tape (VetGlas - Millpledge
front leg causes major problems resulting in
Veterinary) to the opposing stem. Both stems are
humane euthanasia.
sometimes fractured and can be cast in the same
way but supported with tape under the jaw.
Pelvic or spinal fractures
Sometimes, in growing antlers, the velvet cover-
Fractures of the pelvis or spine can be evaluated
ing is tom and bleeding (Fig. 27.13). Any tears can
be cleaned with stenile saline and sutured.
by the veterinary surgeon. Does with constniction
of the birth canal after a pelvic fracture should
be spayed before Telease. In fact, many muntjac
Analgesia
does will already be pregnant and may require a
Analgesia can be provided with carprofen, funixin
Caesarean section. X-rays will identify a foetus
and, if there is no head trauma, buprenorphine.
(Fig. 27.12).
Jaw fractures
Dog bite wounds
CoTect alignment of fractured jaws is crucial in
As small deel, especially muntjac, venture neare1 to
dee1 because their method of feeding involves
human activity, they increasingly become the
CTushing and Te-crushing food between theit
victims of attack by dogs. They are also, on occa-
molars. Reduction and stabilisation of a deer's jaw
sion, mauled by foxhounds The wounds are usually
should be coordinated from the inside of the mouth
extensive and deep involving the muscle mass
ensuring that the teeth are correctly aligned.
around the hindquarters. If the deer is cornered
then bites to the abdomen, neck and head are
common. Fawns ale often picked up by the head
Tesulting in fractured skulls and fatal brain damage.
Initially, on admission, the wounds are simply
dressed with IntraSiteTM Gel (Simith & Nephew)
after any haemorrhage has been stemmed. Anti-
biotics are given, using injections of long-acting
amoxycillin, to counter Pasteurella multocida, a bac-
teria common in dogs' mouths.
The wounds themselves can be dealt with after
24 hours when the deet should be stable enough for
sedation or anaesthetic. Flush the wounds with 1%
triclosan (MediScrub - MediChem) with a 19g
needle on a 20 ml syringe (Hayes & Yates, 2003) 01,
preferably, the wound lavage system from Kruuse
(Plate 13).
Ligature or scrape wounds
Fig. 27.12 A radiograph of a muntjac will often show a
Both of these types of wound are caused when a
foetus.
deer gets stuck in a fence or wTought-iron gate. In
264
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 27.13 Sometimes the very tender velvet on unfommed anters will get damaged on fencing
the former, the ligature may well have severed
then the resulting wound will need daily cleaning
blood vessels, ligaments, tendons and nerves below
with Dermisol until the necrosis is reversed and
the wound. It is worth trying to get the wound to
the wound granulates and heals.
heal with regular dressings of a hydrogel such as
BioDres? Wound Dressing (BK Veterinary Prod-
ucts). Any joint involved, often the fetlock, will
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
usually need to be arthrodesed but the deel will still
be able to use it. Preparation HTM (Whitehall
In theory, triage is a Tapid initial examination. In
Laboratonies) will help maintain circulation.
deer, though not so rapid, the initial examination
Where all the blood supply has been destroyed any
should, if possible, evaluate the animal's potential
tissue beyond the wound will die off. The leg would
fo1 1elease, o1 at least captivity. Often discussion o1
then need amputation; usually mid-femur amputa-
a second opinion helps make the decision whether
tion is a more manageable disability for the deer.
to treat the deel Or whether it is never likely to
When a deer has been trapped between the bars
recover full mobility.
of a wrought-iron gate, there will be skin lesions
There are clear ctiteria that indicate that euthana-
where the fur has been tubbed away. If there are no
sia will be the only option for a given animal. An
internal injuries, the skin lesions will dry and even-
awareness of these can save both you and the
tually heal completely. Initially treating with
animal a lot of pointless stress trying to stabilise the
Dermisol? Multicleanse Solution (Pfizer Animal
deer. Signs of a deer with no future could be:
Health) will assist with debridement and support
healing.
· Fractured spine
As with the other species that are caught in wire
●The loss of two or more legs
O1 snares, fox, badger, hedgehog, it is cTucial that
The loss of just one leg in a male deer
 once released from a ligature any deer is kept in
·Predisposition to arthritis in more than one leg
captivity for at least a week. This is to assess
●Chronic arthnitis in more than one leg
whether there is pressure necrosis along the line of
·Irreparable jaw damage
the ligature. If the wound does start to break down
·Blindness
Deer
265
On a more positive note, howevel, most deer
sheds isolated from the hubbub of general practice
casualties are not suffering from severe disabilities
Or a rescue centre.
or injuries such as these. Most of them can be
Small deel are best suited to sheds with a foor
treated with a good chance that they will make a
area no large1 than 1.8 m x 1.2 m. Fallow 01 1oe deer
full recovery and can be released.
would need 2.4 m x 1.8m. The 1oof should be no
On admission, all deer should be infused intra-
higher than 1.8m. Do not be tempted to provide
venously
ywith fuids and methylprednisolone.
largel areas for the deel as given more space they
Methylprednisolone may cause a pregnant deer to
are more likely to injure themselves and theit han-
abort but it is so important in countering shock that
dlers. Most sheds have uprights that are proud in
many firmly believe it must be lsed for these deer
the shed area. It is better to round these off or to
casualties.Fallow deer are easiest to deal with still
line the shed with stock boarding from foor to
strapped to their stretchers and on the foor;
ceiling (Fig. 27.14).
muntjac, 1oe and Chinese water deer are definitely
Lighting should be with red bulbs which, in
much easier to treat suspended in a trolley harness.
theory, should be invisible to the deel, who are
Muntjac have particula1ly tough skin making it
colour blind. The Ied light left on all the time
impossible to insert a cannula without frst cutting
enables people to see into the shed without having
down to the vein, usually the cephalic or lateral
to click a switch. The quieter the better for deer.
saphenous. Using rat-toothed forceps and a No. 11
Hay can be laid quite deeply both for bedding
scalpel blade, the veins are reasonably large and
and for eating. Sometimes a deer may not be able
easily accessed by a 20g (32mm) catheter. All
to stand up for some time. It is a good idea to have
species require this size of catheter except fallow
some sort of draining floor so that the animal stays
deer where 18g (51mm) catheters are more
dry. At The Wildlife Hospital Trust (St Tiggywin-
appropriate.
kles), deer sheds are on concrete bases with calf
As well as fuids, all deer will benefit from
mats overlaying the cold stone, then hay. The sheds
vitamin E compounds with selenium (Dystosel
have built-up drainage foors that have been made
Intervet) given intramuscularly at 1 ml for muntjac
based on industnial matting. These keep those
and up to 3ml for fallow deer. Broad-spectrum
antibiotics,  normally
long-acting
amoxycillin,
should be provided, as shock is inevitably present.
Open fractures should be covered with Intra-
SiteTM Gel and temporarily stabilised. If there is to
be a delay before the veterinary surgeon can attend
a new casualty, any open fracture should
be
cleaned, reduced, sutured and temporarily splinted.
 Dog bite wounds are dressed with IntraSiteTM
Gel and held with loose sutures to maintain the
integrity and shape of the skin. Ligature wounds are
cleaned with Dermisol?.
Euthanasia, should it be necessary, should be
preceded by gaseous anaesthetic. There is no need
for shooting or captive bolt pistols Drugs are fat
less traumatic.
Studs
CAGING
Wall of shed
Deet are animals that should never be kept in cages
O1 kennels. They do need solitude, especially away
Fig. 27.14 Suggestion for a deer shed lined with stock-
boarding
from people. They should preferably be kept in
266
Practical Wildlife Care
prone deet dry and can be removed and washed at
img from surgery. It is infused at slightly less
Tegular intervals.
than a maintenance rate, i.e. 30 ml/kg daily, for
In winter, and for shocked deer, heat lamps are
48 hours.
provided. In summei, the sheds have to be venti-
(2) The other method is to remove the Tumen con-
lated in case they overheat in sunlight.
tents of a deer killed by trauma, say a 1oad
After deer have finished treatment in theit sheds,
traffic victim, and to freeze it in polythene bags.
they are either released or else kept in large pad-
This can then be defrosted and fed by stomach
docks with other deer until they are fit for release.
tube into the 1umen of a debilitated deer. The
The dee1 paddocks ale fenced with a 2 m high deer
gut fora from the dead deer should immedi-
fence that is sprung so that if a deer Tuns into it, it
ately start to ferment and kick-start the Tumen
will simply bounce off.
processes.
Various huts and hutches are put around the
paddock to serve as shelters and an automatic
Hydestile Wildlife Rescue (G. & L. Cornick, peI-
drinking water system is provided because deer,
sonal communication) has evolved a further kick-
especially fallow, drink copious amounts of water.
start formula especially useful when a Toe deer has
A mineral block should be provided under tain-
diarrhoea. The ingredients are:
proof shelters.
· pint chopped spinach
* pint crushed Weetabix
FEEDING
●1 teaspoon of ginger
·water
In the wild, deer are either grazers or browsers. In
captivity, it is possible to allow some access to grass
The ingredients are blended together in a one-quatt
for grazing, and browse can be cut from local
jug and this is fed directly into the deer's mouth
hedgerows. It is difficult to provide enough fodder
with a 60 ml syringe. Fresh bramble leaves, just the
naturally so deer can be offered a range of artifi-
leafy bits, may also prove to be very appetising.
cially prepared foods.
The diet provided is coarse goat mix, available
Unsuitable foods
from most agricultural merchants, in addition to the
deel's hay. Alfalfa can be provided for more
It is not a good idea to feed deel on fruit as they
Toughage, high protein and calcium, and Browsers'
may prefer this to a more balanced diet and can
Pellets (Mazuni Zoo Foods) offer more nutrition to
 Japidly lose condition and develop fermentation
 a deer that needs building up. A deer that is receiv-
bloat. Similarly, greens and carrots are not particu-
ing antibiotic therapy will need a pro-biotic addi-
larly suitable. The occasional tit-bit may help in
tive to its feed. Vetrumex (Willows Francis
 getting a new patient to feed.
Vetetinary) is suitable.
RELEASE
Reluctant feeders
Some deer, especially 1oe, are teluctant to feed in
Taking animals out to release is a bit more hectic
captivity. In not feeding they very quickly lose
than bringing in a weakened casualty. Deer, in pal-
weight and condition with rumenal stasis accelerat-
ticular, if they are fit for release willbe full of energy,
ing the decline. There are two ways of dealing with
strength and an unswerving instinct to escape.
this:
If deer are maintained in paddocks prior to
Telease they may need to be restrained with tran-
(1) The deel can be infused with peripheral nutri-
quilliser darts before they can be handled and
tion through its intravenous cannula sites.
transported. Muntjac, 1oe and Chinese water deeI
Nutnifex Lipid Peli (B Braun Medical) has 
can all be safely accommodated in carrying boxes.
been very successfully employed in Testoring
Fallow deer, however, will need a small box trailer
condition to debilitated deel or those Tecover-
to calry them to a telease site.
Deer
267
MUNTJAC CASUALTYFORM
RESCUERTO COMPLETETHISSECTION
OFFICEUSE ONLY
SEF
Date/Code:
Esimated Age:
Body Condirion:(Please circle)
LOCATION:
Poor
Average
Good
Very Good
County:
Iajuries:
Place Name:
OS Grid Ret:
Date of Release:
LOCATION OF RELEASE:
PLEASE STAPLETHIS
Coungy"
FORMTOADMITTANCE CARD
Ploce Name:
OS Grid Ref:
Fig. 27.15 A sample Muntjac Casualty Form.
All deel should be released where they were onig-
9 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. This
imally found. Muntjac, however, are sometimes found
means that it is an offence to release a muntjac or
im gardens and obviously should not be released there.
allow one to escape.
They can only be released by a licensed person within
There ale provisions fo1 rehabilitators who can
1 km of where they were found. A piece of woodland
apply fo1 a licence to release muntjac in the ten
O1 open area in the vicinity would be suitable.
core counties and within 1 km of where they were
found. Many rehabilitators have this dispensation
s0 any treated muntjac should be released through
LEGISLATION
their auspices. Figure 27.15 is an example of a
Muntjac Casualty Form, which could be used by a
Wild deer have some protection against cruelty in
licensed rehabilitato1.
the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996. In cap-
The use of tranquilliser darts is through a special
 oi      
nifle o1 a blow pipe. These weapons are covered by
Animals Act 1911.
firearms legislation and need a licence from the
The other legislation that affects deer rehabilita-
local police. They no longer need an additional
tion is that muntjac are now included on Schedule
Home Office Licence.
28
Bats
Species seen:
to a ship's sonar navigation system. A bat may
have modified ears and noseleaves to facilitate
Barbastelle
Barbastella barbastellus
Serotine
echolocation.
Eptesicus serotinus
One other natural ability that would affect their
Bechstein's
Myotis bechsteinii
care is that when bats are resting they can become
Brandt's
Myotis brandti
torpid and adjust their body temperature nea1 t0
Daubenton's
Myotis daubentoni
the ambient temperature of their surroundings; they
Whiskered
Myotis mystacinus
Natteret's
Myotis nattereri
are heterothermic. Further, they are one of the few
Nyctalus leisleri
British mammals to hibernate fully. Usually this is
Leisler's
in secluded sites where there are not great tempeI-
Noctule
Nyctalus noctula
ature fuctuations and there is a degree of humidity.
Pipistrelle
Pipistrellus pipistrellus
Bats are generally long lived with records of 20
Brown long-eared
Plecotus auritus
Grey long-eared
Plecotus austriacus
years oT more.
Greater Horseshoe
Rhinolophusferrumequinum
Lesser Horseshoe
Rhinolophus hipposideros
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
On rare occasions,
vagrants from Europe Or
America are found in this country and other species
Bats needing to be taken into care will probably be
are being added to the British list as they are
incapable of fying so there is no need for a net.
identifed.
Howevel, trying to catch a bat that is fying, with a
As identifcation of most bats is particula1ly dif-
net, is fraught with difficulty because of the bat's
ficult, a good reference guide is essential (Corbet &
ability to echolocate and the very real danger of
Ha1Tis, 1991; Stebbings, 1993).
injuring the bat.
The equipment needed for bats includes a pai1 of
light leather gloves, to avoid being bitten, and any
NATURAL HISTORY
sort of small container for holding them. Bats can
squeeze through the smallest of holes so you must
Bats ale the only mammals capable of sustained
be sure that any container is escape-proof. Hagen
flight. The wing of a bat extends to an elongated
produce a range of small plastic Small Pals Pens
hand with a fexible membrane of skin stretched
with slotted plastic lids. The smallest model (H351)
from the body to the tips of the fingers and tail. The
will contain any bat. The only provision for bats is
Aeo dieus e qiin pasodxa si rahuy isiy io qunn
to drape some quilted kitchen paper towel over the
that enables the bat to cling to or climb trees, walls
inside walls to allow the bat to climb and hang on.
and 1oof linings (Fig. 28.1).
sie rendo se os tes Aran aie sie
Bats have small eyes but locate their surround-
such as surgeon's loupes OT magnifying headbands
ings and prey with echolocation techniques similar
will help with smaller injunies (Fig. 28.2).
268
Bats
269
2nd digit
1st digit
Antebrachial
membrane
3rd digit
Humerus
4th digit
Carpus
(wrist)
Dactylopatagim
(wing membrane)
Bacu
 5th digit
Metacarpals
Qlna
Lateral
ibula
membrane
Calcar
Phalanges
Tail
Foot
Interfemoral
membrane
Fig. 28.1 Skeletal structure of bat wing.
RESCUE AND HANDLING
Whatever container they are cattied in, a lining
of quilted paper towel will give them a secure way
It is absolutely essential that anyone handling O1
of steadying themselves and scurrying out of the
attempting to handle a bat be vaccinated against
light.
Tabies. For this reason, the general public should
TISEASES
tated bats. Someone with 1abies vaccination in
place should attend any lescue calls. Not that rabies
Bats are, like other wild animals, reasonably resis-
is a common problem but the only incidents
tant to disease. Howevel, any bat brought into care
Tecorded in Britain have had senious consequences
could be suffering from a disease not yet desctibed
and were all Daubenton's bats which are not nor-
in that particula1 species. The one disease that has
mally found around houses.
callied a lot of publicity in recent years is rabies. It
A bat that needs rescuing can usually be simply
is a well-known fact that bats in other countries are
picked up o1, as many are spotted clinging to walls,
infected with rabies and cases of people developing
picked off Some species are extremely small and
Iabies after being bitten by bats are not uncommon
can be easily injured unless care is taken in han-
in some countries. However, the European bat
dling them. Generally, they should be laid across
Lyssa virus type 2 (EBLV2) of rabies has only been
the fingers holding them down firmly but gently
found about ten times in the whole of Europe and
with the thumb (Fig. 28.3).
classical rabies has never been tecorded in a bat
If they are not torpid, bats can be noisily aggres-
from Europe.
sive and make to bite. The wearing of light gloves
will prevent their tiny teeth causing any injury.
Rabies
Without gloves the smaller species may o1 may not
be able to penetrate the skin but the larger bats, the
In this country in a 10-yea1 survey of bats by the
noctule and the serotine, have quite a powerful bite.
Rabies
s Reseaich and Diagnostic Unit at the
270
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 28.3 How to hold a bat firmly but gently
moment the bat was thought to be infected. She suf-
fered no ill effects from her encounter. This type of
rabies is different from the sylvatic rabies that
infects other mammals such as dogs, cats and foxes.
Fig. 28.2 Bat injuries are often so tiny that surgeon's
EBLV2 has not been tecorded in any wild o1
loupes are needed to help identify specific defects.
domestic animal other than a bat.
Only three cases of bats found positive for
EBLV2 have been tecorded in Britain out of 3000
Central Veteninary Laboratory, 1882 bats of 23
bats tested over the last 15 years by the Veterinary
species were screened for the rabies antigen
Laboratonies Agency. All these bats were Dauben-
(Whitby et al., 1996). All were found to be negative.
ton's, one in Sussex, one in Middlesex, the othe1 in
The Veterinary Laboratories Agency is still seeking
Lancashire. The other positive incident was, sadly,
bat carcasses (Appendix 5).
the death of a bat worker in Scotland. Any bats
Howeve1, in June 1996 a Daubenton's bat was
showing suspect symptoms or behaviour should be
Tescued at Newhaven in Sussex showing unusual
confined and reported to a veterinary surgeon who
behaviour. Rather than the normal threat and bite
may decide to contact the Public Health Authori-
behaviou1, this bat was oveily aggressive attacking
ties or DEFRA.
everything it could and biting the rescuer on many
The Joint Nature Conservation Council (JNCC)
occasions. The bat appeared to be having fits and
and the Bat Conservation Tiust (BCT) woik tire-
was euthanased. At the Central Veterinary Labora-
lessly to give out a positive attitude to bats and bat
tory the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test (a
welfare. The JNCC has tecently published the 3rd
test wherein small amounts of DNA may be ampli-
edition of The Bat Workers' Manual and the BCT
fied and identified) proved positive for EBLV2. The
is constantly updating matenial on its website,
finder received post-exposure prophylaxis from the
www.bats.org.uk.
Bats
271
The JNCC guidelines for dealing with bats are
 success appears to be by massaging E45 (Crookes)
Teproduced in Appendix 1, and all these guidelines
CTeam into the membranes.
and advice from both groups should be taken in by
Whatever the attempted 1emedy, any course of
Tehabilitators, veterinary staff and all others who
 treatment is going to take a long time.
may have to handle sick or injured bats.
Hair loss
Carcases
Many young bats and long-term captives seem to
As part of the constant monitoring of bats for
develop patches where their fur will be missing.
rabies it is requested that any carcases, not only
Pipistrelles are particula1ly prone to this complaint.
suspect cases, should be sent fresh to the Veterinary
Once again, no specific cause has been identified.
Laboratories Agency (Appendix 5).
Perhaps it may be traumatic where a bat rubs itself
on a water bowl or is sucked by a contemporary. It
 s       
Ectoparasites
Generally, the condition will recede if the bat is
not handled and is kept on its own. The adminis-
Bats calry a Iange of host-specific ectoparasites
including feas, mites (Plate 40), ticks, the batbug
tration (orally) of essential fatty acids (EfaCoat Oil
- Schering-Plough Animal Health) may be of use
(Cimex pipistrelli) and, on horseshoe bats, the nyc-
in this condition and that of wing membrane necrO-
tenbiid fy (Phthinidium biarticulatum).
sis. There are very few records of any attempts at
Insects can be safely removed using Whiskas
 treatment and as this is a very common condition,
Exelpet (Pedigree Masterfoods) fea powde1. This
should be dusted into the fur with a small dry
a solution will help many bats to be returned to the
wild.
paintbrush. Whiskas Exelpet is also effective
against ticks (B1own, 2003). St1onge1 insect repel-
lents may well be toxic to bats Mites can be picked
Subcutaneous emphysema
off with a small paintbrush dipped in water. A sys-
temic acaticide such as ivermectin (IvomecTM Injec-
The cause of this condition is as yet unknown. The
bat is found with areas of its body inflated with air
tion fo1 Cattle - Merial Animal Health) mixed 1 : 9
under the skin. The Temedy is simple but effective:
with propylene glycol can be administered subcu-
 taneously or orally at 0.02 ml/10 g.
· The skin over the swelling is cleaned and
swabbed with surgical spirit
Sticky wing
● The air is aspirated using an insulin syringe
· A course of broad-spectrum antibiotics is started
Sometimes when a bat is in captivity and not using
● Swellings may reappea1 and will have to be aspi-
its wings regularly, the interior of the folds of the
rated again
wing may become sticky and odorous. This may be
a mixture of bactenia and yeasts. It should be
The condition will generally resolve.
washed off with a warm salt solution.
Wing membrane necrosis
COMMON INCIDENTS
Nobody knows for sure what causes wing mem-
Cats
brane necrosis, a condition in which the membranes
dry, crack and flake away. The necrosis will also
The most common incident affecting bats is being
travel into neighbouring bone. The cause may be
caught by a cat. Usually live bats are rescued from
bacterial or fungal. It may be caused by trauma Or
cats by the pet owmer and taken to a rescue centre.
through a lack of humidity.
Sometimes a cat will become a regular stalker of a
Systemic antibiotics have been tried as a treat-
bat colony causing deaths and injunies on a daily
ment but the Iesults have been elratic. The most
basis.
272
Practical Wildlife Care
Vagrants
Bats will occasionally be found during the day cling-
ing to outside walls or just lying on the ground. They
are probably trauma victims but a definite reason
for their debility may not be found. Normally they
ale dehydrated and consequently in shock. Once
they are stabilised and fit for release they should be
Teturned to the alea where they were found.
Orphans
Baby bats are sometimes left in a nursery while
their mothers are out hunting. They can also cling
to their mother to join her on fying trips and
become lost. Whatever the leason, solitary baby
bats are regularly encountered and rescued.
Rather than just adopting an orphan, attempts
should be made to get it back to its toost. HoweveI,
simply returning an orphan to its 1oost doesn't
seem to work. The babies ale invariably found
dead. The solution is to give the mother herself a
chance to find her youngstei. The orphan can be
Fig. 28.4 Design for a wooden hanger for re-uniting
Tescued subsequently if she does not appea1.
orphan bats with their mothers.
A wooden baby bat hanger is a very simple
device for this purpose. A piece of untreated sawn
timber approximately 500mm × 200 mm is mounted
vetically on an 50 mm fence post set up in some
been felled. The woodpecker nest cavity had to
soft ground. Provided the weather is fine, just
be sawn open to remove the nine babies. Some
before dusk the baby bat is encouraged to cling ver-
were already dead and some died later, all from
tically to the board. Ifit is near to the colony, as the
fractured skulls. The remaining babies were
bats leave to feed the baby bat should call. With
reared and released (Fig. 28.5).
luck, its mother will hear the call and come to the
board to collect her youngster (Fig. 28.4). An hour
after dusk,if its mother has not returned, the baby
ANAESTHETICSANDANALGESIA
can be removed and taken into care.
Anaesthetics
It may be hard to imagine, but a tiny animal such as
OTHER INCIDENTS
a bat has a complete nervous system and will con-
sequently be able to feel pain and discomfort from
Sometimes bats are involved in bizalre incidents
the tiniest defect. It is, therefore, not going to lie still
that could never be expected. The following are two
for any treatment procedure. In the past, some
cases that illustrate the nature of these incidents:
people induced torpor by putting the bat in a refrig-
erator before any treatments. The torpor may still
· A cottage was struck by lightning and a part of
the bat but has no analgesic properties. This is tan-
the 1oof destroyed. In the 1oof was a colony of
tamount to cruelty and should never be considered.
bats; some were killed by the lightning while
The anaesthetic of choice for a bat is isoflurane,
others Teceived major injunies.
with a high fow rate of oxygen, administered
· A nursery of noctule bats was found in an old
through a facemask fashioned out of a syringe case
woodpecker hole after the tree containing it had
O1 1ubber tube (Fig. 28.6). Being small, any bat
Bats
273
Fig. 28.5 A woodpecker hole used as a
nursery by several female noctule bats.
Fig. 28.6 Bats can be given gaseous
anaesthesia through a face mask made
out of a plastic tube.
under anaesthetic is going to lose heat rapidly. A
frequent applications of a topical local anaesthetic,
heated table or heat mat is essential. The oxygen
included in a teething gel sold in pharmacies for use
should be continued for some time after the anaes-
in babies, may bring some 1elief.
thetic is switched off.
COMMON INJURIES
Analgesics
Wing tears
A fracture in a bat's wing is going to be painful. It
may be possible to administer small enough
Tears of the wing membranes are very common.
amounts of analgesics if they are diluted in water
They range in size from pinhead to the complete
for injection. Flunixin, carprofen and buprenor-
membrane torn off between fingers or body and
phine could be useful. If this is not possible then
fingers. Bats can, howevel, often still fy adequately
274
Practical Wildlife Care
even with tears in the wing, and it is worth trying to
the wing bones. Holding the bat up to a light source
get them to fy before trying remedial treatments.
and extending each wing will highlight most frac-
Small tears will resolve themselves Major tears
tures as well as any bleeding into the tissuies.
can be sutured with a 7/0 swaged-on absorbable
Many fractures, however, will be open fractures,
suture but it is very difficult to get the tear edges
usually of the humerus or radius - the ulna is
 into apposition. The use of tissue glue (VetbondTM
insignificant and not normally a problem. Fractures
- 3M) is another option but again it is nearly impos-
OT,
more often, &
amputations of the fingers
sible to get the edges of the defect to meet.
(metacarpals and phalanges) regularly coincide
One technique allows the debriding of the tea1,
with major tears of the wing membranes. Open
leaving fresh incised edges that are more likely to
fractures can be thoroughly cleaned with stenile
heal. The technique (Fig. 28.7) has to be canried out
saline. The skin sheath can usually be withdrawn
with the bat under general anaesthetic:
to allow the exposed bone to be teduced and
covered.
(1) A strip of clea1 micro-perforated
tape
Stabilisation of fractures in a bat's wing requires
(Omnifilm? - Millpledge Veterinary) is laid
a large degree of innovation (Fig. 28.8) including
adhesive side upwaids on the table
the following techniques.
(2) At the edges of the defect, where the mem-
brane has rolled up,it is unfurled until the tear
Splinting
edge is exposed
(3) The first edge of the tear is laid along the
Splinting can be achieved with small lengths of
adhesive tape and is kept unfurled and
adhesive tape folded over the edge of the wing
pressed completely flat on the tape
excluding the joints. The usual problem with this
(4) The opposite edge is unfurled and laid next to
very simple technique is that the bat will often chew
the first edge, but overlapping it
at the tape and eventually pull it off.
(5) Tissue glue is then applied under this oveI-
More stable splints have been fashioned from
lapping edge and the two sides held together
small stnips of Vet-Lite (Runlite) which can be
(6) The edges are then cleaned and swabbed with
easily moulded after being doused in hot water.
sUTgical spirit
The joints are avoided with splints for the same
(7) When the area is diy, a No. 15 scalpel blade is
Teason they are avoided in birds. Any ankylosis
Tun down the centre of the overlapping edge
could well impede a bat's manoeuvrability in
 making an identical incision along both edges.
hunting-
The tape underneath should not be cut as it
 keeps both edges in apposition.
Tissue glue stabilisation
(8)  Removing the top loose edge, permeable clea1
wound dressing (OpSiteTM
FlexigridTM
Anothet method of stabilising compound fractures
Smith & Nephew o1 Tegade1m - 3M) is laid
of the humerus and radius is with tissue glue (Vet-
over the incision and attached fimly
 bondTM - 3M) (Lollar & Schmidt-French, 1998).
(9) The bat is turned over; the adhesive tape is
With a humerus fracture, the wound is cleaned
Temoved along with the second debnided edge
and the viable bones replaced under the skin.A few
of the first area of membrane
diops of tissue adhesive are placed, not poured, on
(10) Another stnip of permeable clear wound
to the dorsal surface of the wing membranes on
dressing is laid over the back of the join, the
each side of the defect. No adhesive is allowed
bat tumed ovel and the join pushed home
on the wound itself. Then quickly but gently the
(11) A course of broad-spectrum antibiotics is
wing is folded into a natural position by pressing
started
the forearm against the humerus and the humerus
(12) Afte1 ten days the join should be healed and
against the body (Fig. 28.9). Over the following 4-6
the tape can be removed
weeks, do not let the bat try to fy. Any pieces of
adhesive that have worked loose
should
be
Fractures
Iemoved and replaced, on a daily basis, with fresh
tissue glue.
Any fractures suffered by a bat will usually be of
Similarly, compound fractures of the radius can
Bats
275
Tear
First edge of tear is stuck to adhesive
side of clear micro-perforated tape.
Tissue
glue
Strip of
skin
Pull second edge of tear onto
With scalpel cut through both layers
tissue glue along first edge.
of membrane but not through tape.
Remove strip of skin. Put strip of wound
Remove original strip of adhesive
tape with other strip of skin. Cover
down. Turn wing over.
back of cut with strip of wound dressing.
Fig. 28.7 Suggested method of aligning major wing tears in a bat.
276
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 28.8 A typical splint made out of a cotton bud
be stabilised by running a continuous line of tissue
that external fixators would seriously compromise
adhesive along the entire length of the dorsal side
the strength of the bones.
of the outermost fingers. The outer finger is then
pressed up against the damaged radius in a natural
Amputation
position. Once the adhesive has hardened the daily
protocol of adhesive replacement will continue for
Bats can survive in captivity after the amputation
4-6 weeks.
of a wing o1 part of a wing. They will need both
thumbs to be able to walk and climb and euthana-
sia should be considered if that is not possible.
Intramedullary pinning
The intramedullary cavity of both the humerus and
radius is minute. However, intramedullary pins
TRIAGE AND FIRST AID
have been fashioned out of fine-gauge (28 g, 27 g,
30g) hypodermic needles o1 the inserts from
The structure of a bat and the extent of its injuries
spinal needles. Their success is vatied, but most fail
can easily be seen as soon as it is admitted. Often
through osteomyelitis or an inadequate blood cir-
portions of the wings are missing prohibiting any
culation and healing capability. Antibiotics should
chance of release. The assessment at triage is going
be targeted at skeletal infection. Lincomycin
to be: Will the bat be releasable and if not can it be
(Lincocin Aquadrops?-Pharmacia & Upjohn) O1
comfortably maintained in captivity?
clindamycin (Antirobe? Capsules - Pharmacia
Animal Health) have been found effective, but they
Fluid administration
may cause diarrhoea.
All newly admitted bats should receive warmed
External fixation
subcutaneous fuids, preferably Hartmann's solu-
tion laced with 10% Duphalyte (Fort Dodge
Unfortunately, the bones in a bat's wing are so fine
Animal Health).
Bats
277
Antibiotics
Fracture of humerus
tissue adhesive
Amoxycillin is the antibiotic of choice to treat
attacks by cats, and the lesultant Pasteurella rmulto-
cida infection; preferably reconstituted oral drops,
given at 40-50mg/kg twice daily. At these tiny
volumes the dose can be taken as the smallest
fracture
drops possible. Clamoxyl Palatable D1ops (Pfizer
Animal Health) have the longest reconstituted life
of 14 days.
Amoxycillin is also suitable as the broad-spectrum
antibiotic for bats in shock or with skin wounds.
Clindamycin can be provided twice daily with a
tiny amount of the antibiotic powder from inside
one of the capsules.
Fracture of radius
       s
equivalent to those given to domestic camivores
(with marked titration to allow for the small body-
weight of bats). Adhering to allometric principles,
fracture
based on a metabolic weight, would probably tend
to overdose in a bat that temained torpid and
appropriate reduction of drug dosage may mean
that therapeutic levels are not achieved in the
active bat (Routh, 2003).
tissue adhesive
EUTHANASIA
By fa1 the most effective, least traumatic method
gently press against
foream until set
of euthanasia for bats is to anaesthetise them first
with gaseous anaesthetic and then administer an
overdose of barbiturates intracardiac or intrapeli-
toneally (Stocke1, 1997).
fracture
reduced
CAGING
Fig. 28.9 Tissue glue stabilisation of bat-wing fractures
(after Lollar & Schmidt, 1998).
The simplest form of caging for bats, and the easiest
to keep clean, are the plastic Small Pals Pens made
by Rolf C. Hagen and sold in most pet stores.
Quilted kitchen pape1 towel can be draped down
the insides for the bats to cling to and to hide under.
The fuids can be administered subcutaneously in
Radiant waimth can be provided with a ted light
insulin syninges beneath the skin over the back.
bulb in a small fexible table lamp.
Dose tates vary from 0.3ml fo1 a pipistrelle to
A slightly more expensive container is a cage
 0.8 ml for a serotine bat. This can be repeated every
designed for bugs o1 breeding butteiflies Its sides
12 hours.
are made of fine nylon mesh stretched taut. This
Bats often do not start drinking on their own;
enables the bats to climb easily, as they prefer to
they can be encouraged with Lectade (Pfzer
1oost at the highest point possible. Again, radiant
Animal Health) from a small paintbrush
warmth can be provided by a red light bulb
pipette.
(Plate 41).
278
Practical Wildlife Care
A largel container could be a small two com-
vitamins does not provide the additives bats need.
partment rabbit hutch with the wire mesh replaced
Howevel, there are products that will be absorbed
with finer mesh. The walls and ceiling should be
by the mealworms and provide the necessary sup-
covered with fine nylon mesh enabling the bats to
plements. Mealworm Diet Calci-Paste (IZVG) is
climb and 1oost in the closed compartment.
suitable, as is Nutrobal (Vetark Animal Health) and
Bats that are for release should be given the
Mealworm Diet Plus (MediVet).
space to exercise and fly and demonstrate theil
ability to catch insects.
Based on the dimensions given in the Nature
Waxworms
Conservancy Council's (now English Nature) pub-
The larvae of the waxworm Galleria mellonella
lication The Bat Workers’Guide (Mitchell-Jones,
have a softer outer skin than mealworms and are
1987), The Wildlife Hospital Trust (St Tiggywinkles)
not as mobile. They are suitable for smaller bats and
has constructed a bat flight cage where insects can
youngsters. They too should be supplemented with
be attracted and bats can be allowed to 1oost and
Nutrobal (Vetark Animal Health) o1 Mealwoim
fy; it can even be used as a telease facility. The
Diet Plus (MediVet), o1 preferably Mealworm Diet
dimensions are 4.9m x2.5m x 2m covered on three
Plus Calci-Paste (IZVG).
sides with ↓-inch galvanised mesh. The base is con-
cTete to allow grounded bats to be seen easily.
Bat boxes, feeding stations (for mealworms and
Maggots
waxworms) and water fountains are set in various
Bats will take blow-fly maggots, the gentles sold in
places. The nest boxes can be waimed electrically if
angling shops The stipulation must be that they are
it is thought necessary. In the centre of the flight
cleaned. That is to say that they have been starved
cage is an ultraviolet fluorescent lamp that attracts
so that the toxic contents of their gut will have
insects for the bats to hunt.
passed through.
FEEDING
Obesity
Bats naturally hunt and eat fying insects. In cap-
Bats, especially the larger species, can overeat and
tivity, it is obviously not possible to provide a
put on too much weight. Obese bats can lose the
natural diet but alternatives are available.
 In order to see that bats feed it is a good idea to
Weighing a bat every day will give an indication
feed at regular times and in a completely separate
of its well-being and will highlight any increases in
empty plastic aquatium (Plate 57). The live food
weight.A chart of average weights of the different
can be put on the clean foor where the bats will
species acts as a good reference point during the
 have no trouble finding it and can be seen feeding
daily weighing (Table 28.1).
O1 not feeding, as the case may be.
RELEASE
Mealworms
Mealworms (Tenebrio molitor) ale the standaid
The principle behind all wildlife care is to get the
fall-back to feed bats. Initially it may be necessary
animal back to fitness and teady for release. Bats
to cut the heads off the mealworms and squeeze
aTe no different, but there is still little evidence of
some of the insides on to a bat's mouth to get it
the sluiccess or failure of releasing bats.
interested. Eventually the bats can be trained to
Bats should be Tetumed to where they were
take headless mealworms. One thing to beware of
found. They will be familiar with the vicinity and
is that vagrant mealworms have been known to
should be able to return to their native 1oost. In
attack small bats like pipistrelles.
order to give them protection from diurnal preda
Mealworms are good feed for bats but are
tors, all releases should be carried out after dusk
lacking in some minerals. Dusting them with multi-
and when the weather is fine. It is not advisable to
Bats
279
Table 28.1 Average weights of British bats. There will 
release bats during the winter months, December-
be differences pre-hibernation, during hibernation and 
March inclusive.
post-hibernation.
Species
Weight (g)
LEGISLATION
Pipistrelle
4-7
Whiskered
4-8
Bats and their 1oosts have complete protection
Lesser horseshoe
5-7
Brown long-eared
6-12
under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.
 Howevet, a person is not committing an offence if 
Daubenton's
6-12
Natterer's
6-12
they take into care any bat that is disabled other
Barbastelle
6-13
than by their action. Any bat taken into care must
Bechstein's
7-13
be teleased as soon as it is fully fit.
Grey long-eared
7-14
Leisler's
11-20
There has been considerable discussion on the
Serotine
15-35
suitability of hand-reared bats for Telease. The
Greaterhorseshoe
16-31
Abandonment of Animals Act 1960 legislates
Noctule
18-45
against the release of unsuitable animals, because
this would cauise them unnecessary suffering. Opin-
ions are now changing, with the present attitude
being that hand-reared bats can be successfully
Teleased provided the Telease programme offers
some monitoring of their viability in the wild.
20
Other Mammal Species
Species mentioned:
digging being also broad and flat with five strong
claws making it a very efficient excavato1.
·Mole(Talpa europaea)
●Scottish wildcat (Felis silvestris)
●Red-necked Wallaby (Macropus rufogriseus)
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
●Wild boar (Sus scrofa)
The only specific items needed for mole care are
· Common seal (Phoca vitulina)
●Grey seal (Halichoerus grypus)
thick gloves for handling and for containment a
● Cetacea (various species)
large dry glass aquarium. No lid is necessary. Moles
cannot climb so can be carnied in any cardboard
box.
Part I: Terrestrial Mammals
RESCUE AND HANDLING
Mole
Rescuing moles usually involves taking a victim
NATURAL HISTORY
from a cat or picking up a 1oad casualty. Theit
movement above ground is frantic but not very fast
The mole spends most of its life in a selies of
so they are easily caught. Howevel, on suitable soil
tunnels it digs underground just below the surface
they will dig and rapidly disappear from sight.
O1 over a metre down. It patrols this system taking
Moles do bite and although it is not a setious bite
invettebrate prey, mainly earthworms, Lumbricus
it is advisable to wear gloves. They can, without
terrestris. It also stores earthworms by biting theit
gloves, be held with theil scruff secured between
antenior segments and storing them paralysed.
the thumb and index fnger.
The mole is active throughout the whole day and
Theit nose tegion is very sensitive and should be
during the whole year. In frozen or dry spells it will
protected during handling or examination.
dig deeper following its prey down to lower levels.
They are very solitary animals that only get
COMMONDISEASES
together during mating. During the rest of the year
they will aggressively drive other moles from their
tenTitory.
There is scant evidence ofinfectious diseases affect-
There are numerous colour vanieties, including
ing moles but that is not to say that they may not
be present.
piebald, grey, albino and an almost golden colour
(Plate 42).
To enable it to dig, the mole has a broad, fat-
Parasites
tened humerus quite unlike the humerus in any
Moles can caity feas, mites and ticks but generally
 other mammal. Its forepaws are also adapted for
they are clean of external parasites.
280
Other Mammal Species
281
Inteinally, they can be susceptible to trematodes,
and time-consuming to try to keep them fed on
protozoans and fungal infection but these will not  j
 invertebrates. Moles can be fed on chopped mice; a
generally affect their rehabilitation.
single mole has been known to eat as many as 16
mice in a day. This gives some idea of their vora-
cious appetite.
COMMON INCIDENTS
Water should be provided at all times. It may
need changing regularly as it soon becomes soiled
Mole casualties are usually picked up for one of
as the evel-active mole passes through it on its
three Teasons:
incessant ramblings.
(1) They are caught by cats
RELEASE
(2) They are injured on the Toads
(3) They are found dehydrated above ground
The prefelred habitat for a mole is in deciduous
during exceptionally dry weather
woodland where there is no evidence of other
moles. As they are released amongst the leaf litter
it is advisable to stay with them until they disappeal
COMMON INJURIES
underground.
Injuries are not normally seen in mole admissions.
Cats may cauise minor lacerations.
LEGISLATION
Moles in care are protected from cruelty by the
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
Protection of Animals Act 1911 and in the wild by
the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996.
Subcutaneous fuids are the norm for moles to-
gether with long-acting amoxycillin for cat attack.
Scottish wildcat
CAGING
NATURAL HISTORY
As mentioned earlier, moles can be kept in a large
The Scottish wildcat is a highly secretive animal
aquarium that should be about half full of loose soil
confined now to the Temote highlands in Scotland
(Fig. 29.1). In the wild it feeds mainly by hunting
of their time tunnelling through the soil. Apart from
rabbits and small animals.
a water dish, they require no other fittings, branches
It is not dissimilar to a large, strong domestic
Or ornament.
tabby cat but has a largel, thicke1 tail with three to
Food should be put straight on to the soil. The
five dark rings and a black tip blunt. It will, unfor-
soil can get quite dirty and should be replaced every
tunately, breed with feral cats resulting in hybrids,
few days.
weakening the genetic strain.
D1 Andrew Kitchenel of the National Museum
of Scotland is deeply involved with the Scottish
FEELING
wildcat populations and would be happy to advise
 on the identifcation of any wildcats brought into
Moles are active for three periods over 24 hours.
Tehabilitation (pers. comm.). What are needed are
They should have access to food at all times. It is
good-quality colour photographs of the animals'
said that a mole will die if deprived of food for more
dorsal, ventral and lateral aspects of both sides.
than an hour.
In general:
They will take mealworms and waxworms scat-
tered amongst the soil mix in their containers.
· Wildcats should not be released until formally
However,they eat so much that it is both expensive
identified
282
PracticalWildlifeCare
Fig. 29.1 A Scottish wildcat is more
fierce and much stronger than a feral
cat.
· There is cuently no genetic identification possi-
COMMON DISEASES
ble but photographs should help
● Hybrids, infectious o1 feral domestic cats should
Ectoparasites
not be released in the known range of the wildcat
● All dead wildcats should be sent for post mortem
Various parasites have been recorded in wildcats,
to the National Museum of Scotland
probably
(Corbett, 1979). Species 1eco1ded have included:
·Cat fea (Ctenocephalides felis)
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
·Rabbit fea (Spilopsyllus cuniculi)
·Rodent flea (Hystrichopsylla talpae)
Wildcats are extremely poweiful and ferce animals
·Ticks (Ixodus ricinus)
demanding the strongest equipment. A dog grasper
·Lice (Filicola subrostratus)
is essential together with a strong catrying basket
that has a crush facility. In captivity a blowpipe and
There have been few Tecords of wildcats in care
darts can provide a method of remotely injecting O1
but generally ectoparasites should not be a major
else a crush cage would be essential.
problem.
Endoparasites
RESCUE AND HANDLING
Roundworms (Toxocara cati) and tapeworms
Apart from orphans, any wildcat that needs
(Taenia spp) can be tieated with standard cat
Tescuing will be severely injured and disabled. To
Iemedies.
handle a wildcat that is not unconscious safely, a
dog grasper should be used around the neck and
Cat diseases
front leg. Do not try to scruff a wildcat as you would
scTuff a domestic cat. It is much stronger and can
One of the great worries with the spread of feral
inflict senious injury with its claws as well as its
cats is the introduction to wildcat populations of
teeth.
feline diseases.
OtherMammalSpecies
283
There is evidence that pure-bred Scottish wildcats
FEEDING
commonly register positive for feline leukaemia
virus (FeLV) and no doubt other diseases of the
Although wildcats can be provided with good-
domestic cat can be transmitted to the wild popula-
quality cat food, their diet should refect their wild
tions (J. Lewis, personal communication).
preferences. Rabbits, mice, rats and day-old chicks
AllScottish wildcats should be screened for
are eaten. The latter will need a feline mineral sup-
feline diseases and not be released if they could
plement in order to provide a balanced diet.
pose a threat to the wild population.
Dental damage
RELEASE
Wildcats often have damaged teeth. These should
Scottish wildcats should be released where they
be treated before the animal is released (Plate 43).
were found. Howevel, with the problems of
hybridisation, Scottish Natural Heritage will be
COMMON INCIDENTS
able to advise if that location is unsuitable and can
Tecommend alternatives.
Scottish wildcats are very rarely near enough to
 In a new area, a system of hacking (see Chapter
human habitation to be involved in traumatic inci-
18) will give the cat a better chance of integrating
dents. Usual occurrences are Toad traffic accidents
with the local fauna.
and there are records of casualties caused by
heather burning, traps and snares.
LEGISLATION
COMMON INJURIES
Scottish wildcats are protected from cruelty as are
all Bnitish mammals. They also fall under the aus-
Recorded injunies are usually fractures caused by
pices of the Dange1ous Wild Animals Act (1976) as
Ioad traffic accidents, notably fractures to the jaw.
members of the Felidae.
In all respects the wildcat 1oad traffc accident
A Dangerous Wild Animal licence is required.
victim suffers similar injunies to other casualty
These can be provided, at a cost, from the Envi-
domestic cats.
Ionmental Health Offcer at the local Council.
The use of a blowpipe and pneumatic darts does
Tequire a Firearms Licence, which will be available
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
at a local police station.
Apart from an unconscious wildcat or one that is
seriously debilitated, it is usually necessary t0
Red-necked wallaby
sedate the animal in order to provide intravenous
Auids and medication. Once again, a wildcat will
present as a large aggressive domestic or feral cat
NATURAL HISTORY
 and will benefit from standard cat-care practices.
The Bnitish population of 1ed-necked wallabies
are derived from a Tasmanian subspecies, having
CAGING
 sombre colouring and seasonal breeding (Yalden,
1991).
The Scottish wildcat is extremely powerful and
There ale known populations in the Peak
needs a really strong metal cage. The provision of a
District, around Loch Lomond and in some
divider is essential for cleaning. Any unnecessary
numbers alound Whipsnade Zoo in Bedfordshire.
handling of a wildcat should be avoided.
The author has also been seeing casualties and free-
A rehabilitation pen outside needs to be strong.
living wallabies in the Chiltern Hills.
high, covered and with many large branches and
They are usually in small groups and on lower
platforms set well above the ground.
ground subsist on a diet of grass and bracken.
284
Practical Wildlife Care
Like other kangaroos, wallabies are pseudorumi-
COMMON DISEASES
nants: i.e. they have a complex stomach in which
feImentation by symbiotic bacteria and protozoa
As yet not many wild or feral wallabies have been
aid digestion.
reported for rehabilitation but in captive wallabies
there are two conditions that can give cause for
concern.
EQUIPMENT AND TRANSPORT
Wallabies can be caught in nets, especially the
Post-capture myopathy
padded ‘wallaby’ nets marketed by Rob Harvey
This is very similar to the myopathy that affects
(see Appendix 6), which are ideal. Once caught,
captured wild dee1. Treat with fuids, corticosteroids
they can be catried in hessian sacks, as they may
and with selenium (Dystosel - Intervet) as one
jump and injure their heads in an enclosed box.
would with a deer.
Fluids can be infused through the lateral coc-
cygeal vein, which runs along the side of the tail, or
RESCUE AND HANDLING
the cephalic veins in the front legs (Fig. 29.2).
Wallabies do seem to be going the way of other
Lumpy jaw
introduced species, such as muntjac, and are falling
foul of 1oad traffic, swimming pools, fences and
This disease is caused by Bacteroides nodosus and
enclosed gardens.
other bacteria. It is associated with poor hygiene,
pue [namod Araa aie sal pue paay puy i
overcrowding and generally bad husbandry. It
can inflict injury if a handler is careless. Normally
should not occur in the wild but not enough is
hold and pick up a wallaby by the thick bone of its
known about Britain's population of feral wallabies
tail and one hand on the neck taking care to watch
to completely discount the chance that it may
those hind legs (Cracknell, 2004c).
OCCuIT.
e         
Other Mammal Species
285
The veterinary surgeon should look for swelling
and a nightmare for anybody trying to tend a wild
around the face and neck, excessive salivation and
boar casualty.
general loss of condition. Even the smallest of
 mucosal sinuses around teeth could indicate lumpy
RESCUE AND HANDLING
jaw.
Clindamycin (Antirobe? Capsules - Pharmacia
The injured wild boar would probably be the most
Animal Health) has proven useful in early cases,
dangerous wild animal to be encountered in this
but generally the prognosis is poor.
country. Being the fist to be called to a wildlife
casualty, the vet, nurse O1 rehabilitator should be
FEEDING
aware of the danger to themselves and the public
of an injured wild boar.
Wallabies will feed simila1ly to deel, so can be
D1. Martin Goulding has been studying the wild
offered coarse goat mix or a wallaby diet from
 boar in Britain for over seven years and has worked
specialised zoo suppliers.
on a strategy for dealing with a wild boar casualty.
Even with his expelience, he has serious reserva-
tions about trying to tend a casualty and has drawn
RELEASE
up the following recommendations, with which this
author fully concurs:
Not being a native species wallabies should never
be Teturned to or released in the wild.
Ieoq Piw painjul 1o yos e 1eau jee ueo noA jI ·
then it is a very poorly animal indeed as their
nOTmal 1esponse to people is to fee quickly
LEGISLATION
· A sick or injured wild boal can be very, very dan-
gerous. Males ovel two years old have tusks in
Walabies are on Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and
the lower jaw that are razor sharp. These are his
Countryside Act 1981 and s0 cannot be legally
main weapons. With a flick of his head he can
Teleased in Britain. Of course in captivity they have
sever human skin very quickly and easily, includ-
the full protection against cruelty afforded by the
mg main arteries. Females also have tusks but
Protection of Animals Act 1911.
these are not as well developed as in the male.
Howevel, they can still inflict senious wounds.
Both sexes have large jaw bones and conse-
Wild boar
quently a bite that can crunch bone.
·No one should get close to a sick or injured wild
NATURAL HISTORY
boar. Even if apparently ^out for the count', a
boar can move and turn his head very quickly.
Wild boa1 were a major part of the British fauna
Thus if you are standing behind an animal that
until they were hunted to extinction several
appears lifeless, it may tum its head (with tusks
hundred years ago. Howeve1, in 1981 the first wild
and bite) towards you in an instant.
boa1 farm was established, in Cambridgeshire.
If a sick or injured wild boa1 is found, a vet and
Since then other farms have sprung up until in
the police should be called. The police should be
2000 the Department fo1 the Environment Food
 r   rn  s 
and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) reported 4554 wild
dangerous wild animals and hence there are
boar being farmed in Britain. Over those twenty
public safety conceins.
years wild boar seem to have escaped and there is
· It is only advisable to transport a sick or injured
now a viable population living in the wild in south-
wild boa1 (i.e. to the wildlife hospital) when it is
east England.
fully sedated. Unless very strong welded steel
Wild boar are shy and retiring and avoid humans
mesh cages are available, a boa1 not sedated will
to live in dense woodland.They seldom fall sick but
break out if it is not too sick or too badly injured.
their habit of feeding On Toadside grass verges
A horsebox may not necessarily be stiong
makes themm candidates for 1oad traffc accidents
enough.
286
Practical Wildlife Care
· The cages and pens typically seen at wildlife hos-
pitals will not be strong enough to hold a recov-
ering boa1. Also regarding pens, wild boar can
jump surpnisingly high and can root under most
fences. On a wild-boar farm, the fencing needs to
be at least five feet high and dug into the ground
one foot. An electnic wire is also tecommended.
A boar recovering in a wildlife hospital would
therefore need a specially constructed pen.
Shelter from the sun is also essential.
· No staff should enter the pen for administering
teatment, feeding o1 cleaning duties. Treatment
should only be cafTied out by a vet, who would
probably have to anaesthetise the animal using a
dart gun. He would not be able to get near it if
the beast were mobile.
Fig. 29.3 Most casualties are seal pups.
· Captive boar will eat grain, vegetables, fruit,
tubers and artifcial pig nuts could be tnied. A
plentiful supply of water is essential for wallow-
img and drinking, particularly in hot weather.
Most casualties are seal pups with the occasional
●Wild boat have a prefered home range. If rehabili-
adult debilitated by disease 01 injury (Fig. 29.3).
tation is to be successful, the boar should be
Their rescue is often not appropriate and if neces-
released in woodland close to where it was found
le8 ol lou se os siaipuey paoaladxa spaau Aies
and at night (wild boa1 are usually noctumal).
bitten.
Howevel, catching the animal and transporting it
Any sightings of a seal possibly needing rescue
will not be easy unless the animal is heavily sedated.
should be immediately refeTred to the local centre
To rehabilitate a sick or injured wild boa1 in a
for assistance. The police in the area will have a list
wildlife hospital successfully would, in my opinion,
of the most suitable people to contact. It is best not
be almost impossible. Even to try and rehabilitate
 to attempt a rescue but to monitor the animal until
an animal in a penned area of a fiendly wild boar
help alives.
farm would be very difficult as they are so unruly.
The dangers of a wild boar casualty do, I feel,
Cetaceans
make it a candidate for police marksmen or at least
a veteninary surgeon with expenience of large wild
Even more specialised than seal care is the rescue
animals and remote tranquillising equipment.
and treatment of stranded or trapped whales, dol.
phins or porpoises.
Part II: Sea Mammals
 Stranding or other incident affecting cetaceans can
occul at any point around Bnitain's coastline. The
 Both of the following groups of animals requie
advice on finding a stranded or trapped cetacean is
specialised rescue techniques, handling, holding and
not to try to rescue it but to contact the Bnitish Divers
treatment beyond the capabilities of most practices
Manine Life Rescue (BDMLR) who have estab-
and rescue centres.
lished a nationwide network of volunteer Tescue
teams (see Appendix 7). The tescue team will ask for
some information and will advise which procedures
Seals
to follow to steady the animal until help arnives.
For the notes on these procedures from the
Seals are abundant in several areas around the Bnitish
Bnitish Divers Manine Life Rescue
Marine
coast. In these areas there is usually a group or centre
Mammal Medic Handbook (Bamett, Knight &
specialising in seal rescue and rehabilitation.
Stevens, 2004) see Appendix 2.
30
Rearing Orphaned Wild Mammals
-s  s   r r
At rescue centres it is often possible to predict
rated from theit mothers It is practically unknow
some almivals but it is preferable to have a complete
fo1 a wild mother to abandon her young, although 
range of consumables and equipment 1eady in
it can happen if they are seriously disturbed. Nor-
order to cope with whichever animal is brought
mally orphans are found because some disaster has
in.
befallen the mother or theit nest is destroyed, often
during human construction or tepair work.
With any wild mammal orphan taken into care
FOODS
the circumstances of its rescue should be consid-
 ered and the opportunity taken to return it to its
In hand-rearing we seek to enable suckling by p10-
nursery, if that is at all possible. Otherwise the
viding milk replacers and sometimes passive immu-
young animal will need hand-rearing and the com-
mity, until weaning leads to the release of a fully wild
mitment of time and patience that that requires.
animal.
All of the British telrestial species have been
Teared by hand at some time or another. Vatious
protocols are now in place based on the experience
Milk replacers
of rehabilitators. It is recommended that their prac-
Each species of mammal produces its own individ-
tices are followed as each species has its own idio-
ual milk. It is not practical to obtain exactly these
syncrasies that need to be addressed. Howevel,
particula1 milks but substitutes can be made up of
others may have their own methods that have been
similar component parts (Table 30.1).
successful so 'if it works for you' do not change it.
There are pet milks and, of course, milk products
Many of the accepted practices apply to more
from cows, but these have generally proven to be
than one species so familiarity with the normal pr0-
inappropriate for use with wild mammals. All milks
tocols can be adapted to suit any individual species.
should be warmed otherwise the animal may not
feed. Once used any milk product should be dis-
carded. NeveI reheat any milk or milk replacer.
NATURALHISTORY
Additives for milkreplacers
Mammals are born in Britain at various times of the
year and in varying litter sizes from one in most
Generally available commercial milk Teplacers
deer to multiple births in smaller mammals. The
such as Esbilac (PetAg) and Lamlac (Volac InteI-
young are born either fully furred and mobile o1,
national) have a balanced amount of vitamins con-
more commonly, without much or no fur and with
tained in their formula and require no additional
their eyes and ears closed. Theit mothers suckle
vitamins, except if there is a particula1 requirement
them for various amounts of time until they are
e.g. a calcium supplemment for squirrels. Goats'
weaned on to an adult solid diet.
milk, however, would be more beneficial if a d1op
287
288
Practical Wildlife Care
Table 30.1 Analysis of the milk of some UK mammals (after Pet-Ag).
Species
% solids
Protein % solids
Fat % solids
Carbohydrates % solids
Badger
18.6
38.7/38.8
33.9
18.8
Bottle-nosed dolphin
79.1
2.6
41.7
16.3
Browm rat
22.1
37.0
40.0
17.0
Fallow deer
25.3
26.0
50.0
24.0
23.5
25.5
34.0
16.2
XOH
18.2
34.6
34.6
25.3
[eas Ka]
67.7
16.5
78.6
3.8
[aunbs Kan]
39.6
18.7
62.5
9.4
Harbour porpoise
45.8
89.7
2.8
Hare
32.2
31.0
46.0
5.0
Hedgehog
21.6
33.3
46.3
9.3
House mouse
29.3
31.0
45.0
10.0
Mink
21.7
26.0
33.0
21.0
12110
38.0
28.9
63.0
0.3
Rabbit
31.2
32.0
49.0
6.0
Red deer
21.1
34.0
40.0
21.9
Red-necked wallaby
13.9
28.8
33.1
32.4
Roe deer
19.4
45.4
34.5
20.1
Sika deer
36.1
34.3
52.6
9.4
Stoat
23.5
25.5
34.0
16.2
Water shrew
35.0
28.6
57.1
0.3
Table 30.2 Milk replacers.
Product
% Solids
Protein % of
Fat % of
Carbohydrates % of
Goat
12
22
32
39
Esbilac (Pet Ag)
97
33.2
43.0
15.8
Multi Milk (Pet Ag)
97
30.0
55.0
trace
Lamlac (Volac Feeds)
60
24
24
Table 30.3 Additives for milk replacers.
Product
Function
Avipro (Vetark Animal Health)
pro-biotic
Abidec (Warmer Lambert)
multivitamins only add to goat's milk
Stress (Phillips Yeast Products)
calcium/phosphorus supplement
Prolam (Schering-Plough Animal Health)
colostrum antibody supplement for herbivores
Pancrex (Pharmacia Animal Health)
digestive enzyme
Kitten Colostrum Substitute (Net-tex Ltd)
colostrum antibody supplement for insectivores and carmivores
of multivitamins (Abidec? - Wamer Lambert) was
● Pedigree Chum Puppy Food (Pedigree Masterfoods)
added (Tables 30.2 and 30.3).
· A ready access to wild plants such as dandelion,
chickweed and clover
Weaning foods
· Prosecto dnied insects (Haith)
●Waxwormlarvae
●Farley's Rusks (HJ Heinz)
·Mealworms
·Plain digestive biscuits
· St Tiggywinkles Mammal Glop
RearingOrphanedWild Mammals
289
St Tiggywinkles Mammal Glop is mixed in bulk
at pet stores or veterinary practices, others need to
and is made up of:
be improvised but these ale mainly for the smallest
Orphans.
· One dog food tin of Pedigree Chum Puppy Food
Available commercially are:
(Pedigree Masterfoods)
· One dog food tin of water
● Esbilac Nursing Kit (Pet Ag) - contains a bottle,
· One dog food tin of dnied insects (Prosecto -
teats and a cleaning brush and is suitable for
Haith)
small and larger animals
· One pinch of Pancrex (Pharmacia Animal
· Catac Kitten and Puppy Rearing Bottles and
Health)enzyme
teats (Fig. 30.1) - useful for smaller animals
· One pinch of Vetamin & Zinc (Millpledge
· Belcroy Premature Baby Bottle
Veterinary) multivitamins
· Large deer may require a full-sized baby bottle
· teaspoon of Nutri-Plus (Virbac)
and teat; lamb-feeding bottles from agricultural
● One pinch of Stress (Phillips Yeast Products)
merchants are also suitable
· Pastettes (Alpha Laboratonies) - these are avail-
This is mixed to the consistency of soft ice cream
able in a range of sizes up to the size for a squinrel.
and frozen in shallow dishes with lids (Jonipax
They are not practical for sterilisation and should
Ashwood Timber & Plastics). The mixture is
be discarded after each feed. In use the tip of the
defrosted in a tefrigerator before use.
 pastette is cut off and a small Catac teat is attached
Points to consider are:
HYGIENE PRODUCTS
· Hedgehog feeders can be made from:
 A 1 ml syringe body
Disinfectants
o An eye dropper bulb
0 A 16g hypodermic needle with the point cut off
· TniGene (MediChem International) - a com-
o The rubber insert from a Vacutainer blood-
bined surface cleaner and disinfectant that, when
sampling needle (Fig. 30.2)
used at the recommended concentration, is a safe
· Some animals have a particularly strong sucking
cleaning medium
·Milton (Procter & Gamble) － for stenilising
action, so it is essential that all teats are secure
 bottles, teats and feeding utensils
· Mice, voles, shrews and bats can be fed with a
●MediScrub Hand sciub (MediChem Inteina-
small artist's paintbrush
·Shallow plastic dishes with lids for freezing
tional) - for personal hygiene
prepared food (Jonipax - Ashwood Timber &
Also cotton buds, paper towels, pet or baby wipes.
Plastics) (Fig. 30.3)
Do not use household disinfectants or detergents.
Housing and other equipment
Creams and ointments
· Various plastic cages, boxes and aquaria
· Heat lamps, which can be fexible table lamps
· White petioleum jelly is useful to provide relief
with a 20W, 25W or 40W red bulb (Fig. 30.4)
if the animal becomes sore after urinating
●Metanium (Roche) provides: titanium dioxide,
· Metal heat mats
· Scales capable of weighing in 1g increments
peroxide, salicylate, tannate to relieve urine
·Smallveterinary bedding
scalding further
·Food liquidiser
EQUIPMENT
PROCEDURES
Feeding bottles, etc.
On admission
Obviously, different babies will require various
The infant casualty as it airives will piobably be
sizes of bottles and teats to suit. Some are available
in some distress It will be cold and possibly
290
Practical Wildlife Care
 (   )   
dishes prevent anaerobic bacteria from flourishing in
'glop' formula.
Fig. 30.1 The range of Catac kitten and puppy rearing
bottles and teats suitable for wild animals
Fig. 30.2 A hedgehog baby feeder and components.
dehydrated, and sometimes injured and attacked
by flies.
Initially it should be weighed, warmed and given
watm subcutaneous fuids. Some youngsters, e.g.
deer, foxes, badgers and otters, will be large enough
 to be infused intravenously with warmed fluids.
Also at this stage all babies beneft from a small
amount of Pet Breeders Nutri Drops (Net-tex Ltd)
given orally. The dose tate is 0.1 ml per 90 g.
Toiletting
The next prionity, and one that is often forgotten, is
to stimulate the animal to urinate and sometimes
defecate. If a newly admitted orphan does defecate,
Tetain the faeces for laboratory examination for
Fig. 30.4 A simple heater can be a flexible table lamp
fitted with red bulbs of various wattages.
internal parasites.
RearingOrphanedWildMammals
291
Feeding
Familiarisation
Very young animals, with theit eyes still closed, are
usually more teceptive to the first bottle feeds as
they are not frightened of what they cannot see.
Older animals, who can see, are going to be very
shocked and distressed at losing their mothers.
They will need to be handled with great care and
patience, if they are to settle and feed.
Begin by giving them a cuddly toy that they can
hide with. Then, once they have settled to this, 1ub
your hands over the cuddly toy so that the animals
can get used to your scent. Try not to have used
scented soaps or other perfumes before trying to
feed them.
Then find a quiet place with no distraction, for
you or the animal. At fist, be patient and try gently
pushing the pipette o1 teat between the lips. At first
the animal will resist, it does not want this alien
object in its mouth. Howevel, do persevere and still
being gentle eventually the baby will take the teat.
Once the teat o1 pipette is in the mouth, gently
Fig. 30.5 Toiletting a newly-admitted badger cub
express a small amount of the milk replacer. Never
fill or flood the mouth as this may lead to inhala-
tion pneumonia. You should be able to see the baby
Most mammal young are unable to urinate
swallow those first few drops. Then it can be given
without assistance. Normally their mothers will
another two or three drops of milk replace1. If the
stimulate them to do this but if the youngster is
baby shows no interest in swallowing, gently agitate
orphaned it may not have been relieved for some-
its tongue with the teat.
time. Failure to uninate can lead to fatal uraemia
It may seem to take a long time but gradually,
 and most mammals will show no interest in feeding
over about two days, the babies will leam to relax
if their bladders are full.
and trust you and settle down to feeding and
The animal can be stimulated to urinate by
 growing. The golden rule with all these procedures
rapidly, but gently, dabbing a damp cotton bud o1
is'gently does it!'
piece of paper towel over the genital area and anus
(Fig 30.5). The animal may not 1espond at frst, but
persevere until it does uninate. This procedure
First bottle feed
should be carlied out before and after each feed. In
fact, deer will respond to being stimulated while
The next stage of rearing is to get the orphan used
to bottle feeding. At first it may reject the bottle or
they are suckling-
With smaller infants there may be an element
else overindulge leading to fooding of the mouth
and inhalation of the liquid. This can lead to inhala-
of overflow from the bladder, which may appea1 to
tion pneumonia but there is less chance of this
be spontaneous urination. Left unchecked the
 bladder may not empty and the overflow will lead
developing if Lectade (Pfizer Animal Health) oT
other oral rehydration fuid is given for the first two
to unine scalding. Assume that it is overflow unless
feeds.
the urine is seen to be pulsing under some pres-
sute. Urine scald can be relieved with either white
petroleum jelly, Metanium (Roche) o1 Hypercal
· The third feed should be 75% 1ehydrating fuid
(Nelsons).
and 25% milk replacer
292
Practical Wildlife Care
· The next feed would be 50% 1ehydrating fuid
milk 1eplacers, opt fo1 two to fou1 feeds, to ensure
and 50% milk 1eplacer
adequate nutrition.
·Then 25% rehydrating fuid and 75% milk
It is important that the orphan be seen to
replacer
swallow milk. If milk overflows from the mouth o1
· The first full feed of milk replacer will be at the
down the nose there is a possibility that the hole in
sixth feeding session
the teat is too large or just that too much milk is
· Gradually introducing the milk replacer causes
being given. It may also point to a split or cleft
less aggravation in the change from natural milk
palate.
to artificial milk
After each feed the orphan must be toiletted
again and its face and fur wiped clean with a baby
Hold the animal tipped slightly forward as
Or pet wipe.
this helps prevent inhalation. Then offer up the
feeding bottle to its mouth. Do not force it to drink
Colostrum
sll oul og owl 1o doip e lal pue juaned aq 1nq
mouth. Once it starts to take the liquid then it will
Mammals have passive immunity passed to them in
be more receptive to milk feeding. Do make sute
colostrum in their mother's milk. In most cases an
that the hole in the teat is not too large. In fact
Orphan will have received colostrum and, except in
the most suitable orifice in a teat is a cross-shaped
animals like hedgehogs, will not need any more.
cut that can be easily extended if it is too small
However, in some situations a substitute
(Fig. 30.6).
colostrum should be provided:
Milkfeeding
· When an animal has not received any maternal
milk, e.g. after it is delivered by Caesarean
Once the orphan has taken those first five feeds and
section; one day on neat colostrum is usually
has been toiletted, a regime of feeding can be estab-
sufficient
lished. Overmight feeding is not necessary except
· When an animal would naturally be provided
fo1 moles, shrews, tiny mice and voles. Generally,
with colostrum for a longer period. For example,
four feeds a day can be planned: early morning.
hedgehogs absorb colostrum for up to 41 days
lunchtime, teatime and one late at night. A fifth feed
after birth. Mice also have the ability to receive
should be fitted in for shrews and moles.
colostrum up to 16 days after birth.
Some species will require only one o1 two feeds
a day. In the wild, rabbits and hares will be fed only
With these orphans, the frst day's milk should be
once daily but in captivity being fed on artificial
50 :50 colostrum mixed with the milk substitute. On
the second day mixed 50:50 with the milk substi-
tute and from then on mixed 25:75 with the milk.
Mice should teceive this until they are weaned
while hedgehogs should receive colostrum until
they are about 21 days old and starting to wean.
Hygiene
After each feed the baby's face should be wiped
clean with a pet/baby wipe. This will prevent a build
up of food that might cause hair loss, soreness and
infection.
At each feed all bowls and feeding utensils
should be thoroughly washed and kept in a stenilis-
ing solution such as Milton (Procter & Gamble).
Any unused milk should be discarded and mixed
Fig. 30.6 A cross-shaped cut in the top of a teat.
freshly for each feed.
Rearing Orphaned Wild Mammals
293
It is impractical to try to sterilise pastettes, which
· Parasites - there may be a heavy burden of
should also be discarded. It is not possible to clean
WOTms Or coccidia
them thoroughly before stenilisation. Organic
matter cannot be stenilised.
It is a distinct advantage if each orphan can be
THINGS THAT GO WRONG
fed with its own paticular bottle.
Inhalation pneumonia
Rest
This is the main killer of orphaned mammals. Using
 Oral rehydration fuids for the first feed prevents a
In between feeds the animals must be allowed to
sleep and digest their meals. A tired animal will be
lot of the problem.
Teluctant to feed. Also it is much easier to feed an
If it does happen the affected animal may start
animal that is hungry, so, as long as mealtimes are
to breathe heavily and even with an open mouth.
adhered to, the orphan should be letting you know
An audible ‘click’ can sometimes be heard as it
it is hungry and needs feeding.
breathes. Amoxycillin by injection can help to
All wild mammal orphans should be kept in
Temedy the condition and the veterinary surgeon
family groups remote from any other animals, espe-
may prescnibe othel respiratory drugs.
cially domestic pets, and should not be allowed to
All baby mammals should be held upright as they
walk around on the foor either in rescue centres o1
ale given milk replacers.
houses.
Hypothermia
Housing
An infant mammal will not feed if it is cold. Usually
Pet-catrying baskets O1 plastic aquaria are ideal
it should feel just warm to the touch. However, t00
nursenies for young animals. In these an overhead
much heat can lead to hyperthermia, which can
heat source can be provided with a fexible lamp
very quickly be fatal.
fitted with a red bulb. The animals must be able to
Generally, each heat source should be at one end
move away from the heat if they wish. A non-slip
of the container allowing the animals to move away
mat on the foor will aid the orphan's stability,
from it if they are uncomfortable.
The use of veterinary bedding is ideal as it keeps
The warmed area of any container could be kept
the animals dry. Do not cover the bedding with any-
at app1oximately (Watts, 1987):
thing and only use newspaper underneath it.
Most small mammals will appreciate a cuddly toy
· 35°C fo1 haitless babies
●32°Cfor babies that are haired but stilhave theit
OT piece of warm blanket to snuggle up to or under.
eyes closed
● 30°C when the eyes open
Weighing
·23°C afte1 weaning
A development chart will provide a record of an
animal's progress and a basis for future excursions
Winding
into rearing. Each orphan should be weighed at the
same time each morning before its first feed. Its
Some of the larger infants will gulp air as well as
weight should remain constant or increase. Any
milk replacer. This causes the very human baby
complaint of ‘wind'. It can usually be relieved by
weight loss must be monitored and if it continues
Over 48 hours then something may be going wrong.
gently massaging Or patting the back. Major wind
Such weight loss could be caused by:
problems may be relieved with gripe water, avail-
able at chemists for human babies.
· Diarhoea - the baby should be starved fo1 24
hours and receive only oral replacement fuids
Imprinting
(Lectade - Pfizer Animal Health) in place of milk
· Infection - there may be the start of an infection
This is the worst thing that can happen to an
waTanting the uise of antibiotics
orphaned mammal. It can become totally reliant on
294
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 30.7 Baby hedgehogs are fed using
a feeder made from a 1ml syringe.
human company or that of domestic animals and,
SPECIES IDIOSYNCRASIES
in the end, cannot be released.
The following Tules should be followed to
Hedgehogs
prevent imprinting:
Milk: Being insectivores, hedgehog babies, UI-
· Never attempt to tea1 a mammal on its own; seek
chins, fare very well on a diet of Esbilac (Pet Ag)
out another fosterer who may have orphans of
milk replace1. To provide the immune stimulant
the same species
that hedgehogs need for the first 21 days until the
· Do not talk to the orphans especially aftel
teeth start to erupt, the feeds should be sup-
weaning
plemented with Kitten Colostrum Substitute
●Do not handle the animals other than when they
(Net-tek) in the following proportions:
 are being bottle fed and toiletted
· For the first 24-48 hours - 50% Esbilac: 50%
● Keep particularly vulnerable animals such as fox
Colostrum
cubs and deer from seeing humans and hearing
● For the next 19 days - 75% Esbilac: 25%
human voices
Colostrum
● Do not let children handle o1 play with young
· From then to fully weaned - 100% Esbilac
animals
Feeder: Use a 1ml syringe with a Vacutainer
Tubber tip o1 pastettes, which should be dis-
carded after each feed (Fig. 30.7).
Quarantine
Freguency:
The only occasion when an orphan should be kept
·Newly born should be fed every 2-3 hours
on its own is when it is first admitted. It is advisable
including during the night
to keep it away from established groups as it may
·Weighing 50g should be fed every 3-4
be harbouring an infection. Usually this will show
hours
itself in 3-4 days.
● Weighing 100 g and over can be fed four times
a day
Penis sucking
Weaning:
When teeth appeal, at about 21 days,
wean on to St Tiggywinkles Mammal Glop. This
This happens a lot with squirels and otters. Where
should be liquidised to the consistency of soft ice-
it is other siblings causing the problem the affected
cream and frozen in shallow dishes (Jonipax -
animal should be removed and kept on its own.
Ashwood Timbe1 & Plastics). Glop should be
Often it is the animal itself that is self-mutilating.
allowed to defrost in a reffigerator. Do not waim
The only way to prevent this is to fashion an
it in an oven o1 microwave. Always freeze ^glop
Elizabethan collar out of a piece of plastic O1
before using it - this stops bacteria multiplying
cardboard.
before lise.
RearingOrphanedWild Mammals
295
Notes: Baby hedgehogs tend not to suck on the
teat. The milk must be slowly fed into the mouth.
It is also cTucial that baby hedgehogs have over-
head heat and not a heat pad.
Moles
Milk: As moles are insectivores their milk
Ieplacel should be Esbilac (Pet Ag).
Feeder: Small pastettes o1 home-made pipettes
like those used for hedgehogs are suitable.
Frequency: Moles are very active 24 hours a day
and unfortunately will need bottle-feeding both
day and night. The night feeds can be less fre-
quent than the daytime feeds.
Weaning: Once again, moles need to feed day and
night and should always have available St Tiggy-
winkles Glop or chopped mice, and when in an
adult container lined with loose soil they should
always have available waxworm and mealworm
larvae to hunt and feed on.
Notes: Once weaned moles should be kept on
their own in aquaria with 80-100 cm of loose soil
at the bottom, in which they can buriow.
Although time consuming it is vital to sieve the
soil thoroughly every day to make sure the wax-
worms and mealworms are being eaten.
Fig. 30.8 Feeding a baby shrew with a paintbrush.
Shrews
Milk: Esbilac (Pet Ag).
babies at 25°C-30°C assists them in the digestion
Feeder: Paintbrush dipped in milk Or a small
of milk 1eplacers (B1own, 2003).
pastette.
Feeder: Allow baby bats to lap off a small paint-
Frequency:
Avid feeders; should be fed hourly
brush dipped in Esbilac mix. Only baby-wipe
both day and night (Fig. 30.8).
bats if they get milk replacer on their fur.
Weaning:
Wean as soon as possible onto live
Frequency:
 Up to eight times per day for unfurred
invertebrates, e.g. maggots, mini-mealworms Or
very young bats and four times per day for fully-
waxworm larvae.
furred babies being reared on Esbilac (Mitchell-
Notes: Shrews should have food available all the
Jones & McLeish, 2004).
time. Their rapid metabolism requires constant
Weaning: Bats can be weaned onto the insides of
nourishment.
mealworms o1 waxworms and then onto whole
larvae. There is, howevet, discussion that feeding
insects on the ground may blunt the bat's apti-
Bats
tude for catching fying insects. Weaned young-
Milk: Esbilac (Pet Ag) is the only milk 1eplace1
sters should receive fying and hunting practice
suitable for earing baby bats Other types of
in a bat flight cage.
milk have been used but the bats reared on these
Release: The success of releasing hand-reared
substitutes have never made the grade. Esbilac
bats has always been controversial. However,
mixed 1 part powde1 to 1 pa1t hot wate1 provides
American bat rehabilitators are having success in
a thicker, suitable milk substitute. Keeping the
Teleasing their hand-reared youngsters. There
296
Practical Wildlife Care
needs to be a great deal more research carried
Table 30.4 Feeding quantities and frequency for orphan
out on the releasing of hand-reared bats
rabbits.
(Mathews, 2003).
AGE
AMOUNT
FREQUENCY
Taking into consideration the apparent naivety
of hand-reared bats at catching their natural
<4 days
1-4ml
Every 2-3 hours during
prey, moths and flying insects, they should be
the day; last feed
given the opportunity to learn to hunt without
midnight, first feed 5 AM
4-10 days
4-10ml
being in danger of starvation. Use a bat flight
Every 4 hours during the
day; last feed 11 pM, first
 cage with lighting to attract flying insects, and a
feed 6 AM
trap door the full width of the cage fitted at one
>10 days
As much as it
2-3 times a day; as they
end.Various roost boxes are fixed around the top
will take
take more, reduce the
of the cage. The foor is kept completely clean
frequency
except for a large tray where mealworms and
waxworms can be offered to the bats.
In the first few nights, with the trapdoor closed,
the bats are offered mealworms and waxworms
Also once a day, the pipette or bottle teat
in the tray. Then gradually the mealworms and
should be dipped into Pancrex (Pharmacia
waxworms are withheld trying to encourage the
Animal Health) to aid digestion and Stress
bats to try for the flying insects. As they become
(Phillips Yeast Products) as a calcium and phos-
more proficient in catching the fying insects
phorus supplement.
the tray of larvae can eventually be left empty
Bottles: For small rabbits pastettes o1 pipettes are
until almost dawn. At this stage, during daylight,
suitable, gradually being increased in size up to
the trapdoor can be fixed open so that the young
Catac Puppy Bottles.
bats can leave if they wish but can return as they
Frequency:
See Table 30.4.
have a familia1 roost and a fall-back supply of
Weaning:
:Once the rabbit's teeth start to erupt, at
food.
about 15 days, the rabbit should be encouraged,
Unless all these facilities for the telease of
although it will be eluctant, to lap the Esbilac
hand-reared bats are available then any hand-
mix from a shallow bowl. A dninking bottle fixed
Teared youngsters should be passed on to reha-
to the side of the cage should contain water and
bilitators who do have the facilities.
will be more Teadily taken by the rabbit.
The rabbit should now be bedded on hay,
which it will eat. Also it should be offered dan-
Rabbits
delion leaves, clovel and chickweed picked from
Milk:  Rabbits
srequire a high-protein milk
 unpolluted ground and a good quality rabbit mix.
 Teplacer. Esbilac (Pet Ag) has been found to be
If the rabbit s reluctant to start eating solids
very suitable. The Esbilac should be mixed fresh
then offer it small amounts of banana or broken
at each feed in proportions of one part Esbilac
off pieces of Fa1ley's Rusks (Heinz).
to two parts hot water.
Colostrum and other additives:
Young Tabbits ale
Hares
particularly susceptible to infection. If the young
rabbit is newly bom then in its first two days it
Milk:
Esbilac is suitable for leverets.In the first
should receive a colostrum substitute (Prolam -
twelve days a probiotic such as Bio Live Yoghurt
Schering-Plough Animal Health) along with its
should be added, to provide beneficial bacteria.
Imilk replacer in a ratio of one part colostrum to
Bottles:
Initially, for very small leverets, a small
two parts Esbilac.
syringe fitted with a small Catac teat gradually
After this, ^ teaspoon of Bio Live Yoghuit
increasing in size to a Catac Puppy Bottle.
should be added to the Esbilac once a day. This
Frequency:
For the first 3-5 days, t0 get the leveret
introduces non-pathogenic  bacteria
into the
used to bottle feeding, it should be fed three
Iabbit's gut to help keep potential pathogens
times pe1 day. After that, leverets only need to be
under control.
fed twice a day until weaned.
RearingOrphanedWildMammals
297
Fig. 30.9 Orphaned squirrels are keen bottle feeders
Weaning:
 Just like rabbits, leverets can be bedded
Table 30.5 Frequency of feeding baby squirrels
on hay, which they will start to eat. They can also
Age
Frequency
be offered dandelion leaves, clover, chickweed
 and a small amount of fresh grass.
<7 days
Every 2-3 hours during the day; last feed
midnight, first feed 6 AM
7-14 days
Every 3-4 hours during the day; last feed
Squirrels
at 11 pM,first feed 7 AM
14-21 days
Milk: Squirrels can be reared on goats' milk as
Every 4-5 hours moving quickly to four
times a day; last feed 11 PM, first feed
long as a calcium and phosphorus substitute is
8 AM
added at least once a day. Dipping the teat in
Stress (Phillips Yeast Products) will help counter
the hypocalcaemia that seems to affect squinrels.
Bottles: Initially squirrels will learn very quickly
nibble. Aftel a few days, they can be introduced
to take milk from a plastic pipette with a small
to adult squirrel fare: a good quality dry puppy
teat on the end (Fig. 30.9). As they get olde1 they
food, pecan nuts, curly kale and endive. Squinrels
can be progressed to a Catac bottle with a teat
must never be given peanuts o1 sunflowel seeds
on the end. The teat should have a small hole,
as these have deleterious effect on thei1 calcium
made with a hot needle, to slow down the squir-
levels leading to hypocalcaemia.
Tels guzzling. It is also best to top up the bottle
Notes:
Young squirels appreciate a hammock
without trying to take it away as the squirrel will
made by suspending a towel from one side of the
object to any intelruption.
cage to the other (Fig. 30.10).
Always keep baby squirrels tipped forward o1
standing on all four feet upright on a surface to
Voles and mice
prevent them taking too much milk.
Frequency: See Table 30.5.
Milk: Esbilac is the milk 1eplacer of choice for
Weaning: At 2-3 weeks old, squirrels can be given
these small mammals Mice, howevel, should be
pieces of Farley's Rusks (Heinz) on which to
given added colostrum (Prolam - Schering-
298
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 30.10 Baby squirels like to have a hammock as a nest area.
Plough Animal Health) at a ratio of one patt
locally, is rather like a small squinel but is not so
colostrum to three parts Esbilac, at least until
Teceptive to hand-rearing and may bite as it grows
they are weaned. All species of voles and mice,
larger.
will benefit from having theit paintbrush feeders
dipped in Stress (Phillips Yeast Products) once a
Milk: Glis should be hand-reared on goats' milk,
day.
which it will lap from a pipette rather than suck
Feeder:
A small paintbrush dipped in the milk
like a squirrel.
Teplacer for ealier feeds followed up, as the
 Feeder: Initially a small pipette or paintbrush (Fig.
animals grow, by the finest of the pastettes.
30.11) is ideal. As it grows, the glis will lap the
Freguency:
Voles and mice need feeding every
 milk from a teaspoon. On no account should the
hour from dawn until late at night. Overnight
milk be tipped into the animal's mouth.
they will need feeding every two hours.
Frequency:
Every 2-3 hours until late at night.
Weaning:  Voles and mice will wean before theit
Night feeding should not be necessary.
eyes open at about nine days. Mice can be started
Weaning:
At 2-3 weeks old, even before theit
on crumbled digestive biscuits o1 broken lusks
eyes are open, glis will statt to wean. In the ealy
scattered on the foor of their cage. Voles will
stages they will eat pureed apple baby food from
 prefer green stuff and should be offered chopped
a very shallow dish or pot lid. A very shallow dish
dandelion leaves o1 chickweed.
of milk replacel should be made available at the
same time.
As the glis grows, the pureed apple can be
Dormice
changed to apple sauce and then onto cut up
The hazel dormouse should be hand-reared based
eating apples. At this stage they can also be
On a vole or mice tegime but should be weaned
 offered rusks and a good quality dry puppy food.
onto a squirrel diet of rusks, good quality puppy
Notes: Glis are strictly arboreal and do like to
food, curly kale and endive.
have perches to climb and gmaw. They are also
The edible dormouse, o1 glis, as it is known
nocturnal.
RearingOrphanedWild Mammals
299
Table 30.6 Frequency of feeds for fox cubs.
Age
Frequency
Up to 7 days
Every 2-3 hours during the day, every
4 hours at night
10 days
Every 4 hours during the day, last feed
10 pPM, first feed 6 AM
18 days
4 times a day
Frequency:E
Follow Table 30.6, but some fox cubs
will continually wake and call from about 5 AM.
Keeping the cubs within earshot will make sure
theit early morning calls do not go unheard.
Weaning: Weaning should be started when all the
cub's deciduous teeth are through and it is able
to stand. At first, offer a shallow dish of goats
milk and encourage the cub to lap. It will soon
get the hang of lapping, so a bowl of goats’ milk,
that is replaced regularly, and a bowl of water will
need to be always available.
At about three weeks' of age the cub can be
offered its first solid foods - either a dish of
Pedigree Chum Puppy Food (Waltham) oT a
 good-quality dry puppy food.
 At five weeks, all bottle feeding is stopped and
 at six weeks all milk substitutes are stopped.
Fig. 30.11 Baby Glis glis will take milk from a
From five weeks on the Pedigree Chum Puppy
paintbrush.
Food is gradually replaced with adult dog food
and frozen mice o1 chicks. When possible, allow
the cub 1oad kills to get it used to scavenging for
some of its sustenance in the wild.
Foxes
Notes: Fox cubs should not be Teared on their own
Single fox cubs will settle much easier into captiv-
as they will definitely become imprinted and end
ity if they are given a cuddly toy as a comforter to
up as a non-releasable failure. Track down other
cling to and tear apart as they grow.
gToups rearing foxes. They will willingly take
Over a lone youngstet.
Milk: Goats' milk, with Abidec multivitamins
(Wa1ner Lambert) added, once a day or Esbilac
Smaller mustelids: stoat, weasel, polecat
with no added vitamins needed.
Feeder:
When small, Esbilac Puppy Bottles OI
Milk: Esbilac (Pet Ag) is suitable for hand-
Belcroy Premature Baby Feeders ale suitable.
Tearing these small mustelids.
Aftel about ten days, the fox will need eithel a
Bottles:
:The Catac Kitten Bottle with a small teat
large Catac bottle, a large Pet Ag bottle o1 even
is ideal for the smaller stoat and weasel, while the
a small human baby bottle. The teats should have
Catac Puppy Bottle would suit the polecat.
CToss cuts to stop the fox taking too much at any
Frequency:
 These species should be fed four O1
one feed.
five times a day.
As they drink very quickly, fox cubs may get
Weaning:
The animals wean very easily even
‘trapped wind'. Burping them by rubbing theit
before their eyes open. Initially, they will relish
backs should ease the condition.
chopped mice, and being strictly camivorous will
300
Practical Wildlife Care
soon resort to taking whole animals: frozen mice
Ideally badger cubs should not be released or
OT Iats.
Teared on their own but should be included with
Notes:  These intelligent animals are easily tamed
others that another rehabilitation group could be
so it is crucial that handling and contact are kept
Tearing.
to a minimum.
Otters
Badgers
Otters still remain very scarce in some areas of
Bnitain. They are, howevel, making a recovery over
Milk: Badgeis can be reared on goats' milk, but
much of their former range, so more orphaned o1
Esbilac (Pet Ag) has proven to be more suitable
and does not need supplementary vitamins
displaced cubs are going to be found needing to be
hand-reared.
added.
Their reating is more specialised than most
 Just like foxes, badgers can suffer with trapped
species and demands a more comprehensive set of
wind and should be ‘burped’ by gently rubbing
instructions (R. Green, personal communication)
the back.
Bottes: Being larger animals, the Esbilac (Pet Ag)
and like badgers they should be reared along with
othe1 otters and not on their own.
Puppy Bottles are ideal (Fig 30.12).
Freguency: Four to five feeds per day are suitable,
Milk: Esbilac (Pet Ag) is the milk replacer of
with no might feeding necessary.
choice, although it can sometimes cause scouring
Weaning: Badgers are a bit slower to wean than
in very small cubs The Esbilac is mixed with
other species and will only start to wean at about
liquidised fish to form a sort of “fish soup’ (see
8-10 weeks old. They take a long time to wean
Appendix 8). White fish are the best for the soup
onto dog food and then frozen mice o1 chicks. Be
but eels or trout are also suitable. Herring OT
wary when feeding mice and chicks that they do
mackerel should not be used. To the soup is added
not try to swallow them without chewing and
a pinch of vitamin supplement (Fish Eaters
choke.
Tablets - Mazuri Zoo Foods or Aquavits - IZVG).
Notes: Badger cubs are easily tamed and can end
Bottles: The best utensil for feeding the fish soup*
up not being releasable. It is as well to remem-
is a large syringe, as this can be helpful to assist
ber, though, that a male cub that is imprinted
cubs that are weak in sucking and also enables
 may still turn and attack (S. Hanris, personal com-
the feeder to measure accurately how much soup
munication).
has been taken.
Fig. 30.12 Badger cubs are more suited
to Esbilac (Pet Ag) feeding bottles.
RearingOrphanedWild Mammals
301
They should be weighed every day, preferably
Table  30.7 Feeding quantities  and frequency for
before the first morning feed. It is best to have
muntjac and Chinese water deer.
only one person feed each ottel, as any change
Age
Amount
Frequency
does seem to affect any weight gain.
The sterility of all food-preparation equipment
New bom
50-100 ml
Four times a day
and feeding utensils is absolutely crucial, espe-
2 weeks
up to 200ml or more
Three times a day
cially fo very young otters.
Faeces: A healthy cub on a milk replacer produces
dark spraints with a fim enough consistency to
hold their shape.
Once weaned, howevel, it should be offered whole
 Pale spraints are a sign of trouble, especially if
animals like mice, rabbits or day old chicks.
they are Tunny or just blobs of creamy stuff in a
It will not easily tame and so should be able
watery liquid. These should be tefelred to the
to be released with the guidance of one of the
veterinary surgeon without delay.
Scottish rehabilitation groups.
In the event of diarrhoea, withhold food fo1 a
day and give as much waimed Lectade (Pfzel
Sea Mammals
Animal Health) or rehydrating fuid and clean
watel as is possible. Basic fluid replacements will
The sea mammals that are found will be seals, both
common and grey. Any suggestions of orphans
amount for the extra dehydration.
should be refenred to the nearest specialist centre
If a cub does get dianhoea then discard any
(see Chapter 29).
soup already made up. Clean and restenilise all
mixing and feeding utensils. Start again with a
Deer
different milk replace1, Lactol (She1ley's), Welpi
(Petlife Intemational) or Cimicat (Petlife InteI-
Milk: Lamlac (Volac Feeds) ewe milk 1eplace1 has
national), and a different type of fish.
proven to be very suitable for rearing deer fawns.
Frequency:
 OtteI cubs can be fed every 2-3 hours
The Lamlac should be made up using a small
with longer periods overnight if the cub seems
amount of hot water, then shaken, then topped
comfortable.
up with cold water and shaken again. A pinch of
Weaning:
Weaning is different with each otter
Avipro (Vetark, Animal Health) or ↓ teaspoon of 
cub. Some refuse to give up the fish soup while
live bio yoghurt and a pinch of Stress (Phillips
others will snatch at the first whole small fish they
Yeast Products) should be added once a day.
are offered taking a finger or two if you are not
Bottles: The smaller deer, muntjac and Chinese
careful. The best weaning foods are different
water deer, will take milk from Esbilac bottles,
whole small fish. However, difficult weaners,
while the larger species, fallow and 1oe, may need
sickly or weak cubs will relish small fresh trout.
lamb bottles and teats or human baby bottles.
Always remember to give that vitamin supple-
Frequency:
Table 30.7 is fo1 guidance only - indi-
ment (Fish Eaters' Tablets - Mazuri Zoo Foods
vidual deer will vary in the amount they take.
Ltd or Aquavits - IZVG) if the weaned otters are 
Generally, though they will stop feeding when
fed white fish.
they have had enough. Fallow and 1oe fawns will
Release:
For now, all hand-reared
lotter cubs
take twice the amount of milk replacer.
should be released through groups that have
Weaning:
Once the deer is approximately three
plenty of experience of releasing otters and are
weeks old, while calrying on with the bottle
situated in good otter country (R. Green, pel-
feeding, start to introduce goat mix, alfalfa and
sonal communication).
fresh vegetation like dandelions, clover, bramble
leaves and a small amount of grass.
Try mixing about 1 tablespoon of grated peal
Scottish wildcat
to the goat mix to encourage weaning.
The pure wild Scottish wildcat kitten should be
Always, though, make a bowl of water and one
hand-reared, initially, just like a domestic kitten.
of Lamlac available to the fawn.
302
Practical Wildlife Care
Fig. 30.13 Muntjac fawn born by Caesarean section.
Once the deer is eating Teadily the number of
With the deer standing, the bottle, with some of
bottle feeds can be reduced to twice,then once a
the milk replacel expressed, is offered up to the
day. Weaning is normally complete at about 6-8
mouth all the while gently dabbing, with a damp
weeks old.
tissue, the genital area encouraging the deer to
Notes: Deet are naturally very nervous and fawns
urinate and defecate, which seems to act as a stim-
should be teared well away from any hubbub or
ulant to start sucking. It may take several attempts
other animals. A separate garden shed is ideal.
to get the dee1 to take milk from the bottle, but
The feeding and cleaning should only be
on no account must it ever be forced. Be patient.
carnied out by one person. Initially stroke the
At Tiggywinkles the orphaned deer usually start
deer down one side of its face to imitate a deer
accepting the bottle on the second day.
mothel's behaviour. Then once the fawn seems
 Any deer born by Caesarean section should be
to settle the first artificial feed can be attempted.
hand reared (Fig. 30.13).
31
Reptiles and Amphibians
Part I: Reptiles
This is the snake most often injured by its excur-
sions into gardens and its habit of favouring com-
British species seen:
post heaps for egg laying.
The lizards with legs, the common and sand
·Snakes: Grass snake (Natrix natrix), adde1 O1
lizard, are feet of foot and not often caught and
viper (Vipera berus) and smooth snake (Coro-
injured. Some cats, howevel, seem to specialise in
nella austriaca)
lizards, probably because they happen to live near
·Lizards: Slow worm (Anguis fragilis), common
t0 good lizard habitat. The slow worm is a lizard but
lizard (Lacerta vivipara) and sand lizard (Lacerta
does not possess legs. It is more often caught than
agilis)
the other two species, presumably because it does
not possess thei1 wariness and speed of escape.
Othel escaped exotic species of snakes, lizaids,
All three lizards practise autotomy - the ability
iguanas and chelonians are found and rescued.
to shed their tail to a predator if caught. There is an
However, these are normally tropical species and
unossified fracture plane in the mid-region of the
require the specialised paraphemalia and veteri-
centrum of a caudal vertebra (Davies, 1981). When
nary attention now proliferating to cope with the
caught by a predator this snaps, a portion of the tail
various pet species. They are not truly rehabilitation
breaks off and wriggles madly to attract the atten-
candidates; they cannot be released and have to be
tion of the assailant. The lizard then escapes and
kept o1 passed to a 1ecognised 1eptile hobbyist.
grows a new tail.
NATURAL HISTORY
EQUIPMENT, TRANSPORT,
RESCUE AND HANDLING
The three species of Bnitish snake are easily recog-
mised. Only one, the adder,is poisonous; the smooth
Lizards and snakes, except the venomous adder,
snake is a constrictor, butis now very rare. The grass
can be simply picked up if they are injured. They
snake, Bnitain's largest and commonest snake, is
ate, however, easily bruised, causing tissue damage.
neither; it catches its prey in its mouth where the
They should be handled gently. Never pick up a
typical serpentine back-facing teeth make escape
lizard by its tail - it will break off.
difficult. The adder will feed on small mammals
Grass snakes when caught will emit a particula1ly
and birds, as will the other two species. Howevel,
foul-smelling liquid from their anal gland. The
the smooth snake is noted for taking lizards, espe-
wearing of vinyl gloves will prevent your hands
cially the endangered sand lizard, which shares its
from becomming contaminated. They may make an
habitat.
effort to bite, but are not dangerous. They may also
The grass snake is very aquatic and is often
'play dead'. Do not be fooled until a thorough
injured visiting garden ponds hunting fish and frogs.
examination has been made.
303
304
Practical Wildlife Care
These species of snakes and lizards can be safely
they are too cold, thei1 digestion slows down,
transported in small plastic aquaria with hinged lids
causing Tegurgitation OT Totting of food in the
in the top. They are particularly good at escaping
stomach, and this can lead to bactenial infection. If
through even the tightest gap.
they are too hot then they will quickly dehydrate
Adders are quite different - they are dangerous.
and desiccate.
Although the bite of an adder is rarely fatal, it can
Reptiles used to be maintained at theit prefeled
be and can cauise severe illness o1 discomfort. Do
body temperature (PBT). This has now been mod-
not get bitten. In approaching an adder do wear
ifed to be the prefelred optimum temperature
thick gauntlets. Howevel, although these will offer
zone (POTZ). The POTZ of most British reptiles
protection from an adder's bite, the snake may
lies between 22°C and 30°C (Coope1 & Jackson,
damage its teeth on the heavy matenial.
1981):
With the gloves on, the snake can often be simply
lifted with a snake hook and deposited in some-
Grass snake
26.0°C
thing deep, such as a dustbin. If the dustbin is lined
Adder
30.0°C
with a cloth bag this can be closed with a drawstring
Smooth snake
27.0°C
to contain the snake. A second tie can be wrapped
Sand Lizard
27.0°C
around just below the drawstring to make doubly
Slow woTm
22.6°C
sute of no escape. After this is secure, the snake can
still bite through the bag itself so do not touch it.
Any of these with a deep cloacal temperature of
Another method, featured in the guidelines of
over 38°C (slow woim 30°C) can be classed as
the Joint Nature Conservation Committee, is to
hyperthermic and should be cooled by immersing
use a foam-padded restraining stick for directing
in cold water. Hypothermia will automatically
the snake into a swing-lid kitchen bin laid on its
Tesolve under the gentle heat of an overhead heater
side (Griffths & Langton, 1998). The bin is then
suitable for reptiles.
see injured adders it is worth checking with your
tainers fo1 common species is 45-70%.
local hospital or doctor that they have anti-venom
available, just in case. Veterinary suppliers may
calry it in stock. It is called Euro-viper Anti Venom.
Dysecdysis
Take particular care with any snake you do not
As reptiles grow, their skin does not expand and so
Tecognise. There are many exotic pets that escape
they have to shed it. This process is called ecdysis.
and some may be venomous. Until they are identi-
For the shedding to go without a hitch, the condi-
fied treat every exotic as a venomous species.
tions have to be suitable. Too low or too high a
humidity might prevent ecdysis A disorder in the
COMMON DISEASES
process of ecdysis is called dysecdysis.
The wrong envionment with lack of suitable
There are many diseases Tecorded in the thousands
Tocks on which to rub off the old skin can cause
of species of reptile with many of them being
problems, as can the reptile not having bathed
descnibed in the various excellent works on reptile
Tegularly. If the old skin is not shed it could cause
disease. However, as disease diagnosis is strictly
constriction and resulting necrosis, particularly in
the province of the veterinary surgeon (Veterinary
lizards and tail tips.
Surgeons Act 1966), the diseases mentioned here
It is possible to recognise a snake with dysecdy-
sis because the old skin covering the eyes may be
are those commonly encountered and accepted as
conditions not strictly requiring a diagnosis.
cloudy. Sometimes all that is needed is for the snake
to bathe and be given a 1ock o1 a 1ough piece of
wood on which to slough the old skin (Fig. 31.1). If
CONDITIONS AFFECTING SNAKES
this does not work putting the animal in between
Hypothermia and hyperthermia
two layers of wet towel which may help the process
of sloughing.
Snakes and lizards are ectothermic - their body
Another method is to rub the reptile with a selies
temperature matches that of theit surroundings. If
of cotton-wool balls ranging from wet to dry.
Reptiles and Amphibians
305
COMMON INCIDENTS
Cat attack
The domestic cat will capture lizards, including slow
worms, and small snakes, usually grass snakes.
Medication should be with amoxycillin at 22 mg/
kg by mouth 1-2 times daily o1 10mg/kg intramus-
cularly daily as long as the animal is at its POTZ.
It is suggested that amoxycillin alone is often
ineffective in reptiles unless given with aminogly-
cosides (Bishop, 1998). The addition of amikacin
(Amikin - Bristol-Myers Squibb) at 5mg/kg can be
effective.
Injections should be given into the front third of
the body so that the drug is not transported directly
to the kidneys via the renal portal vein (Frye, 1991).
Fig. 31.1 Snakes with dysecdysis can be helped, like
Netting
this grass snake, by being provided with a rough piece
of wood.
Grass snakes are fond of visiting garden ponds.
Often the pond is covered with netting to protect
fish from herons. Grass snakes can become tangled
in the netting causing damage to the scales and
Working from the nose to tail should see all the old
skin. After they are cut free, any wounds should be
skin removed. Particular care should be taken over
bathed with saline.
the eyes. The old ‘spectacles’ should be moistened
Pressure necrosis may develop but usually the
with water or hypromellose (artificial tears) and
snake can be released after five days' observation and
slid off with damp cotton buds. If that is unsuccess-
broad-spectrum antibiotic cover with enrofoxacin
ful refer the snake to a veterinary surgeon expeni-
(Baytil 2.5% - Baye1) at 5mg/kg by mouth daily.
enced with reptiles. The use of adhesive tape OI
forceps is contraindicated, as they would probably
cause permanent damage to the underlying eye
COMMON INJURIES
(Lawton, 1991).
Bite wounds
Maladaptation syndrome
Apart from those wounds inficted by cats, grass
snakes are often attacked by dogs. The bite wounds
This applies particularly to the grass snake. It
means that the animal will not settle to captivity,
are usually severe with underlying damage to inter-
nal organs and the skeletal frame. The wounds can
will not eat and eventually does not thrive. It may
be cleaned with saline and sutured taking particu-
be that the lighting or temperature is unsuitable.
lar care of the intemal organs.
Specialised ultraviolet lighting with the spectrum of
Damage to the skeleton, paticularly the spine,
natural light (using Trulite - Durotest Intemational
may not be fatal. A veterinary surgeon familiar with
or Life-Glo - Rolf C. Hagen fuorescent lights) for
Teptile injury will be able to advise on treatment o1
a photopeniod of 12 hours on, 12 hours off may
euthanasia.
stimulate the appetite.
Antibiotic covel should be based on amoxycillin
Generally though, grass snakes will need to be
to counter the bacteria carlied on the dog's teeth.
force fed if they are contained for any length of
time.
The real success with all of these reptile casual-
Implement wounds
ties is to release them as soon as possible into a suit-
People will attack snakes with sticks, spades or even
able habitat.
just the feet. The injuries are usually of the skin,
306
Practical Wildlife Care
internal organs O1 skeletal frame. Referral for an
experienced prognosis, as made for bite wounds, is
Tecommended for all seriously injured snakes.
Autotomy in lizards
This is the ability a lizard has to shed its tail. The
Tesulting wound will not require suturing as a new
tail will regenerate. This new tail may not be as
slender and pointed as the original tail. Any closure
of the wound could result in abnormal growth.
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
Dehydration
The main first-aid procedure with snakes is to
Fig. 31.2 A grass snake can receive fluids subcuta-
provide fuids. Dehydration in snakes is noticeable
neously along its side.
by a wrinkling of the skin and the classic tenting.
The snake should be weighed and the degree of
dehydration estimated. Snakes can show a 20%
dehydration but mostly it is better to assume a
5-10% of bodyweight deficit.
Intracoelomic
Three Toutes of administration are available.
Warm fluid may be given into the body cavity using
an intravenous catheter for prolonged fluid therapy.
As this is entry into the body cavity the author
010
thinks this method, though very effective, should be
Either Hartmann's solution or Lectade (Pfizer) can
the province of the veterinary surgeon.
be given by a small stomach tube. The lubricated
tube is slid into the stomach, which is approxi-
mately one-third of the distance from the nose to
PROGNOSIS
the cloaca. The dose is 2% of bodyweight given
twice daily (Marshall, 1993). It may take some days
A good knowledge ofreptile anatomy is essential, as
to tehydrate a snake fully
some damage to the intemal organs is inretrievable.
Subcutaneous
Caging
With a 25 g hypodermic needle fitted to a syringe,
Snakes and lizards are best kept in eithel plastic o1
fuids can be given along the medial line on the side
glass aquania with a lid ventilated with small holes.
of the body. The siting should be about one-third of
The base should be covered with newspaper OT
the body length, as measured between the nose and
paper towel making it much easier to keep the
the cloaca. Fluids are administered in a forward
set-up clean.
direction (Fig. 31.2).
A sick or injured reptile will benefit from an
A seliously debilitated snake could be boosted
overhead ceramic heat lamp at one end of the
with a subcutaneous bolus of amino acids and vita-
aquarium. This should be controlled by a thermo-
mins (Duphalyte - Fort Dodge Animal Health) at
stat to maintain a temperature of 25-30°C. Slow
2% of bodyweight. When injecting reptiles, the
worms should be maintained at 20-25°C.The com-
needle should be slid under the scales not through
plete heating and thermostat kit is available at most
them.
large pet stores.
Reptiles and Amphibians
307
Water must be provided, especially for grass
● Intracardiac overdose of pentobarbitone in an
snakes, who like to immerse themselves completely.
 anaesthetised animal
Pieces of bark will allow the animals to hide away.
· Cranial trauma sufficient to induce instantaneous
Lighting should be with an ultraviolet light suit-
 and complete brain destruction (e.g. shooting,
able for Teptiles and providing a full spectrum of
 captive bolt or blunt instrument)
natural light. A Trulite (Durotest International),
Reptisun (Zoo-Med Laboratories) or Iguana Light
In order to confiim that the reptile is dead,
(Zoo-Med Laboratories) bulb within 30 cm of the
ensure it does not react to stimuli and then pith
Teptile will cetainly assist its recovery. The bulbs
(physically destioy) the brain.
will have to be replaced every nine months.
Generally, snakes should be kept on their own.
RELEASE
Feeding
All these teptiles should be released where they
Snakes are going to be reluctant to feed but may
were found provided that the habitat is suitable. In
take dead brown mice, slightly warmed and moved
particular, grass snakes do tend to live neat water
 around in front of them on a piece of string.
and can be released, not neat a garden pond, but
Lizards will take flies, maggots O1 crickets dusted
near to a stream or small tiver.
with a calcium/phosphorus supplement (Cricket
Smooth snakes and sand lizards are very rare,
Diet Calci-Paste
 - IZVG; Nutrobal - Veta1k
and any casualties should definitely be released
Animal Health).
Slow worms naturally feed on the small grey slug
where there are others of their species. Advice can
be obtained from English Nature (Appendix 7).
Limax agrestis easily found in gardens under Tocks
OT pieces of wood. This food is readily taken and is
the food of choice for captive slow worms.
EXOTICS
EUTHANASIA
As more and more people acquire exotic reptiles as
pets, more and more of these reptiles outgrow their
There will be cases where a Teptile is injured
welcome or actually escape into the countryside.
These refugees, together with reptiles that turn up
beyond treatment and will need killing, humanely.
In the past many reptiles have been subjected to all
in imported goods at warehouses, are more fre-
kinds of torture in the name of euthanasia (gentle
quently being handed in to animal welfare organi-
killing). Never use the following methods to kill a
sations and rehabilitation groups.
Initially they will need frst aid and fluid therapy.
Teptile. In fact, they could be construed as cruelty
unde1 the Protection of Animal Act 1911:
They invariably need to be warmed up and once
settled should be kept in a POTZ of 25°C-30°C.
· Freezing is very painful
They should not be released but will have to be
· Drowning is unacceptable as the reptile's brain
kept o1 passed on to a zoo o1 reptile hobbyist.
will continue to function for some time
· Decapitation is not acceptable as the brain can
continue to function for up to an hour afterwards
LEGISLATION
●Cervical dislocation for the same reason
· Overdose of anaesthesia without pithing (de-
Reptiles in captivity are protected by the Protec-
stroying the brain of an anaesthetised animal)
tion of Animals Act 1911.
Adders ale classed as dangerous wild animals
Acceptable methods of choice ale:
by virtue of being members of the Vipetidae. To
keep one in captivity Tequires a licence under the
· Intravenous overdose of pentobarbitone
Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976. This can be
· Intraosseous overdose of pentobarbitone
obtained from the local District Council.
308
Practical Wildlife Care
Part II: Amphibians
Amphibians have moist and permeable skin and
can be damaged by being picked up with a dry, dirty
Native species:
hand. Before handling, wash the hands thoroughly
in water with no soap o1 detergent and keep the
· Frogs: Common frog (Rana temporaria).
hands wet for handling. Even more suitable are
· Toads: Common toad (Bufo bufo) and natterjack
unpowdered vinyl gloves.
toad (B. calamita)
Amphibians they should be provided with a cool,
· Newts: Great crested newt (Tniturus cristatus),
ventilated, waterproof box for transportation, in
Smooth (or common) newt (7. vulgaris) and
which they can 1est on damp vegetation or a clean
palmate newt (T. helveticus).
damp sponge. Tadpoles should only be transported
immersed in water.
Introduced species:
Most rescues are aftet garden accidents or,in the
Pool frog (R. lessonae), marsh frog (R. ridibunda),
case of newts, when they are found hibernating in
edible frog (hybrid of pool and marsh frogs) (R.
the most unlikely places.
esculenta), tree frog (Hyla arborea) and North
Each spring toads migrate to their mating ponds
American bullfrog (R catesbeiana).
along the same 1outes that have been used for cen-
turies. Unfortunately, many of these Ioutes cross
busy Toads. Many hundreds of toads are thus killed
NATURAL HISTORY
O1 maimed. They can be rescued or helped actOss
the road by organised teams.The phenomenon only
Amphibians need water in which to breed. They
lasts for a few wet nights in spring.
return to familiar waters in the spring having spent
the rest of the year on dry land.
The mating of frogs and toads is by the males
COMMON DISEASES
clinging to the females with a grip called amplexus.
The males grow black pads on their forefeet for a
There is still little known about the diseases affect-
more secure gnip (nuprial pads). Male toads croak
 ing amphibian populations. In fact, over the last few
when they are touched, possibly to let other male
 years, research has been carnied out into which epi-
toads know their sex.
zootics are killing masses of frogs every yea1. Any
Frogs’ eggs are laid in clumps, those of toads in
mass die-offs should be recorded for Froglife (see
strings and those of newts singly under the leaves of
Appendix 7) who are maintaining Bnitish records
water plants. They all go through a stage as tadpoles
of herpetofauna incidents.
and then metamorphose into the adult animal.
Some diseases, discussed below, are well known
 All species frequent gardens even if they have nO
and have been seen for many years.
water feature. Often a toad will become a familial
Tesident living under its own particular Iock and
Red leg in frogs
emeiging to catch various invertebrates.
Amphibians in this country practise a simple
Red leg is a common bacterial infection of frogs
form of hibernation. Usually it is on dry land under
caused by Aeromonas hydrophila. It is known as
a Iock or bunied in the ground. Frogs may some-
‘Ted leg' because of the ted lesions seen on and
times overwinter in the mud at the bottom of ponds.
under the hind legs. Sometimes many animals will
be found dead for no apparent reason while others
may present terminal neurological signs, spasms O1
EQUIPMENT, HANDLING,
vomiting.
RESCUE AND TRANSPORT
Aeromonas hydrophila may be palt of a ffog's
normal bactenial load, so its isolation does not give
When amphibians are in captivity they should be
a definitive diagnosis (Williams, 1991). It is highly
kept in a glass Or plastic vivarium or aquarium.
 contagious and will kill all of the frogs in a pond.
They should be provided with access to dry land as
Some protection can be provided by moving su1-
well as to water.
viving frogs into clean water and replacing the pond
Reptiles and Amphibians
309
water and contents In captivity, a weak solution of
They have a habit of sitting out in long grass and
saline (0.6%) will provide some disinfection.
consequently are caught in mowers or strimmers.
'Red leg’ will also descnibe symptoms of other
Newts are found in dry situations such as under
diseases, which the veterinary surgeon may wish to
paving slabs or sheds. People think they should be
investigate as an altemative diagnosis.
in water but after breeding, they, like the other
amphibians, will come out onto dry land for most
Iridovirus-like agent from frogs
of the year and for hibernation.
During 1993 many frog deaths were refelled to
the Central Veteninary Laboratory. Of 17 carcasses
Road accidents
examined, 16 showed evidence of iridovirus-like
Hundreds of toads do get killed every year on their
particles, the fiist time these had been reported
from the common frog (Drury et al., 1995).
migration treks across Toads. Some, however, do
pue dn paxoid uao aie pue aaiains oi sleue
Once again, deaths of this nature should
be
brought into care.
lefelred to Froglife (Appendix 7) fo1 guidance.
Salt poisoning
Cat attacks
Toads on their migratory treks often cToss Toads that
Cats do not seem to prey on amphibians as much
have been recently salted. A team of volunteer Ies-
   s  s r  
cuers in Madingley, Cambs, reported toads suffering
the hard way that toads secrete an evil-tasting sub-
from a teddish skin discoloration and disorientation
stance through their skin, making them particulaily
sometimes resulting in the toads stumbling and
unpalatable. Frogs and newts are, however, caught
hitting their chins on the 1oad. Washing the toads in
and are sometimes rescued alive and brought into
clean water 1emedied most of those affected but 19,
care.
the most heavily salted, died (Foste1, 1997).
Hydrops
COMMON INJURIES
Hydrops is a condition in which lymph accumulates
When working on amphibians lay them on a damp
in the dorsal lymph sacs and sometimes in the
sponge or cloth. Any tap water used on amphibians
coelom. According to Wiliamms (1991),the aetiology
is unknown and the fuid accumulates again after
should be de-chlorinated by letting it stand for 24
hours before use (Gibbons, 2000).
aspiration. The condition is 1eported in anulans
(tail-less frogs and toads) but the author has seen
a similar condition in a smooth newt, one of the
Skin lacerations
Caudata (with tails).
Skin lacerations are usually suffered by frogs in-
volved in garden accidents. They are often on the
Subcutaneous emphysema
legs accompanied by fractures and other soft-tissue
Frogs have also been presented bloated with ait
damage (Plate 45). They can be sutured with 4.0-6.0
and unable to swim (Plate 44). No caluise has been
absorbable sutures with a swaged-on cutting needle
established. The air can be aspirated with a syringe
(Vicryl -Ethicon).
and small-gauge needle. It may well reoccur but
A frog's skin is surprisingly tough to suture and
eventually the frog will return to normal.
frogs are particularly slippery and difficult to
control. For suturing, it is best to anaesthetise them.
The simplest anaesthetic for use with amphibians is
COMMON INCIDENTS
tricaine mesilate (MS222 - Thomson and Joseph).
MS222 is dissolved in water at a concentration of
Garden accidents
25-1000 g/l. The frog is placed in the solution up to
Accidents in the garden are the most common
its nostrils. It is observed and once faccid should
source of amphibian casualties, especially frogs.
be removed from the water and placed on a cool,
310
Practical Wildlife Care
damp sponge fo1 any procedure. Depth of anaes-
mouths into theit oesophagus! ^Press down one of
thesia can be maintained by occasionally syringing
the eyes with your fingel, and note that it can be
the anaesthetic solution over the frog or conversely
made to project very considerably into the buccal
to lighten the anaesthesia syringing it with oxy-
cavity. This movement is employed by the animal
genated water. Leaving the animal for too long in
swallowing’(Marshall, 1932).
the MS222 can result in the frog's death.
A totally blind amphibian should be humanely
Provided the lacerations are not debilitating, the
destroyed but the animal can probably exist as long
frog could be released after two days, preferably
as one eye is functioning. There is the question of
into a pond area in a garden. A quick release is
focusing on prey with only one eye but amphibians
necessary because common frogs do not fare that
do seem to cope. The author has seen a frog with
well in captivity.
one eye firmly grown inside its mouth that had
obviously coped in the wild for some time before it
Fractures
was caught by a cat. However, strangely enough the
frog could see with the eye in its mouth and had
Both frogs and toads are presented with limb frac-
adjusted its prey-catching ability to counter the dis-
tures and jaw fractures. They do take a long time to
advantage (Plate 46).
heal, but limb fractures can be immobilised with a
Iange of methods including Vet-Lite (Runlite)
splinting, extracutaneous fixation or intramedullary
ADMISSION AND FIRST AID
pinning.
 Jaw fractures will need suturing, preferably with
Euthanasia
surgical wire.
The essence of triage is that some casualties have
Amputees
a hopeless prognosis and should be humanely
● Toads cope well with the loss of one leg,although
destroyed. In fact, because of all the problems with
euthanasia of cold-blooded animals, amphibians are
they should only be released in a known garden
just as difficult to kill as are reptiles (see above)
pond area
Immersing frogs, toads and newts for long periods in
● Frogs are less likely to cope with amputations
the MS222 will eventually kill the animal painlessly.
and should be humanely destroyed if subject to
the loss of a leg
If there are many amphibians to be euthanased,
for instance if there is pollution O1 mass disease,
● Newts will possibly generate a new leg to replace
the one that is missing
then a euthanasia chamber fed with benzocaine will
painlessly provide the required result (Coopel,
2003).
Tongue injuries in anurans
Euthanasia is particularly difficult to achieve
Both frogs and toads have their tongues hinged at
with amphibians using just an overdose of barbitul-
the front of their mouths. These they fick forward
lates Because of the elTatic nature of barbiturates
to catch thei prey. The tongue is often traumatised
 in amphibians, it is most humane to anaesthetise the
when a jaw is injured. It can be sutured using Vicryl
 animal deeply with gaseous anaesthesia and then
(Ethicon) but may be inoperative post trauma.
provide the overdose by the intracardiac or intra-
Without the use of the tongue, the frog or toad
coelomic Toutes.
would not be able to feed. Frogs that have lost the
Decapitation, freezing o1 pithing with a needle
use of thei1 tongues should be humanely destroyed,
inserted intothe foramen magnum arenotnow
but toads can often be taught to feed from the
acceptable (UFAW/WSPA, 1989), although pithing
hand and can be kept in captivity in a suitable
to destroy the brain, after deep anaesthesia, is ac-
environment.
ceptable as a confirmation of death.
Eye injuries
Fluid therapy
Frogs and toads uise their eyes not only to seek out
Hartmann's solution laced with 10% amino acids
prey; they also use them to push food from their
and vitamins (Duphalyte - Fort Dodge Animal
Reptiles and Amphibians
311
Health) can be provided subcutaneously at 10% of
Animal Health) and put near to the animal so that
bodyweight.
 it can register thei1 movement when they warm up.
Toads will readily take waxworm larvae. Newts
will take small worms and waxworm larvae. Frogs
Antibiotics
may take crickets or any of the other foods but will
A range of antibiotics has been used with am-
probably not feed in captivity.
phibians and is well documented (Bishop, 1998).
Entofloxacin (Baytril 2.5% - Baye1) at 5-10 mg/kg
by mouth o1 subcutaneously is a broad-spectrum
RELEASE
antibiotic the author has used without any obvious
side effects.
Once again, these animals, especially toads, are best
Teleased where they were found. If that is not suit-
able then they can be released near any garden
CAGING
pond.
Great clested newts are now very tare and
Amphibians are best kept in glass o1 plastic
should be retumed to thei1 original location as
aquaria.A ventilated lid is essential,as newts have
should nattenjack toads.
the ability to climb glass. Ultraviolet lighting and a
dark heat source will hasten the healing processes.
The POTZ for native amphibians should be loweI
EXOTICS
than that tequired for Teptiles. Heating should
provide a temperature not higher than 20°-23°C.
Exotic amphibians, such as tree frogs, are being
Although these are amphibians, they do not nec-
found but are usually accidental being imported
essarily need to be kept in water. In particula1,
hiding on foodstuffs. They are usually tropical
toads and newts often favour a dry enviionment but
species who need a POTZ of 28°-32°C.
still need access to water in which to immerse them-
Tree frogs can climb glass, so their vivarium
selves. Frogs tend to be more aquatic and will spend
needs to have a good ventilated covel.
most of their time in water.
They might feed on mini crickets or flies but
Teally the best idea is to move uninjured exotic rep-
tiles to zoo or collectors.
FEEDING
 Foreign species should never be released into
Bnitain.
These animals will only take moving live prey
invertebrates. These ale available at most pet stores
as mealworms, waxworms, ctickets, 1ed worms and
LEGISLATION
clean maggots. To feed them the food should be put
into a fridge for 15 minutes to cool them and slow
The only proviso affecting amphibian rehabilitation
them down. They are then dusted with a calcium/
is not to release non-native species and not to take
phosphorus supplement (Mealworm o1 Cricket
 OT possess healthy great crested newts or natterjack
Diet Calci-Paste - IZVG; Nutiobal - Veta1k
toads.
openc
Bat Conservation Trust Guidelines
on Handling Bats
Joint Nature Conservation Committee Advice on bats
grounded bats. The advice from the Department of
and rabies (Mitchell-Jones & McLeish, 2004)
Health is that there is no risk to the public provided they
do not touch or pick up bats. It may be possible for a bat
worker to visit to examine the bat and retrieve it if appro-
VACCINATION
priate. The local Animal Health Divisional Office (or its
equivalent in Northerm Ireland, Republic of Ireland, Isle
Following the discovery of European Bat Lyssa virus type
of Man and Channel [slands) should be contacted if
2 (EBL2) in two Daubenton's bats in England (Author's
note: a third has been confirmed in 2004), and the death
explanation of its behaviour is readily available. It should
of a bat worker in Scotland from the same virus, it
be remembered that there are hazards to both wild
Sieq ul iuasaid sh snia sul ieul pansse aq Mou isn
animal and human in inexperienced people handling any
in the UK. Testing of dead bats by DEFRA over the last
decade indicates that the overall incidence of infection
wild animal.
The bat worker should establish whether the bat has
is likely to be very low, although limited testing of live
bitten anybody. If so,then the bat worker should consider
Daubenton's bats for antibodies suggests that exposure
encouraging the finder to collect the bat (using a box and
to EBL2 may be more widespread. Nevertheless, infected
cardboard slide, bite-proof gloves or a heavy cloth) into
bat bites have caused human deaths so appropriate pre-
a box where it can be examined later. (Author's note: [
cautions against infection must be taken.
The Department of Health's recommendation is that
experienced personmel).
people regularly handling bats should be vaccinated
If a bat has bitten, or may have bitten, a member of the
against rabies. Included in this category are all active bat
public, they should be advised to seek immediate medical
workers and wardens, and those regularly taking in sick
advice. If available, the bat should be retained in captiv-
and iniured bats. The Statutory Nature Conservation
ity for assessment by an experienced person, or eutha-
Organisations (SNCOs) and the Bat Conservation Trust
nased, depending on the assessed risk. Post-exposure
a  i  i y q  a   s
considered after discussions with a doctor or GP. The
- lou su oum auoue Aq iuu aq iou inous sig
HPA (tel: 020 8200 4400) or SCIEH (tel: 0141 300 1100)
ceived these vaccinations.
can provide advice to doctors or the public about the
Even when fully vaccinated, people should avoid being
assessment of risk.
bitten by wearing appropriate bite-proof gloves when han-
The BCT office holds a list of all Animal Health
dling bats. Any bat bite should be thoroughly cleansed with
Divisional Offices (AHDOs) and their equivalents else-
soap and water and advice should be sought from your
where and has details of appropriate health offices. A list
doctor about the need for post-exposure treatment. Further
of AHDOs can be found at http://www.defra.gov.uk/
information is available from the SNCOs, the Bat Conser-
corporate/contracts/adho.htm.
vation Trust (BCT) or the Health Protection Agency
(HPA)/Scottish Centre for [nfection and Environmental
Health (SCIEH). The BCT website http://www.bats.org.uk/
SUBMISSION OF FRESH DEAD BATS TO THE
VETERINARY LABORATORIES AGENCY (VLA)
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC FINDING
To encourage an increase in the rabies surveillance:
GROUNDED BATS
· All dead bats should be sent by first class mail to the
Members of the public should be advised not to handle
VLA as soon as possible (but not on Friday). If there
312
Appendix1
313
is to be a delay in posting, keep in refrigerator (4-6°℃)
forms and specimen tubes are available free of charge
until the bat can be collected or posted. Rabies-related
from the Bat Conservation Trust.
virus can be isolated from frozen or decomposing
· The package should be sent to Rabies Diagmostics, Vet-
material, but the chances are enhanced in fresh
erinary Laboratories Agency, New Haw, Addlestone,
unfrozen specimens.
Surrey, KT15 3NB. Some bat groups have had an
· If euthanasia is agreed upon,it can be carried out by a
arrangement with the Veterinary Officers of their local
vet using intraperitoneal injection of a small volume of
Animal Health Divisional Office regarding collection
barbiturate; altermatively, gaseous anaesthesia can be
of bats for delivery to the VLA.
used if facilities exist. (Author's note: Bats should
· As in other countries, the identification of all bats
preferably be anaesthetised before being given an
submitted to VLA is confirmed by an appropriate bat
imtraperitoneal injection.) Other methods are available
specialist and the material is subsequently passed to
but should avoid breaking the skin or skull.
one of our national museums (mostly to Liverpool or
● Details of date, source and circumstances of fnding
Edinburgh).
should accompany samples. If there is reason to be sus-
picious of the animal, call your local Animal Health
Divisional Office before dispatching the bat.
TAKINGBATSINTOCAPTIVITY
Packaging must comply with the Post Office regula-
tions for pathological material: carcasses should be
Bats should be held in captivity in accordance with the
packed in a tightly sealed container and surrounded by
Bat Conservation Trust guidelines.
absorbent material; this should be securely fastened
 DEFRA has confirmed that any captive bat that is still 
and placed in a stout envelope or padded bag: the
    i s  ne 
package must be marked
1*Pathological specimen:
considered safe to release as soon as it is in a fit state.
Fragile with care’ and sent by first-class post to the
All bats that die in captivity should be submitted to the
VLA; packages should be clearly marked with a large
VLA as soon as possible.
red *R'next to the address. Suitable pre-paid envelopes,
@.INCC
Appendix 2
British Divers Marine Life Rescue
(BDMLR) Guidelines for Response to
Cetacean Strandings
Initial response to cetacean stranding reports on the
●Any attempts made to refloat? (if so, how was it done
telephone. (Strandings Hotline 01825 765546.)
and how long was taken over it).
ASK FOR DETAILS
ADVICE TO GIVE OUT
· Species size and number (if species not known, size and
· Support the animal in an upright position and dig
appearance).
trenches under the pectoral fins.
Contact details (who reported by/contact telephone
· Cover the animal with wet sheets or towels (even
number).
Wm buisnop 1o Bufeids Aq istou i daey pue (peameas
· Exact location (nearest town/name of beach/location
water.
on beach/access to beach).
NB: The blowhole should not be covered, and care
Conditions at the scene (weather/sea state/tide state/
should be taken to avoid any water or sand entering
level of disturbance).
计
● Condition of cetacean (alive or dead/no. of breaths per
● All contact, noise and disturbance should be kept to a
minute/any wounds/skin condition/obvious dipping of
minimum.
lumbar muscles or neck?/period of time observed).
● Position of cetacean (in sun or shade/in or above the
Taken with permission from: Marine Manmal Medic
surf/on rocks, shingle or sand).
Handbook (Bamett, Knight & Stevens, 2004)
314
Appendix 3
Birds
s on Schedule 4 of the Wildlife and
Countryside Act 1981 (as of March 2004)
Common name
Scientific name
Bunting, Cirl
Emberiza cirtus
Bunting, Lapland
Calcarius lapponicus
Bunting, Snow
Plectrophenax nivalis
Buzzard, Honey
Pernis apivorus
Eagle, Adalbert's
Aquila adatberti
Eagle, Golden
Aquila chrysaetos
Eagle, Great Philippine
Pithecophaga jefferyi
Eagle, Imperial
Aquila heliaca
Eagle, New Guinea
Harpyopsis novaeguineae
Eagle, White-tailed
Haliaeetus albicilla
Chough
Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax
Crossbills (all species)
Loxia spp.
Falcon, Barbary
Falco pelegrinoides
Falcon, Gyr
Falco rusticolus
Falcon, Peregrine
Falco peregrinus
Fieldfare
Turdus pilaris
Firecrest
Regutus ignicapiltus
Fish-Eagle, Madagascar
Haliaeetus vociferoides
Forest-falcon, Plumbeous
Micrastur ptumbeus
Goshawk
Accipiter gentilis
Harrier,Hen
Circus cyaneus
Harrier, Marsh
Circus aeruginosus
Harrier, Montagu's
Circus pygargus
Hawk,Galapagos
Buteo galapagoensis
Hawk, Grey-backed
Leucopternis occidentalis
Hawk, Hawaiian
Buteo solitarius
Hawk, Ridgway's
Buteo ridgwayi
Hawk, White-necked
Leucopternis lacernulata
Hawk-Eagle, Wallace's
Spizaetus nanus
Hobby
Falco subbuteo
Honey-Buzzard, Black
Henicopernis infuscata
Kestrel, Lesser
Falco naumanni
Kestrel, Mauritius
Falco punctatus
Kite, Red
Merlin
Falco columbarius
Oniole, Golden
Oriolus oriotus
Osprey
Pandion haliaetus
Redstart, Black
Phoenicurus ochruros
Redwing
Turdus iliacus
Sea-Eagle, Pallas'
Haliaeetus leucoryphus
Sea-Eagle, Steller's
Haliaeetus pelagicus
Serin
Serinus serinus
315
316
Practical Wildlife Care
Serpent-Eagle, Andaman
Spilornis elgini
Serpent-Eagle, Madagascar
Eutriorchis astur
Serpent-Eagle, Mountain
Spilornis kinabatuensis
Shorelark
Eremophila alpestris
Shrike, Red-backed
Lanius collurio
Sparrowhawk, New Britain
Accipiter brachyurus
Sparrowhawk, Gundlach's
Accipiter gundlachii
Sparrowhawk, Imitator
Accipiter imitator
Sparrowhawk, small
Accipiter nanus
Tit, Bearded
Panurus biarmicus
Tit, Crested
Parus cristatus
Warbler, Cetti's
Cettia cetti
Warbler, Dartford
Sytvia undata
Warbler, Marsh
Acrocephalus palustris
Warbler, Savi's
Locustella luscinioides
Woodlark
Lullula arborea
Wryneck
Jynx torquilla
Any bird one of whose parents or other lineal ancestor was a bird of a kind specified in the above list.
Appen
The Law Relating
 to the Use and
Possession of Airguns
(Adapted from the leafet Airgun Law, published by the
Shooting Sports Trust Ltd)
range or shooting gallery
AIRGUNS IN PUBLIC PLACES
Persons under 14 years
 [f anyone is under 14 years the restrictions on using an
It is against the law for anyone to have a loaded airgun
airgun are very strict indeed. All those restrictions which
in a public place. An airgun is loaded if there is a pellet,
apply to adults and people in the 14-17 age group apply
dart or anything else in the gun whether it is cocked or
to them and there are more. They may not buy or hire an
not. A public place is anywhere the public are allowed to
airgun or ammunition and may not even accept an airgun
go,regardless of who owns the land,and even though they
as a gift. If anyone gives to or sells an airgun for a person
may have to pay. Roads,streets,footpaths,canal towpaths,
under 14 years, they must keep control of it at all times
public parks, play areas are all examples of public places.
and must not allow the child to be in complete control,
[f the general public have some sort of right or permis-
though he can be allowed to use it under supervision.
sion to be in a particular place, that is a public place and
- pu ui u aae ueo no sia t Iu j
you are not allowed to have a loaded airgun in that place.
tion temporarily in your possession only in two special
situations:
AIRGUNS AND YOUNG PEOPLE
· In connection with membership of an approved rifle
club or cadet corps or when at a shooting gallery
 These restrictions apply to young people. Two age groups
You can have the airgun temporarily, and you can use
are involved, those of 14-17 years and those under 14
it when you are on private premises where you have a
years.
night to be provided you are under the supervision of
a person who is over 21 years old. If a pellet goes
Persons aged 14 to 17
outside these premises on to someone else's property,
both the child and the adult may be taken to court.
inq ‘unbiie ue auu io Anq Aeu auo ou dnoua aae su u]
· You can also carry an airgun or air rifle (but not an air
can borrow one or receive it as a gift from a person over
pistol) in a public place if it is in a securely fastened
17 years. If anyone is under 17 years any airgun and
IZ laao auoauos fq pasiiadns aie no pue laaoo ung
ammunition must be bought by someone over 17 and this
 should generally be parents or guardians.
years.
In this age group anyone can use an airgun on private
 For all practical purposes a person under the age of 14
property where they have a right to be, without supervi-
years must be supervised by someone over the age of 21
sion. With two exceptions no one may have an airgun in
years at all times when he has an airgun in his possession,
a public place. The exceptions are:
even within his own home.
· Using an airgun at a rifle range or in connection with
a rife club or shooting gallery
HIGHWAYS
● In this age group anyone may carry an unloaded airgun
or air rife (but not an air pistol) in a public place if, and
It is an offence to fire any weapon within 50 feet of the
only if,it is in a securely fastened gun cover so that it
centre of any roadway,if by doing so you cause a nui-
cannot be fired
sance. This offence could be committed by someone on
· Pay special attention to the fact that there are no cir-
Aem e ul un e pasn oum peoi e ol asoo Aladoid alead
cumstances where a person under 17 years can have an
which upset people on the road.
317
318
PracticalWildlifeCare
PROTECTION OF BIRDS
have any firearm in a public place, unless safely covered.
Even if it is safely stowed any firearm other than an
Most birds are completely protected by law. It is some-
airgun, unless obviously for an innocent purpose, could
times thought that those birds which are often called
reasonably be reported to the police. Anyone firing any
vermin can be killed at any time by anyone. That is not
weapon on or over a piece of land without the permission
so. Birds which are regarded as pests (sparrows, starling,
of the landowner is probably guilty of an offence, and
-,      q  q   (
should certainly be reported to the police.
rised person', that is the person who owns the land or who
Any unauthorised non-airgun should definitely be
has permission to shoot pests. A trespasser or a person
dealt with by the police. Weapons such as crossbows, bow
who shoots at such a bird in a public place will commit
-iuep se isn[ aq ueo siindeieo aiel uaaa io moue pue
offences against the Firearms Act for having a gun and
ous. If a person is behaving dangerously with any weapon,
   s go ud  a   o
 or seems likely to, call the police and tell them there is an
even trying to kill, a wild bird, when he is not an autho-
armed person in a public place - they will be quick to help
rised person.
you deal with the situation.
FIREARMS
Any gun is a serious matter. It is normally an offence to
Suggested Record Sheet to Accompany Bat
Samples to the Veterinary Laboratories Agency
Appendix3 to AHC 96/
Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food
Laboratory Use Only
Scottish Office Agriculture, Environment and
Fisheries Department
Welsh Office Agriculture Department
R/
BAT
Data rec'd
BAT SAMPLES FOR RABIES SCREENING
SUBMITTING OFFICE
1.
SPECIES, AGE and SEX:
2.
DATE and TIME FOUND:
3.
DATE and TIME OF DEATH:
NATURAL/KILLED
(Estimate if not known)
4. LOCATION (Give map reference if possible)
5.
CIRCUMSTANCES OF FINDING
6.
SYMPTOMS
7.
GENERAL CONDITION
8.0
GIVE DETAILS OF ANY BITING
OR SCRATCHING INCIDENTS
INVOLVING HUMANS OR ANIMALS
SIGNED
DATE
Please send to:
Rabies Diagnostics
VeterinaryLaboratoriesAgency
New Haw
Addlestone
Surrey KT15 3NB Tel: 019323 41111
Copy to: VA (Rabies) Tolworth TJ and VA Pentland House or
Cathays Park if appropriate
BAT 1 (Rev. 1996)
319
Selected
and Suppliers
Avian bone splints; intraosseous needles
O'Tom tick lifter
Cook Veterinary Products, Cook (UK) Ltd, Monroe
Pet stores and veterinary suppliers
House, Letchworth, Herts SG6 1LN
Pet Breeder Nutri Drops; puppy colostrums; kitten
Baby bird cages (2685 Chinchilla/Ferret Cage Small)
colostrums
Pet Planet, 10 Lindsey Square, Deans Industrial
 Pet Nap,4 Hartham Lane, Biddestone, Chippenham,
Estate, Livingston EH54 8RL
Wilts, SN14 7EA
Bat detectors; bat boxes - woodcrete
 Pigeon harnesses, artificial eggs and other equipment
Alana Ecology Ltd, The Old Primary School, Church
Boddy & Ridewood,Thomburgh Road,Eastfield
Street, Bishop’s Castle, Shropshire,SY9 5AE
Scarborough, Yorkshire YO11 3UY
Plastic bird rings
Brinsea TLC-4M Intensive Care Unit
Brinsea Products Ltd, Station Road, Sandford,
AC Hughes Ltd, 1 High Street, Hampton Hill,
Middx,TW12 1NA
N. Somerset, BS25 5RA
Poly-Aid
Catching equipment
The Birdcare Company, Unit 9,Spring Mill Industrial
MDC Products Ltd, Unit 11,Titan Court, Luton,
Estate, Avening Road, Nailsworth, Glos. GL6 0BU
Beds, LU4 8EF
Prosecto dried insects; most bird seeds
Esbilac (Pet Ag)
 John E Haith, Park Street, Cleethorpes, Lincs, DN35
Perky Pet Foods, 1 Moorland Way, Lincoln, LN6 7.1W.
7NF
Fencing pliers (Crescent 1936 Heavy Duty Fence Tool)
Skeletons
Tool-Up Ltd, 22 Longman Drive, Invermess, IV1
John Dunlop Osteological Supplies, 12 Tideway,
1SU www.tool-up.co.uk
Littlehampton, West Sussex, BN17 6QT
General rehabilitation supplies
Small animal ventilator SAV03
Wildlife Hospital Trading Ltd, Aston Road, Had-
Vetronic Services Ltd, 35 Sutton Close, Watcombe,
denham, Bucks, HP17 8AF Tel: 01944 292292
Torquay, Devon, TQ2 8LL
Hagen Products
Stainless steel kennels
Available from pet stores
ShorLine Ltd, Unit 39a/39b, Vale Business Park.
Humane squirrel traps
Llandow, Cowbridge, South Glamorgan, CF71 7PF
Swan bags
Okasan Ltd, 6 Stake Lane, Farmborough, Hants,
GU14 8NP
Ratsey & Lapthorm, 42 Medina Road, Cowes, Isle of
Wight, PO31 7BY
Materials handling products for swan pens and fooring
Trigene
Powell Mail Order Ltd, Unit 1 Heol Aur, Dafen
MediChem [ntemational, PO Box 237, Sevenoaks
Industrial Park, Llanelli, SA14 8QN
Kent TN16 0Z.1
Mealworms; waxworms; crickets; additives
Ultraviolet lights (Power-Sun)
The Mealworm Co. Ltd, Houghton Road, North
 B. Herp Supplies, Purlands Farm, Bridport Road,
Anston Trading Estate, Sheffield, S25 4.1l
Dorchester, Dorset, DT2 9
Metal heat mats
Wahl Micro Clippers
Net-Tex Ltd,Priestwood, Harvel, Nr Meopham,
Wahl (UK) Ltd, Herme Bay Trade Park, Sea Street,
Kent, DA13 0DA
Heme Bay, Kent CT6 8.1Z
Nutrobal; Avipro
Wallaby nets
Vetark Animal Health, PO Box 60,Winchester,
Rob Harvey, Kookaburra House, Gravel Hill, Holt
SO23 9XN
Pound, Famham, Surrey GU10 4LG
320
Useful Addresses
Wildlife Rehabilitation
Bat Conservation Trust
International Zoo Veterinary Group
15 Cloisters House, 8 Battersea Park Road, London,
Keighley Business Centre, South Street, Keighley,
SW84BG
West Yorks, BD21 1AG
British Divers Marine Life Rescue
Dr A. Kitchener, National Museum of Scotland
Lime House, Regency Close, Uckfield, Sussex, TW22
Chambers Street, Edinburgh, EH1 1.1F
1DS
Strandings Hotline Tel: 01825 765546
National Federation of Badger Groups
15 Cloisters House, 8 Battersea Park Road, London,
Countryside Council for Wales
SW84BG
Plas Penrhos, Ffordd Penrhos, Bangor, Gwynnedd.
LL57 2LQ
Operation Chough
Paradise Park, Hayle, Cormwall, TR27 4HY
Department for the Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs (DEFRA)
St Tiggywinkles, Wildlife Hospital Trust
Zone 1/17, Temple Quay House, 2 The Square,
Aston Road, Haddenham, Bucks, HP17 8AF
Temple Quay, Bristol, BS1 6EB
E-mail: mail@tiggywinkles.org.uk
Department for the Environment, Food and Rural
Website:http://www.tiggywinkles.com
Affairs (DEFRA) Wildlife Incident Unit
South Devon Seabird Trust
Central Science Laboratory, Sand Hutton, York,
YO4 1LZ
24 Ashley Way, Teignmouth, Devon, TQ14 8QS
Poisons Hotline Tel: 0800 321600
Swan Sanctuary
English Nature
Field View, Pooley Green, Egham, Surrey, TW20
Northminster House, Peterborough, PE1 1HA
8AT
Tel: 01784 431667
Environment Agency
Rio
House,
Waterside
Drive,
Aztec
West,
The Mammal Society
Almondsbury,Bristol,BS32 4HD
2b Inworth Street, London, SW11 3EP
Emergency Hotline Tel: 0800 807060
Veterinary Poisons Information Service
European Wildlife Rehabilitation Association
Medical Toxicology Unit, Avonley Road, London,
c/o
Wildlife
Hospital
Trust,
Aston
Road,
SE14 5ER
Haddenham, Bucks, HP17 8AF
Tel: 0207 635 9195
Fax:0207 771 5309
Froglife
or
Mansion House, 27/28 Market Place, Halesworth,
Suffolk IP19 9AY
The General Infirmary, Great George Street, Leeds,
LS1 3EX
Institute of Zoology
Tel: 0113 245 0530
Regents Park, London, NW1 4RY
Fax: 0113 244 5849
321
Rehabilitation
 Protocol for Otters
Contaminated with Oil
Designed for the Braer oil spill in January 1993 by Dr
(4) PREPARATION FOR REMOVAL OF OIL
John Lewis MA, Vet MB, PhD, MRCVS
Prepare everything necessary for the de-oiling process, as
it is necessary to keep the period of sedation/anaesthesia
(1) ASSESS ON ARRIVAL
to the minimum. This includes checking that the washing
facility is available, warm and clean. That all injections are
If the animal is in extremis euthanase with pentobarbitone.
ready, any fuids warmed,and that there are at least three
Decide whether the animal is adult, juvenile, weaned
 people ready to carry out the cleaning.
or not, collapsed, conscious and whether the degree of
contamination is severe, medium or light.
Animals under 1 kg are unlikely to be fully weaned.
(5) SEDATE OR ANAESTHETISE
Smaller or weaker animals may be handleable under light
(2) CONSCIOUS ANIMALS, LIGHTLY OILED
sedation, for which use diazepam (Valium) 1-2mg/kg i.m.
The majority of lightly oiled otters will need to be
Give immediate first aid/supportive care. This can be
anaesthetised for cleaning. In this case use, in order of
preference:
sedation, with diazepam at 0.5-1.0mg/kg.
Wamth should be provided, carefully.
· Tiletamine with zolazepam (Zoletil - Virbac) at 10-
Hartmann's Huid should be administered intra-
20mg/kg subcutaneously or intramuscularly is the
venously if possible, or given subcutaneously at 10-
preferred drug; the higher dose rate will produce a
20ml/kg.
deeper and longer anaesthetic
Methylprednisolone at 30mg/kg should be given by
·Medetomidine (Domitor -Pfizer Animal Health) at
the most advantageous route.
Other dnugs to be provided are:
   s  u x aq
or subcutaneously: medetomidine can be reversed with
· Multivitamins by injection
atipamezole (Antisedan? - Pfizer Animal Health)
· Long-acting amoxycillin at 0.1ml/perkg either intra-
●Xylazine hydrochloride (Rompun - Bayer) at 2mg/kg
muscularly or subcutaneously
plus ketamine hydrochloride at 10mg/kg can also be
Vitamin E and selenium (Dystosel - [ntervet) at 0.5ml
mixed in the same syringe and should be given
subcutaneously or intramuscularly
intramuscularly
●Vitamin K injection at 5mg/kg
· Ketamine hydrochloride at 10mg/kg plus diazepam at
1-2mg/kg intramuscularly
(3) LEAVE IN WARM, DRY, QUIET CONDITI0NS
All these drugs can be given using a crush box. If the
FOR 24 HOURS MINIMUM
then the otter should be intubated and kept anaesthetised
Provide water AND rehydrating solution (Lectade 
umder isoflurane/oxygen. However, this may be diffcult
Pfizer).
to manage whilst washing the animal and should only be
Food can be offered, but this is not necessary at this
carmied out by a veterinary nurse.
stage.
Once anaesthetised/sedated an ophthalmic cream
Do not overheat. Otters have difficulty in losing excess
should be spread onto the surface of the eyes to protect
body heat.
the cormea.
322
Appendix8
323
(6) EXAMINE THOROUGHLY
(13) TRANSFER TO HOLDING PEN
During anaesthesia, monitor the rectal temperature when
Provide overhead heat above the pen and do not clean
possible, and the heart and respiratory (breathing) rates
out for first five days unless absolutely necessary.
throughout:
●Temperature: 37.5-38.9°C (99.5-102°F) is thought to be
(14) FEEDING
normal for this species
· Note pulse rate and respiratory rate
Food should be offered 2-3 times a day depending on the
· Listen to heart, lung, check colour of mucous mem-
size of the otter and its eating preference. Initially if solid
branes, pulse quality and state of hydration
food is refused or causes intestinal problems, try “fish
+
Examine mouth; if endoscope available, examine
soup' (recipe below).
stomach intermally
· Examine rest of body: general condition, degree of
· Do not feed crustacea until other food is taken and
there are no intestinal problems. After that crabs etc.
oiling, limbs, tail, genitalia etc.
· Take blood sample (jugular vein is usually easiest):
are always welcome.
haematology and serum biochemistry are desirable
● Frozen fish should be defrosted with the recognised
Spare serum should be stored/submitted for hydro-
protocol (see Chapter 17)
+
carbon analysis
 Some otters will not feed while there are people watch-
Weigh the otter
ing or in the area of the pen
+
· Give warmed Hartmann's Huid at 10ml/kg by subcuta-
1
 Feed as much as the otters will take; they may well be
umderweight and need to feed up 
as ss q  s
drated otters
Water should be available for drinking,in heavy dishes,
● If blood glucose is low, give 0.5-1.0ml 50% glucose by
at all times; otters do not need to be provided with
slow intravenous injection
water in which to swim
●Nandrolone laurate (Laurabolin - [ntervet) at 0.5ml
intramuscularly
Recipe for Fish Soup (developed by Rosemary & lim
● [ron dextran (Imposil 200) at 0.5ml intramuscularly
Green)
Plough) at 1 mg/kg
Ingredients
● Bismuth (Pepto-Bismol) 5-10ml via stomach tube
250g (approx ↓lb), skinned, boned white fish (Cod,
haddock, whiting, pouting etc. are all suitable. Do not use
oily fish such as sprats, mackerel or herring.)
(7) TRANSFER TO PRE-WARMED WASHAREA
2 tablespoons of Lactol
Whilst anaesthetised.
1 teaspoon of cod liver oil
1 teaspoon of Ovigest or Duphalyte
Liquidise with a little water and dilute to the consis-
(8) WASH THOROUGHLY WITH WASHING
tency of a thick soup.
UP LIQUID
Food supplements
2% solution Fairy Liquid used at 42°C
· Vitamin supplement ↓ tablet daily (Fish Eaters' Tablets
- Mazuni Zoo Foods or Aquavits - [ZVG)
(9) RINSE THOROUGHLY WITH PLAIN
● Ethylestrenol 2 tablets daily (Nandoral - Intervet)
WATER 42°C
· Light kaolin and neomycin (Kaobiotic tablets
Pharmacia Animal Health Ltd) ↓ tablet twice daily for
(10) DRY THOROUGHLY
a5kg otter
This to be done with towels initially and then with
hairdryers. The drying should be in a separate room away
(15) IF HEAVILY OILED ON ARRIVAL
from the high humidity in the washroom.
These animals need to be de-oiled when they come in. If
they are weak, this will not necessarily involve an anaes-
(11) TRANSFER TO OTTER CARRYING BOX
thetic, or they may be handleable with diazepam sedation.
The cleaning must wait until the otter receives its full
Lined with clean dry hay.
quota of first aid and stabilisation.
(12) LEAVE TO RECOVER IN BOX
(16) IF UNCONSCIOUS ON ARRIVAL
Leave the box in warm, dark quiet place. Check at
Institute the full shock/collapse regime.
intervals.
adl oq o paun aq is sinu snouai
324
Practical Wildlife Care
ture and infused via the cephalic orjugular veins. Because
Following that the cubs can be encouraged to take first
of the otter's tough skin it may be necessary to cut-down
fakes of fish, then pieces until finally the whole fish.
onto the vein.
Monitor body temperature constantly throughout
attempts to revive an unconscious or collapsed animal.
(18) MIXING OTTERS
Treatment for the inevitable hypothermia must be aggres-
sive but not too rapid.
 u   aiq o  s 
another otter:
(17) CUBS
●If <3 months, two otters can usually be mixed without
problems. Watch when mixing initially.
As a general rule otter cubs over 1 kg are almost certainly
· If >3 months, only attempt to mix otters of similar size
weaned.
i  s    i 
Otter cubs below 1 kg are likely to be at least still par-
age can inflict severe injuries on each other, which may
tially reliant on matermal milk but can usually be fed “fish
be fatal. Bites are often inflicted around the face, gen-
 soup' (see above). This may be from a bottle, but progress
itals and limbs. Wounds can be hidden by fur until
to a dish as soon as possible.
grossly infected.
References and Further Rea
Anon. (1994) Viral haemorrhagic disease confirmed in
Breed,A. & Di Concetto, S. (2002) Pododermatitis in
wild rabbits (News and Reports). Veterinary Record,
a Great White Pelican (Pelecarus onocrotalus). [n:
135, 342.
Proceedings of the Autumn Meeting 2002 of the British
Arent,L.R.& Martell,M. (1996) Care and Management
of Captive Raptors. The Raptor Centre, University of
Brown, B. (1994) Bats and ectoparasites. Bat Care News,
Minnesota.
June 2-8.
Baines, FM. & Davies, R.R.(2004) Euthanasia of reptiles.
Brown, M. (1994a) Baby bat release structure. Bat Care
Veterinary Times, 3 March, pp. 8-9. Veterinary Business
News, December 13-14.
Development Ltd, Peterborough.
Brown, M.(1994b) Baby bats. Bat Care News, lune 8-9.
Baines, FM. & Davies, R.R.(2004) Euthanasia of reptiles.
Brown, M. (1995) Sticky wing. Bat Care News,September
Veterinary Times, 15 March, pp. 12-14. Veterinary Busi-
10-11.
ness Development Ltd, Peterborough.
Brown, M. (2003a) Baby bats. Bat Care News, Spring
Barlow, R.M. (1986) Capture myopathy. In: Management
2003, No. 29, pp. 13-16. West Yorkshire Bat Hospital,
and Diseases of Deer (ed. T.L. Alexander), pp. 130-1.
Otley, West Yorkshire.
Veterinary Deer Society, London.
Brown, M. (2003b) Seasonal problems - ticks. Bat Care
Barmard, S.M. (1995) Bats in Captivity. Wild Ones Animal
News, Summer 2003, No. 30 pp. 19-20. West Yorkshire
Books, Springville, CA.
Bat Hospital, Otley, West Yorkshire.
Bamett, ., Knight, A. & Stevens, M. (1998) Marine
Brown, M. (2004) Milk substitutes for baby bats. Bat Care
Mamma! Medic Handbook. British Divers Marine Life
News Spring 2004, No. 33, pp. 6-9. West Yorkshire Bat
Rescue, Gillingham, Kent.
Hospital,Otley,West Yorkshire.
Barmett,., Knight A.& Stevens M.(2004) Marine Manua!
BVNA (1994-95) Fracture Management and Bandaging
Medic Handbook, 4th edn. British Divers Marine Life
for Veterinary Nurses. British Veterinary Nursing Asso-
Rescue.
ciation, London.
Bennet, R.A.& Kuzma,A.B.(1992) Fracture management
Capucci, L., Nardin, A. & Lavuzza, A. (1997) Serocon-
in birds.Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine,23(1),5-38.
version in an industrial unit of rabbits infected with a
Berg,C.(2003) Best Practices for Migratory Bird Care
 non-pathogenic rabbit haemorrhagic disease-like virus.
during Oil Spill Response. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service,
Veterinary Record, 140, 647-50.
Anchorage.
BVZS (2003) Guidelines for Acceptable Methods of
Bishop,Y. (1998) The Veterinary Formulary,4th edn.
Euthanasia for Zoo,Exotic Pet and Wildlife species:
Pharmaceutical Press, London.
No. 1 Reptiles. British Veterinary Zoological Society,
Bourme, D. (2002) Duck plague: the Spring Menace. [n:
www.bvzs.org.
Proceedings of theAutumn Meeting2002 of the British
Chitty, 1. (2002) Birds of prey. In: BSAVA Manual of
Veterinary Zootogical Society, pp. 43-5.
Exotic Pets (eds A. Meredith & S. Rechoke), 4th edn.
Boydell, P. (1997) Survey of Ocular Disease in Birds of
 pp. 179-92. British Small Animal Veterinary Associa-
Prey in the UK. Proceedings of the 4th Conference of
tion, Quedgeley, Glos.
the European Committee of the Association of Avian
Chitty,.l. (undated) The things a vet has to do. In: You and
Veterinarians, Loughborough, Leics.
Your Vet, p. 17. BVA, Animal Welfare Foundation, 7
Bradford,1. (2001) Rehabilitation and Post Release Sur-
Mansfield Street, London W1G 9NQ.
vival Rates of Guillemots. South Devon Seabird Trust,
Coles, B.H.(1997) Avian Medicine and Surgery,2nd edn.
Teigmmouth.
Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Bray, J.P. (undated) The Biology of Wound Healing and
Cooper, 1.E. (1979) Parasites. In: First Aid and Care of
the Practical Care of Wounds. Queen's Veterinary
Wild Birds (eds 1.E. Cooper & 1.T. Eley), pp. 140-9.
School Hospital, Cambridge.
David & Charles, Newton Abbot, Devon.
325
326
References andFurtherReading
Cooper,l.E.(1993) Pathological studies on the bam owl. [n:
Eatwell, K. (2003) Fluid and supportive nutrition of the
Raptor Medicine. Chiron Publications, Keighley, Yorks.
sick bird. Veterinary Times, 28 July 2003, pp. 10-11.
Cooper, l.E. (2003a) Reptiles, amphibians and fish.
Veterinary Business Development Ltd, Peterborough.
In: BSAVA Manual of Wildlife Casualties (eds E.
Evans, L.(1993) First aid wound and fracture treatment
Mullineaux, D. Best, .1.E. Cooper), p. 273. British Small
for birds. Wildlife Rehabilitation Today,5(2),34-8.
Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley.
Flecknell, PA. (1991) Rabbits. In: Marual of Exotic Pets
Cooper, .l.E. (2003b) The relevance of anatomy and phys-
(eds PH. Beynon & 1.E. Cooper), pp. 69-81. British
iology to the care of reptile patients. Veterinary Times,
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham.
18th August, p. 8. Veterinary Business Development
Fort, T. (2003) Sorry, steak's off the menu. In: The Times,
Ltd,Peterborough.
October 25th 2003.
Cooper,.E.& Jackson,O.F.(1981) Diseases of the Rep-
Foster, .l. (1997) Salty toads tum red, bump chins. BBC
tilia. Academic Press, London.
Wildlife Magazine,15(3),62.
Cooper, PE. & Penaliggon, l. (1997) Use of Frontline
Frazer, D. (1983) Reptiles and Amphibians in Britain.
Spray on rabbits. Veterinary Record, 140, 535.
Bloomsbury Books, London.
Corbet, G.B. & Harmis, S. (1991) The Handbook of British
Frink, L. (1989) The basics of oiled bird rehabilitation.
Mammals,3rd edn.Blackwell Scientific Publications,
Wildlife Rehabilitation Today,1(2),4.
Oxford.
Frink, L. (1993) Anatomy of an oil spillresponse. Wildlife
Corbett, L.K. (1979) Feeding ecology and social behav-
Rehabilitation Today,5(2),27-31.
iour of wildcats (Felis siivestris) and domestic cats (Felis
Froglife (Undated) Unusual frog
mortality.
Froglife
catus) in Scotland. PhD thesis, University of Aberdeen.
Advice Sheet 7. Froglife, Halesworth, Suffolk.
Coughlan, A.R. (1993) Secondary injury mechanisms in
Frost, L.M. (1999) Hand-rearing orphaned or deserted
acute spinal cord trauma.Journal of Small Animal
neonate or young hedgehogs. In: Proceedings of the 3rd
Practice, 34, pp 117-22. British Small Animal Veteri-
InternationalHedgehog Workshop of theEuropean
nary Association, Quedgeley, Glos.
Hedgehog Research Group (ed. N. Reeve), p. 18.
Cousquer, G. (2002) Ophthalmological findings in free-
Roehampton Institute, London.
living tawny owls (Strix aluco) admitted to a wildlife
Frye, FL. (1991) Biomedical and Surgical Aspects of
veterinary hospital during 2000-2001. In: Proceedings
Captive Reptile Husbandry, 2nd edn. Kreiger, Malabar,
of the Autumn Meeting 2002 (ed. V. Roberts), pp. 78-80.
India.
British Veterinary Zoological Society, London.
Gallagher, .1. & Nelson, . (1979) Causes of ill health and
Cracknell, .1. (2004a) Avian radiography and radiology in
natural death in badgers in Gloucestershire. Veterinary
practice. Veterinary Times, 9 February 2004, pp. 6-7.
Record,105,546-51
Veterinary Business Development Ltd, Peterborough.
Gibbons, PM. (2000) Reptile and amphibian husbandry
Cracknell, i. (2004b) Avian radiography and radiology
considerations for wildlife rehabilitators. In: Selected
in practice - Part 2. Veterinary Times, 16 February
Papers Eighteenth Annuat Symposium, March 14-18
2004, pp. 6-7. Veterinary Business Development Ltd,
(ed. D.R. Ludwig), pp. 3-14. National Wildlife Reha-
Peterborough.
bilitators Association, Milwaukee.
Cracknell, .1. (2004c) Macropods: Australia's big-footed
Gorrel, C. (1996) Teeth trimming in rabbits and rodents.
beasties. Veterinary Times, 2 February 2004, pp. 8-9.
Veterinary Record, 139,528.
Veterinary Business Development Ltd, Peterborough.
Goulden, S. (1995) Botulism in water birds. Veterinary
Crissey, S.D. (1998) Handing Fish Fed to Fish Eating
Record,137,328.
Mammais. United States Department of Agriculture,
Goulding, M. (2003) Wild Boar in Britain. Whittet Books,
Washington, DC.
Stowmarket.
Davies, PM.C. (1981) Anatomy and physiology. In:
Gourley, .l. (undated) Repair of skin avulsion from the
Diseases of the Reptilia (eds & l.E. Cooper & O.F
lower jaw of the cat. Vaterinary Times. Veterinary Busi-
Jackson), pp. 9-73. Academic Press, London.
ness Development Ltd, Peterborough.
De Herdt, P. & Devriese, L. (2000) Pigeons. In: Avian 
Greenwood, A.G. (1979) Poisons. In: First Aid and Care
Medicine (eds TN. Tully, M.PC. Lawton & G.M. Dor-
of Wild Birds (eds .1.E. Cooper & 1.T. Eley), pp. 150-73.
restein), pp. 312-38. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
David & Charles, Newton Abbot, Devon.
Divers, S. (1996) Ultraviolet lights for reptiles. Veterinary
Greenwood, A.G. & Barmett, K.C. (1980) The investiga-
Record,138,627-8.
tion of visual defects in raptors. In: Recent Advances in
Dorrestein, G.M. (2000) Nursing the sick bird. In: Avian
the Study of Raptor Diseases (eds .l.E. Cooper & A.G.
Medicine (eds TN. Tully, M.PC. Lawton & G.M.
Greenwood), pp. 131-5. Chiron Publications, Keighley,
Dorrestein), pp. 75-1l1. Butterworth Heinemann,
Yorks.
ox
Gregory, M.W. & Stocker, L.R. (1991) Hedgehogs. In:
Drury, S.E.N, Gough, R.E. & Cunningham, A.A. (1995)
Marual of Exotic Pets (eds PH. Beynon & l.E.
[solation of an inidovirus-like agent from common
Cooper), pp. 63-8. British Small Animal Veterinary
frogs (Rana temporaria).Veterinary Record,137,72-3.
Association, Cheltenham, Glos.
Duff, 1.P., Scott, A. & Keymer, I.F. (1996) Parapox virus
Gregory, R.D., Wilkinson, N.I., Robinson, l.A., et af.
infection of the grey squirrel. Veterinary Record, 138,
(2002) The population status of birds in the United
527.
Kingdom, Channel Islands and [sle of Man: an analy-
References andFurtherReading
327
sis of conservation concerm 2002-2007.British Birds,
Rehabilitation (ed. B.L. Penzhom), pp. 130-4. South
95, pp. 410-50.
African Veterinary Association, Onderstepoort, South
Greig, A., Stevenson, K., Percy V, Pirie, A.A., Grant, .M.
Africa.
& Sharp, l.M. (1997) Paratuberculosis in wild rabbits.
Lane, D.R.& Cooper, B. (1994) Veterinary Nursing (for-
Veterinary Record, 140, 141-3.
merly Jones's Anima! Nursing. 5th edn). Elsevier
Griffths, R.A. & Langton, T. (1998) Catching and han-
Science, Oxford.
dling of reptiles. In: Herpetofauna Workers’ Manual
Lawton, M.PC. (1991) Lizards and snakes. In: Marua!
(eds 1. Gent & S. Gibson), pp. 33-43. .Joint Nature Con-
of Exotic Pets (eds PH. Beynon & l.E. Cooper),
servation Committee, Peterborough, Cambs.
 pp. 244-60. British Small Animal Veterinary Associa-
Hall, E.D. (1992) The neuroprotective pharmacology of
tion. Cheltenham, Glos.
methyl prednisolone. Journal of Neurosurgery 76,
Lewis, 1.C.M. (1992) Resuscitation. Presented at the Con-
13-22.
gress ofthe EuropeanWildlifeRehabilitationAssociation,
Harcourt-Brown, F (1998) Pet rabbits. Part 4. Looking
31 October-1 November, Thame, Oxon. European
after their teeth. Veterinary Practice Nurse, 10(4), 4-8.
Wildlife Rehabilitation Association, Haddenham,Bucks.
Harcourt-Brown, NH. (1996) Radiology. In: Marua! of
Lewis, 1.C.M. (1998) Badgers for vets. UK Vet, 2(2, 3, 4).
Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfow! (ed. PH. Beynon, N.A.
Lierz, M. (2002) Surgical treatment of phallus prolapse in
Forbes, & N.H. Harcourt-Brown), p. 93. British Small
waterfowl. In: Proceedings of the Autumn Meeting 2002
Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley, Glos.
of the British Veterinary Zoologica! Society,p.63.
Harden, 1. (1996) Trichomoniasis in raptors, pigeons and
Lightfoot, T.L. (2001) Practical Lab Session - Avian Prac-
doves. Journa! of Wildlife Rehabilitation, 19(1), 8-17.
tical Lab. Atlantic Coast Veterinary Conference 2001.
Harmis, S., .Jeffries, D. & Cheeseman, C. (1994) Problems
Lollar,A.& Schmidt-French, B.(1998) Captive Care and
with badgers?, 3rd edn. RSPCA, Horsham, W. Sussex.
MedicalReference for the Rehabilitation of Insectivo-
Hayes, G. & Yates, D. (2003) Understanding dog bite
rous Bats. Bat World, Mineral Wells, TX.
wounds. In: Vaterinary Times, 24th November 2003, p. 16.
McKee, W.M. (1993) The spine. In: Marual of Small
Veterinary Business Development Ltd, Peterborough.
Animat Fracture Repair and Management (eds A.
Helliwell, L. (1993) Nutrition of captive bats. Bat Care
Coughlan & A. Miller), pp. 133-43. British Small
News,September 2-4.
Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley, Glos.
Huckabee, l.R. (1997) Circulatory Shock and Fluid
McLelland, 1. (1990) A Colour Atlas of Avian Anatomy.
Therapy. In: Selected Papers of the Fifteenth N.W.R.A.
Wolfe Publishing,London.
Symposium, pp. 53-69. National Wildlife Rehabilitators 
Macwhirter, P. (2000) Basic anatomy, physiology and
Association, St Cloud, Minnesota.
nutrition. In: Aviar Medicine (eds T.N. Tully, M.PC.
James, M. (2004) A new technique for repair of separated
Lawton & G.M. Dorrestein), pp. 1-25. Butterworth
mandibular symphyses in the cat. Vaerinary Times,
Heinemann, Oxford.
23rd August 2004, p. 27. Veterinary Business Develop-
Malley, D. (1996) Teeth trimming in rabbits and rodents.
ment Ltd, Peterborough.
Veterinary Record, 139, 603.
Joseph, V. (1996) Aspergillosis: the silent killer. Journa! of
Marshall, A.M. (1932) The Frog. Macmillan, London.
Wildlife Rehabilitation,19(3),15-18
Marshall, C. (1993) Reptiles for Veterinary Nurses. British
Kampe-Persson, G. (2002) Ecology of hedgehogs in a
Veterinary Nursing Association,London.
highway environment. In: Abstract of the 5th Interna-
Mathews,F. (2003) Rehabilitation of babies. Bat Care
tiona! Hedgehog Symposium (eds D. Scaravelli & N.
News, [ssue No. Summer 2003(30), pp. 11-14. West
Reeve), p. 6. Riserva Naturale Orientata di Onfermo,
Yorkshire Bat Hospital, Otley, West Yorkshire.
Italy.
Matthews,K.A.(1996) Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Kear,. (1986) Ducks, geese, swans and screamers (Anser-
Care. Lifeleam, Guelph, Ontario.
iformes) feeding and nutrition. In: Zoo and Wild
Mead, C. (1991) Seabird mortality as seen through
Aninal Medicine (ed. M.E Fowler) pp. 335-41. W.B.
ringing. Ibis, 113,418.
Saunders,Philadelphia.
Mean, R.l. (1998) The prevalence and pathology of the
Kellaher, S. (2003) Rabbit tips. [n: Veterinary Practice
helminth parasites of the British hedgehog (Erinaceous
Nurse, Summer 2003, p. 25.
europaeus). MPhil thesis, School of Biological Sciences,
King,A.S.& McLelland, 1. (1984) Birds, Their Structure
Univerisity of Portsmouth and Wildlife Hospital Trust,
and Function. Bailliere Tindall, Eastbourme, E. Sussex.
Haddenham,Bucks.
Kirkwood, .K. (1991) Wild mammals. In: Marual of
Michell,A.R.(1985) What is shock? Journal of Small
Exotic Pets (eds PH. Beynon & J.E. Cooper),
AnimalPractice,26,719-38.
pp. 122-49. British Small Animal Veterinary Associa-
Mills, N. (2003) The role of silver in veterinary medicine.
tion, Cheltenham, Glos.
Veterinary Times, Sept 2003, pp. 6-8. Veterinary Busi-
Kirkwood, J.K., Holmes, J.P. & Macgregor, S. (1995)
ness Development Ltd, Peterborough.
Garden bird mortalities. Veterinary Record, 136, 372.
Mitchell-.lones, A.. & McLeish, A.P. (2004) Bat Workers'
Klem, D. .lnr (1989) Bird - window collisions. The Wilson
Manual, 3rd edn. p. 24. Joint Nature Conservation
Bulletin, 101(4), 606-20.
Committee, Peterborough.
Lambrechts, N. (1995) Wound management and care. In:
Morgan, R.V. (1985) Manuat of Small Aninal Emergen-
Proceedings of the SASOL Symposium on Wildlife
cies. Churchill Livingstone, New York, NY.
328
References and FurtherReading
Moris, P. (1999) Studies of released hedgehogs, what
Racey, P.A. (2004) Handling, releasing and keeping bats.
next? In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Hedge-
In: Bat Workers' Manual (eds A.l. Mitchell-lones &
hogWorkshop of the European Hedgehog Research
A.P. McLeish), 3rd edn. pp. 63-9.
Group, (ed. N. Reeve), p. 13. Roehampton [nstitute,
Raftery, A. (2002) Avian Triage. British Veterinary Zoo-
London.
logical Society Proceedings,Autumn 2002,16-17.
Munro, R., Wood, A. & Martin, S. (1995) Treponemal
Redig, PT. (1979) Infectious diseases. In: First Aid and
infection in wild hares. Veterinary Record, 136, 78-9.
Care of Wild Birds (eds l.E. Cooper & l.T. Eley),
Murray, M.l. (1994) Management of the Avian Trauma.
pp. 118-39. David & Charles, Newton Abbot, Devon.
Care Seminars in Avian & Exotic Pet Medicine 3,
Reeve, N. (1994) Hedgehogs. T. & A.D. Poyser, London.
pp.200-209.
Reichenbach-Klinke, H.& Elkan, E.(1965) The Principa!
Murray, M.l. (undated) Fluid Therapy and Administration
Diseases of Lower Vertebrates.Diseases ofAmphibians.
in Wildlife Care. Skills Seminar VIII - Intermational
TFH Publications, Hong Kong.
Wildlife Rehabilitation Council, Suisun, CA.
Rendle, M. (2004) Stress and Capture Myopathy in Hares.
Neal, E.G. (1977) Badgers. Blandford Press, Poole,
Glenlark Nature Reserve.
Dorset.
Reynolds, M. (undated) Operation Chough. Paradise
Neal, E. (1986) The Natura! History of Badgers,p. 166.
Park, Hayle, Cormwall.
Croom Helm Ltd.
Ritchie, B.W., Otto, C.M., Latimer, K.S. & Crowe, D.T.
Neff, T. (1997) Emaciation in raptors. In: Proceedings
(1990) A technique of intraosseous cannulation for
of the 1997 Conference -From Science to Reality.
intravenous therapy in birds. The Compendium on
A Bridge to the 2lst Century (ed. M.D. Reynolds),
Contiruing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian,
pp. 197-200. Intermational Wildlife Rehabilitation
12(1), 55-8.
Council, Concord, CA.
Rosen, M. (1971) Botulism. In: Infections and Parasitic
Ness, M. (1997) The art and science of fracture repair.
Diseases of Wild Birds, pp. 100-17. University Press,
Veterinary Practice Nurse,9(4),26-7.
Ames, IA.
Orendorff, B. (1997) Hand-rearing songbirds. In: Selected
Routh, A. (1992) The bat - European Microchiroptera.
Paper Fifteenth Arnua! Symposium (ed. D.R. Ludwig).
Considerations for their successful rehabilitation. Pre-
National
Wildlife
Rehabilitators
Association,
St.
sented at the Congress of the European Wildlife Reha-
Cloud, Minnesota.
bilitation Association,31 October-1 November,Thame,
Orr,H.E.(2002) Rats and mice. In: Manual of Exotic Pets
Oxon. European Wildlife Rehabilitation Association,
(eds A. Meredith & S. Redrobe),4th edn. British Small
Haddenham, Bucks.
Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley, Glos.
Routh,A. (2003) Bats. In: Manua! of Wildlife Casualties
Otto, C.M., Kaufman, G. & McCrowe, D.T. (1989)
(ed. E. Mullineaux, D. Best & l.E. Cooper), p. 104.
Intraosseous infusion of fuids and therapeutics. The
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Quedge-
Compendium on ContinuingEducation for the Practic-
ley, Glos.
ing Veterinarian,11(4),421-31.
Routh,A.& Sanderson, S. (2000) Waterfowl [n: Avian
Oxenham, M. (1991) Ferrets. [n: Marual of Exotic Pets
Medicine (ed. TN. Tully, M.PC. Lawton & G.M.
(eds PH. Beynon & 1.E. Cooper), pp. 97-110. British
Dorrestein). Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham,
Routh, A.& Sleeman, .l.M. (1995) Greenfinch mortalities
Glos.
(letter). Veterinary Record, 136, 500.
Penman, S. & Ciapparelli, L. (1990) Endodontic disease.
Rudge, A.1.B.(1984) The Capture and Handling of Deer.
In:Manual of Small Animal Dentistry (eds C.E.Harvey
Nature Conservancy Council, Peterborough.
& H. Simon Orr), pp. 73-83. British Small Animal
Sainsbury, A.W. (1997) Veterinary care of squirrels. UK
Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, Glos.
Vet, 2(6),40; 3(1), 56.
Penman, S.& Harvey, C.E. (1990) Periodontal disease. In:
Sainsbury,A.W. & Gurmell,.1. (1995) An investigation into
Manual of Small Animal Dentistry (eds C.E. Harvey
the health and welfare of red squirrels (Sciurus vul-
& H. Simon Or), pp. 37-48. British Small Animal
garis) involved in re-introduction studies. Veterinary
Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, Glos.
Record,137,367-70.
Pennycott, T.W., (2005) Salmonellosis in wild birds
Samour, l.H., Bailey, TA. & Cooper, JE. (1995) Tri-
1995-2002. British Veterinary Zoological Society, Pro-
chomoniasis in birds of prey (Order Falconiformes) in
ceedings of the Autumn Meeting 2003,p. 80.
Bahrain. Veterinary Record, 136, 358-62.
Perrins,C.(1987) New Generation Guide Birds of Britain
Sandys-Winsch, G.(1984) Anima! Law,2nd edn. Shaw &
and Europe. William Collins Sons & Co Ltd, London.
Sons, London.
Plunkett, S. (1993) Emergency Procedures for the Smal!
Sharp, B.E. (1996) Post-release survival of oiled, cleaned
Animal Veterinarian.WB Saunders,Philadelphia, PA.
seabirds in North America. Ibis, 138, 222-8.
Pukas, A. (1999) Death lurks as the crow fies. The
Shaw, E. (1990) Diagnosis and treatment of ‘sick gull
Express, 6 February, p. 33.
syndrome'. Journal of Wildlife Rehabilitation,13(2),
Racey, PA. (undated) Keeping, handling and releasing.
3-5.
[n:The Bat Worker's Manual (ed.A.. Mitchell-lones).
Simpson, V. (2003) Bite wounds, bacterial infections and
 pp. 36-41. Nature Conservancy Council, Peterborough,
mortality in otters (Lutra lutra) in southem and south-
Cambs.
west England: a 15-year study. In: Proceedings of the
References andFurtherReading
329
Autumn Meeting 2003 (ed.V. Roberts). British Veteri-
Stoskopf, M. & Kennedy-Stoskopf, S. (1986) Aquatic
nary Zoological Society.
Birds. In: Zoo and Wildlife Medicine (ed. M. Fowler),
Simpson, V.R.(1997) Health status of otters (Lutra lutra)
2nd edn. W.B. Saunders and Company, Philadelphia.
in southwest England based on post mortem findings.
Taylor, PM. (undated) Fluid Therapy in Animals:A Prac-
Veterinary Record, 141, 191-7.
tical Guide. Hoechst UK Ltd, Milton Keynes.
Simpson, VR. & King, M.A. (2003) Otters. In: Marua! of
   ssss Auag ) i 
Wildlife Casuaitie (eds E. Mullineaux, D. Best & 1.E.
aquatic birdsIn:SelectedPapers FifteenthAnnuatNWRA
Cooper), p. 139. British Small Animal Veterinary Asso-
Symposium (ed. D.R. Ludwig), p. 49. National Wildlife
ciation, Quedgeley, Glos.
Rehabilitators Association, St. Cloud, Minnesota.
Sims, M. (1997) Strictly for the birds. Veterinary Practice
UFAW/WSPA[WorldSociety for the Protection of
Nurse,9(1), 320-33.
Animals] (1989) Euthanasia of amphibians and rep-
Sims, S.(1983) Use of IV Huids in small wild birds.Journa!
tiles.Report of a Joint UFAW/WSPA Working_Party.
of Wildlife Rehabilitation,6(3),5-6.
Universities Federation for Animal Welfare, Potters
Slade, R. & Forbes, M. (2004) The importance of the
Bar, Herts.
source of fibre in the diet of the rabbit. In: U.K. Vet,
Veterinary Laboratories Agency (2003) Wildlife Surveil-
9(1), 69-70.
lance Report October 2003-December 2003 Quarterly
Stebbings, R. (1993) Which Bat Is It? The Mammal
Report, 5(3).
Society, London.
Vindevogel, H.& Duchatel, .P. (1985) Understanding
Stocker, L.R. (1987) The Complete Hedgehog. Chatto &
Pigeon Paramyxovirosis. Natural Granen NV, Schoten,
Windus, London.
Belgium.
Stocker, L.R. (1991a) Code of Practice for the Rescue,
Wallis, A.S. (1996) Head and neck problems. In: Manua!
Treatmert,Rehabilitation and Retease of Sick and
of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfow! (eds PA. Beynon,
Injured Wildlife. Wildlife Hospital Trust, Aylesbury,
NA. Forbes, & NH. Harcourt-Brown), pp. 238-9.
Bucks.
 British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Quedge-
Stocker, L.R. (1991b) The Complete Garden Bird. Chatto
ley, Glos.
& Windus, London.
Watts, E. (1987) Guidelines for handrearing small
Stocker, L.R.(1992) St Tiggywinkles Wildcare Handbook.
mammals. In: Proceedings ofthe British Veterinary Zoo-
Chatto & Windus, London.
logical Society Autumn Meeting, pp. 21-5. London.
Stocker, L.R. (1994a) Rescue and rehabilitation of
Welsh,V.(1981) Immobilisation of Simple and Compound
badgers in Britain.Journal of Wildlife Rehabilitation,
Fractures in Mammals. Wildlife Rehabilitation Council,
17(3), 12-16.
Walnut Creek, CA.
Stocker, L.R. (1994b) The Complete Fox. Chatto &
Welsh,V.(1983) Immobilisation of Simple and Compound
Windus, London.
Fractures in Songbirds and Raptors. Wildlife Rehabili-
Stocker, L.R. (1995) Wild mammals seen in general
tation Council, Walnut Creek, CA.
practice. Presented at the 1993 meeting of the British
Whitby, l.E., Johnstone, P, Parsons, G., King, A.A. &
Veterinary Zoological Society, London, 4 December
Hutson,A.M. (1996) Ten-year survey of British bats for
1993.
the existence of rabies. Veterinary Record, 139, 491-3.
Stocker, L.R. (1996) Respite for rehabilitators 
who
     
handle deer. Wildlife Rehabilitation Today, 7,4.
contaminated birds.In: The Effects of Oitl on Wildlife:
Stocker, L.R. (1997) Feedback on euthanasia. Bat Care
Oil Symposium, October 1990 (eds 1. White & L.
News, June, pp. 11-12.
 Frink), pp. 67-72. Intermational Wildlife Rehabilitation
Stocker, L.R.(1998) Medication for Use in the Treatment
Council, Suisun, CA.
of Hedgehogs (Erinaceous europaeus). Wildlife Hospi-
Williams, D.L. (1991) Amphibians. In: Manual of Exotic
tal Trust, Aylesbury, Bucks.
Pets (eds PH. Beynon & l.E. Cooper). British Small
Stocker, L.R. (1999) Incidents adversely affecting the
Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, Glos.
hedgehog (Erinaceous europaeus):its rescue and reha-
Wobeser,G.A.(1981) Diseases of Wild Waterfowt.Plenum
bilitation in the United Kingdom. In: Proceedings of the
Press, New York, NY.
3rd International Hedgehog Workshop ofthe European
Wymne, .1. (1998) Management of dehydration in nestling
Hedgehog Research Group (ed. N. Reeve), p. 17. Roe-
birds. Journa! of Wildlife Rehabilitation, 1l(2), 13-14.
hampton Institute, London.
Yalden, D.W. (1991) Marsupials: Order Marsupialia. [n:
Stocker, LR. (2003) Injuries caused by the deterioration
The Handbook of British Mammals (eds G.B. Corbet
of legal snares seen by The Wildlife Hospital Trust
& S. Harris), 3rd edn. pp. 563-7. Blackwell Scientific
(pers. comm.).
Publications, Oxford.
Note: numbers in italics refer to figures in the text; numbers in bold refer to figures in the colour plate
section.
Abandonment of Animals Act 1960, 279
balloon syndrome, 34, 203
abrasions, 49,264
barium sulphate, 147,148
abscess, 33,44, 58
bats, 39, 41, 57, 268 et seq., (Appendix 1) 312,
acidosis, metabolic,31,106, 207
(Appendix 5) 319
acupuncture,17,17
orphans,272,272,273,295
addresses (Appendix 7), 321
beak shapes, 30, 109, 130
adenovirus type 1, 123
bicarbonate of soda, 106, 207
admittance, see record keeping
bird fancier's lung, 9
adrenaline, 18
bird tables, 111
airgun,317
birds of prey, see raptors
airways, 16,16
biting fies, see hippoboscids
Aleutian disease,2,250
bitterm, 156 et seq.
alimentary canal, birds, 35
blackbird,2,23,111
alkalosis, metabolic, 31
bladder,63,67,239
Ambu bag, see aritificial respiration
blindness, 169, 169
amino acids,31
blood,37
amoxycillin, 111,212,221,251,277
boar, wild, 5,285 et seq.
amphibians, 41, 44, 45, 46, 62, 87, 308 et seq.
Borrelia burgdorferi, see Lyme disease
amputation,140,230,239,248,262,276,310
bottle feeding, 291, 294
anabolic steroids,104,116
botulinum, see poison
anaesthetic
Brachylaemus erinacei,see fukes
genneral,112,112,146,208,209,238,272,273
brain damage, 18
local,39,273
brandy, 37
analgesics,41,98,208,239,263,273
bread and milk, 37
anglers’tackle,18,30,90,90,138,138,146,153,156
breathing,13,15, 15,16,19
see aiso ligatures
bromhexidine, 202
ankylosis,65,75,80,162
budgerigar, 114
antitoxin, 94,137,145
bumblefoot
arthritis, 261,261
birds of prey, 48, 163, 169
artificial respiration, 3, 17
swans, 145
aspirin,169
buntings, 108
aspergillosis, 88, 123,139, 158,182
buprenorphine, 208,239, 263
atipamezole,238
bums, 12, 47,49, 50
autotomy in lizards,303, 306
buzzard, see raptors
avian botulism, see poison
avian cholera,137
Caesarean section,302,302
avian pox,89, 110, 167
caging, see species chapters
avulsion, skin of the jaw, 100, 100
calcium borogluconate, 105
calcium/phosphorous, see metabolic bone disease
bacteriology, 52
campylobacteriosis, 9
badger, 10, 39, 232 et seq.
candidiasis,123
orphans,235,238,300,300
canine parvovirus, 2
330
Index
331
canker, see michomoniasis
orphans, 301,301
Caparinia tripilis, see mange, hedgehogs
roe, 257,258
Capillaria aerophila,see lungworm
defrosting fish, 155
capillary refill time (CRT), 14, 15, 19, 21
dehydration, see fuids
cardiac arrest, 14, 17, 19
delayed implantation, 236,237
cardiac resuscitation, 18
dental disease, 21, 98 et seq.
carmidazole, 96
endodontic,43,99,229,234,234,246,246,247
carprofen,98,208,239,263
malocclusion,22,55a-b,99,198
casting,73,85,263
periodontal,20,98,204
castration, 263
Destructive Imported Animals Act 1932,199,252
cat, domestic predation by,111,194,251,251,271,305,309
dexamethasone, 125
cat, Scottish wild,43,281,282,301
dextrose and saline, 30
cephalexin,240
diagnosis, xi
cetacea, 51, 286,(Appendix 2) 314
diazepam,38,105,129,169,217,221,231
cetrimide, 53
dimetridazole, 96
charcoal, activated,106,208
disinfectants, 289
chemical bums, 49, 51
distemper, canine, 2
chlamydia, see ormithosis
diuretics, see frusemide
chloramphenicol, 163
divers,158,158 et seq.
chlorhexidine gluconate, 53
dog, attack by, 1,207,207,263, 305
circulatory system,13,15,17,82
doramectin,104,133,226,235
clenbuterol hydrochloride, 89, 202
dormice, 33, 107, 196 et seq.
clindamycin,276,285
orphans,298
clostridium, see poison,botulinum
doves, 92,96,120,123
clothing, 3,3,6,7,21
see also pigeons
clotrimazole, 89
doxapram hydrochloride, 17
coaptation, see splints
dry necrosis, 59
coccidia,198,220
duck, 10, 17,27,28, 136 et seq.
code of conduct, 1
orphans, 136, 139,141,183,184,186, 186,191
collar, Elizabethan, 38
duck, viral enteritis (duck plague), 138
collision
dysecdysis, 304
herons, 157
road traffic accidents,125,129,160,207,216,229,237,
ear mites, 205
283
ecdysis, 304, 305
swans,147,147
eclipse, 139
windows,118,167
EDTA, see sodium calcium edetate
colostrum, 292
eggs, 124,136,191
compound sodium lactate,see Hartmann's solution
egret, little, 156 et seq.
concussion, see head trauma
Ehmer sling, 70, 72
coot,153,191
emaciation, 147,161, 167
corticosteroids,27,30,38,202,231
emergency procedures, 16, 19
corvids, 4,26, 91, 132 et seq.
emphysema, subcutaneous, 44, 203, 271, 309
chough,135,135
endotracheal (ET) tube,16, 16
orphans,133,134
enilconazole, 205
crash landing, swans, 147
enrofoxacin,111,145,231, 311
Crenosoma striatum,see lungworm
epistaxis,23
crepitus,63
etamiphylline camsylate,89,202
crop,34,125,125
European brown hare syndrome, 221
Crown property, 150
euthanasia, 10 et seq. 56, 167,210,264,277, 307, 310
crushed foot disease,35, 210
extra-cutaneous fixation (ECF),73,73,79,82,83,209,209
cuckoo,108
eye injuries, 46,58,162,163,169,169,213, 310
dabchick, see grebe
face masks, 112, 112,208, 209
Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976, 283, 307
falconry techniques, 165
death, signs of, 16 et seq.
familiarity, 1,3, 9, 165
deer,2,3,4,64,253 et seq.
feathers
Chinese water, 4,46,254,258
broken, 24, 31, 116,168, 169
fallow,57,57,256,256
haemorrhage, 24
muntjac,1,4,46,47,47,57,58,100,100,257,259,260,
preening,155
262
white in corvids, 134, 134
332
Index
feeding bottles, 289, 290
glottis,15,34
fenbendazole, 95,126
glue,tissue,35,39,274,277
ferret, 249 et seq.
glue trap, 195,195
fieldfare,108
goldcrest, 78, 108
finches, 78,108
golden eagle,see raptors
fpronil,101,133,222
golden period,44,46
first-aid kit, 13, 14
goose, 10, 151 et seq.
fishing line, see ligatures
orphans,191
see also anglers’ tackle
goshawk, see raptors
Heas,89,101,197,199,222,235,282
granulation, see wounds
Hubendazole, 130
grebes, 54, 154 et seq., 154, 156,191
Huids,5 ,25 et seq.,28,34 et seq.
growth problems, 235,235
amphibians, 41, 310
gulls, 4,51, 171 et seq.
dehydration,4,26 et seq.
intraosseous,7,8,36,39
haemorrhage,7,20,21,22,52,199
intravenous,6,21,34,38,140,265
hair loss (bats), 271
oral, 34, 35, 37,140, 306
handling, see species chapter
reptiles,39, 306
hares, 216 et seq.
subcutaneous,9,11, 37,39,276,306
orphans,217,217,296
Hukes, 204
harriers,see raptors
funixin,57,212,239,263
Hartmann’s solution, 31
Hy strike, 15, 50, 56, 90, 211,212,220, 236,237
hazards, personnel, 4,6,20,159,166,174,227,232,245,
foot and mouth disease, 104, 206, 260
285 et seq.
foot injuries,210
head trauma,
force-feeding,117,117
birds, 91,92,118,167
fox,2,2,4,7,37,38,98,103,224 et seq.
mammals,104,105,240
orphans,299
see also skull fractures
fracture disease, see ankylosis
health and safety, 1,4,7 et seq.,20,49
fractures, 60 et seq., 61,62
heart rate, 14, 18
amphibians,87,310
hedgehog, 12, 34, 35, 56, 200 et seq.
bats, 274,277
dental disorders,20, 204
beak, 17,23,27a-c,76,139, 140
ectoparasites,15,205,206,206,211
birds, 74 et seq., 74,112, 116,125,152,157,157, 162
intraosseous cannulation, 39
compound,26,68,72,77,134
orphans, 294 et seq.
coracoid,76
skin wounds,14,207,207,211
jaw, 68,69,76,87,209,239,263
hepatitis, infectious canine, 2,2, 38, 227
leg,83 et seq.,208,230,239,261
heron,4,30,156 et seq.
mammals, 63, 67 et seq., 208, 221, 222, 230, 261
hexamitiasis,123
pelvis,74,230,263
hibemation, 200, 208, 268,279, 308
reptiles,86,86
hippoboscids, 97, 116
skull,67,76,263
hirundines, 108
spinal, 67,75,86,86,130,130,209,248,263,263
hobbles, 258
wing, 16,24, 51,64, 78 et seq.
hobby, see raptors
frostbite, 51
hydrocephalus, 229
frounce, see michomoniasis
hydrocolloids, 54
fruit, 266
hydrogels, 54,210,262,264
frusemide, 42
hydrops,309
hydrotherapy, 209,210
game birds, 129 et seq.
hydroxycoumarins,107
capercaillie, 131
hyperthermia,20, 304
orphans, 186,191
hypocalcaemia,see metabolic bone disease
pheasant,18,91,129
hypothermia,19,246,293,304
quail,129
gapeworm,see symgamiasis
imidacloprid, 101
garden birds, 108 et seq.
imprinting, 10, 134, 189,293
orphans, 188 et seq.
inflammation, see wounds
gavage,34,35,127,127,158
infusion pump, 35,36,39
gizzard,34,35,93,113,155
inhalation pmeumonia, 293
do3
insecticide,90,101,103,271
birds, 189
intemational rehydrating Huid, 30
mammals, 288,289,294
intramedullary pinning, 79, 79,82, 84, 262, 276
Index
333
intramuscular injection, 109, 110
milk,37,106,287
inidovirus-like agent in frogs, 309
mink, 249 et seq.
isoflurane,112,238
mites,see mange
itraconazole, 77,89,158, 182
mole,42,280 et seq.
ivermectin,104,133,137,160,211,220,226,235,271
orphans,295
 molluscicides, see poison
jackdaw,9
Monteggia fracture, 65,66,262
jaundice,2,227
moorhen,153
orphans, 191
kestrel, 75
moult,see eclipse
see also raptors
mucous membranes, 14, 15,19, 21
ketamine, 238
muzzle,38,68,69,132
kingfisher, 91, 117 et seq., 118
mycobacterium, see tuberculosis
myiasis,see fy strike
larvacide,57,211
myxomatosis,101,216,218,218,219,220,223
lavage,13,45,53,263
lead poisoning, 93,93,94,146,146
nandrolone,104,116,226
leg problems, 134
nephropathy in hedgehogs, 207
leptospirosis,7,21,228,228
nitenpyram,212,235,237
leukaemia, feline, 2, 283
noise, 3
levamisole, 202
nutrition,
Licensed Rehabilitation Keeper (LRK), see The Wildlife
oral,10,31,95,214,242
and Countryside Act 1981
parenteral,32,32,266
ligatures,229,263,265
nystagmus, 104
fencing, 57,57,58,229,229,257,257,263
fishing line, see anglers’ tackle
obesity,278
smares,57,229,230,238
oedema, pulmonary,42
string, fruit netting, 111, 200, 201, 213, 239, 305
oesophagus,blocked,146,147,148
see aiso tourmiquets
oil, 32,96,139, 171 et seq., 173,175, 178, 322
lighting, 3
oiled bird washing machine, 179, 179
live food,113, 170
one-eyed cold, see ormithosis
louse (pl. lice), 90, 103,103, 236, 236
ormithosis, 8,122
louse fies, see hippoboscids
orphans
lumpy jaw, 284
birds, 134,134,139,183 et seq.
lungworm,202,203
mammals,238,272,272,287 et seq.
Lyme disease, 7, 260
osprey, see raptors
osteomyelitis,65
maggots, see fly strike
osteotomy, 152
as food, 113,278
otter, xiii, 4,21, 98, 244 et seq. 322
magpie,see corvids
orphans, 247, 300
maladaption syndrome, 305
owners,124,124,128,138
mange, 8, 103 et seq.
owl, 159 et seq.
bats, 39, 271
bam,161, 165
birds, 90, 111, 111,133, 133
little, 161
fox,8,36,37,103,226,227
orphans, 161
hedgehog,104,205,205
tawny, 19, 31, 96,161
human, see scabies
oxygen, 41
maturation, see wounds
mealworms, 278
packed cell volume (PCV), 27, 176
mebendazole, 130, 137
pain,see amalgesics
medetomidine,238
parakeet,ring-necked,114
merlin, see raptors
paralysis,63,64,67,130,239
metabolic bone disease (MBD),
paramyxovirus (PMV-1), 2, 121, 122
birds, 91, 167, 167
paraphimosis, see penis problems
mammals,104,198
parapox virus in squirrels, 198
 metaldehyde, see poison
parvovirus, canine,2
methylprednisolone sodium succinate,31,67,231,265
pasteurella multocida,111,195,263,277
metronidazole, 98,204
pasteurellosis, 9
mice, 193 et seq., 195
pelvis, 74, 263
orphans, 297
penis problems, 204, 294
migrants, 114,117,153
pentobarbitone sodium, 11
334
Index
perches, 163, 163
rehydration, oral, see fuids
peregrine, see raptors
reptiles, 62, 303 et seq.
pet keeping, 10
lizard, 41
phallus, prolapse in duck, 28, 140
snake,5,11, 39, 86,86
photoperiod, 3
terrapin, 41
pigeon, 88, 91,96,120 et seq.,121
tortoise, 41
orphans, 190, 191
rescue,4,200
wood, 10,18,25
respiratory disease, see aspergillosis
pigeon, herpes virus, 124
respiratory disease in humans, 9
 pine marten, 249 et seq.
respiratory failure,15,16,17,17
plasma volume expanders, see fuids
rings, 29,124,124,148
pneumonia,202,229,246
ringworm,8,205
 see aiso inhalation pneumonia
Robert .lones bandage, 69, 70
poison, 51,92 et seq., 93,105 et seq.,229
botulinum 94, 137, 145
salmonella, 9, 110, 111, 124, 207
lead, see lead poisoning
salt, 181
molluscicide,106,207
salt poisoning, 309
rodenticide,20, 105,107,199
Sarcoptes scabiei, see mange
polecat, xiii, 249 et seq.,250, 299
scabies, 8,227
pop-off symdrome,213,213
scars, 45
post capture myopathy,221,258,284
seabirds, 52, 88,171 et seg., 191
post mortem,11,12,282
seals, 4, 286, 286,301
povidine-iodine, 54
sedatives,see diazepam
power lines,147,148
selenium,260,265
praziquantel, 204,229
septicaemia,111
preening,155
serum banking, 11
 preferred body temperature (PBT), 304
shock, xi, 13,18 et seq.,25, 50
preparation H,51,82,111,264
shrews, 193 et seq.
pressure necrosis, see ligatures
orphans, 295,295
pro-biotic,221,266
silver,55
prolapse,58,140
skeletons, diagrams, 60,61, 62, 240
propofol,146
skylark, xii
prosthetics, 17, 27a-c, 140
sling, 86,86
Protection of Animals Act 1911, 215, 243, 249,
slow worm, see reptiles
252
slug pellets, see poison
Protection of Badgers Act 1992, 243
snares, see ligatures
psittacosis, see ormithosis
sodium bicarbonate, 106
pulse,14,19,21
sodium calcium edetate (EDTA), 93
pus, 45,48
sparrowhawk,53,91,96,124,166,169,170
see also abscess
sparrows, xiii, 108
pyrethrum,101,102
spiramycin,98,204
splints
quarantine,
birds, 78 et seq.,79, 81, 82, 84, 85
birds, 187
first aid, 64, 262
orphans,294
mammals,71, 274,276
spondylosis deformans, 204
rabbit, 99,216 et seq.
squirrels, 4,22,55, 99,101, 107,196 et seq.
orphans,296
orphans, 297,297,298
rabies,6, 9,269
stapling,14,55
radiographs, see x-rays
starlings, xiii, 108
raptors, 47, 48, 89, 166 et seq.
starvation, see emaciation
orphans,53,190,191
sticky wing in bats, 271
rats, 7,107
stoat, 249 et seq.
record keeping, 4, 5
orphans, 299
red kite, xii, 49, 93, 96, 166, 167,168, 170
Stomorgyl, 98
red leg, 308
stress, 2, 9,217
redpoll,78
sunbum, 51
reduction of fractures, 65
sunshine,126,126
redwing, 108
 supplies and suppliers,(Appendix 6), 320
re-epithelialisation, see wounds
sutures,25,55,55,56
Index
335
swans,6, 10, 18, 31,32, 90,90, 93,143 et seq
E,260,265
orphans, 191
K,20,107
swift,114 et seq.,117,190,190
voles, 105, 193 et seq., 194
syngamiasis, 95,95,160,167
orphans, 289, 297
g dund asuss
wagtails,108
tapeworm,228
wallaby, red-necked, 283,284
tassel foot, see mange, birds
warblers, 78, 108
teeth clipping, 99 et seq.
warfarin, see poison
temperature, core body, 14,15,19
washing oiled birds, 177 et seq.
temitory,4,114,135,150,165,231
waste disposal, 11
tetanus, 6
water, body, 25,26
thiabendazole, 95
water logging,141,141
thiamine deficiency,96,118,141,156,158,249
water rail, 158
thrushes, xiii, 108
waxworm larvae,117, 117,278
tick remover, 103, 103
weasel, 249 et seq.
ticks,7,89,102, 102, 103,206
orphans, 299
tits, 108
weight,27,27,200,279,293
toileting, 290,291
Weil's disease, see leptospirosis
tongue injuries, 310
West Nile virus, 8, 96
tonicity, 28, 53
whisky, 37
total plasma protein (TPP), 177
Wild Mammals Protection Act 1996, 215, 231,243, 249,
toumiquets, 23
252,267
toxocariasis, 9
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981
tranquilizer darts, 267
Schedule 4, 50,114, 115, 135,170, (Appendix 3) 315
treatment, 4
Schedule 6,196,215
treponemal infection in hares, 221
Schedule 9,114,131,142,153,158,165,199,252,267
triage,25,29,64,176,264,276
Wildlife Incident Unit,106,167,230
tmichomoniasis, 19, 96, 123, 160
wing membrane necrosis, 271
Trichophyton erinacei, see ringworm
wing tears,in bats, 273,275
tmiclosan, 53
woodpeckers, 91, 108, 132
tuberculosis, 8, 221
worming,130,133,137,160, 228,260,282
avium, 207
wound dressing, 54
bovis, 234
wound healing, 43 et seq.
tumours, 204
wounds, 43 et seq., 305
amphibians,45,309
vaccination,
birds, 59
animals,2,122,138
bite, 1,39,48,230,238,240,248,263, 305
humans, 6, 9, (Appendix 1) 312
compound fractures, 68
Velpeau sling, 70,71
fencing lacerations, 161, 161, 168
ventricular fibrillation, 14, 18
shot,48,52,81,95,125,151,152
Veterinary Poisons Information Service,49,51,93,
talons, 48
208
treatment, 13, 50 et seq., 309
Veterinary Surgeons Act 1996, 30, 128
types,43 et seq. 47,48
viral haemorrhagic disease, 2, 219
wren,78,108
vital signs of life, 13 et seq.
vitamins,
x-rays,27,146,146,148,149
B, 31
B1,see thiamine deficiency
zinc deficiency,204,205
B12, 94,141,145,149
zoonoses, 7 et seq., 227, 228
Plate 1 This deer has been attacked by a normally
Plate
2Foxes
may
show
jaundiced
mucous
placid family dog. This is one of the dangers imprinted
membranes.
animals have to face.
Plate 3 Using an Ambu bag can provide effective artifi-
Plate 4 The tenting effect of pinching the skin will show
cial respiration to a casualty
that an animal is dehydrated.
Plate 5 A selection of systemic fluids suitable for wildlife
Plate 6 Medial tibial vein of a swan.
casualties.
Plate 7 Spinal needle inserted to allow intraosseous
Plate 8 Using a syringe pump can infuse intraosseous
fluids through the ulna.
fluids accurately to a bird.
liquid food.
Plate 9 Injecting subcutaneous fluids to a jackdaw in the
 inguinal area at the top of the leg.
Plate 11 Providing subcutaneous fluids to a grass
Plate 12 Burnt hair and spines are common hedgehog
snake can rehydrate it.
injuries.
Plate 13 The wound lavage systemwill safely clean
Plate 14 A hedgehog having had major skin lacerations
contaminated wounds.
was sutured with surgical staples.
Plate 15 Fly egg infestations are seen in hedgehogs.
Plate 16 A fractured wing in a bird can be temporarily
stabilised with a bodybandage.
Plate 17 Female mallard 3 months after having a pros-
Plate 18 Wound caused by fishing line becoming en-
thetic bottom beak fitted (see also Plate 27).
tangled around a swan's beak. Suturing prevented the
woundgaping.
Plate 19 Typical lesions of trichomoniasis - this time in 
Plate 20 Hedgehogs regularly suffer from a chronic
a tawny owl.
build-up of calculus on their teeth.
Plate 21 Otters often receive fractures to their canine
Plate 22 Malocclusion will eventually lead to starvation.
teeth.
This casualty was a grey squirrel.
Plate 23 Blackbirds are often found with broken beaks
Plate 24 A hanging wing usually means a fractured wing
that can sometimes be mended.
that needs splinting.
Plate 25 The wood pigeon, even after major suturing of
Plate 26 Casualty corvids often have exposed, devi-
neck wounds, is a very powerful bird.
talisedbonefragments.
Plate 27a
Plate 27b
   u () t l  )     g   a o  e   
thesis to the soft tissue and skin completes the procedure.
Plate 27c
Plate 28 Mallard drake with a prolapsed penis.
Plate 30 The heron's beak can be a dangerous
weapon.
Plate 29 How a metal ring can slide up into the hock
joint.
Plate 32 Washed birds are placed in a recovery area
with overhead heat lamps (not shown).
Plate 31 Hot gluing a bent feather on a tawny owl.
Plate 34 Hedgehogs with balloon syndrome become
Plate 33 The hazel dormouse may have abscesses
inflated.
Plate 35 Crushed foot disease is another hedgehog
Plate 36 The mange mite Sarcoptes scabiei seen under
phenomenon.
the microscope.
Plate 37 Sarcoptic mange will eventually kill a fox
Plate 38 Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH) may leave a
unless it is treated.
characteristic “blue eye'(Photo: J.C.M. Lewis)
Plate 39 Typically badgers will inflict bite wounds to the
Plate 40 Many bats have mite infestation.
rump area
Plate 42 Moles are of various colours but are all the
Plate 41 A butterfly cage with an overhead heat source.
same species.
makes ideal housing for bat casualties.
Plate 44 Frogs inflated with air can have it aspirated
with a needle, syringe and three-way tap
Plate 43 Like all mammals, wildcats should have reme-
dial dental work carried out, especially after jaw injuries.
Plate 45 Lacerations, suffered by frogs in garden acci-
dents, can be sutured.
Plate 46 Frogs can sometimes adapt to disability
Plate 47 Large birds like this buzzard are often burnt on
powerlines.
Plate 48 A wild buzzard with chronic bumblefoot.
Plate 49 Releasing a red kite in its familiar territory.
Plate 50 Birds on Schedule 4 of the WCA 1981 should
be ringed by a DEFRA inspector.
Plate 51 A back-headed gull showing a typical badly
brokenwing.
Plate 52 A little auk found crashed inland.
Plate 54 Baby grebes have to be fed cold whitebait with
Plate 53 These orphanedsparrowhawks must be
a vitamin supplement,Aquavit(IZVG)
reared on meat, bone and feather.
Plate 55b
Plate 55a
Plate 55 (a) & (b) Malocclusion in a grey squirrel, whose incisors have grown into its head.
Plate 56 A hedgehog with two legs missing must be
euthanased.
Plate 57 Feeding a long-eared bat in an aquarium.