Practical
Emergency and
Critical Care
Veterinary Nursing
Paul Aldridge
Jamg.0 asino1 pue
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Practical Emergency and Critical Care
Veterinary Nursing
I dedicate this book to my son Jacob, the brightest star in the sky
Louise O'Dwyer
For my daughters, Ella and Amber
Paul Aldridge
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/ go/aldridge/ecc_vet_nursing
The website includes:
information charts
video/slideshow demonstrations
Practical Emergency and Critical Care
Veterinary Nursing
Paul Aldridge BVSc, Cert SAS, MRCVS
Senior Veterinary Surgeon
PetMedics Veterinary Hospita!
Manchester
UK
Louise O'Dwyer MBA, BSc(Hons), VTS(ECC)
DipAVN(Medical & Surgical), RVN
Member of the Academy of Veterinary Emergency
and Critical Care Technicians (AVECCT)
Clinical Director
PetMedics Veterinary Hospita!
Manchester
UK
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sonis, Ltd., Publication
This edition first published 2013
@ 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
   s g       os  
Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 SSQ, UK
Editorial offces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to
reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
The right of the authors to be identified as the authors of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reprod uced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright,
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and
product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective
owners. The publisher is not associated with any prod uct or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to
feu tupueisiapun au uo pios st il 'paraao haneu palqns au on presan un uoneogui aaeioune pue aeanose apiaoid
the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of CongressCataloging-in-PublicationData
Aldridge, Paul.
p. / cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
    A 7   1 (d e : ) - 
care. I. O'Dwyer, Louise. II. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Animal Diseases-nursing. 2. Critical Care-methods. 3. Emergencies-veterinary. SF 774.5]
SF774.5.A43 2013
636.089'073-dc23
2012031333
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in
electronic books.
Cover images: courtesy of Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer
Cover design by Steve Thompson
Suoy Suoh 'pauT eipaua ias-isag ueddoi Aq oueled idg'l /s'6 u1 ias
12013
Contents
Preface
vi
11 Nursing the Acute Abdomen Patient
109
12 Nursing Urinary Tract Emergencies
123
 1 Triage and Assessment of the Emergency
Patient
1
13 Nursing the Poisoned Patient
133
2 Monitoring the Critical Patient
9
14 Nursing the Trauma Patient
144
3 Vascular Access
17
15 Nursing the Reproductive Patient
155
 4 ‘Shock' and Intravenous Fluid Therapy
29
16 Small Animal Critical Care and
Hospitalised Patient Nutrition
163
5 Blood Gas, Acid-Base Analysis and
Electrolyte Abnormalities
41
17 Nursing the Emergency
6 Analgesia and Anaesthesia of the
Ophthalmology Patient
181
Emergency and Critical Patient
52
18 Cardiopulmonary Arrest and
 7 Practical Laboratory Techniques
63
Resuscitation
189
 8 Techniques for Oxygen Supplementation
76
19 Nursing Considerations in the
Critical Patient
198
9 Nursing the Dyspnoeic Patient
86
10 Nursing the Cardiac Patient
6
Index
209
Visit the supporting companion website for this book:
www.wiley.com/go/aldridge/ecc_vet_nursing
Preface
Emergency and critical patients are amongst the
 practice as a reference work, turning to the relevant
most challenging and rewarding of cases to treat.
chapters as the need arises. Each chapter contains
The role of the veterinary nurse and the close rela-
 a large number of photographs obtained from
tionship with patients is never more important
real life cases, to illustrate clearly the techniques
 than when nursing these cases. Nurses have a vital
described in the text. Depending on local legisla-
role in the outcome of these patients as recovery is
tion, some techniques described (e.g. tracheos-
dependent on close monitoring and assessing the
tomy) will be outside the scope of what nurses are
response to treatment, often noticing subtle changes
permitted to perform; however, we feel their inclu-
in clinical sigms.
sion is essential to provide an understanding of
During the 12 years that we have both been
why and how these procedures are performed, and
 involved in emergency care, huge steps forward
to emphasise the areas of after care that must be
 have been made in both diagnostic procedures and
dosely attended to.
the treatment of patients, and emergency care has
 To accompany this book a companion website
become a respected discipline in itself.
has been
1  produced (visit www.wiley.com/go/
We hope this book conveys our enthusiasm for
 aldridge/ecc_vet_nursing). Our aim was to pro-
this fascinating area of veterinary medicine, and
vide access to additional resources, tables and
inspires nurses to become more confident in their
 charts that we find useful in the management of
clinical skills and abilities. We hope that reading
 our emergency and critical patients. Where such a
the book will not only teach new skills, but also
document exists then reference is made to it at the
show how an existing skill set can be applied in an
relevant point of the chapter.
emergency situation.
The layout of the book is such that it could be
Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer
read completely by nurses studying towards quali-
July 2012
fications, or equally kept close at hand within the
Triage and Assessment of the
Emergency Patient
Introduction
when dealing with an urgent case in a first opinion
practice.
Throughout the management of the emergency
patient a successful outcome is more likely to be
achieved where prompt, appropriate action is
taken as dictated by the clinical findings of obser-
Telephone triage
vation and examination. Nowhere is this more
important than on initial presentation where the
In many cases the initial contact from the owner of
patient with a life-threatening condition must be
the emergency case will be by telephone. The vet-
identified and receive immediate attention; this
erinary nurse is often involved in establishing the
process is triage.
urgency of the problem, and vitally whether the
 Triage is a system of rapidly evaluating patients
animal needs to attend the clinic immediately.
and allocating treatment to those patients that are
From conversation with some owners it will
-u auo jo ase a ul io 'paau juagm isou u
become immediately obvious from the clinical
vidual case, allocating treatment to the most serious
signs described that the case is an emergency and
problem first. To gain this information, a rapid,
should be seen as soon as possible (see Table 1.1).
efficient, clinical examination of the major body
In other cases the nurse will need to try to deter-
systems is carried out: respiratory, cardiovascular
mine the nature of the problem, and give advice
and central nervous system (CNS). The initial
accordingly. It may be necessary to calm the owner
-uauon pmous waisas Apoq yea jo uogeunexa
to elicit a concise, relevant history, and caution
trate on a small number of clinical signs that
should be used when assessing an owner's percep-
provide the most important information.
tion of the patient's problem. If there is any doubt
 In human medicine, triage is well established
about the need to see an animal, it is safest to
and used in busy accident and emergency depart-
advise the owner to attend or for a veterinary
ments or at the scene of major incidents. The same
surgeon to discuss the case with the owner. It is
principles apply in veterinary medicine, whether
advisable that all patients with a traumatic injury
in a dedicated emergency out-of-hours practice or
should attend the clinic immediately.
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 1.1 Examples of owner-reported clinical signs that
warrant immediate attendance at clinic
Respiratory distress
 Abdominal distension
Severe coughing.
Persistent vomiting or
Weakness or collapse
diarrhoea
Neurological abnormalities
Inability to urinate
Ataxia
 Bleeding from body
 Non-weight-bearing
orifices
lameness
 Profuse bleeding from
Severe pain
wounds
Ingestion of toxins
Dystocia
Figure 1.2(
(a) Preparing for the arrival of a patient.
Figure 1.1  Transport.
Information gathered during telephone tiage allows
equipment to be prepared and so save time once the patient
has arrived; in this case a dog with a pharyngeal foreign
The owner should be questioned as to the signal-
body. (b) Close-up of the trolley in (a). Equipment includes
intravenous access, endotracheal tubes, laryngoscope,
ment of the patient (breed, age, sex and approxi-
surgical kit, tracheostomy tubes, etc.
mate weight) and given clear and concise directions
as to where they are to attend (this is especially
 important where phone lines are diverted out of
hours and owners maybe unaware their call has
preparation to occur prior to the patient's arrival
been diverted to another site or clinic) and an esti-
(see Figure 1.2); this can save valuable time when
mated time of arrival obtained.
initiating stabilisation. For example, equipment
Advice may need to be given on transportation
for supplementing oxygen or obtaining vascular
of the animal, especially following trauma. If an
access can be prepared, or advice can be sought
animal is unable to walk it may need to be carried;
regarding toxic levels, appropriate management
it is preferable for a trauma victim to be carried on 
and antidotes in cases of intoxication.
a board or something rigid, rather than a blanket
(see Figure 1.1). In the case of active bleeding.
direct pressure on to a clean cloth is safer than the
Hospital triage
owmer applying a tourniquet. Always warn the
owner that the animal may be aggressive due
On arrival at the clinic the major body systems are
to pain.
assessed during the triage, and a brief ‘capsular
Knowing the nature of the problem, along with
history obtained from the owner (see Table 1.2). See 
the sigmalment of the animal, allows a great deal of
website documents: Triage assessment sheet.
Triage and Assessment of the Emergency Patient  3
Table 1.2 Questions asked of owners to obtain a 'capsular
A useful path to follow in the initial assessment
history'
of major body systems is ABCD, where:
Signalment (age, sex,
Duration of presenting
A: Airway
neutered, breed)
complaint
B: Breathing
Vaccination history
 Current medication
C: Circulation
D: Dysfunction of the CNS.
Table 1.3  Examples of presenting conditions that should be
taken immediately to the treatment area on arrival
A and B: Respiratory system
Seizures
Ingestion of toxins
Emergencies involving the respiratory system
Trauma
Excessive bleeding
require rapid assessment, cautious restraint and
Prolapsed organs
Open fractures
Burns (see Figure 1.3)
 prompt measures to start stabilisation. Assessment
Dystocia
of the respiratory system should begin as the
patient is approached by observing their posture,
respiratory effort and pattern, and whether any
airway sounds are clearly audible.
 In the normal patient, both cats and dogs have
 a respiratory rate of approximately 10-20 breaths
per minute (bpm), ventilation involves very little
chest movement, and the chest wall and abdomen
move out and in together. Whilst open mouth
breathing and panting in a dog is considered
normal, the same in a cat is always considered to
 indicate respiratory distress and oxygen supple-
mentation is indicated.
 The respiratory system of the patient is assessed
by observation, auscultation and palpation.
Airway
Figure 1.3  Severe burns on a puppy, an example of a
 In a collapsed patient, assess if the airway is patent
patient that should be taken directly to the treatment area.
by listening for breathing, and looking in the
mouth for any obstruction (blood, vomit, foreigm
bodies). Facial injuries or cervical bite wounds can
During assessment, any abnormality detected
 interfere with the airway by disrupting the larynx
with a major body system is likely to be life-
or trachea.
threatening: therefore measures are immediately
taken to start stabilising that condition, prior to
Breathing
completing the rest of the examination. The aim is
 not to reach a definitive diagnosis, but to start treat-
Observation The patient should be closely
 ment of life-threatening conditions. So, for example,
 observed before moving on to auscultation with a
 if an animal is immediately noted to be in respira-
stethoscope. Often, observation alone is enough to
 tory distress, oxygen is administered before any
determine a respiratory problem exists and dictate
other part of the examination is carried out.
the animal should be moved to the treatment area
Patients with certain presentations should be
to start stabilisation. Observation should focus on:
taken to the treatment area immediately, regard-
less of major body system findings (see Table 1.3;
Respiratory rate: an increased respiratory rate is
Figure 1.3).
termed tachypnoea. If a patient is judged to be
4  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
tachypnoeic, the focus should then move to
whether there is increased respiratory effort. If
there appears to be no increased effort, the
tachypnoea may be caused by fear, stress,
pyrexia or pain.
 Respiratory effort: animals with increased respi-
to assist them in their efforts to ventilate ade-
quately. The typical picture is of flared nostrils,
extended neck and abducted elbows as the
animal struggles to draw air in. There will often
also be exaggerated chest wall movement and
abdominal effort, where the muscles of the
 abdominal wall are brought into play to assist
with breathing. In severe respiratory effort
there maybe ‘paradoxical’ movement of the
abdominal wall; where the abdomen moves
inwards on inspiration.
 Respiratory pattern: in the normal breathing
cycle, the time taken for inspiration is similar in
length to expiration. Where alterations in this
Figure 1.4 Pronounced subcutaneous emphysema in a cat
ratio occur it may give clues to the level of the
following thoracic trauma from an airgun pellet.
respiratory tract at which a problem is present
(see Chapter 9).
 Symmetrical movement of the chest wall: rib frac-
wheezes suggests airway narrowing, and 'crackles'
tures, and ‘flail chest'’ segments may cause
suggest the presence of fluid in alveoli.
asymmetrical movement of the chest wall.
Palpation
 Gentle palpation of the chest wall may
Auscultation Listening to the patient before
be useful for detecting obvious trauma or subcuta-
using a stethoscope may reveal abnormal respira-
 neous emphysema. Subcutaneous emphysema is a
tory noises such as stertor, or stridor. Stertor refers
build up of air below the skin, and can be associ-
to ‘snoring’ types of noise, often caused by vibra-
ated chest wall defects or tracheal trauma (see
tion of excessive soft tissue in the oropharynx.
Figure 1.4).
While this is normal in some breeds of dog, in other
Definitive treatment for the cause of respiratory
patients it may be a sign of inflammation. Stridor
compromise should be provided as soon as possi-
is a high-pitched whistling sound, usually associ-
ble. Careful auscultation and observation of the
ated with air moving rapidly through a narrowed
 breathing pattern will often determine the location
opening
of the cause of dyspnoea, be it upper or lower
Auscultation in association with a respiratory
airway, or pleural space disease. This can be essen-
pattern is vital in helping to localise the region of
tial, as often dyspnoeic animals have little or no
the respiratory tract affected (see Chapter 9).
physiological reserve. The ability to establish a
A stethoscope should then be used to ausculate
working diagnosis based on history and examina-
the chest wall, comparing identical areas on the left
tion alone is often the difference between life and
side of the chest to the right side, and similarly com-
death in dyspnoeic animals.
paring ventral lung fields to dorsal. This compari-
son allows abnormalities to be more easily detected.
Breath sounds may be reduced or absent where
C: Cardiovascular
pleural disease exists (pneumothorax, pleural effu-
sion, diaphragm rupture), or increased sounds
During initial assessment of the cardiovascular
where airway disease is present. The presence of
system, the aim is to gauge the effectiveness of the
Triage and Assessment of the Emergency Patient  5
heart in pumping blood to perfuse body tissues,
Capillary refill time
 and also whether that perfusion is delivering
Capillary refill time (CRT) is again assessed on the
 Oxygen to the tissues. Poor perfusion leads to
 gums. Digital pressure is applied with a fingertip
reduced oxygen delivery to tissues, known as
to blanche the mucous membrane, and then when
'shock'. Left uncorrected, shock will lead to cell
the finger is removed, the time taken for colour to
death, and greatly increased morbidity and mortal-
return is measured. A normal CRT is 1-1.75 s.
ity in emergency patients.
A prolonged refill time may be due to decreased
Decreased cardiac output may be due to reduced
cardiac output and vasoconstriction causing re-
circulating volume (hypovolaemia), or be due to
duced peripheral perfusion.
heart failure and arrhythmias.
A rapid capillary refill is likely due to increased
There is no direct method of measuring the
perfusion  of  f
the mucous membrane caused
 amount of oxygen delivered to tissues; examina-
by vasodilation, which can indicate systemic
tion concentrates indicators of cardiovascular per-
inflammation.
formance, or perfusion parameters. Many of the
signs used to detect reduced cardiac output and
 poor perfusion arise as a result of compensatory
measures by the body; measures aimed at preserv-
Pulse
ing blood flow to the heart and brain at the expense
Palpation of femoral and distal (metatarsal) pulses
 of other tissues such as skin, gastrointestinal tract,
will reveal pulse rate and rhythm, and also gives
muscles and kidneys. Compensatory
measures
an impression of stroke volume (the amount of
include increased heart rate and contractility, and
blood pumped with each beat).
vasoconstriction of arterioles leading to capillary
Pulses should be easily palpated (except in obese
beds in less 'vital' tissues.
animals), and should feel 'full'; terms such as these
refer to the quality of the pulse, which may take
Mucous membranes
some practice to appreciate. When judging the
quality of the pulse the force and the duration of
Mucous membranes are normally pink in colour;
the pulse need to be assessed. The pulse is a wave
this is most commonly assessed on the gums. Cats'
of blood travelling down the artery that represents
mucous membranes tend to be lighter in colour
the output of the heart. If the duration of the wave,
than dogs'. Commonly seen changes in mucous
as well as its height is considered, a better idea of
membrane colour are outlined in Table 1.4 (see
stroke volume is gained. As cardiac output drops,
Figure 1.5).
it becomes more difficult to palpate the metatarsal
pulse.
 Irregular pulses may be due to cardiac arrhyth-
Table 1.4 Commonly observed colour changes in mucous
 mias, or conditions such as pericardial effusion.
membranes and their possible causes (see Figure 1.5)
Colour observed
Possible cause
Heart
Pale, white or grey
 Poor perfusion, or anaemia
Auscultation of the heart should be carried out at
'Brick red' or
Vasodilation, systemic
the same time as palpating an artery, this allows
'injected'
inflammatory response
 any pulse deficits (an audible heart beat without
 Blue or purple
Cyanosis: low oxygen
an output) to be detected. The heart rate can be
saturation of haemoglobin
counted (see Table 1.5). A rapid heart rate (tachy-
Yellow
Increased blood bilirubin 
cardia) may be detected with cardiac disease,
levels
cardiac arrhythmias, sepsis or shock due to reduced
Brown
Formation of methaemoglobin,
blood volume. It must be remembered that whilst
e.g paracetamol poisoning
tachycardia is a normal finding in hypovolaemic
Cherry red
Carbon monoxide poisoning
dogs, cats often develop a slow heart rate (brady-
cardia) if hypovolaemic.
6  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
(a)
(b
[c)
(p)
Figure 1.5 (a) Pale mucous membranes in an anaemic animal. (b) Brick red mucous membranes in a patient with systemic
inflammatory response. (c) Blue tinged mucous membranes in a cyanotic cat. (d) Icteric mucous membranes. The yellow
colour is caused by raised levels of bilirubin.
Table 1.5  Changes in heart rate and their possible causes
Heart sounds are often very guiet in severe
hypovolaemia, and muffled where pericardial
Normal heart rates
Dogs: 60-100bpm
effusions are present. Any audible murmurs should
(depending on size)
be noted.
Cats: 160-200bpm (higher if
stressed)
 If indicators of poor tissue perfusion are detected
on triage, stabilisation measures need to be taken
Causes of tachycardia
Cardiac disease
Cardiac tachyarrhythmias
immediately. Continued poor perfusion leads to
Sepsis
cell death and release of free radicals and inflam-
Hypovolaemic shock
matory mediators.
Fear
 Most animals with abnormal perfusion have
Stress
some degree of hypovolaemia. Recognising hypo-
Pain 
volaemia based on the physical examination of per-
Causes of bradycardia
Hyperkalaemia
fusion parametersis an essential skill (see Table 1.6).
Increased intracranial pressure
With practice, the degree of hypovolaemia present
Cardiac arrhythmias
Hypovolaemic shock in cats
can be estimated, and the same parameters used to
measure response to treatment (see Chapter 3).
Triage and Assessment of the Emergency Patient 
Table 1.6 Changes in perfusion parameters seen in hypovolaemia
 Clinical parameter
 Mild hypovolaemia
Moderate hypovolaemia
Severe hypovolaemia
Heart rate*
120-140
140-170
170-220
Mucous membrane
Normal, or pinker
Pale pink
Pale/white/grey
Capillary refill
Brisk (<1 s)
Normal (1 -2 s)
Slow or not detectable
 Pulse amplitude
Increased
Decreased
Very decreased
Pulse duration
Mildly reduced
Reduced
Very reduced
*Heart rates refer to dogs, cats often have a slow heart rate when hypovolaemic.
D: Dysfunction of the central
Readings taken may actually be lower than core
nervous system
temperature if the thermometer tip is within faeces
or gas in the rectum.
The CNS should be briefly assessed through obser-
-ra un uun are saaa poq u
vation and palpation. Observation should begin as
Apoq u aseau ue si eixand suouasad uaa
soon as the patient is approached: posture, level of
temperature above the normal range (due to an
consciousness, and interaction or response to their
increase in the body temperature regulatory set
suroundings should be noted. The patient should
point, so the body is still controlling the body tem-
be ambulatory with normal gait and propriocep-
perature) commonly seen with infection. Hyper-
uaqumsan [enae ui si ie suaed uv) u
thermia is an increase in temperature over and
non-responsive or showing neurological abnor-
above the regulatory set-point. This occurs due to
mailities such as twitching or seizure activity
excessive heat production (e.g. from muscle activ-
should be triaged immediately and taken to the 
ity in a seizuring animal) or an inability to thermo-
treatment area for further assessment.)
regulate (e.g. inability to pant in a dog with
 Depressed mentation can be due to poor oxygen 
larymgeal paralysis). Body temperatures over 40°℃
delivery to the brain, but if this seems more severe
(104°F) are of concern; temperatures of over 42°C
than would be indicated by examination of the
(107°F) are life-threatening.
respiratory and circulatory system, then the suspi-
Low core body temperature can be associated
cion of CNS involvement is increased.
with hypovolaemia. If a reading of 36°C or below
The patient's pupils should be assessed to ensure
is obtained, the patient should be assessed again to
they are symmetrical and equal in size, that a
double check no other signs of poor perfusion are
 pupillary light reflex (PLR) is present (see Chapter 
present.
15) and that there is no obvious dilation (mydria-
Comparing the core body temperature with the
sis) or constriction (miosis).
temperature of the patient's extremity can be
Following assessment of the major body systems,
sued au uosnad rod jo rou raoe
 a brief examination of the rest of the body should
rectal temperature is compared with a reading
be performed.
obtained from the web of the toes. While the
extremities are expected to be at a lower tempera-
Abdominal palpation
After examination of the
ture, a difference of greater than 4°C often indicates
major body systems, the abdomen can be palpated.
reduced blood flow, and hence reduced transfer of
Palpation should reveal any abdominal distension
heat to the extremities.
 or pain. Where distension is present it may be pos-
sible to differentiate between gaseous distension
and fluid effusion. The caudal abdomen should
Summary of triage
be checked to ensure the urinary bladder is not
distended.
Triage aims to evaluate the major body sys-
tems quickly, allowing rapid intervention where
Body temperature Core body temperature is
hypoxia, poor perfusion and other life-threatening
usually assessed by a rectal thermometer reading.
conditions are detected. The same skills can thenn
8 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 1.7
A mnemonic for areas covered by an emergency
secondary evaluation
A CRASH PLAN!
Airway
C
CVS/Circulation
R
Respiratory
A
Abdomen
S
Spine
从
Head
P
Pelvis/rectal exam
L
Limbs
A
Arteries
N
Nerves
this is useful in assessing reduced oxygen delivery
to tissues (see Chapter 3).
Figure 1.6  Placing an intravenous catheter prior to
gathering a‘minimum database'from apatient admitted to
the clinic.
Secondary evaluation
be applied to ensuring the patient is responding to
Once any life-threatening conditions have been
administered treatment.
stabilised, a more thorough secondary examination
Once admitted to the clinic, a standard protocol
can be carried out, systematically covering body
should be followed:
oxygen
supplementation
systems (see Table 1.7). At this point a detailed
where required, an intravenous catheter is placed
history can be obtained from the owner.
  q , 
1 obtained
 More in-depth diagmostic procedures can be per-
from the patient, the details of which will vary
formed, such as imaging, allowing an ongoing
from practice to practice, but usually include rapid
 treatment and nursing plan to be formulated to
clinical pathology such as packed cell volume
deal with each specific problem in order of priority.
(PCV) and total solids by refractometry, blood
A written hospital order sheet covering fluid
glucose measurement, urine specific gravity and
therapy, feeding, medication, diagnostics and
'dipstick', and electrolyte analysis where available
 nursing requirements should be produced for each
(see Figure 1.6). Blood lactate levels can be obtained;
patient.
2
Monitoring the Critical Patient
Introduction
specific problems are suspected from physical
Examination, more specific monitoring can be per-
Close monitoring of the critical patient is essential
formed and further laboratory information may
to determine the effectiveness of any treatment,
be required, e.g. clotting times, slide saline auto-
and to assess the degree of improvement in condi-
agglutination, blood gases, lactate levels.
tion. Just as importantly, changes can be detected
that indicate deterioration is imminent; this allows
intervention to prevent a crisis before it occurs.
Organ function
The most useful information is provided by
Respiratory system
rather than a single one-off measurement. To make
Regular auscultation of the chest fields should be
or graph is require
, with the data entered at speci-
performed (see Practical techniques, Chapter 7) to
fied intervals (see Figure 2.1). How often
these
detect any change in lung sounds. Lung sounds
parameters are monitored will depend
d on the
that have become muffled may indicate worsen-
severity of the problem and the perceived risk of
ing pleural disease; an increase in lung sounds
deterioration. Which parameters are to be moni-
can
1 indicate a worsening of lung or airway
tored also depends on the patient; this should be
pathology.
decided by the clinical team and recorded in the
 Respiratory rate is useful as an indicator of respi-
animal's nursing plan (see Table 2.1). It is far safer
ratory disease. An increased rate could indicate a
to frequently re-assess a few relevant parameters
developing pneumothorax for instance, although
than to repeatedly run a whole bulk of tests that
an increase in respiratory rate (tachypnoea) can
take so much time to complete that deterioration
also be seen with pain, pyrexia, fear or abdominal
may take longer to detect.
distension.
 Individual practices often have a standardised
 An assessment of respiratory effort can be made
'minimum database' of information that is gath-
by observation of the patient. Changes in posture
ered from emergency cases on admission. Where
 can be indicative of increased effort: standing
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
I-STAT
47
123
Figure 2.1   Recording clinical parameters on a suitable
780
recording chart allows important trends to be spotted.
OCLR
Figure 2.2
Performing blood gas analysis with a hand-held
Table 2.1
Examples of areas that are monitored in critical
device.
patients
 Organ function:
Body temperature
Respiratory system
Clinical pathology
Cardiovascular system
Central nervous system
Biochemistry
Haematology
Urinary system
Coagulation profile
Gastrointestinal system
Pain scoring
 Fluid and electrolyte balance:
Hydration status
Recumbency care
Fluids ^in' vs. fluids ‘out'
rather than sitting, extended neck, flared nostrils,
 [euopqe paseanou pue Suneanq ynou uado
movement may be seen.
Figure 2.3 Pulse oximetry in a critical patient. The probe
Respiratory function can be considered adequate
has been placed on the pinna.
if partial pressures of both carbon dioxide and
 oxygen are within normal limits. The method of
choice to monitor this is arterial blood gas analysis.
of the efficiency of gaseous exchange from the
Samples are usually obtained via an arterial cath-
inspired air in the alveoli into the body's tissues.
eter (see Chapter 3). Blood gas analysis measures
Care is required with the placement of the pulse
the arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) (see
 oximetery probe, if left in place for too long it tends
Figure 2.2).
to compress tissue and give a false reading. Con-
 Pulse oximetery provides an estimate of the per-
scious animals can have the probe placed on toe
centage of available haemaglobin that is carrying
webs, lips or ears rather than on the tongue.
Oxygen (oxygen saturation, SpO2) (see Figure 2.3).
Any animal with a reading of less than 95%
It does not reveal how the actual amount of oxygen
SpO2 should receive oxygen supplementation.
is carried in the blood; this depends on the haema-
SpO2
 values of 90% correspond to a PaO2 of
globin content. Oxygen saturation gives an idea
60mmHg. Because of the nature of the oxygen
Monitoring the Critical Patient   11
saturation curve, below 60 mmHg there is a rapid
Pulse rate and character are essential in detecting
 drop in oxygen saturation, so aiming for an SpO2
hypovolaemia and the response to treatment.
of 95% or above gives some margin of safety.
Increasing pulse rate and decreasing amplitude are
evidence of worsening hypovolaemia. The distal
metatarsal pulse becomes non-palpable with mod-
Cardiovascular system
erate hypovolaemia, but should return if effective
therapy is instituted (see Figure 2.5).
Heart rate and rhythm
Importantly, what is palpated as the pulse ampli-
Heart rate can be measured by palpation of an apex
tude is the difference between diastolic and systolic
pressures (i.e. an animal with a systolic pressure of
beat, palpation of a pulse or auscultation with a
100mmHg and a diastolic pressure of 60 mmHg
stethoscope. Where abnormal rhythms are detected,
would have a similar pulse amplitude to an animal
a continuous electrocardiogram (ECG) should be
with 70/30 mmHg blood pressure); it cannot accu-
carried out, and abnormalities recorded. While an
rately measure actual blood pressure. Therefore the
ECG is useful to investigate rhythm disturbance, it
only shows electrical activity. Just because there is
pulse needs to be considered in conjunction with
measures of tissue perfusion and blood pressure
a waveform does not mean there is an output at
readings.
that point; it is always important to check pulses at 
the same time as auscultating the heart.
Mucous membranes and capillary refill time
Pulses
The mucous membrane colour (see Table 2.2)
 Pulses are commonly palpated on the femoral
and capillary refill time (CRT) can help to give an
idea of tissue perfusion and vasomotor tone. The
pulse is valuable. Much useful information is gath-
oral mucosa is normally used as it is easiest
to access. CRT tends to vary with an individual's
ered from the rate, strength and characteristics of
technique.
the palpable pulse.
A normal CRT is usually 1-1.75s. A slower CRT
jeaq jeau yoea ioy juasaid aq pmous asmd v
 suggests reduced blood flow in the tissue, often
(see Figure 2.4). If this is not the case, or there are
resulting from vasoconstriction with hypovolae-
variations in pulse strength, then an ECG is neces-
mia, or heart failure. A more rapid CRT suggests
sary to identify rhythm disturbances.
increased blood present in the tissues; this may be
due to vasodilation seen in sepsis.
Figure 2.4  Auscultating the heart whilst palpating the
Figure 2.5 Palpating a distal pulse on the hind limb of a
femoral pulse allows any pulse deficits to be detected.
patient.
12  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 2.2 Observed changes in mucous membrane colour
(see Chapter 1 for images)
Colour observed
Possible cause
Pale, white or grey
 Poor perfusion, or anaemia
'Brick red’ or
Vasodilation, systemic
"injected'
inflammatory response
Blue or purple
Cyanosis: low oxygen
saturation of haemoglobin
Yellow
Increased blood bilirubin
levels
Brown
Formation of methaemoglobin,
e.g. paracetamol poisoning
Figure 2.6  Measuring toe web temperature. While the
Cherry red
Carbon monoxide poisoning
extremities will always be colder than the core body
temperature, a difference of more than 4°C suggests reduced
 perfusion.
 Mucous membranes are normally pink, although
 sa rad au u s a
dogs.
Tissue perfusion
The sole aim of the cardiovascular system is to
deliver oxygenated blood to the tissues of the
body. All tissues need a supply of oxygenated
blood. Monitoring assesses the delivery of this
 blood to the capillary beds of the tissues. A range
of parameters can help to form an overall picture
Figure 2.7  Indirect measurement of systolic arterial blood
pressure using a Doppler system.
of perfusion:
 Mucous membrane colour
 Capillary refill time
Central venous pressure
3)
 Peripheral pulse
4)
Toe web temperature vs. core temperature (see
In cases that require fluid therapy, but there is a
Figure 2.6)
risk of fluid 'overload' if too much fluid is admin-
5
Urine output (1.0 ml/kg/hour)
istered, it is useful to measure central venous pres-
6
Blood lactate levels
sure. This gives an idea of venous 'filling' and how
7）
Arterial pressure.
 much fluid is returning to the heart. Examples of
typical cases would be anuric/oliguric renal failure,
 A systolic arterial pressure of 90 mmHg (equiva-
or animals in heart failure.
lent of 60-70mmHg mean arterial blood pressure)
A central catheter is required, and the pressure
is required for adequate flow to vital organs. It is
reading can be taken using a manometer, or the
most practical to use a Doppler system and cuff
central catheter can be connected to a pressure
(non-invasive, indirect measurement) (see Figure
transducer and the wave form constantly moni-
 2.7). Alternatives include invasive, direct measure-
tored (see Practical techniques at the end of the
ment via an arterial catheter.
chapter).
Monitoring the Critical Patient  13
Central nervous system
auscultating the abdomen for the presence of gut
sounds.
An animal may have altered mentation because of
conditions inside the skull, such as brain injury, or
Fluid balance
due to more global conditions such as hypovolae-
mia, hypoglycaemia or development of a systemic
 inflammatory response. By monitoring neurologi-
All animals receiving fluid therapy need ongoing
cal status, and recording findings, it is possible to
monitoring to assess effectiveness of therapy, and
     s 
to prevent under or over-dosing. Important consid-
ration or improvement in the patient's condition.
eration must be given to determining what the
The use of a scoring system allows an accurate
patient's fluid needs are; is the patient hypovolae-
record to be kept of the animal's status. While there
mic, dehydrated, or both? Hypovolaemic animals
is still some subjectivity involved, allocating an
need rapid fluid administration, whereas dehy-
overall score allows a trend to be spotted, and pro-
drated animals required correction of their fluid
vides continuity from one team member to another.
deficit over 24 hours. Physical assessment of perfu-
The Small Animal Coma (SAC) scoring system
sion parameters and hydration parameters should
tends to be used (see Chapter 14). This is an adap-
be carried out frequently (see Chapter 4).
tation of the Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) that is
 Patients receiving intravenous fluid therapy
used in human medicine. In the SAC system, a
need to have their fluid input compared with their
score is allocated from 1 to 6 for each of 'motor
fluid output. Fluid input is easily measured by
activity', ‘brainstem fumction' and ‘level of con-
recording the number of fluid bags administered,
sciousness', giving a maximum score of 18.
 d ons t m n  n
inputs to consider are any oral fluids or food, and
intravenous drugs. Fluid output includes urine,
Urinary system
faeces, vomit and any effusions. Urine output can
 be measured via a urinary catheter, or in animals
that are not catheterised disposable bedding can
Monitoring urine specific gravity and output
be weighed before and after urination to estimate
allows quick and simple assessment of kidney
volume (1 gram = 1ml urine). Cat litter trays can
function. Normal urine output is considered to be
be weighed in the same way. Volumes of vomit and
1-2ml/kg/hour. If urine output is at or above this
faeces can be estimated. Volume of effusions can be
level it is assumed renal perfusion is adequate, and
more difficult to determine, but outputs from tho-
therefore it is likely that perfusion of other organs
is also adequate. In animals with an indwelling
racic and abdominal drains are easily recorded,
as are wound effusions collected in active suction
urinary catheter, a closed collection system (see
Chapter 12) provides a means of measuring urine
drains. Dressings can be weighed to estimate effu-
sions in situations such as burns, or open abdomi-
volume. In other animals litter or bedding can be
nal drainage. Some fluid outputsarenotmeasurable,
weighed to estimate the urine of volume expelled.
e.g. loss of water as vapour in expired breath; these
losses are termed 'insensible' losses, and are usually
estimated at 20ml/kg/24 hours.
Gastrointestinal system
Once the fluid inputs and outputs have been
 established, they can be compared. Any large dis-
Patients that are systemically ill can develop vom-
crepancies should be investigated. In a hypovolae-
iting, diarrhoea or ileus. Any vomiting should be
 mic patient we would expect the ‘ins' to be much
recorded, along with any defecation and its nature.
 greater than the'outs' as the deficit is corrected. In
Vomiting and diarrhoea will lead to alterations in
a patient with normovolaemia, the 'ins' should be
fluid requirement.
slightly greater than the 'outs'. Patients should also
The animal's appetite should be recorded, and
be weighed accurately at least twice a day; any
food consumed accurately recorded to ensure
large gains or losses are likely to be caused by fluid
sufficient requirements. Ileus can be assessed by
imbalance.
14  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
direction, but alterations in the ratio give extra
mformation:
Increase in PCV and TP: dehydration
 Decrease in PCV and TP: aggressive intravenous
  a (i a 1m
interstitial fluid moves into intravascular space,
 initially no change or even increased PCV with
decreased TP, due to splenic contraction)
Decreased PCV, normal TP: increased destruction
of red blood cells.
Figure 2.8  Using a hot air blanket to warm a hypothermic
Increased PCV, decreased TP: dehydration with
patient.
protein loss, e.g. haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
(HE).
PCV and TP are important in guiding fluid
Body temperature
therapy and choice of fluid, e.g. colloid, crystalloid.
Prolonged abnormal body temperatures can cause
potentially fatal organ dysfunction.  Abnormal
Electrolytes
body temperatures interfere with a patient's
homeostatic mechanisms, and so delay return to
Electrolyte disturbances are common in critical
normal health. Critically ill animals are less able
patients, either because of their presenting com-
to regulate their body temperature. Where active
plaint or as a result of fluid therapy or drug admin-
warming is employed in hypothermic animals,
care must be taken not to cause overheating, or
istration. Electrolytes should be repeatedly checked
during hospitalisation. Most isotonic crystalloids
localised burming (see Figure 2.8).
used for fluid maintenance (e.g. Hartmann's solu-
 tion) have insufficient potassium levels for mainte-
Clinical pathology
nance requirements.
Blood glucose
Pain scoring
As well as the obvious cases where blood glucose
levels are important, such as monitoring a diabetic
Pain
ketoacidosis patient, control of blood glucose levels
are essential in other critical patients. Hypoglycae-
It can frequently be difficult to assess pain accu-
mia is commonly seen in hypovolaemia, sepsis,
rately based on behaviour in a debilitated or
hyperthermia and liver disease. The use of hand-
nervous animal. Equally, physical manifestations
held glucometers makes glucose level testing quick
of pain may make the measuring of other param
and easy, and allows rapid adjustment of glucose
eters difficult. Indicators of pain can be subtle, and
supplementation via intravenous fluids.
can include the following:
Tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias
Packed cell volume and total protein
Pale mucous membranes
 Depression, aggression, restlessness
Trends in packed cell volume (PCV) and total
Changes in posture and facial expression
protein (TP) can be interpreted together to give
Vocalisation
information regarding fluid balance or ongoing
Hypotension or hypertension
haemorrhage. Changes in both may be in the same
Anorexia.
Monitoring the Critical Patient  15
As well as being a welfare issue, pain and fear
Practical techniques
lead to high levels of blood cortisol which will have
detrimental effects of the immune system and
Central venous pressure (see Figure 2.9)
healing. Pain may lead to poor respiratory function
and reduced ventilation.
Central venous pressure (CVP) is very useful for
The role of pain scoring has long been estab-
monitoring the effects of fluid therapy in critical
lished in human medicine. Applying similar
patients. It is used to detect hypovolaemia and
schemes directly to veterinary patients can be dif-
hypervolaemia, which is particularly important
ficult as verbal feedback and description from the
when dealing with shocked patients and those
 patient is required. Veterinary pain scales have
with heart or kidney disorders.
been devised that attempt to score pain based
Normal CVP values in dogs
s and cats are
 purely on observable parameters and behaviours,
0-10 cmHO (usually 1-6 cmH,O).
examples include the Melbourne Veterinary Pain
 As well as using CVP to assess hypovolaemia, it
Scale and the Modified Pain Scale (see Chapter 6).
can be used for other conditions including assess-
ment of intravascular volume, cardiac function,
vein tone and intrathoracic pressure. When a
Recumbency care
decrease in CVP is seen this is usually the result of
hypovolaemia but other causes are possible.
Most emergency and critical care patients are
 recumbent for at least some of their hospital stay.
The emphasis must be on proper and attentive care
Technique
during this period to ensure comfort and prevent
associated complications.
The measurement of CVP is a relatively simple
Lateral recumbency can lead to the collapse of
technique that consists of placing a central catheter
lung lobes (atelectasis) reducing gaseous exchange;
into the jugular vein. This catheter can also be used
this tends to be more common in larger dogs.
for fluid therapy, medication administration, blood
Another threat to repiratory function is aspiration
sampling, etc.
pneumonia secondary to regurgitation or vomit-
ing. Recumbent patients need to be turned regu-
larly, or maintained in sternal recumbency.
Measurement of CVP using a manometer
Equipment
 Central catheter (of sufficient length to reach
Tip
the right atrium)
When turning patients, they should not be moved from
lateral recumbency straight into the opposite lateral
recumbency; this leads to a potentially atelectic lung being 
uppermost, while the normal lung is being compressed,
reducing venti lation. Rather, the patient should be placed 
in sternal recumbency for a period in between.
 Close attention should be paid to patient hygiene,
with regular bedding changes to prevent soiling
with urine and faeces and associated dermatitis.
Soft, adequately padded bedding is essential to
prevent decubital ulcers formed due to localised
 pressure over prominences of the body (most com-
monly the greater trochanter and the lateral elbow).
Figure 2.9  Measuring central venous pressure (CVP)
16  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Liquid manometer (including method of mea-
(this will measure CVP in the abdominal vena
surement in centimetres)
cava).
Extension set
The catheter should be connected to the exten-
Three-way tap
sion tubing which has been prefilled with the
Isotonic crystalloid solution attached to giving
isotonic solution. This in turm is connected to
set.
the three-way tap. The other two ports on the
three-way tap are connected to the fluid-filled
Technique
manometer and to the giving set connected to
the isotonic fluid bag.
Place the central catheter - this is generally
The three-way tap should be opened so fluids
placed into the external jugular vein, so the tip
are administered to the patient from the giving
lies in the intrathoracic cranial vena cava, at the
set, in order to ensure the catheter is patent and
junction with the right atrium.
functioning correctly.
 In order to insert the appropriate length of cath-
The manometer should then be ‘zeroed’ in
eter, it is necessary to pre-measure the catheter
 order to measure CVP. This is done by ensuring
from the insertion point on the patient's neck to
that if the patient is in lateral recumbency the
the third or fourth intercostal space, which cor-
zero mark is at the sternal angle; if the patient
 responds with the costal border of the shoulder
is in stemal recumbency the zero is at the
(it is useful to take an X-ray post placement
patient's shoulder.
to confirm correct positioning). It is possible to
CVP should then be measured.
perform CVP measurement using the place-
The three-way stopcock is turned so that the
ment of a peripherally inserted central catheter
patient's catheter is connected to the manome-
via the saphenous or femoral vein, with the tip
ter, the fluid level drops in the manometer until
of the catheter ending in the caudal vena cava
it equates with the CVP.
3
Vascular Access
Introduction
Arterial vascular access allows the direct mea-
surement of arterial blood pressure, and the sam-
In an emergency or critical case the rapid place-
pling of arterial blood for blood gas measurements.
 ment and maintenance of an intravenous catheter
is essential, but gaining vascular access may
become more challenging, especially in severely
Planning intravenous access
hypovolaemic or very small patients. Staff should
be prepared to consider alternative routes or tech-
The most suitable type of intravenous access for
niques other than those that they would use in
each patient needs to be considered. Factors to con-
routine cases; injuries or illness could mean certain
sider include the following:
sites cannot be used. The planned access needs to
take into account the size of the patient, tempera-
Choice of catheter, type, material, gauge, length
Which vein to use, and correct preparation
ment, intended use of the catheter and concurrent
How easy/quick is it going to be to insert?
disease or trauma.
In the first instance a peripheral vein is usually
Will the patient need sedation? If so, is it stable?
catheterised to aid stabilisation of an emergency
 Is this long-term access, or a short-term 'fix'?
What  will
1be administered through the
patient (see Figure 3.1). If, after initial treatment, it
is anticipated vascular access will be required for
catheter?
a number of days, then the placement of a catheter
that that has its tip in the cranial or caudal vena
Catheter selection
Jo juaaseuew axe Ae (au [enuan, e) ea
the patient easier For the critical care patient an
 intravenous catheter may be used for drug and
Catheter size
fluid administration, induction of anaesthesia, par-
The size of the catheter needs to be considered.
 enteral nutrition, for serial blood sampling or mea-
Flow rates through the catheter are related to
surement of central venous pressure.
both its radius and length. Catheter radius has the
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
18   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
collecting blood or thoracocentesis, but liable to
 damage any vein due to the sharp tip if left in
place.
Through-the-needle catheters: where the needle
remains attached to the catheter but is secured
and protected in a plastic guard outside the
vein; these are usually bulky.
Through-the-cannula(peel-away)catheters:where
the catheter is placed through a peel-away
sheath.
Ouer-the-wire catheters,i.e. Seldinger technique:a
 guide wire is placed through a needle and the
needle withdrawn, the catheter is then ad-
vanced over the wire into the vein and the wire
withdrawn.
Figure 3.1   An emergency patient being stabilised following
Ouer-the-needle catheters: the most common
the establishment of peripheral venous access via a cephalic
catheter type used day to day in veterinary
vein.
work, suitable for short to medium-term use.
They are easy to place and complications are
greatest effect, the flow rate is related to the radius
rare. They are available in a wide variety of
'to the power' of 4. So, by doubling the diameter
gauges and lengths.
of a catheter you increase the flow rate by 16-fold.
Increasing catheter length increases resistance. So
where rapid fluid rates are required a wide and
Vein selection
 short catheter gives greatest flow rates. This is an
important consideration, as often it is routine to
Peripheral intravenous access
stock longer catheters in the larger gauge.
In an emergency or as a short-term solution,
peripheral veins are usually the most suitable as
Catheter material
they allow rapid and effective catheterisation. Staff
will be familiar with their location, and access
The material a catheter is made from has an effect
can be achieved without sedation, and with only
on how well it is tolerated. An ideal material is
chemically inert so there is no vessel irritation. The
minimal restraint in most cases (see Table 3.1).
catheter also needs to be relatively flexible so it is
Peripheral veins are adequate for administration of
comfortable when the animal moves. Most cathe-
most fluids and drugs, and are ideal for most emer-
 ters are made radiographically opaque by the addi-
 gency cases. The cephalic vein on the forelimb is
tion of barium to the plastic. Recently, antibiotic
most commonly used, but we need to be aware and
impregnated catheters have become more common
familiar with other sites in case injury dictates the
forelimbs cannot be used. Examples include:
in the human field, usually central lines, where the
long-term placement is a concern in case they act
Medial and lateral saphenous veins (see Figure
as a focus for infection such as methicillin-resistant
3.2)
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
 Dorsal common digital vein (over the metatar-
sal bones)
Catheter type
 Auricular veins, e.g rabbits, Basset Hounds.
This usually refers to the way a catheter is placed
or its shape:
Tip
 Butterfly catheters: needles with attached wings
The medial saphenous vein in cats is very easy to catheter-
ise - it is straight and fairly immobile (see Figure 3.3).
and extension tubing. They are suitable for
Vascular Access 19
Table 3.1  Comparison of peripheral and central vascular access
Indications for use
 Peripheral
Central
Restraint/speed/sedation
Rapidly placed 
More time consuming
Minimum restraint
 Patient needs to be immobile
Conscious animal
 Sedation or GA often required
Ease of use
Basic skills
Some training required
Multiple lumen
No
Available
 Parenteral nutrition
No
Yes
Hypertonic fluids
No
Yes
Serial blood sampling
Difficult
Easy
Obstruction flow: tolerated, etc.
Tolerated well
Tolerated well
Flow often obstructs if limb flexed
 Position of animal does not affect flow
Duration
Short term (up to 3 days)
Long term (week or more)
GA, general anaesthesia.
Figure 3.3  A medial saphenous vein on the hindlimb of
a cat.
administered through a hindlimb vein will not be
effective due to effective obstruction of the caudal
vena cava from the dilated stomach.
Placement of a peripheral intravenous cathe-
ter A large area of skin should be clipped to
allow adequate aseptic preparation of the skin (see
Figure 3.4). If the animal is long-haired then a 3609
Figure 3.2  A lateral saphenous vein on the hindlimb of
clip around the circumference of the leg may be
a dog.
 necessary. Place the catheter as distally as possible.
 This allows further puncture at a more proximal
site if necessary. Hands need to be washed before
When selecting the site consider any sources of
placement.
catheter contamination or infection, e.g. vomiting.
 The catheter is usually placed directly through
urination, diarrhoea or excessive salivation. Con-
the skin, but in thick-skinned animals, or dehy-
sider also whether fluid entering that vein will
drated patients, it can be useful to 'nick' the skin
reach the central compartment, e.g. in the case of
with a No.11 blade, this stops the catheter 'bunch-
a gastric dilation and volvulus (GDV), any fluid
ing up' at the tip. Advance the catheter through the
20  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Measurement of central venous pressure is
required
 Patient factors such as conformation or periph-
 eral oedema/limb swelling mean maintaining
a peripheral catheter would be difficult
 Regular serial blood samples are required.
Contraindications include coagulopathies, e.g.
von Willebrand's disease. Placement usually re-
quires sedation or anaesthesia, this may not be
ideal in an unstable patient. In these cases, initial
stabilisation can be achieved via peripheral access,
then a decision made regarding the need for a
central line.
 The jugular vein is the most common point for
Figure 3.4 Placing an intravenous catheter. The area
 insertion of longer central catheters, the location
overlying the vein has been clipped and aseptically
is familiar to the clinician and easily accessible.
prepared.
Where access to the jugular is difficult (e.g. confor-
mation, trauma), it is possible to use a peripherally
inserted central catheter (PICC) technique, in this
case a pre-measured long catheter is inserted in
a peripheral vein, usually the saphenous, and
threaded up to lie in the caudal vena cava.
Central catheter  type selection  Most central
catheters are of the Seldinger/over-the-wire type,
or of the through-the-needle/peel-away type;
often the selection is made on personal preference.
These catheters are available as single lumen or
Figure 3.5 A patient with a central line placed via a
as multi-lumen types. In multi-lumen catheters,
jugular vein.
two, three or sometimes five ports will each have
their own channel running right to the tip of the
catheter, so fluids and drugs do not mix prior to
skin at a 30-40° angle with the bevel up. Never pull
the catheter back onto the stylet after advancing -
 entering the blood stream. Ports can be reserved
for blood sampling only, or for parenteral nutrition
you may damage the tip, or shear off part of the
catheter (see Practical techniques at the end of the
(see Figure 3.6).
chapter).
Central  catheter placement  Central  catheters
are most commonly placed via the jugular vein.
Central venous catheterisation
They need to be placed under strict aseptic condi-
A central venous catheter, or 'central line', is a one
tions, with full surgical skin preparation, draping
where the tip of the catheter lies within the cranial
and sterile gloves. Because of the necessity for this
vena cava (or, less commonly, the caudal vena
preparation, and the need for an immobile animal
cava) (see Figure 3.5).
during placement, sedation or anaesthesia is nearly
A central venous catheter is indicated where:
always required. After placement the catheter is
sutured in place, and the area covered with a dress-
 Long-term fluid administration is likely
 ing to prevent contamination of the area, or inter-
Hypertonic medication, fluids or parenteral
ference by the patient (see Practical techniques at
nutrition will be administered
the end of the chapter).
Vascular Access  21
resulting in swelling of the foot, or head/face in
the case of jugular catheters. Check for swelling
proximal to the catheter which may indicate ex-
travasation of fluid. Dressings should be replaced
daily. Discharge, reddening or thickening of the
- a 'asd  's jo ss aq  
eter should be removed, and ideally the tip sent for
culture. Most authorities advise that no peripheral
01 smou 8 ue rauol aneid un hal si aae
prevent the risk of thrombophlebitis; if vascular
access is still required, the catheter should be
removed and access gained in a different site.
Repeated conmection and disconnection of Luer
junctions should be avoided, as this is a common
source of contamination.
Figure 3.6 A Seldinger type, multi-lumen central line.
Catheter complications
Extravasation  Leakage of fluid from the vessel is
more likely if the fluid is administered directly
from a needle or a butterfly catheter rather than an
indwelling catheter, but it is still worth checking
Jo a a  q a a si
extravasation can be minimised by:
Selecting a site away from a joint
Use of small soft catheters
Prompt removal of catheter once no longer
required
 Minimising movement of the catheter by ade-
quate dressing.
Infection Aseptic technique at placement and
vigilant maintenance of the site are key to infection
prevention. Animals have increased risk of infec-
tion such as MRSA if they are acutely ill, immuno-
suppressed, undergoing surgery (especially with
implants) or have intravenous catheters present -
critical patients often have all of these risk factors
Figure 3.7 Checking and redressing an inpatient's
present. The greatest risk of introducing infection
 intravenous catheter.
paaoan are sden uonnalu ro sias dirp uaum si
and re-connected; aseptic handling is important.
Removal of the catheter should be carried out
Catheter maintenance
umder aseptic conditions.
 Once the catheter is placed, its ongoing monitoring
Blood loss  Significant blood loss is rare (venous
and maintenance are essential (see Figure 3.7). The
pressures are low and clots should form quickly),
area should be checked several times a day for any
but usually occurs if a giving set becomes discon-
swelling, pain, leakage, heat or reddening of the
nected, or the animal bites through it. Close moni-
skin. Ensure that the dressing is not too tight,
 toring is required.
22  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Thrombus  and  t
thrombophlebitis
Usually, the
Techniques for difficult cases
flow of fluids, or regular flushing, prevents a blood
clot forming in the lumen of the catheter. Clots can
Improving access to veins
form at various sites:
 In animals with severe hypoperfusion, subcutane-
In the lumen of an unused catheter
ous oedema or vasculitis, it may be impossible to
On the outer surface of a catheter
place an intravenous catheter percutaneously.
Where the tip of the catheter irritates the vessel
A facilitative incision reduces the skin tension
wall
and friction against the catheter and eases place-
Where the catheter was introduced through the
ment of catheters in dehydrated patients, or those
vessel wall.
with tough skin. A 1-3 mm incision is made directly
over the vessel or parallel to it. Care should be
Most thrombi are small and insignificant. The
taken to avoid the vessel when making the facilita-
development of inflammation and infection associ-
tive incision.
ated with the thrombus is more serious. This
thrombophlebitis is recognised by redness and
swelling at the insertion site; there may be purulent
Tip
discharge.
Make a facilitative incision with the tip of an 1 8 G needle.
Catheter embolism This is rare, but can occur at
The tip is inserted into the skin and dragged to make an
 insertion or removal of the catheter. When placing
incision. This avoids pressing down with a scalpel blade
directly over the vein (see Figure 3.9).
a over-the-needle catheter it is possible for the
needle to cut the tip off the carmula. This occurs if
the cannula is advanced, and then retracted back
'Cut-down' refers to the surgical exposure of a
onto the stylet. If the catheter is cut through
vein prior to catheterising it. As opposed to just
with a blade or scissors during removal of the
'nicking' the skin, a surgical incision is made over
dressing, the piece of catheter may form an embolus
the anticipated location of the vessel, following dis-
with potentially serious effects (see Figure 3.8).
section the vein is identified (see Figure 3.10). This
A tourniquet should be placed, or the limb flexed
can be applied to both peripheral and jugular
to prevent proximal migration, and a radiograph
veins. Ideally, this is carried out under strict aseptic
taken to locate the catheter prior to removal.
Catheter fragments that reach the heart are left
in situ.
Figure 3.8 Catheter embolism, a rare example of catheter
complications. The catheter was cut through whilst
removing a dressing, and can be seen circled on the
Figure 3.9  Making a facilitative incision with an 18G
radiograph where it has travelled up the cephalic vein.
needle.
Vascular Access  23
Figure 3.11   An example of a patient where an intraosseous
 needle may be invaluable; a young collapsed puppy.
Severe burns
Figure 3.10 Performing a 'cut-down' to identify a lateral
Extensive
subcutaneous
oedema
or
saphenous vein on a dog.
emphysema
 Severe obesity.
conditions, but where this is not possible and the
procedure is carried out in a hurry, the catheter is
Commercially available intraosseus needles can
used only until improved circulation has been
be obtained, but disposable bone marrow biopsy
achieved, and percutaneous catheterisation can be
needles work well. Spinal needles can also be used
performed aseptically elsewhere. The ‘cut-down'
in an emergency - the main requirement is that the
catheter can then be removed and the site managed
needle has a stylet that can be removed to prevent
as a 'contaminated' wound.
clogging with bone.
Tip
Tip
When performing a cut-down' to find a jugular vein, draw
Spinal needles or bone marrow biopsy needles can be
an imaginary line from the angle of the jaw to the manu-
used as intraosseus needles. In very young animals regular
brium at the thoracic inlet and make the incision on this line.
hypodermic needles can be used.
Intraosseous needles and catheters
Several sites for intraosseus needle placement
can be used:
This is an under-utilised technique, but in cases
where intravenous access cannot be established
 Medial aspect of trochanteric fossa on the femur
and rapid fluid resuscitation is required, it can be
Medial surface of the proximal tibia
invaluable (see Figure 3.11). The technique is espe-
Cranial aspect of the greater tubercle of the
cially useful in collapsed puppies and kittens,
humerus
where the softer bones also make placement easier.
Wing of the ilium.
 Indications for using intraosseus administration
include the following:
The sites in the hind leg are preferred and easier
to use. The bone to be used should not be broken,
Shock
and the overlying skin should be intact so there is
Cardiac arrest
no risk of bacterial contamination. Clinicians often
24 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
prefer to use the femur, as this allows placement of
The stylet is now held still, while the outer
most of the length of the needle along the medul-
cannula is advanced into the lumen.
lary cavity, which helps to prevent dislodgement 
 The assistant can now occlude the vein over the
(see Practical techniques at the end of the chapter).
catheter tip to prevent haemorrhage.
Needles should be placed aseptically and should
An injection port, or fluid administration giving
be removed after a maximum of 72 hours, al-
set, is now connected, and the catheter secured
though they are rarely used for this long. Potential
in place with adhesive tape.
complications include fat or marrow embolism to
the lungs (seen in humans, not reported in animals),
 damage to neurovascular structures, bone frac-
Placing a central catheter using the
tures, growth plate damage and extravasation of
Seldinger technique (see Figures 3.14, 3.15,
fluids if both cortices are pierced.
3.16, 3.17, 3.18 and 3.19; see also website
video: Central (jugular) line placement)
Practical techniques
By using the Seldinger technique, long, soft and
flexible catheters can be inserted into a vein over a
Placing an intravenous over the needle
 guide wire. The technique is commonly used for
catheter (see Figures 3.12 and 3.13)
central lines, and PICC.
 Hair is clipped over the proposed site, and the
● The area is clipped, aseptically prepared and
skin aseptically prepared. Gloves should be
then draped.
worn and aseptic technique observed.
Afacilitative skin incision is made, and a needle
An assistant applies pressure to 'raise' the vein.
or introducer catheter inserted into the vein.
The skin should be held taut to stabilise the
The guide wire is inserted into the vein via the
underlying vein, and the over the needle cath-
 introducer catheter, and the introducer catheter
eter is inserted through the skin, at an angle of
is removed, leaving the wire within the vein.
45°, and into the vein.
 A dilator is passed over the wire into the vein.
If the vein is penetrated, blood will be seen in
This dilates the subcutaneous tunnel and the
the hub of the catheter.
hole in the vein wall.
The angle of the catheter to the skin is reduced,
The catheter is advanced over the wire a pre-
and the catheter advanced further into the vein.
measured distance into the vein so that the tip
lies within the central compartment.
Figure 3.12  Placing an over-the-needle catheter in a 
peripheral vein. The catheter is inserted through the skin at
Figure 3.13 The outer cannula is advanced off the stylet
an angle of 45°.
into the lumen of the vein.
Vascular Access 25
Figure 3.14 A patient anaesthetised and prepared for placement of a central line via the jugular vein.
Figure 3.15 A 'cut-down' has been performed to identify
Figure 3.16 The guide wire is inserted through the needle,
the jugular vein, and a needle inserted into the vein.
and the needle has been withdrawn.
 The wire is removed, the catheter is sutured in
ous tissues and down to the level of the
 place and covered with a dressing.
periosteum.
A small skin incision is made overlying the site.
The needle is inserted, ‘walking' the tip of the
Placing an intraosseus needle in the femur
needle off the medial aspect of the greater tro-
(see Figures 3.20, 3.21, 3.22 and 3.23)
chanter helps ensure there is no damage to the
sciatic nerve.
Intraosseus catheters can often be placed without
●The needle is inserted by 'seating' the tip into
sedation, if local anaesthesia is used:
the cortex with a firm, controlled twisting
action, paying attention to the angle of inser-
 Clip and prepare the site surgically, then instil
tion. Once seated in the medullary cavity the
local anaesthetic into the skin, subcutane-
stylet can be removed.
26  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 3.17
A dilator is passed over the wire, and into the
Figure 3.20
 Infiltrating local anaesthetic at the site of
vein to widen the hole in the vein wall.
 proposed insertion of the intraosseous needle; the proximal
femur.
Figure 3.18 The catheter is pre-measured and advanced
Figure 3.21 The intraosseous needle (in this case a bone
over the wire into the vein. The guide wire can then be
 marrow biopsy needle) is inserted and seated into the
withdrawn.
medullary cavity.
Figure 3.22 Once in place, fluid boluses can be 
Figure 3.19
The catheter is sutured in place and a dressing
administered via the needle, or a fluid administration set can
placed over the area.
be connected.
Vascular Access 27
 s   a  a s
diameter.
Arterial catheters are used for directly measur-
ing blood pressure, and to collect blood samples
for blood gas analysis. The commonly used artery
for both these procedures is the dorsal metatarsal
artery, but the femoral, auricular, radial, brachial
and coccygeal arteries can also be used.
Catheterisation of the dorsal
metatarsal artery
Figure 3.23  A dressing can be placed around the area to
This artery is relatively superficial. It can be located
prevent infection.
in the proximal area of the metatarsus, medial
to the extensor tendon and between the second
and third metatarsal bones. Catheters used are
20-24 F.
The patient should be placed in lateral recum-
bency with the limb to be used for catheterisa-
tion dependently.
 The skin over the proposed site should be
 clipped and briefly prepped (the author places
a Hibitane solution soaked swab over this site
whilst carrying out hand washing) and then
wiped with Hibitane solution. The area should
not be scrubbed as this will often result in
spasming of the artery, making catheterisation
impossible.
 The pulse should be palpated on the dorsal
metatarsal, a small bleb of 2% lidocaine can be
Figure 3.24 Placing an arterial line in the hind limb of a
used in the area in order to desensitise it.
patient.
Whilst still palpating the artery the catheter
should be inserted directly, using the other
hand, above the vessel (between the second
Flush the catheter and connect an infusion set.
and third metatarsus). The catheter should be
Boluses can be given with a syringe.
 inserted at an angle of 45-60° depending on
 Once circulation has been improved, an intra-
operator preference.
venous catheter can then be placed and the
 Care should be taken to approach the artery at
imtraosseus catheter removed, as it tends to be
 an angle of 10-30° to ensure the catheter is cor-
bulky and awkward to dress if used for any
 rectly aligned to the artery, which will facilitate
length of time.
feeding.
Arterial walls are much thicker than venous
walls, so a purposeful, directed motion may be
Placement of an arterial catheter
 required once the tip of the inner stylet is resting
(see Figure 3.24)
just over the arterial wall.
● Once a flashback of blood is seen in the hub
Intravascular artery catheterisation is technically
of the catheter, the catheter should then be
more difficult than vein catheterisation, as arter-
advanced off the needle and into the artery;
28  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
as this is performed the angle of the catheter
The same procedure is used for the collection
can also be reduced.
 of arterial samples using a needle and syringe.
The catheter should then be flushed with
As arterial lumens are relatively narrow, again a
heparin saline solution and taped into place.
small gauge needle is selected (25-gauge for a small
The catheter should be labelled as arterial.
dog or 22-gauge for a larger patient). Once the
Arterial lines should be flushed every 1-2
sample has been obtained, the needle is withdrawn
hours or continually via a pressure bag and
and firm pressure is applied to the site for 2-5
microtubing.
minutes.
'Shock' and Intravenous Fluid Therapy
Normal physiology
more severe physiological effects than global loss
of fluid (dehydration).
The average water content of an adult animal is
The body water content will depend on the
60% of their body weight. The water content of a
balance between the amount of water that is
healthy animal varies with age (young animals
acquired by the body and the amount that is lost.
may be 70-80% water, older animals may be 50-
Normal water intake:
55%) and body condition (fatty tissue contains less
water than other soft tissue).
Drinking
Of the total body water (see Figure 4.1):
 Eating: moist diets may be 70-80% water
Metabolism: oxidation of fat, carbohydrate,
Two-thirds is inside the cells of the body: intra-
protein produces water
cellular fluid (40% body weight)
Therapeutic.
One-third is outside of the cell membranes:
extracellular fluid (20% body weight)
Normal fluid loss:
 Most extracellular fluid is within the tissues:
interstitial fluid (15% body weight)
 Urination: regulated by healthy kidneys, fluid
 The remaining extracellular fluid is intra-
 and electrolytes
vascular fluid (4% body weight).
Defecation:
small
amounts,
fluid
and
electrolytes
The remaining 1% body weight is transcellular
 Respiration: evaporation, water only
fluid, this is specialised excreted fluids that serve a
 Sweating: small amount in cats and dogs, fluid
specific function, e.g. cerebrospinal fluid, gastroin-
and electrolytes.
testinal tract secretions.
 Intravascular volume comprises such a small
In some situation, or illnesses, the animal's
proportion of total body fluid that any loss of fluid
ability to maintain the body's fluid balance will be
from this compartment (hypovolaemia) has much
impaired.
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 30  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Transcellular fluid
 Pathological fluid losses: transudate, exudates,
etc. Pyometra, burns, peritonitis
Haemorrhage
Intracellular fluid
40%
Surgery: evaporation from surgical site, haem-
Interstitial
15%
orrhage, etc.
Extracellular
%61 piny
Dry matter
Abnormal losses from fluid compartments
40%
Intravascular
4%
When considering administering fluid therapy to
Figure 4.1  Distribution of body water content.
correct a fluid deficit, it is essential to think care-
fully about where the deficit exists. This should be
straightforward based on the history of the patient,
and also a clinical examination.
The history of the animal will give an idea of the
type of fluid lost:
1) With a primary water depletion, hypotonic
fluid is lost initially from the extracellular
fluid, and the extracellular fluid becomes
hypertonic. Water moves from the intracellular
fluid to equilibrate and the extracellular
volume is supported, and therefore intravas-
cular volume maintained. This leads to a
reduction of intercellular and extracellular
(interstitial and intravascular) fluid. Fluid loss
is distributed over the whole of the body, so
Figure 4.2  A patient with a fractured mandible following a
reduction in intravascular volume is small (i.e.
road traffic accident. Physical difficulty in drinking may
reduction in total body water content), this
reduce water intake.
is dehydration, e.g. not drinking, or large
amounts of dilute urine (chronic renal failure,
 diabetes mellitus) and not drinking enough to
Abnormal water intake:
keep up with losses.
2）
Water and electrolyte loss: isotonic fluid loss
Metabolic disorders
will lead to no change in osmolarity of the
Anaesthesia (pre-operative/general anaesthe-
extracellular fluid, so therefore no movement
tia/recovery)
of water to compensate. This reduction in
Systemic illness
intravascular volume is hypovolaemia and
Dysphagia, physical difficulty (see Figure 4.2)
will lead to a perfusion deficit, e.g. haemor-
Water deprivation.
rhage: intemal or external, extracellular fluid
 loss in excess of fluid and solute intake (e.g.
 Abnormal fluid loss:
vomiting, diarrhoea).
3
 Hypertonic losses: extracellular fluid becomes
Vomiting (4ml/kg per vomit.)
hypotonic relative to intracellular space, and
 Diarrhoea (4ml/kg per episode, up to 200 ml/
water moves out of the circulation into cells.
kg/day)
This leaves the situation even worse, causing
 Abnormal
urine production: renal disease,
diabetes
enteritis), where a secretory diarrhoea leads to
Increased respiratory evaporation: e.g. panting,
acute, severe haemoconcentration and hypo-
eaoudssp
volaemia (see Figure 4.3).
Shock' and Intravenous Fluid Therapy  31
Does the patient need fluid therapy?
Which route should be used?
Which fluid should be administered?
At what rate, for how long?
Does the patient need fluid therapy?
The history of the presenting animal will be a good
indicator in determining where the deficit exists:
whether a hydration deficit or a perfusion deficit.
The history should include duration of illness,
frequency of vomiting or diarrhoea, water intake,
food intake and any haemorrhage, to get an idea
of fluid losses and intakes.
Figure 4.3  A patient with haemorrhagic diarrhoea; severe
hypovolaemia can become a consequence.
Perfusion deficits: hypoperfusion
The term 'shock' is used where oxygen delivery to
Dehydration and hypovolaemia are not inter-
tissues is poor due to tissue hypoperfusion. This
changeable terms. Dehydration refers to a hydra-
leads to cell damage, and if not corrected to organ
tion deficit, where water is lost over the whole of
 dysfunction, organ failure and death. Cell damage
the body, but predominantly from the intracellular
and cell death will lead to the release of inflamma-
and interstitial fluids. Hypovolaemia refers to a
tory mediators which can lead to systemic inflam-
reduction of intravascular volume which therefore
matory response symdrome (SIRS).
reduces the perfusion of tissues, causing a perfu-
Tissues may be hypoperfused due to:
sion deficit.
 Both hydration and perfusion parameters are
 Decreased circulating blood volume (hypovo-
initially assessed with physical examination. Hy-
laemic shock)
dration status is assessed by looking at param-
 Decreased capacity of blood to deliver oxygen
eters such as moisture of mucous membranes, skin
Decreased ability of the heart to pump blood
turgor and presence of retraction of the globe,
(cardiogenic shock)
which are affected by interstitial and intracellular
 Decreased ability of vascular system to main-
fluid levels. Perfusion status is assessed by physi-
tain vasomotor tone (maldistributive shock)
cal parameters that are affected by intravascular
Obstruction of blood flow from, or to, the heart
volume and perfusion: heart rate, pulse quality,
(obstructive shock).
mucous membrane colour, capillary refill time,
urine output.
Hypovolaemic shock  Hypovolaemic shock is the
The two conditions cause distinctly different
 most common form of shock seen in veterinary
clinical signs and must be managed in different
medicine, where tissue hypoperfusion is due to
 a    s a a s
loss of circulating blood volume. This loss of
administration, so appreciating the difference, and 
volume may be due to blood loss (internal or exter-
recognising the symptoms, is essential in formulat-
nal), or loss of fluid from the gastrointestinal tract
ing a treatment plan.
(vomiting, diarrhoea), the kidneys, or effusion
and/or transudate into the peritoneal or pleural
space. (Strictly speaking the term dehydration
Forming a fluid therapy plan
refers to loss of water from the whole of the body
- a global loss. If dehydration is severe enough
When formulating a fluid therapy plan for a patient,
it may lead to hypovolaemia, but the two terms
it is worth considering the following questions:
 are not the same - hypovolaemia refers to loss of
32  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 4.1  Detecting changes in perfusion parameters
Clinical parameter
Mild hypovolaemia
Moderate hypovolaemia
Severe hypovolaemia
Heart rate*
120-140
140-170
170-220
Mucous membrane
Normal, or pinker
Pale pink
Pale/white/grey
Capillary refill
Brisk (<1 s)
Normal (1-2s)
Slow or not detectable
 Pulse amplitude
Increased
Decreased
Very decreased
Pulse duration
Mildly reduced 
Reduced
Very reduced
Peripheral pulse
Easily palpable
Faintly palpable
Not palpable
Plasma lactate
3-5 mmol/l
5-8mmol/l
>8 mmol/l
aq oi spual eiaelonody ol asuodsai aui 'azis paaig yim Aien sajei jeay Sujsal alm 'shop jo jeul oi siajal ael jeah,*
uniform. Note that cats may have a slow heart rate (bradycardia) in response to hypovolaemia.
intravascular fluid, and does not include extravas-
5)Mentation/level of consciousness: the brain has a
cular fluid (intracellular and interstitial).)
high metabolic rate and low energy reserves so
If the circulating blood volume falls, the body's
is dependent on a constant supply of oxygen
defence mechanisms come into play Blood flow
and glucose.
is diverted away from capillary beds that are less
6
Extremity vs. rectal temperature: due to vaso-
essential (e.g. skin, gastrointestinal tract) so that
constriction, blood flow to the extremities
the circulating volume can be sent to more 'vital'
decreases, so they get colder. The toe web
organs such as the brain, heart and kidneys. This
temperature is usually 4°C lower than core
is achieved by vasoconstriction of the vessels
temperature.
leading to the capillaries of the less vital organs.
This is a normal solution to a problem, and saves
The extent of the alteration in perfusion param-
lives, but volume needs to be restored before irre-
eter should give the clinician an accurate idea of
versible cell damage occurs.
the severity of hypovolaemic shock present (see
Table 4.1).
Recognising hypovolaemic shock  A diagnosis
Physical examination is the main basis on which
of hypovolaemic shock is made by a careful physi-
hypovolaemic shock is recognised, but laboratory
cal examination, whereby signs of poor tissue per-
samples can be of some use. Lactate is produced
fusion can be recognised:
when cells are metabolising anaerobically, i.e.
without oxygen. If tissues are poorly perfused,
1)  Heart rate: increases in heart rate can be seen
 oxygen delivery is reduced and lactate production
as an early indicator of volume loss, the
increases. Due to poor perfusion, lactate clearance
increase in rate attempts to increase cardiac
is also decreased (see Chapter 7) so increased
output. In dogs, regardless of size,
these
lactate levels in blood are an indicator of poor per-
increases are fairly uniform. Caution in cats -
fusion, and in some cases can be used as a prog-
hypovolaemic cats can often have slower than
nostic indicator.
normal heart rates.
2）
 Pulse quality: subjective impression of the full-
ness, or width of a pulse. Vasoconstriction
Maldistributive shock In maldistributive shock,
and small stroke volume lead to poor pulse
 poor perfusion of tissues exists due to loss of vaso-
quality.
motor tone and therefore inappropriate vasodila-
3）
Mucous membrane colour: severe vasoconstric-
tion. This leads to the intravascular fluid being
tion means less haemoglobin and oxygen in
em leoue ue u poq a ssoe panqnsi
the mucous membranes and so they appear
the body has effectively lost control of the regula-
pale or white.
tion of perfusion. Clinical signs of maldistributive
4）
Capillary refill fime: a measure of peripheral
shock include rapid capillary refill time (CRT), red
vasomotor tone.
 mucous membranes and tachycardia.
Shock' and Intravenous Fluid Therapy  3
Table 4.2 Physical indicators of hydration deficits
Percentage dehydration   Clinical signs
<5%
No detectable clinical signs
Increased urine
concentration
5-6%
Subtle loss of skin elasticity
(tenting)
6-8%
Marked loss skin elasticity
Slightly sunken eyes
Dry mucous membranes
10-12%
Tented skin stays in place
Figure 4.4  A patient with systemic inflammatory response 
Sunken eyes, protruded
syndrome (SIRS). The brick-red mucous membranes are
third eyelid
Caused by vasodilation due to loss of vasomotor tone.
Dry mucous membranes
Progressive signs of shock
Causes of maldistributive shock are anaphy-
laxis or SIRS (see Figure 4.4). SIRS is a clinical
state where a localised pathology has lead to
widespread systemic inflammation, associated
with dilation and  increased permeability of
blood vessels. Initiating causes may be infectious
(sepsis) or non-infectious (pyometra, septic perito-
nitis, pancreatitis, severe tissue injury, burns,
neoplasia).
Hydration deficits  Hydration status is classically
assessed by measuring physical parameters that
will be affected by reduction of fluid in the inter-
stitial and extracellular fluid. Assessment includes:
 Moistmess of gums or cornea: other problems
such as nausea can cause excessive salivation
b
and make membranes appear moist even if
dehydrated
 Skin turgor or skin tenting: dehydration causes
the skin to remain tented for several seconds
Retraction of the globe (sunken eyes)
This assessment can only give a very rough
approximation of deficit at best (see Table 4.2).
Signs of dehydration can be very variable; skin
turgor can vary as the animal gets older and with
Figure 4.5 Skin tenting can be affected by body condition:
body condition (see Figure 4.5). The assessment
(a) performing a skin tenting test in an emaciated dog:
may often underestimate the degree of dehydra-
(b) there is a persistent skin tent long after releasing the skin
tion, but this is not always a problem as, in contrast
due to absence of subcutaneous fat.
34   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
to hypoperfusion, these losses need to be replaced
more gradually. Any animal that is showing any
-paurur paieann aq pmous uoisnadou jo suis
ao rah paauo ss uou pe pe
hypoperfusion is corrected.
Any animal that is 12-15% dehydrated will be
collapsed and moribund.
Packed cell volume (PCV) and total protein
(TP) levels can be a useful guide to the level
of dehydration. In an animal that had normal
PCV and TP beforehand, which is now suffering
from dehydration, we would expect to see in-
creases in both parameters. The picture can be
confused if the patient has concurrent anaemia or
hypoproteinaemia.
Figure 4.6  A cat receiving subcutaneous fluids to maintain
water intake.
Which route should be used?
Enteral fluids
Intraperitoneal fluids
If the animal is willing to drink, and there is no
Injecting fluids into the peritoneal cavity gives
vomiting, then oral fluids are suitable for cases of
similar results to subcutaneous administration, but
mild dehydration. In the clinical context this would
with risk of damage to abdominal organs. It is used
only really apply to animals that have accidently
 by some clinicians in small animals or neonates.
been deprived of water. Patients with a clinical
condition that has led to water loss in excess of
Intravenous fluids
intake are obviously already unable to keep up
with their requirements. Naso-oesophageal tubes,
The intravenous route is the most efficient means
Or oesophagostomy tubes, can be used for mainte-
to replace fluid in all the fluid compartments. The
nance of fluid and food requirements where there
choice of fluid to be administered is not limited,
is trauma or anorexia preventing the animal from
rapid administration can be carried out and large
eating and drinking.
volumes can be given leading to rapid correction
of perfusion deficits.
 The disadvantages are few (risk of side effects,
patient interference, necessary training, etc.) and
Subcutaneous administration
minor compared to the benefits of the technique.
Subcutaneous fluids are totally unsuitable for
patients with perfusion deficits as they will not
Intraosseus fluids
bring about rapid resuscitation and will be poorly
absorbed due to peripheral vasoconstriction. In
Administering fluids into the medullary cavity of
mildly dehydrated animals, subcutaneous fluids
a bone can be a life-saving procedure where it is
will slowly rehydrate the patient; absorption can
 not possible to catheterise a vein. The technique is
take 4-8 hours. Only small volumes should be
10 saiddnd pasnjradodu u pasn Ajuounuoo arou
injected in any one site (10-20 ml/kg) of an isotonic
kittens, where the combination of small veins, cir-
fluid.
culatory collapse and soft bones make the tech-
This route is sometimes used for maintenance of
nique ideal (see Chapter 3). In these patients, if it
water intake in cats with chronic renal failure (see
is not possible to catheterise a vein, then subcuta-
Figure 4.6).
neous or intraperitoneal fluids will not be absorbed
Shock' and Intravenous Fluid Therapy  35
due to the mechanisms of hypovolaemic shock
These crystalloids are often referred to as replace-
leading to peripheral vasoconstriction.
ment crystalloids; the electrolytes are similar in
composition to extracellular fluid, i.e. relatively
high sodium, and low (or no) potassium. When
Which fluid should be administered?
used long term there is a tendency to hypokalae-
mia if the patient is not eating. Supplementation
The main groups of fluids used are crystalloids,
with potassium should be considered once volume
artificial colloids and blood products. Each fluid
deficits are replaced.
has its own indications and contraindications. The
Maintenance isotonic crystalloids (e.g. Plasma-
fluid deficit present, and the underlying disease
lyte M) exist with relatively high potassium levels,
 process, will dictate which fluid is suitable; this is
but can only be given slowly, and their use is
why it is important to be able to assess the deficit
limited.
 present via clinical examination.
Hypertonic crystalloids
sSuchfluidshaveroughly
Crystalloids
eight times the osmolarity of plasma. By adminis-
tering such hypertonic fluids into the intravas-
Crystalloids are solutions that can easily leave the
cular space, an osmotic gradient is created that
 intravascular fluid and enter all body fluid com-
draws fluid from the interstitial space into the
partments. They contain water, electrolytes and
circulation.
other solutes. The varying concentrations
pue
An example of a hypertonic crystalloid is 7.2%
relative amounts of these electrolytes and sol-
saline. This is a very effective rapid means of
utes determine the indications for the different
increasing volume, as long as the fluid is there in
crystalloids.
the interstitium to be drawn in. Therefore hyper-
tonic saline should not to be used in patients with
Isotonic crystalloids  Isotonic replacement crys-
concurrent dehydration. The saline will redistrib-
talloids are the most commonly used fluid group
ute, so its effect is temporary and needs to be fol-
in small animal medicine. They are versatile and
lowed with other fluids.
can be used to treat hypovolaemia, dehydration
A 4-7ml/kg (dog) or 2-4ml/kg (cat) dose is
and to replace ongoing losses.
given over 2-5 minutes, and produces a response
Where fluid and electrolyte loss has occurred
similar to an isotonic crystalloid dose of 60-90ml/
(e.g. vomiting, diarrhoea, effusions, haemorrhage)
kg. This is useful in large breed dogs where an
a perfusion deficit will be likely. Isotonic crystal-
isotonic crystalloid bolus would take a long time
loids have a similar tonicity to plasma and are used
to administer. It is useful also in resuscitation of
mainly to replace perfusion deficits. Large volumes
patients with a head injury at risk of intracranial
can be given rapidly where necessary, without
pressure increases.
much risk of dramatic electrolyte imbalances.
When used for expansion of the intravascular
Hypotonic crystalloids
 Where primary water loss
fluid, these crystalloids will equilibriate with inter-
and dehydration only are suspected, with no evi-
stitial fluid, meaning less than 25% of the fluid will
 dence of hypoperfusion, then the loss is hypotonic,
be left in the intravascular space after an hour.
 and the replacement fluid used is also hypotonic.
Examples of isotonic crystalloids are 0.9% saline,
These crystalloids are poor volume expanders
Ringer's solution and Hartmann's solution.
and dilute serum electrolytes, so are unsuited for
Hartmann's solution is a balanced buffered iso-
the replacement of intravascular volume in perfu-
tonic replacement crystalloid, in that it contains
sion deficits. Examples of hypotonic crystalloids
electrolyes and a buffer (lactate) that regulates pH.
are 5% dextrose and 4% dextrose in 0.18% sodium
As such it is usually the preferred replacement
chloride.
crystalloid. Saline 0.9% might be preferred in situ-
The dextrose in these fluids is immediately
ations of hypercalcaemia, hyperkalaemia or where
metabolised once it is in the blood stream, effec-
the liver is unable to metabolise the lactate.
tively leaving water behind. This means the fluid
is isotonic in the bag, but hypotonic once in the
There are three common types of artificial colloid:
circulation - this prevents lysis of erythrocytes. The
level of glucose is not enough to provide any
11
Gelatins: e.g. Haemaccel, Gelofusine, produced
meaningful calories.
from mammalian collagen. Shorter duration of
These fluids may be referred to as maintenance
action than any other colloid due to their small
crystalloids - they will provide the body's water
molecule size. Following infusion over 90
requirement, but not ongoing electrolyte require-
 minutes, intravascular volume expansion is
ments. The body loses a lot more potassium day
only 24% of volume infused (similar to an iso-
to day than it does sodium, so true maintenance
tonic crystalloid, where 20-25% will remain in
fluids need potassium supplementation.
the intervascular space after an hour).
2
Dextrans: Dextran 40 or 70. Prepared from
Synthetic colloids
nary medicine.
Colloids are large molecules that increase the
3）
Hydroxyethyl starches: e.g.
hetastarch, pen-
oncotic pressure of plasma, which holds fluid in
tastarch, tetrastarch. Derived from amylo-
the intravascular space and increases volume.
pectin, a branched form of plant starch.
Because they remain in the intravascular space,
Hydroxyethyl molecules are substituted onto
and do not equilibrate with interstitial fluid like
the amylopectin to
 prevent intravascular
crystalloids, they are more effective at maintaining
hydrolysis. Estimates of initial volume expan-
volume. As long as vascular permeability is normal,
sion vary from 70% to 170% of infused volume.
colloids maintain the oncotic gradient between the
intravascular and interstitial spaces, reducing fluid
efflux from the vasculature.
Rate, quantity and duration of fluid therapy
They will have the desired effect until they are
broken down or degraded by the body, or until
 Intravenous fluid therapy to correct hypoperfusion
they leak from the vessels. The rate at which their
is a life-saving procedure and must be performed
effect diminishes depends on
the
 molecules
over minutes to hours to increase intravascular
involved. Artificial colloids contain a mixture of
volume and improve perfusion of cells. By con-
molecules of differing weights.
trast,
, correcting dehydration and chronic fluid
Initial volume expansion will depend on the
therapy to re-establish and maintain water and
number of molecules, not the molecule size. The
electrolyte balance is planned and re-assessed over
duration of the effect will be dependent on mole-
each 24-hour period.
cule size - the larger molecules will persist longer
All calculations are based on estimates; the
and take longer to degrade (see Table 4.3).
patient must be monitored closely and the clinical
Table 4.3  Comparison of common artificial colloids
Mean molecular
Approximate duration
Type of colloid 
Fluid name
weight (kD)
of effect (hours)
IV dose
Gelatin
Haemoccel
30
1-2
1 0-20 ml/kg/day
Dextran
Dextran 70
70
1-3
Bolus 5-1 0ml/kg
Maint:10ml/kg/day
Hydroxyethyl starch
Hetastarch 6%
450
6-12
Bolus 5-1 0ml/kg
1 0-20 ml/kg/day
Hydroxyethyl starch
Pentastarch 10%
200
4-6
Bolus 5-1 0ml/kg
1 0-20 ml/kg/day
Shock' and Intravenous Fluid Therapy  37
team willing to adapt the fluid therapy plan as
with a view to correcting intravascular volume,
they go.
and therefore normalising perfusion parameters:
Dog
Cat
Treatment of hypovolaemic shock, acute
Severe
60-90 ml/kg
40-60 ml/kg
fluid therapy
hypovolaemia
Moderate
30-50 ml/kg
10-20 ml/kg
The aim treatment of hypovolaemic shock is to
hypovolaemia
replace intravascular volume rapidly (see Figure
Mild
10-20ml/kg
5-7ml/kg
4.7). The effectiveness of treatment can be moni-
hypovolaemia
tored by using the same perfusion parameters as
mentioned above. The goal or end-point of the
This bolus would be given over 15-60 minutes
resuscitation is normal perfusion parameters; mea-
depending on severity of hypoperfusion.
surements of lactate and urine output can also be
After the dose has been administered, perfusion
used. Observation of these parameters should be
parameters are assessed again. If they have re-
made every 15 minutes or so and fluid therapy
turned to normal, doses should now concentrate
tailored depending on the response.
on replacing ongoing losses at a much slower rate.
After assessing the degree of hypovolaemia
If parameters are still abnormal, an acute dose is
present, a bolus dose is selected and administered
again selected.
These fluids need to be administered into the
intravascular space rapidly, so an intravenous or
intraosseous route is required. Wide bore catheters
are indicated to optimise flow rates (see Chapter 3).
 Before starting aggressive fluid therapy remem-
ber there are some contraindications: cardiac dis-
ease, respiratory disease and brain injuries. Anuric
renal failure requires careful fluid therapy, but
fluid is required to confirm the diagnosis. Cats
have a smaller fluid volume and tolerate volume
overload poorly, so rates and volumes are reduced
by one-third to half. (
Occasionally, in suspected
cases of ongoing internal haemorrhage that is not
a more limited resuscitation may be indicated.
Isotonic replacement crystalloids are often the
first choice for fluid resuscitation of hypovolaemic
animals (Hartmarn's being commonly used), but
colloids, hypertonic saline and blood products
all have their place. Colloids give a profound and
persistent effect on intravascular volume, from a
smaller volume; a 20ml/kg dose of colloid would
have similar effect to a 60-90ml/kg dose of iso-
tonic crystalloid. It is common to use a combina-
tion of crystalloid and colloid to give intravascular
expansion, with a longer duration. Hypertonic
saline should be considered where large patients
in severe hypovolaemic shock are presented. In
Figure 4.7  A patient with hypovolaemic shock receiving 
these cases it may not be possible to administer
rapid administration of fluids aided by a pressure bag
isotonic crystalloids fast enough. A hypertonic
applying pressure to the fluids.
saline bolus can be administered and followed up
38  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
with isotonic crystalloids. Hypertonic saline also
Replacement: this volume required is estimated
has a role in resuscitation of patients that have
 as a percentage of the animal's body weight based
concurrent haemorrhage within an enclosed space,
on clinical signs.
e.g. intracranial haemorrhage or pulmonary contu-
sion. In these cases the intravascular volume can
 Deficit (ml) = body weight (kg)
be expanded without the large volumes of isotonic
x % dehydration x 10
crystalloid that would extravascate and contribute
 to haemorrhage and swelling.
For example, a 30-kg Labrador, estimated at 8%
dehydrated:
Chronic fluid therapy: patients with
normal perfusion parameters
Deficit (ml) = 30 kg x8 ×10
= 2400 ml.
Chronic fluid plans are suitable for patients with
normal perfusion parameters: those that had hy-
Maintenance: this is the normal requirement of
dration deficits only, or patients that have had per-
fusion deficits corrected and are now moving to a
the animal per 24 hours. This is estimated at 60 ml/
kg/day for small dogs and cats, 50 ml/kg/day for
longer term plan.
medium dogs and 40ml/kg/day for larger dogs.
 If no hypovolaemia exists, then hydration, elec
For example, a 30-kg Labrador:
trolyte and acid-base abnormalities can be cor-
rected over 24-48 hours (see Figure 4.8).
 Consider three components when working out
30 kg x 40 ml/kg/day =1200 ml.
the plan:
Ongoing losses: ongoing losses need to be esti-
1) Replacement of losses
 Maintenance requirements
 mated, e.g. diarrhoea, vomiting. Occasionally they
2)
can be measured, e.g. chest drain outputs, weigh-
 Ongoing losses.
ing dressings to assess exudates. For example, a
 30-kg Labrador, with diarrhoea and vomiting:
Diarrhoea 5x100 mla day
Vomiting 5x100 ml a day
=1000 ml/day.
We aim to replace deficits over 24 hours, so
requirement is:
Replacement + Maintenance + Ongoing losses
e.g. 2400 + 1200 +1000 = 4600 ml per day
=192 ml per hour.
Figures given in millilitres per hour will need
 converting to drips per minute if infusion pumps
 are not available. Always double check how many
drops are in a millilitre for the giving set you have
in stock. The majority of 'adult' giving sets have a
rate of 20 drops per ml, but some are manufactured
at 15 drops per ml. Paediatric giving sets and
Figure 4.8 A patient receiving fluids to correct a hydration
 burettes are normally calibrated at 60 drops per ml,
deficit.
but again double check the packaging.
Shock' and Intravenous Fluid Therapy  39
[u 1ad sdoip oz x 1nou/u z61 8a
If the animal has returned to normal, then we
= 3840 drops per hour
can consider stopping fluid therapy and monitor
3840 drops per hour divided by 60
the animal as it comes off fluids.
= 64 drops per minute.
Monitoring fluid therapy
Other methods for calculating requirement
The fluid therapy plan needs to be considered as a
flexible, ongoing situation, and will need adapting
A much less accurate method of calculation is used
as the patient's status changes. The best way to
by some people. This assumes all animals have a
 monitor a patient's needs is by repeated physical
daily maintenance requirement of 50ml/kg/day,
examination. We should be able to assess the effect
and just multiplies this by 2 or 3, depending on the
of the fluid therapy, and compare the actual effect
degree of dehydration. This technique is likely
with our desired effect. Remember that the ani-
to underestimate requirements seriously. This is
mal's normal homeostasis may be impaired, so we
really just guessing, and if perfusion deficits are
need to monitor carefully to prevent over-dosage
present is dangerous.
or imbalances. The physical exam should check
 In practice, replacement isotonic crystalloids are
hydration and perfusion parameters, as well as
used for maintenance phase, as it is usual for the
checking for any complications of fluid therapy.
such as oedema, phlebitis and extravascation
losses. Often, these fluids will need potassium
of fluid.
supplementation as they are low in potassium.
Perfusion parameters: heart rate, pulse quality.
mucous membrane colour, CRT, toe web vs. core
Duration of fluid therapy
temperature, mental demeanour.
 Making the decision when to end fluid therapy
Hydration  parameters:  moisture of  mucous
must be based on what the goals were when fluids
membranes, skin turgor, retraction of the globe.
were started.
Body weight: sudden changes is body weight are
Acute rate fluids: we are correcting perfusion
usually due to changes in body water. When cor-
deficits, so need to check perfusion parameters:
recting dehydration, increasing bodyweight would
be encouraging.
Heart rate: has it returned to normal?
 Pulse quality: normal amplitude and duration?
Urine output: can be measured by weighing wet
Mucous
membranes and CRT: returned
to
bedding, catching urine in patients that can stand
normal?
or by indwelling urinary catheters. A urine output
Mentation: improved?
of 0.5-2.0ml/kg/hour is one of the goals of fluid
resuscitation of hypoperfused animals.
 If the animal shows signs of normal perfusion,
then we can make the transition from acute phase
Arterial blood pressure: low arterial blood pres-
into maintenance phase.
sure is a late change in shock, and means other
compensatory mechanisms are no longer main-
Maintenance fluids: we are correcting dehydra-
taining arterial pressure. It is therefore possible
tion and supporting the animal:
for an animal to be in shock and still have normal
pressure, but be in need of fluid boluses. If the
 Is the patient eating and drinking normally?
pressure has dropped, we look to return the
Are electrolytes within normal range?
mean arterial pressure to be above 60 mmHg as an
 Is urination and kidney function normal?
initial goal.
40 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Central venous blood pressure: can be mea-
Fluids out are less easy to measure. Urine output
 sured if a central line is in place with the tip in the
 is easily measured if a urinary catheter is in place,
cranial vena cava, this gives us an idea of pre-load:
otherwise weigh bedding, use non-absorbent cat
the amount of blood returning to the heart to
litter or catch urine with kidney dishes, etc. When
be pumped. CVP is a more useful assessment of
weighing cage liners, assume 1 g is equal to 1 ml of
overall vascular filling than arterial blood pressure.
fluid. Any vomit or diarrhoea must be estimated.
Where this is not possible, the neck should be
Calculating: measure every 6 hours, fluids in
clipped and the jugular veins inspected: Flat veins
should be approximately 10% more than fluid out
and poor filling when we attempt to 'raise' the vein
(some fluid is lost by sweating or evaporation from
indicate hypovolaemia.
the respiratory tract). If the fluid out is larger than
the fluid in, we need to increase the fluid rate.
Blood testing: packed cell volume and total
If the fluid in is much larger than the fluid out we
protein levels can be measured quickly, and in
need to think why. If the patient is still dehydrated,
acute fluid therapy can be used as a guide to
this would be normal, so does the patient still show
whether fluids are needed or not, or in cases of
signs of dehydration? Otherwise why is the patient
internal haemorrhage we can gauge the progress
absorbing extra fluid:
exudates, oliguric renal
of resuscitation and whether haemorrhage
is
failure, overhydration?
ongoing. Hypokalaemia is a risk in patients on
soaa us pe era p o
Signs of overhydration
 can be used as a guide for the requirement for
supplementation.
If we administer too much fluid we can overload
the body, and especially the interstitial space.
Excessive fluid in the interstitial space may show
Fluid balance measurement
itself as:
When administering maintenance fluids to hospi-
Peripheral oedema: feet, legs, axilla, face, etc.
tal inpatients, the best way to monitor volume
Chemosis
status is by keeping track of the volumes of fluid
 Pulmonary oedema
going into a patient, compared with those coming
 Cerebral oedema.
out.
Fluids in are easily measured; as well as volumes
of intravenous fluids administered, measure any
water drank, and record food eaten.
5
Blood Gas, Acid-Base Analysis and
Electrolyte Abnormalities
Introduction
curve is shifted to the right. Such shifts occur
as a result of changing physiological conditions
Within the vascular system, oxygen is either bound
such as temperature, acid-base status and levels
to haemoglobin or dissolved in the plasma. The
of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate in erythrocytes. This
vast majority of the oxygen (98%) is carried in asso-
means it is not possible to accurately predict the
ciation with haemoglobin in the red blood cells.
SaO2 from the PaO2 and vice versa.
Haemoglobin molecules are able to carry large
quantities of oxygen to tissues, with each molecule
of haemoglobin able to carry up to four molecules
Blood gas analysis
of oxygen.
 Both arterial blood gas analysis and pulse oxim-
Blood gas analysis gives us information about both
etry are used to evaluate the ability of the lungs to
pulmonary function and acid-base status and is
deliver oxygen to systemic
ial blood, but the
essential in order to make a diagmosis, provide
treatment and monitor the progress of patients
with either respiratory or metabolic abnormalities.
moglobin saturated with oxygen (SaO2). Arterial
Acid-base status can be evaluated on arterial blood
blood gas analysis measures the amount of oxygen
gas (ABG) or venous blood gas (VBG) samples.
dissolved in the plasma (expressed as the partial
 In order to evaluate oxygenation, however, an arte-
rial sample is mandatory. Four key pieces of in-
between PaO2 and SaO2 is not linear; the oxygen-
formation are provided from the ABG: partial
haemoglobin dissociation curve is sigmoid
in
pressures of both oxygen (PaO2) and carbon
shape (see Figure 5.1). If the curve is shifted to the
dioxide (PaCO2), blood pH and bicarbonate con-
left, this indicates that the haemoglobin
1hasa
centration (HCO3). It is vital to know the normal
higher affinity for oxygen and thus a higher satura-
values in order to evaluate samples accurately (see
tion for a given PaO2. The opposite is true if the
Table 5.1).
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
42   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
100
in ventilation may occur in patients with primary
95.8-
pulmonary disease, central nervous system (CNS)
impairment, or may occur as a compensatory
change in patients with metabolic disturbances.
(SaO2
ion 
urati
Assessing acid-base status
50
sati
Changes in ventilation may occur as a response to
cent
a metabolic disorder causing an abnormal pH.
Respiratory compensation occurs when the body
attempts to correct an acidosis or alkalosis by
altering ventilation in order to either increase or
decrease the level of CO2 within the body. For
26.840
80
120
example, a decrease in the blood pH and HCO3
Oxygen partial pressure (pO2, mmHg)
Figure 5.1
Oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve.
Definitions
Table 5.1
Normal arterial blood gas values
Acid - a substance that can donate hydrogen ions (H+)
Acidaemia/alkalaemia - describes the actual pH of the
Value
 Normal
Abnormal
blood. Acidaemia is present if the pH is <7.4 and alka-
laemia is present if the pH is >7.4
pH
7.35-7.45
<7.35
>7.45
Acidosis - refers to processes in the body that result in
Acidosis
 Alkalosis
 increased acidity (decrease pH)
PaO2
>90mmMg
75-89 mmMg
<75mmMg
 Alkalosis - refers to processes in the body that result in
Mild hypoxia
Severe
decreased acidity (increase pH)
hypoxia
Base - a substance that can accept hydrogen ions (H+)
Base excess - a measurement used to assess the metabolic
PaCO2
35-45mmMg
<35mmMg
>45 mmMg
contribution to an acidosis or alkalosis. A positive value
Alkalosis
Acidosis
indicates an excess of base (metabolic alkalosis) and a
HCO3
18-24 mEq/l
<18mEq/l
>24 mEq/l
negative value indicates a deficit of base (metabolic
Acidosis
 Alkalosis
acidosis)
Buffers - systems that offer immediate cushioning (buffer-
ing) to sudden changes in pH
 FiO2 - fraction of inspired oxygen is the measured con-
Assessing ventilation
centration of oxygen delivered to the patient. Room air
is 21% (FiO2 = 0.21)
Metabolic acid - body acids that cannot be converted to
PaO2 (measured in mmHg or kPa) is an accurate
a gas (lactic acid, ketones, glycolic acid, acetoacetic
reflection of the ability of the lungs to transfer
acidy
0xygen to the blood. A low PaO2 represents hypox-
pH - determines the acid-base status by measuring hydro-
aemia and can initiate hyperventilation. The SaO2
gen ions (H+)
(pulse oximeter) measures the percentage of hae-
PaCO2 - the partial pressure of CO2 dissolved in arterial
blood as the result of cellular metabolism, and is a direct
reflection  of the adequacy of alveolar  ventilation.
95-100% is normal. These two values are crucial
PaCO2 is controlled through the lungs via either hyper-
to optimise the oxygen concentration delivered
ventilation or hypoventilation and changes can occur
during mechanical ventilation.
within minutes. Measured in mmHg or kPa
PaCO2 (in mmHg or kPa) indicates the effective-
PaO2 - the partial pressure of oxygen dissolved in arterial
ness of alveolar ventilation. Alveolar ventilation
blood, representing the lungs' ability to oxygenate
determines PaCO2. Hyperventilation results in a
blood. A decrease in PaO2 is defined as hypoxaemia.
Measured in mmHg or kPa
tilation increases PaCO2 (hypercapnia). Changes
Respiratory acid - carbon dioxide (CO2)
Blood Gas, Acid-Base Analysis and Electrolyte Abnormalities 43
 indicate a primary metabolic acidosis; in response,
 Step 5. Determine which component is the primary
the respiratory rate would increase in order to
disorder. In simple acid-base disturbances, the
reduce the PaCO2 and therefore try to self-correct
primary disorder is the component that has
the imbalance.
changed in the same marner as the pH. If an
acidaemia exists, the primary disorder will be
the component that corresponds to an acidosis.
Metabolic assessment
For example, if the pH and the HCO3 are low,
the primary disorder is metabolic (a metabolic
Serum bicarbonate levels provide information
acidosis). Conversely, if the pH is low, and
about the metabolic aspect of acid-base balance.
the pCO2 is elevated (respiratory acidosis), the
HCO3 is controlled by renal retention and excre-
primary disorder is respiratory. If both the meta-
tion; this can be accurately measured in either
bolic and respiratory components have changed,
venous or arterial samples. An increase in HCO3
in the manner of the pH, then a mixed acid-base
results in a metabolic alkalosis, whilst an abnor-
disturbance exists.
mally low HCO3 results in a primary metabolic
Step 6. Determine if there is a compensatory
acidosis. Primary metabolic acid-base disorders are
response. Compensatory responses will cause
predominantly corected by treating the underlying
the component to move in an opposite manner
disease. The kidneys respond to respiratory acid-
from the pH. That is, if an acidaemia exists, the
base disturbance by retaining or excreting increased
compensatory response to an acidaemia would
amounts of HCO3. This compensatory response
be an alkalosis. Thus, a compensatory response
occurs far more slowly than respiratory changes.
to an acidaemia wound be an elevated HCO3,
or a decreased pCO2; a compensatory response
to an alkalaemia would be a decreased HCO3 or
Step by step blood gas analysis
increased pCO2. For example, if the pH HCO3-
As previously stated, the body functions best at a
and pCO2 are low, then a primary metabolic
pH of 7.4. Any physiological event that causes
acidosis with respiratory compensation exists. If
apuosip Aumuiud e paleo st Hd poonq u alueuo e
the pH is low, and the HCO3 and pCO2 are
A primary disorder will stimulate a compensatory
high, a primary respiratory acidosis, with meta-
response in an attempt to restore the pH to normal.
bolic compensation exists.
Step 7. Always remember the body can never fully
Step 1. Examine the PaO2 and determine if the
compensate to a normal pH, and it will never
J axo astupe - panxody si juad
over-compensate.
necessary.
Step 2. Examine the pH. If the pH is <7.35 an aci-
daemia exists; if the pH is >7.45 an alkalaemia
Treating acid-base disorders
exists.
Step3. Is there a respiratory component? Examine
Acid-base disorders are best treated by address-
the PaCO2. If it is high or low, a respiratory com-
ing and correcting the underlying problem. Occa-
ponent exists (could be primary or secondary/
sionally, however, intervention to directly adjust
compensatory); if it is normal, no respiratory
pH must be initiated, usually if the pH becomes
component is present. For example, increased
life-threatening.
 PaCO2 will result in a respiratory acidosis, and a
decreased PaCO2 a respiratory alkalosis.
Step 4. Is there a metabolic component? Examine
Metabolic acidosis
the HCO3, if it is high or low, a metabolic com-
ponent exists (could be primary or secondary/
Causes:
compensatory); if it is normal, no metabolic com-
ponent is detected. If the HCO3 is high, a meta-
Diabetic ketoacidosis
bolic alkalosis exists; if low, a metabolic acidosis
Renal insufficiency
exists.
Excessive lactic acid production
 44  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Exogenous toxins (ethylene glycol)
4）
 Respiratory disease/trauma - pneumothorax,
Diarrhoea.
airway obstruction, pulmonary oedema, etc.
Acidaemia should be treated with intravenous
 Treatment depends on the underlying cause
sodium bicarbonate, but only when the pH is <7.05.
and the severity of the hypercapnia. Acute, severe
To calculate the amount of sodium bicarbonate
respiratory acidosis usually requires intubation
to administer it is necessary to first calculate the
and positive pressure ventilation.
bicarbonate deficit:
Bicarbonate deficit = body weight (kg)
Metabolic alkalosis
x 0.3 x base excess.
The most common causes of metabolic alkalosis
Administer one-quarter of the bicarbonate deficit 
are the following:
intravenously over 5-10 minutes, and then re-
check the patient's pH. If the pH returns to a more
1）
Vomiting (loss of H+ in the stomach contents)
acceptable range >7.2, discontinue bicarbonate
2)
Hyperadrenocorticism
administration and continue treating the underly-
3)
Exogenous steroid therapy
 ing disorder. There are potentially several adverse
4）
 Potassium depleting diuretic therapy leading
complications associated with the administration
 to hypokalaemia and 'contraction alkalosis'
of sodium bicarbonate. The most common are the
5)Bicarbonate therapy.
following:
It is very rare for any patient to require the
1) Rebound alkalaemia.
administration of acid to correct a severe meta-
2）
 Hypernatraemia.
bolic alkalaemia (pH >7.8). Nearly all patients will
3)1
 Hypokalaemia - rapid correction of the pH
 respond when 0.9% saline is administered because
drives potassium intracellularly. This is most
it is an acidifying solution.
important with severe metabolic acidosis sec-
ondary to diabetic ketoacidosis. This is an
advantage when treating severe hyperka-
Respiratory alkalosis (hyperventilation)
laemia and acidosis secondary to urethral
obstruction.
Respiratory alkalosis is the result of hyperventila-
4)  Seizures secondary to hypocalcaemia. If there
tion. The most common causes in animals are pain,
is a rebound alkalaemia, this will cause in-
fever and anxiety. Other conditions include CNS
creased protein binding of calcium, which
disorders, exogenous drug administration and
lowers ionised calcium.
over-zealous ventilation. Treatment is based on
5）
 Paradoxical cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) acidosis.
identification and treatment of the underlying
 Increasing plasma HCO3 can increase PaCO2.
cause.
Increased amounts of CO2 can then cross the
blood-brain barrier readily and lower the pH
Placement of an arterial catheter
of the CSF.
Arterial catheterisation is technically more difficult
than placing a catheter into a vein, as arteries are
Respiratory acidosis (hypoventilation)
less superficial and much smaller. Arterial cathe-
ters are used for measuring blood pressure directly
The most common cause of respiratory acidosis is
and to collect blood samples for blood gas analysis,
respiratory depression caused by the following:
q n  ar ss pa  r
 required. The commonly used artery for both these
11
 Drugs - general anaesthetics, opioids, etc.
procedures is the dorsal metatarsal artery, but the
21
Central nervous system trauma
femoral, auricular, radial, brachial and coccygeal
Space occupying lesions in the brain
 arteries can also be used.
Blood Gas, Acid-Base Analysis and Electrolyte Abnormalities 45
Catheterisation of the dorsal metatarsal artery
ensure the catheter is correctly aligned to the
 artery, which will facilitate feeding.
This artery is relatively superficial. It can be located
Arterial walls are much thicker than venous
in the proximal area of the metatarsus, medial to
walls, so a purposeful directed motion may be
the extensor tendon and between the second and
 required once the tip of the inner stylet is resting
third metatarsal bones. Catheters of 20-24 gauge
just over the arterial wall.
are used:
Once a flashback of blood is seen in the hub
The patient should be in lateral recumbency
of the catheter, the catheter and stylet should
then be advanced together for approximately
with the limb to be used for catheterisation
1-2mm (to ensure the catheter itself lies within
placed dependently.
the arterial lumen and not just the tip of the
The skin over the proposed site should be
stylet) and then pushed off the needle and into
clipped and briefly prepped (the author places
the artery; as this is performed the angle of the
a Hibitane solution soaked swab over this site
catheter can also be reduced (see Figure 5.4).
whilst carrying out hand washing) and then
wiped with Hibitane solution. The area should
 not be scrubbed as this will often result in mus-
cular spasm in the artery, making catheterisa-
tion impossible.
The pulse should be palpated on the dorsal
 metatarsal, a small bleb of 2% lidocaine can be
used in the area in order to desensitise it (see
Figure 5.2).
●Whilst still palpating the artery the catheter
should be inserted directly, using the other
hand, above the vessel (between the second
and third metatarsus) (see Figure 5.3). The
catheter should be inserted, through the skin,
at an angle of 45-60°, depending on operator
preference.
 Once through the skin, the angle of the catheter
should be reduced. Care should be taken to
approach the artery at an angle of 10-30° to
Figure 5.3 Insertion of arterial catheter.
Figure 5.2 Palpation of the dorsal artery.
Figure 5.4 'Flashback' of blood within the stylet.
46  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
and phosphorus. There are a wide variety of dis-
eases associated with electrolyte abnormalities.
Sodium
Sodium is primarily an extracellular cation with
less than 10% of total body sodium found intracel-
lularly. An increase or decrease in serum sodium
concentration will almost always be a reflection of
the water balance of the patient, rather than an
Figure 5.5  Correctly labelled arterial line.
absolute increase or decrease in the amount of total
body sodium. For this reason it is important to
The catheter should then be flushed with hepa-
evaluate a patient's circulating volume and hydra-
rinised saline solution, taped into place and
 tion status whenever a serum sodium concentra-
labelled as arterial (see Figure 5.5).
tion is assessed.
 Arterial lines should be flushed every 15 min-
When the plasma concentration of sodium is
utes or continually via a pressure bag and
decreased or increased, it alters the osmolality
microtubing.
of the blood, which will trigger either the thirst
 mechanism or antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin)
The same procedure is used for the collection of
release, respectively. Hence water is added or
arterial samples using a needle and syringe. Once
excreted therefore bringing the body's sodium con-
centration back to normal. See Table 5.2 for causes
in the artery a flash of blood will be seen in the hub
of the needle and the syringe should be aspirated.
and clinical signs of hyponatraemia.
Proprietary arterial sampling syringes can simplify
this part of the procedure. These syringes have a
plunger that allows air to be displaced; the syringe
Hyponatraemia
is pre-filled with air to the volume of blood required
and, once the artery is punctured, the syringe fills
Dog serum sodium <125 mEq/l.
directly under arterial pressure with no need for
Cat serum sodium <135mEq/l.
further manipulation of the plunger. As arterial
 s    n  s
 needle is selected (25 gauge for a small dog or 22
gauge for a larger patient). Once the sample has
Treatment
been obtained, the needle is withdrawn and firm
 Sodium should be administered at a rate that
 pressure is applied to the site for 5 minutes.
increases plasma sodium concentration by less
than 0.5 mEq/l/hour If sodium is administered
 at rates faster than this, central pontine myelin-
Tip
olysis can occur.
 Sodium deficit can be estimated using the fol-
You may find it easier to detect the initial 'flashback' of
 blood once the catheter is in the artery, and to prevent the
lowing formula:
blood from clotting. by prefilling the catheter and stylet
with heparinised saline
(Normal plasma Na - measured plasma Na)
x 0.6x body weight (kg).
Understanding electrolyte balance
● Fluid therapy can be commenced using a solu-
tion with a sodium concentration of no more
Some of the most important electrolytes in the
than 10 mEq/l greater than the patient's plasma
 body are sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium
sodium concentration.
Blood Gas, Acid-Base Analysis and Electrolyte Abnormalities 47
Table 5.2 Causes and clinical signs of hyponatraemia
Table 5.3 Causes and clinical signs of hypernatraemia
Causes
Clinical signs
Causes
 Clinical signs
Gastroenter itis
Hypotension, shock
Hypovolaemic
Vomiting, diarrhoea, adipsia,
Kidney disease, diuretics,
Weakness
hypernatraemia
hypodipsia, hyperventilation,
polydipsia, inappropriate
urinary obstruction, diuresis, renal
Vomiting, anorexia,
ADH release
disease, third space losses
 abdominal pain, ileus
 Congestive heart failure
Normovolaemic
Diabetes insipidus, iatrogenic
Altered level of
hypernatraemia
hypernatraemia, hypodipsia/adipsia
Hypothyroidism
consciousness
Hypervolaemic
Hyperaldosteronism,
Burns, tissue trauma
Seizures
hypernatraemia
hypercorticism, iatrogenic
Third space losses 
(hypertonic sodium administration,
sodium bicarbonate administration)
Post obstructive polyuria
latrogenic: administration
 of hypotonic fluids
Table 5.4  Causes of hypochloraemia
ADH, antidiuretic hormone.
Causes
Gastric vomiting
 Oxygen therapy if appropriate, particularly
Pyloric outflow obstruction
 in hypotensive patients, to maximise oxygen
 Duodenal foreign body
delivery to tissues.
Severe pancreatitis
 0.9% NaCl is usually sufficient to correct
Administration of diuretics
hyponatraemia but hypertonic saline may be
used in patients with severe hyponatraemia
(<110mEq/l).
Chloride
Hypernatraemia
 Chloride is one of the most important anions in the
 body, representing approximately two-thirds of the
 Dog serum sodium >160 mEq/l.
anions in the blood. Fluids and drugs containing
chloride, such as 0.9% saline, hypertonic saline and
See Table 5.3 for causes and clinical signs of
potassium chloride, can increase patient's chloride
hypernatraemia.
levels. Chloride retention in the renal system can
occur secondary to renal failure, renal tubular aci-
dosis, diabetes mellitus and chronic respiratory
Treatment
alkalosis. Loop diuretics and thiazide
diuretics
Maximum correction rate: 0.5 mEq/kg/hour;
can cause an increased loss of chloride relative to
rapid correction of hypernatraemia can result
sodium. Hypochloraemia can occur with gastric
in cerebral oedema.
vomiting and as an adaptive mechanism with
If patients are hypovolaemic, restore circulat-
chronic respiratory acidosis. Pseudohyperchlorae-
 ing volume with isotonic fluids, Hartmann's or
mia can occur when patients are being treated with
0.9% NaCl to replace dehydration deficits, then
potassium bromide. Most chloride abnormalities
a hypotonic fluid, 0.45% NaCl, can be used to
are associated with acid-base abnormalities and
replace free water deficits.
clinical signs relate primarily to the acid-base dis-
Assess sodium levels every 24 hours.
turbance rather than the alteration in chloride.
Severe hypernatraemia should be corrected
Hyperchloraemia is typically associated with aci-
over 2-3 days at a rate of 0.5 mEq/kg/hour or
dosis and hypochloraemia with an alkalosis. See
10-12 mEq/day.
Table 5.4 for causes of hypochloraemia.
48  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 5.5 Causes of hyperchloraemia
Causes
Severe diarrhoea
 Renal retention of chloride
Long-term administration of 0.9% NaCI
Hypochloraemia
Hypochloraemia
is associated with metabolic
alkalosis because chloride concentration varies
inversely with bicarbonate concentration.
Figure 5.6 Hypokalaemic patient demonstrating
ventroflexion of the neck.
Treatment
Administration of 0.9% NaCl to correct volume
deficits.
Table 5.6  Cause and clinical signs of hypokalaemia
Causes
 Clinical signs
Hyperchloraemia
Vomiting and diarrhoea
Muscular weakness
See Table 5.5 for causes of hyperchloraemia.
(ventroflexion of neck in
cats; see Figure 5.6)
Anorexia
Lethargy
Treatment
Renal disease
Vomiting
Administration of 0.9% saline.
Burns
Anorexia
Diuretic administration
Arrhythmia
Potassium: hypokalaemia
 Polyuria
Dyspnoea - respiratory
 paralysis in severe
hypokalaemia
Hypokalaemia is common in critically ill patients
Insulin therapy
Flaccid hemiplegia
(see Figure 5.6). It can result from excessive loss
(renal disease, polyuria, diuretics, vomiting or
Acidosis
Intestinal occlusion
diarrhoea), decreased intake (anorexia, potassium
deficient fluids) or translocation from extracellular
to intracellular fluid (insulin and glucose adminis-
tration, bicarbonate, alkalosis). See Table 5.6 for
 causes and clinical signs of hypokalaemia.
Table 5.7
Guide to potassium supplementation
 Serum K+
Amount of K+ to 
Maximum infusion
(mEq/l)
add/litre (mEq)
rate (ml/kg/hour)
Treatment
Potassium should be added to the fluids of all
<2
20
6
2.0-2.5
15
8
anorexic animals at a dosage of 14-20mEq/l.
More severe cases can be treated using the
2.5-3.0
10
12
3.0-3.5
7
16
dosages in Table 5.7.
Blood Gas, Acid-Base Analysis and Electrolyte Abnormalities 49
When administering potassium do not exceed
should be immediately followed by 2.5%
0.5mEq/kg/hour or cardiac arrest may occur.
glucose in IV fluids.
 Oral potassium supplementation can be given
Calcium gluconate 10% (0.5-1.0ml/kg IV
initially at a dosage of 1mEq/kg every 48
slowly) directly antagonises the effect of potas-
hours, then 0.5mq/kg every 12 hours for
sium on the heart without lowering serum con-
maintenance.
centrations. It is used to treat life-threatening
 Potassium can be added to subcutaneous fluids,
arrhythmias.
but concentrations >30mEq/l are irritant to
Sodium bicarbonate 1-2mEq/kg slowly will
tissues.
translocate potassium into the cells. Avoid
this treatment in patients with the potential
for hypocalcaemia (e.g. cats with urethral
Hyperkalaemia
obstruction).
 In general terms, hyperkalaemia can be the result
There are distinct electrocardiographic findings
of increased intake, movement of potassium extra-
associated with hyperkalaemia, although the order
cellularly, and inadequate excretion in the kidneys
in which they appear in cats seems to be less con-
secondary to renal or post-renal causes. Massive
sistent than in dogs. The electrocardiographic
tissue damage such as occurs with crush injuries,
ane u puaredde ssa aq o radde sauqe
as well as rapid reperfusion, e.g. following aortic
cases of hyperkalaemia, e.g. feline lower urinary
thromboembolism treatment, can result in severe
tract obstruction. The abnormalities, in the order
hyperkalaemia. Iatrogenic causes include fluid
they typically appear, include tall or peaked T
therapy, administration of spironolactone 
pue:
waves, a prolonged PR interval, an absent P wave,
 angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, loop
a prolonged QRS complex, bradycardia, atrial
and thiazide diuretics. Clinical sigmns of hyperka-
standstill, sine wave complexes, ventricular fibril-
laemia relate to weakness of skeletal, cardiac and
lation and complete standstill.
gastrointestinal muscles due to hyperpolarisation
of the membranes. Cardiotoxic effects can become
evident when potassium concentrations exceed
7.5mEq/l. Table 5.8 lists the causes and clinical
Magnesium
signs of hyperkalaemia.
Magnesium is the second most abundant intracel-
lular cation (calcium is the most abundant). Mag-
Treatment
nesium exists in three forms: protein bound,
 Regular insulin (0.5IU/kg IV) will induce the
complexed with divalent anions (e.g. sulphate,
translocation of potassium into the cells. This
phosphate) and ionised. The biologically active
form is ionised. Magmesium is distributed through-
out the body 80% within bone, 19% in skeletal
Table 5.8 Causes and clinical signs of hyperkalaemia
muscle and with the remaining 1% in the heart,
liver and other tissues. Some 99% of magnesium is
Causes
 Clinical signs
intracellular, with only 1% being found in serum
so serum magmesium levels may not accurately
Renal failure, urethral
Arrhythmias
 reflect total body concentrations. Magnesium has
obstruction
Muscular weakness
many roles within cellular reactions including
Addison's disease
Reduction in tissue
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), maintenance of cell
Tissue trauma, bladder or
perfusion
membrane electrical gradients in the nervous,
urethral rupture
musculoskeletal and cardiovascular systems. Mag-
Ingestion of potassium salts
nesium is an integral part of Na-K-ATPase, which
Acidosis
maintains the sodium-potassium gradient across
cell membranes.
 50  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 5.9 Causes and clinical signs of hypomagnesaemia
Table 5.10 Causes of hypermagnesaemia
Causes
 Clinical signs
Causes
Administration of
Neuromuscular signs:
Acute renal failure
Mg deficient fluids
weakness, twitching, ataxia,
hyperreflexia, seizures, coma
latrogenic causes: use of cathartics containing
 Diarrhoea
magnesium and over-dosage of magnesium chloride
Cardiovascular signs:
 Renal losses
or magnesium sulphate used to correct
tachyarrhythmias,
hypomagnesaemia
hypertension
Hypomagnesaemia
and canine studies of patients admitted to ICU, the
 incidence is 5-13%. Hypermagnesaemia is most
Hypomagnesaemia is more common than hyper-
often associated with renal failure. Table 5.10 lists
magnesaemia and has been reported to occur
the causes of hypermagnesaemia.
 in approximately 54% of critically ill veterinary
 patients, establishing hypomagmesaemia as one of
the most clinically significant electrolyte disorders
Treatment
in critically ill patients.
The causes of magnesium deficiency are both
 Discontinue exogenous magnesium adminis-
numerous and complex. In general, they can be
tration.
Diurese using 0.9% NaCl, lactated Ringer's
divided into: decreased intake, increased losses
and alteration in distribution. Decreased dietary
solution at 2-4 ml/kg IV.
intake of magnesium, if sustained for several
Frusemide, 1-2mg/kg every 12 hours PO, SC,
IV to enhance diuresis: use with caution as may
weeks, can lead to sigrificant depletion. In addi-
tion, catabolic illness and prolonged intravenous
cause dehydration, which may impair magne-
fluid therapy or parenteral nutrition without mag-
sium excretion.
nesium supplementation can contribute to magne-
sium depletion. See Table 5.9 for causes and clinical
signs of hypomagnesaemia.
Calcium
Treatment
Serum calcium levels should be checked in any
patient with unexplained weakness, stiffness,
 Administer magnesium (as either magnesium
polyuria, enlarged lymph nodes, seizures or peri-
chloride or magnesium sulphate) in 5% dex-
 parturient illness.
trose solution at 0.75-1.0mEq/kg/day IV for
24-48 hours.
 For critical patients with life-threatening cardiac
arrhythmias give 0.15-0.3mEq/kg IV over 5-15
Hypercalcaemia
minutes. If hypomagnesaemia is the cause of
the arrhythmia, rapid improvement will follow
Hypercalcaemia can be caused by neoplasia (espe-
the IV bolus.
cially lymphosarcoma), anal sac adenocarcinoma,
 Correct the underlying disease.
multiple myeloma, metastatic bone tumours,
primary hyperparathyroidism, acute or chronic
renal failure, hypoadrenocorticism or vitamin D
Hypermagnesaemia
rodenticide toxicity. Haemolysis and hyperli-
paemia may falsely raise calcium concentration.
Hypermagmesaemia is relatively uncommon com-
Table 5.11 lists the causes and clinical signs of
pared to hypomagnesaemia, but in both human
hypercalcaemia.
Blood Gas, Acid-Base Analysis and Electrolyte Abnormalities 51
Table 5.11
 Causes and clinical signs of hypercalcaemia
Table 5.12  Causes and clinical signs of hypocalcaemia
Causes
 Clinical signs
Causes
Clinical signs
Neoplasia (especially
Renal, neuromuscular
Hypoalbuminaemia
Seizures
lymphosarcoma)
and cardiovascular
Vitamin D deficiency
Tetany
system abnormalities
(Gl malabsorption)
Anal sac adenocarcinoma
Anorexia
Hypoparathyroidism
Weakness
 Multiple myeloma
Lethargy
Eclampsia
Ataxia
Metastatic bone tumours
PU/PD
Acute pancreatitis
Anorexia
Primary
Vomiting
Ethylene glycol toxicity
Vomiting
hyperparathyroidism
 Phosphate enemas
Arrhythmias
Acute or chronic renal
Muscle weaknes
failure
Citrate toxicity
Panting
Hypoadrenocorticism
Cardiac arrhythmias
Low calcium/high phosphorus diet
Muscle tremors
Vitamin D rodenticide
Seizures
Renal failure
toxicity
Gl, gastrointestinal.
Treatment
Calcium chloride 10% contains 27.2mg/ml
elemental calcium. Because it is more potent,
Identify and treat the underlying cause.
a lower dose (0.4-0.6ml/kg) should be given.
Supportive treatment including administration
of 0.9% sodium chloride, 100-125ml/kg/day,
Calcium chloride should never be administered
SC as it is tissue irritating and can result in
to encourage urinary excretion of calcium.
tissue necrosis and slough.
Frusemide, 24mg/kg every 8-12 hours, SC,
Calcium should be administered very slowly
IV, PO if hypercalcaemia persists following
(over 10 minutes) whilst monitoring the electro-
adequate volume expansion.
cardiogram (ECG). If bradycardia develops the
infusion should be discontinued.
The response to therapy is usually rapid -
Hypocalcaemia
decreasing tremors, muscle relaxation.
Hypocalcaemia is commonly seen in small breed
bitches within 21 days post whelping (see Chapter
Further reading
15). Hypocalcaemia may also occur post thyroidec-
tomy in cats if the parathyroid glands have acci-
Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
dentally been removed or damaged. Table 5.12 lists 
Critical Care for Veterinary Technician, 2nd edition.
the causes and clinical signs of hypocalcaemia.
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine
and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 2nd edition.
Treatment
BSAVA, Gloucester.
MacIntyre, D.K, Drobatz, K.J. Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
Calcium gluconate 10% contains 9.2mg/ml
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
elemental calcium. The initial signs are con-
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
trolled by the administration of 1.0-1.5ml/kg
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
slow IV. The same volume may be diluted 1:1
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
with saline and administered SC every 8 hours
Wingfield, W.E. and Raffe, M.R. (2002) The Veterinary
umtil oral supplementation is commenced.
ICU Book. Teton NewMedia, Wyoming.
Analgesia and Anaesthesia of the
Emergency and Critical Patient
Introduction
agents that will minimise additional physiological
insult and patient decompensation.
The critically ill or injured patient represents a true
anaesthetic and pain management challenge. The
majority of critically ill patients will require the
Patient assessment
provision of analgesia and anaesthesia in order
to perform diagnostic and/or therapeutic proce-
An initial assessment should be performed which
dures at some point during their hospitalisation.
focuses on the patient's major body systems, i.e.
Systemic injury or disease that contributes to shock,
those systems most adversely affected during
cardiac dysrhythmias, thoracic pathology, hepa-
anaesthesia: cardiovascular, respiratory, neurologi-
torenal and central nervous injury will result in
cal and urogenital. The goal of anaesthesia in any
an unstable patient that responds abnormally to
critical patient is to maintain tissue and organ per-
anaesthesia and pain management. As a result of
 fusion and ensure sufficient oxygen delivery and
their physical status, these patients require careful
carbon dioxide removal. Individual patients will
assessment and planning in order minimise com-
have differing abilities to achieve these goals, and
plications and ensure a safe anaesthetic. Physiolog-
the initial assessment is vital to identify those
ical ‘reserves’ that normally compensate for the
patients that may have difficulties. The critical
destabilising effects of anaesthetic agents are not
 available because they have been previously acti-
which means that compensatory mechanisms
vated to stabilise the patient in the post-injury
 may be unable to respond adequately and main-
period. The goal of the anaesthetist is to stabilise
tain homeostasis once anaesthetics have been
the patientrapidly, identify key physiological prob-
administered. By stabilising patients prior to the
lems that may be affected by anaesthesia and pain
nduction of anaesthesia, we are more likely to
management, and select anaesthetic and analgesic
have a patient that is able to tolerate anaesthesia
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Analgesia and Anaesthesia of the Emergency and Critical Patient 53
without substantial decompensation and deterio-
relies on the serial evaluation of this system to
ration. The temptation to rush unstable patients to
assess the depth of anaesthesia through reflexes
anaesthesia must be avoided.
and muscle tone. Decreased mentation and/or the
inability to ambulate may indicate significant CNS
problems. The development of a safe and effective
Respiration
anaesthetic plan for these patients requires a
kmowledge of the baseline neurological status of
The patient's respiratory rate, pattern and effort
the patient prior to the administration of any
should be assessed. Auscultation of the patient's
anaesthetic drugs. Some anaesthetic drugs can
chest should be performed which will give infor-
result in significant changes in intracranial pres-
mation about both cardiac and respiratory func-
sure which may exacerbate the effects of head
tion. Cardiac arrhythmias, murmurs or dull or
trauma or brain disease. The spinal injury patient
absent heart and lung sounds, as well as increased
pulmonary noise, such as crackles or wheezes,
from a backboard or other device to avoid further
may indicate abnormalities, which on induction
damage to the spinal column during or after induc-
 of anaesthesia could develop into life-threatening
tion of anaesthesia, when the muscles have relaxed
complications. If there is any doubt regarding car-
and are no longer supporting the skeletal system.
diopulmonary function, then further evaluations
For all patients, critical or not, anaesthesia can
and testing should be performed. The patient's
affect renal function either via decreased glomeru-
 oxygen carrying capacity should also be assessed:
lar filtration or decreased renal blood flow. Con-
adequate levels of haemoglobin are necessary in
versely, poor renal function with azotaemia can
order to transport oxygen to the tissues.
affect the response to anaesthetic agents, with
 an increased CNS sensitivity. Renal insufficiency
Cardiovascular system
can also affect the patient's acid-base status, result-
ing in a concurrent increase in serum potassium
The cardiovascular system assessment will provide
as well as a decrease in drug dose required to
produce anaesthesia. Hyperkalaemia is a possibil-
the anaesthetist with information that can be used
ity in patients with renal insufficiency, ruptured
to anticipate the patient's ability to perfuse tissues
urinary bladder or urethral obstruction. Patients
adequately. Mucous membrane colour, capillary
refill time, pulse rate, rhythm and quality, in com-
with serum potassium levels >5.5mEq/l should
bination with thoracic auscultation and the mea-
not be anaesthetised until the potassium levels
surement of arterial blood pressure, will provide a
have been reduced. If the patient already has some
baseline of the patient's cardiovascular function.
degree of renal disease and experiences a period of
Anaesthetic drugs are likely to result in significant
hypotension and/or hypovolaemia during anaes-
depression of the cardiovascular system in criti-
thesia, the likelihood of worsering of the disease is
cally ill patients, which will result in a further
increased. Pre-anaesthesia serum biochemistry
results should be evaluated to assess liver function,
reduction in the system's ability to perfuse tissues
and meet oxygen demands. Prior to the induction
renal function, acid-base status and electrolytes in
of anaesthesia, an intravenous catheter should
order to establish a baseline.
always be placed, if not already present, and intra-
venous fluids or blood products administered in
combination with the administration of oxygen in
Anticipated problems and
contingency plans
ensure adequate oxygen delivery.
Critically ill patients requiring general anaesthesia
 are much more fragile than healthy patients. Physi-
Neurological system
ological reserves and compensatory mechanisms
 are often reduced, resulting in a less stable patient
Anaesthesia is the reversible depression of the
that is more prone to complications and possibly
central nervous system (CNS) and the anaesthetist
umable to respond to the additional stresses of
 54   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
anaesthesia and the procedure to be performed.
several drugs with selective and complementary
For any patient, anaesthesia has the potential for
actions. The pharmacokinetic properties of these
detrimental effects, but critically ill patients are at
drugs should allow rapid onset, rapid recovery
a greater risk of complications due to their often
and rapid responses to changes in delivered doses.
diminished reserves and tendency for rapid dete-
'Balanced anaesthesia’ is the use of smaller
rioration. Neural and hormonal responses will pre-
doses of a combination of drugs to achieve the
serve circulation and perfusion to essential organs,
various components of anaesthesia, thus reduc-
but this response may make a patient more sus-
ing the disadvantages of using large doses of
ceptible to the adverse vasoactive effects of most
any one drug. Balanced anaesthesia also offers a
anaesthetic drugs. Hypotension, hypovolaemia,
multi-dimensional approach to pain control: not
hypercapnia, hypoxia, hypothermia and pain are
only does it help to block autonomic responses
some of the potential problems for these patients,
tos
surgery and
provide  analgesia postopera-
which must be considered when devising an anaes-
thetic plan.
hypersensitivity.
Anaesthesia drug plan
Pain management in the critical patient
ueapisuon juodu ue s juusu urn
Anaesthetic agents are commonly used to provide
following initial examination of the severely in-
chemical restraint and analgesia in the critically ill
jured patient. Pain has been showm to be a pow-
pue snnadera go Aaea e roy janed pamjun 1o
erful factor in producing physiological instability
diagnostic procedures. Drugs are often used in
in the acutely injured patient. As such, it is impor-
combination; if they act synergistically, lower doses
 tant and necessary that pain management be con-
of each individual drug may be administered, with
sidered a high priority during the triage period.
obvious advantages. Drugs that are usually well
Pain management should never be delayed for
tolerated in healthy patients may produce cata-
fear of ‘masking' clinical signs; in fact, clinical
strophic effects in unstable patients due to reduced
indicators of coexisting injury may be hidden in
juase 'uosan slu ioH 'saarasan, Areuoumdopren
patients with severely pain. The main concern
selection becomes critical; agents that
t provide
with initiating pain management early in the triage
good CNS depression and analgesia with minimal
 period is that further'destabilisation' of the patient
cardiopulmonary effects are preferred. Also, the
may occur due to the effects of analgesic drugs.
use of local or regional anaesthetic techniques
However, this concern is unwarranted in most
is valuable in these cases to produce analgesia
cases.
without compromising cardiopulmonary or CNS
 Options for pain management during the initial
function. Historically, general anaesthesia was pro-
triage period may be divided into systemic and
duced by using just one or two drugs. Although
non-systemic therapy. Systemic therapy choices
we could increase the depth of anaesthesia
aby
 include opioids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
increasing inspired concentrations of isoflurane,
drugs (NSAIDs), local anaesthetics and alpha-2
a po  o b A sa daa A a
 agonists. Adjunctive pain medications include ket-
reflex (subcortical) responses to noxious stimuli.
 amine and iidocaine. Drugs are selected on the
Trying to block these responses using isoflurane on
basis of their individual and collective 'safety’ to
its own will produce severe cardiovascular and
cardiovascular, respiratory and CNS body systems.
respiratory depression. This happens even in fit,
Systemic pain management may be safely insti-
healthy animals, but is even worse in those that are
tuted using haemodynamically 'safe' drug classes
already ill. The other important role of the anaes-
 in unstable or critically ill patients. The opioids are
thetist, therefore, is to maintain homeostasis (espe-
the major drug group that meets this benchmark.
cially oxygen delivery to tissues) at the same time
Opioids have neutral or favourable haemodynamic
as providing the three components of the triad.
effects following administration in critically ill
Therefore, the trend in modem anaesthesia is to
or injured patients. Opioids may be classified into
lighten up'. This generally involves the use of
'strong', ‘intermediate' and ‘weak' analgesics; in
Analgesia and Anaesthesia of the Emergency and Critical Patient 55
general, a 'strong agent' is selected for pain man-
used to sedate patients for non-painful procedures,
agement during the triage period. Members of the
relieve anxiety or as a component of premedication
'strong’ class currently available include morphine,
for general anaesthesia. This group of drugs pro-
methadone and fentanyl, and each can be success-
vides good sedation and reduces the amount of
fully used during acute presentation. Generally,
anaesthetic agents required to induce and maintain
intravenous administration is preferred.
anaesthesia. Acepromazine has the beneficial effect
of reducing the occurrence of catecholamine-
induced arrhythmias, but one of its negative effects
Sedatives
is that is can result in hypotension, and in some
breeds, particularly Boxers, can result in cardiovas-
Analgesia and neuroleptanalgesia
cular collapse. Acepromazine is non-reversible and
has a long-lasting effect (4-6 hours). These effects
Opioids are frequently used in physiologically
may be prolonged in patients with reduced hepatic
unstable patients due to their minimal cardiopul-
function or when administered at the high end of
 monary and CNS effects. The most predictable
the dose range. Acepromazine should be avoided
response is achieved by using opioids with mu-
in critical patients where hypotension is a concern,
receptor activity (morphine, methadone, fentanyl,
although the author uses doses <0.1 mg/kg (usually
buprenorphine). Opioids are often combined with
0.05 mg/kg) and this has never been a problem.
 tranquillisers, to produce neuroleptanalgesia,
.or
with sedatives, in many cases to produce increased
Benzodiazepines
sedation while maintaining physiological stability.
Acepromazine, benzodiazepines or alpha-2 recep-
These can produce a calming or anxiolytic effect,
tor agonists are frequently co-administered with
muscle relaxation and also have excellent anticon-
opioids to achieve a predictable sedative effect
vulsant properties. They are commonly used as: (a)
However, true anaesthesia does not result from
anticonvulsants for seizure control, (b) as tranquil-
these drug combinations; therefore, stimulation by
lisers that provide muscle relaxation and sedation;
touch, manipulation or pain may antagonise seda-
and (c) for control of fear-induced behaviours.
tion and produce an agitated patient. Table 6.1 lists
Their effects are reversible using flumazenil.
the drug doses for sedation in the high-risk patient.
Benzodiazepines enhance the action of gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA), the major inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the brain. When benzodiaze-
Phenothiazines
pines are used: 1) as a pre-anaesthetic agent; 2)
The most commonly used phenothiazine used in
o  s (g r  g o  
veterinary medicine is acepromazine, which is
agent with an intravenous anaesthetic drug, the
Table 6.1  Drug doses for sedation in the high-risk patient
Drug
Dose
Notes
 Diazepam
0.06-0.11 mg/kg IV
Use with opioid, ketamine
Midazolam
0.06-0.1 mg/kg IM, IV
Use with opioid, ketamine
Acepromazine
0.02-0.04 mg/kg IM, IV
Use with caution in hypotensive patients
Medetomidine
1-5 μg/kg IM, IV
Use with caution in hypotensive patients
Ketamine
3-11 mg/kg IM,1V
 Use with diazepam or midazolam in dogs
Morphine (dogs, cats)
0.5-2 mg/kg IM
Use with diazepam, midazolam, or ACP
Caution with IV use due to histamine release
Methadone (dogs. cats)
0.03-0.2 mg/kg IM, IV
Use with diazepam, midazolam, or ACP
Fentanyl (dogs only)
1 0-50 μg/kg IV
Not good as sole agent
Propofol
2-6mg/kg IV
Monitor for apnoea
ACP, acepromazine.
 56   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
quantity of other anaesthetic drugs required to
Opioids
both induce and maintain anaesthesia is reduced.
Benzodiazepines have minimal cardiopulmonary
Mu-agonist opioids
effects but their analgesic effects are minimal. Diaz-
epam and midazolam are both used in small animal
Mu-agonist (pure) opioids provide consistent and
practice and have very similar actions; the major
effective analgesia and are commonly viewed as
difference between them is that midazolam
1is
the best drugs available for pain control in small
water-soluble but diazepam is not (necessitating
 animals. The use of opioids in general practice is
formulation in either a lipid emulsion or in propyl-
 sometimes detered because these drugs are legally
ene glycol; the addition of propylene glycol
controlled substances. However, the paperwork
however is irritating when administered intrave-
and security associated with their storage and use
nously). The water solubility of midazolam permits
is well justified by the analgesic benefits to the
greater flexibility in delivery routes, which is espe-
patient. There are many types of opiate receptors
I  r aa a u  A
in the CNS and they each have different roles in
patient. Both drugs have mixed effects following
the activity of the nervous system. The two most
sole administration. Variation in CNS sedation
 important receptors with respect to pain are the mu
is very common, although sedation may be more
and the kappa receptors. The drugs we use have
predictable and profound in patients with haemo-
very different affinities for these receptors and this
dymamic compromise. Neither drug is a signifi-
helps to explain the differences in duration of
cant cardiac nor respiratory depressant, although
action and efficacy between the available drugs.
greater respiratory depression has been associated
None of the opioids produce a loss of conscious-
with midazolam. Both agents are skeletal muscle
ness in our patients; therefore they are not used
relaxants and possess anticonvulsant properties
solely to induce general anaesthesia. There is a
which makes them particularly useful for critical
wide
variation in the dosage: each patient's
patients. Both agents will reduce dose requirement
response should be assessed and the dose and
for  sedative-hypnotics including propofol (the
timing
 of administration adjusted accordingly.
 author administers 1 ml/20kg Diazemuls, 5 mg/
Opioid effects are reversible with the administra-
ml lipid emulsion of diazepam) when adminis-
tion of a pure opioid antagonist such as naloxone.
tered just prior to induction of anaesthesia. They
The beneficial effects of opioids include:
are also co-administered with opioids
and ket-
amine to enhance sedative effects and improve
1）
Excellent analgesia with mild cardiopulmo-
skeletal muscle relaxation.
nary effects that are dose dependent
2
Reduced dose of other anaesthetic drugs
Alpha-2 agonists
required to induce anaesthesia
3）
 Dose-dependent CNS depression.
Medetomidine and(
dexmedetomidine
provide
dose-related sedation, muscle relaxation and anal-
The negative effects of mu-agonists include:
gesia. They have profound cardiorespiratory effects
characterised by initial hypertension, bradycardia,
decreased tissue perfusion and respiratory depres-
11
Bradycardia (anticholinergic responsive)
sion. Most of these side effects are dose related;
2
Vomiting (less commonly with methadone)
for this reason, the use of this drug class in unstable
3）
 Panting and respiratory depression when used
patients is limited to not more than 5% of the dose
with other respiratory depressant drugs, i.e.
recommended by the manufacturer At the low
inhaled anaesthetics
dose, minimal haemodymamic effects traditionally
4
Dysphoria (dose dependent)
 seen with this class are noted. This drug class has
5）
 Urine retention and constipation
value when very small doses (1-3 μg/kg) are com-
bined with opioids for sedation and restraint. This
Table 6.2 lists the commonly used opioids for anal-
combination  appears  well  tolerated 
with
less
gesia and Table 6.3 the constant rate infusion (CRI)
intense side effects attributable to either drug class.
rates for analgesia.
Analgesia and Anaesthesia of the Emergency and Critical Patient 57
Table 6.2 Commonly used opioids for analgesia
Duration 
 Dose range (mg/kg
Route of
(hours unless
 unless otherwise
p!o!do
administration 
indicated)
stated}
Infusion rate (IV)
Main side effects
Morphine
IM (SC, slow IV in
~4 dogs
0.1-1 (dogs)
 0.1-0.5 mg/kg/hour
Vomiting
(sop
6-8 cats
0.1-0.2 (cats)
Methadone
IM (SC, slow IV in
~4 dogs
0.1-1 (dogs)
(sop
6-8 cats
0.1-0.2 (cats)
 Pethidine
IM (SC in cats)
~1 dogs
3.5-5 (dogs)
1-1.5 cats
5-10 (cats)
Fentanyl
IV (IM)
20 mins
 2-1 0μg/kg
0. 1-0.7 μg/kg/min
Bradycardia, cardiac
following a
arrest; respiratory
single dose
depression
Buprenorphine
IM (SC, IV, orally
?6
10-20μg/kg
in cats)
 Butorphanol
IM (SC, IV)
45 mins - 1
0.2-0.8
 Tramadol
PO
s8op 8
2-5 mg/kg (dogs)
Sedation at high
8 cats
 2-4 mg/kg (cats)
doses, dysphoria in
Cats
Table 6.3  Constant rate infusion (CRl) infusion rates
SnJa
Loading dose (mg)
Loading dose (ml)
Infusion dose and rate
Morphine
0.3 mg/kg (can use
0.03 ml/kg
0.1-1 ml/kg/hour
methadone)
 Add 1.5 ml to a 250-ml bag and run at 2 ml/kg/hour
 Slow IV or IM 
Ketamine
0.5mg/kg. Slow IV
0.005 ml/kg
 0.15 ml into a 250-ml bag and run at 2ml/kg/hour
Lidocaine
0.5mg/kg
0.1 ml/kg of a 1%
25-75 μg/kg/min
Slow IV (over 5min)
solution (1 0mg/ml)
Add 19ml to a 250-ml bag and run at 2 ml/kg/hour
MLK
As above
As above
Add 1.5 ml morphine + 0.15ml ketamine + 19 ml
lidocaine to a 250-ml bag and run at 2 ml/kg/hour
MK
As above
As above
Add 1.5 ml morphine + 0.15ml ketamine to a
250-ml bag and run at 2 ml/kg/hour
Medetomidine
2 μg/kg
0.002 ml/kg
0.6-5μg/kg/min
Add 4.5 ml to a 250-ml bag and run at 2 ml/kg/hour
MLK, morphine, lidocaine, ketamine; MK, morphine, ketamine.
Morphine
(M6G), which is active. The potency of other drugs
is usually measured in comparison to morphine
Morphine is the prototype of opiate analgesics.
(i.e. ‘morphine equivalents'). Dosages for animals
Systemic effects of morphine are described above.
are listed in the range of 0.1-1.0 mg/kg every 4-6
One of the metabolites is morphine-6-glucuronide
hours, IM, SC, IV.
58  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Methadone
psychotic effects, fewer haemodynamic effects and
less physical dependency. A ceiling on the analge-
Methadone is a synthetic opioid currently used for
sic effects (i.e. a limit to the analgesic efficacy of
analgesia and treatment of heroin addiction. Meth-
these drugs) distinguishes them from pure opioid
adone interacts primarily with mu-opiate recep-
agonists.
tors, but also binds with variable affinity to
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and alpha-2 adren-
Butorphanol
ergic receptors. The NMDA receptor effects may
enhance the analgesic properties and decrease tol-
erance normally associated with repeated admin-
Butorphanol is a weak analgesic with a short dura-
istration of opioids. The elimination rate in dogs
tion. Butorphanol has mixed effects because it is
is much faster than in people, with values in
a mu-antagonist, or a partial mu-agonist, but a
dogs ranging 1.75-4 hours following IV and SC
kappa-agonist. It has opiate agonistic activity that
is considered five times that of morphine. On the
administration.
other hand, its antagonistic effects are weak and
only one-fortieth of the antagonist effects of nalox-
Pethidine
one (some references suggest that it has no activity
on the mu-receptor). Therefore, its agonist actions
Pethidine has one-third to one-sixth the potency of
predominate. Butorphanol has been used as an
morphine, and is shorter acting (at 3-5 mg/kg its
 antitussive and analgesic. It may have fewer gas-
duration of action isless than 1 hour). With repeated
 trointestinal effects than pure opioid agonists but
use it may have fewer effects on the gastrointesti-
this has not been assessed in veterinary patients.
nal tract than other opioids. The usual dose is
Butorphanol is used in dogs, horses, cats and
5-10mg/kg for cats and 3-5 mg/kg for dogs, IM
some exotic animals. In dogs it has been used fre-
(SC in cats).
quently for pre- and postoperative analgesia by
injection at 0.2-0.8mg/kg. Efficacy is limited to
 mild pain, however butorphanol may be useful as
Fentanyl
a part of a sedative combination for procedures
such as radiography.
Fentanyl is a synthetic opiate with potent mu-
opioid effects, without action on other receptors.
Because the structure is distinct from opiate-
Buprenorphine
derived drugs, some of the adverse effects attrib-
uted to morphine are not observed with fentanyl.
Buprenorphine is a partial mu-receptor agonist,
Opioids are drugs that are derived purely from
with little effects on the kappa-receptor. It is 25-50
opium, whereas opiates have a similar structure
times more potent than morphine. It is available as
but are not made from opium. Although it is 80-
a 300 μg/ml injection. In animals it is reported that
100 times more potent than morphine, fentanyl can
the duration of analgesia is longer (e.g. 6-8 hours)
be used safely when administered with care. The
than the duration of action of morphine, perhaps
usually dose is 2-10μg/kg IM, SC, IV or as an
because it dissociates more slowly from receptors.
intravenous infusion. It is often used as a transder-
Because of the higher affinity for the mu-receptor,
mal preparation.
higher doses of naloxone may be needed to reverse
the effects of buprenorphine.
Opioid agonists/antagonists and
partial agonists
Tramadol
Opiate agonists/antagonists have effects that may
Although not a true opioid, tramadol will be dis-
differ qualitatively from those of pure opioid ago-
cussed in this section. The exact mechanism of
nists such as morphine. Such differences may
action for tramadol is uncertain; it is a complex
include  less  respiratory depression, 
fewer
drug whose metabolism and action in dogs and
Analgesia and Anaesthesia of the Emergency and Critical Patient  59
cats is still not fully understood. However, various
excellent safety record and an acceptable duration
possibilities exist: it has some mu-opioid receptor
of effect when used correctly. Bupivacaine has both
action, and may also inhibit the re-uptake of nor-
a longer onset (15 minutes vs. 5 minutes) and dura-
epinephrine (NE) and serotonin (5HT). One of the
tion (4 hours vs. 2 hours) of action when compared
isomers has greater effect on serotonin re-uptake
with lidocaine. For short-term procedures, lido-
and greater affinity for mu opiate receptors. The
caine is acceptable and cost-effective. For contin-
 other isomer is more potent for inhibition of nor-
 ued pain management, bupivacaine is preferred.
epinephrine re-uptake and less active for inhibiting
Epidural techniques should be used with cau-
serotonin re-uptake. Taken together, the effects of
tion in haemodynamically compromised patients.
tramadol may be explained through inhibition of
Vasodilation may be noted following local anaes-
serotonin re-uptake (similar to fluoxetine and other
thetic administration in the epidural space, which
antidepressant drugs), action on alpha-2 receptors
will contribute to hypotension. Cardiovascular and
(similar to medetomidine and xylazine), and also
 neurotoxicity can be noted at lower doses in hypo-
action on mu-opioid receptors (similar to mor-
volaemic patients.
phine). The metabolite
(O-desmethyltramadol,
Primary CNS depression that is not reversible
also called Ml) may have greater opioid effects
 may be noted following epidural administration of
than the parent drug (e.g. 200 times greater affinity
lidocaine or bupivacaine.
for opioid receptor binding).
General anaesthesia
Dissociative drugs
For many critical patients, the type of surgical pro-
In emergency or critical patients, ketamine has
cedure being performed means general anaesthe-
minimal effects on cardiovascular function in all
sia will be required. Reasons for this decision
but severe shock cases. This is due to its ability to
include ability to protect the airway, provide ven-
evoke sympathoadrenal responses which preserve
tilatory support and provide a motionless surgical
cardiac output and blood pressure. In heart failure
field. Altered potency, distribution and clearance of
or unstable shock patients, ketamine has potent 
 anaesthetic drugs should be assumed in all unsta-
cardiovascular depressant effects. Ketamine also
ble cases because of altered tissue perfusion and
produces dose-dependent respiratory depression,
drug protein binding. Patients suffering from
characterised by decreased tidal volume, increased
trauma should be considered to have a full stomach,
respiratory rate and apneustic breathing. This may
s0 protection of the airway is a priority. CNS injury
be more frequent in those patients with cardiopul-
should be assumed unless proven otherwise and
monary instability. The combination of ketamine
anaesthetic drugs selected accordingly. Table 6.4
with diazepam or midazolam is useful for sedation
lists the drug doses for anaesthesia in the high-risk
or anaesthetic induction in the stable patient.
patient.
Opioids may be added to this mixture to enhance
analgesia. The author currently uses ketamine
 intravenous infusions for all surgical procedures.
Patient monitoring
Electrocardiography  (ECG), capnography and
Local anaesthetics
arterial blood pressure should be monitored during
anaesthetic induction so that acute changes associ-
 Local anaesthesia is a valuable adjunct which may
ated with anaesthetic agent administration can be
reduce parenteral drug requirement for sedation or
identified rapidly and appropriate action taken.
chemical restraint. Commonly, local anaesthetics
(See website documents: Anaesthesia Monitoring
Chart, Anaesthesia Record, Post Operative Recov-
venous applications. The most commonly used
ery Sheets.) Arterial blood pressure may be moni-
drugs in veterinary medicine are lidocaine (2%)
tored using oscillometric or Doppler detection
and bupivacaine (0.5%). Both drugs have an
 techniques. If available and possible, an arterial
60 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 6.4 Drug doses for anaesthesia in the high-risk patient
Drug
Premedicant dose
Induction dose
Diazepam
0.06-0.11 mg/kg IV
Same
(use with opioid or ketamine)
Midazolam
0.06-0.1 mg/kg IM, IV
Same
(use with opioid or ketamine)
Ketamine
 3-10 mg/kg IM, IV
6-11 mg/kg IV
(use with diazepam or midazolam in dogs)
Morphine
0.5-2 mg/kg IM
Caution with IV use due to histamine release
(use with diazepam or midazolam in cats)
Fentanyl
Not for premedication
10-50μg/kg IV
(人|uo s8op)
 Propofol
Not for premedication
2-4 mg/kg IV following premedication
 Alfaxalan
Not for premedication
2 mg/kg IV in dogs following premedication
2-5mg/kg IV in cats following premedication
catheter should be placed in the dorsal pedal or
sympathoadrenal activity that is critical in preserv-
femoral artery for direct (invasive) blood pressure
ing haemodynamic stability; anaesthetic agents
measurement.
 Capnography  provides
a
-uou
 generally inhibit this response and render the
invasive method to assess adequacy of alveolar
patient susceptible to acute changes in blood pres-
ventilation, cardiac output, pulmonary perfusion
sure and tissue perfusion. Sympathetic activation
 and systemic metabolism. Pulse oximetry is used
also causes redistribution of cardiac output to vital
to measure arterial saturation of haemoglobin with
 organs such as heart, kidney and brain. Such redis-
Oxygen, with the probe attached to the buccal
tribution of blood flow to core organs, plus the
mucosa, tongue or tail base. Placement of a cen-
presence of increased levels of enkephalins, endor-
trally or peripherally placed central venous cathe-
phins and other amino acid neuropeptides as a
ter permits serial monitoring of central venous
component of the overall stress
response, will
pressure, which allows an evaluation of volaemic
modify the dose of anaesthetic agent required.
status and is particularly useful in septic patients
and patients at risk of volume overload, e.g. those
with chronic heart failure.
Urine
 production is
Premedication
monitored by serial expression and
 collection of
urine or placement of a urinary catheter and closed
Premedication is not commonly used in trauma or
collection system. Core body temperature is moni-
 critically ill patients if systemic pain management
tored to define when supportive
measures are
has been implemented in the triage period. If no
required. In severe cases,
supportive
therapy,
including supplemental
oxygen
administration,
tion with morphine, methadone or fentanyl may be
intravenous fluids and drug 
g therapy should be
suitable. Premedicant doses of opioids are similar
commenced during the stabilisation period.
to healthy patients due to the high safety margin
associated with these drugs. If a tranquilliser is
 indicated, diazepam or midazolam may be given
Drug selection
intravenously as part of a co-induction. Given in
this manner, they enhance and facilitate the actions
All common anaesthetic agents may be used in the
of the induction drug. Low doses of ketamine may
trauma patient. However, dosage modification is
also be safely administered in combination with
qy sey juaned eumen aul 'pamba1 Aensn
minor tranquilisers.
Analgesia and Anaesthesia of the Emergency and Critical Patient  61
Induction drugs
oxide is discouraged due to concern for com-
promising oxygen delivery to the patient. Also,
Opioids are often used for anaesthetic induction
nitrous oxide is contraindicated in cases demon-
 in haemodymamically unstable patients, with fen-
strating closed air spaces, such as pneumothorax
tanyl the primary choice in this class. In severely
or pneumoperitoneum and gastric dilatation and
depressed patients, opioids alone may be adequate
volvulus (GDV) patients.
 to facilitate airway management, although in most
cases, co-administration of a benzodiazepine or
hypnotic is required to produce adequate relax-
Anaesthesia maintenance
ation to facilitate intubation. If additional relax-
 ation is indicated, topical laryngeal desensitisation 
As noted above, cardiac performance decreases in
with lidocaine spray is performed, taking care not
a dose-dependent manner when inhalation agents
to exceed the toxic dose.
are used for anaesthetic maintenance. In trauma-
The majority of veterinary clinics have the choice
tised or hypovolaemic patients, lower inhalant
of two injectable agents for the induction of anaes-
-uiis juaaard cn Aessanu aq Aeu suoeuao
thesia in routine cases - propofol and alfaxalone.
 Most of the commonly used induction agents
inhalant level is the increased risk for sudden
(thiopentone, propofol, alfaxalone) cause hypoten-
emergence during anaesthesia. In order to reduce
sion even in healthy patients, and this can be
this risk, we need to balance the need to preserve
 profound in the high-risk case, particularly
in
cardiovascular function while maintaining
an
hypovolaemic animals and patients with
：low
adequate depth of anaesthesia.Looking
at the
cardiac reserve. For this reason, these agents are
not recommended by themselves for anaesthetic
relaxation, analgesia) the highest dose requirement
induction in critical or emergency patients. The
for inhalant anaesthesia is to provide adequate
manufacturers of alfaxalone (Alfaxan) claim it
pain control. Using adjunctive techniques to pro-
causes less cardiovascular depression, but, as yet,
vide pain control can reduce the inhalant dose
there seems to be litle evidence to support this. As
requirement. This strategy is referred to as “bal-
always, the safest anaesthetic is the one with which
anced anaesthesia'
you are most familiar, so if these are your only
There are two other options that provide supple-
options in terms of induction agents then they
mental analgesia and permit delivery of low inhal-
should be used in combination with other agents,
ant doses. One option is to combine regional/local
e.g. benzodiazepines, to reduce the dose required
analgesia with general anaesthesia, i.e. the use of
to produce loss of consciousness.
local or regional nerve blocks to ‘desensitise’ the
Rarely, inhalational agents may be selected for a
surgical field, so that the inhalant is required only
‘mask induction'. Both isoflurane and sevoflurane
to provide unconsciousness. This strategy can be
produce a dose-related decrease in cardiac perfor-
highly effective in anatomical regions amenable to
mance noted as decreased cardiac output.
The
local or regional nerve block. A second option is to
decreased cardiac output is due to reduced stroke
provide supplemental parenteral analgesia using a
volume; heart rate normally remains within the
drug or drug combination that has less effect on
normal range. Both sevoflurane and isoflurane
cardiac performance than the inhalant drug. The
cause a dose-related reduction in arterial blood
simplest method is to provide supplemental anal-
pressure, which is largely due to a decrease in
pioido ue jo uogensnuupe snouaannui Aq eisan
vascular tone. Additionally, both isoflurane and
such as morphine or fentanyl. These opioids are
 sevoflurane are potent respiratory depressants,
powerful analgesic drugs that have minimal car-
with decreased respiratory rate, decreased tidal
diovascular effects. An advanced method would
volume and increased arterial and end-tidal carbon
be to combine the opioid with other adjunctive
dioxide concentrations. Isoflurane and sevoflurane
 analgesics to provide multimodal analgesia. Such
decrease cerebral metabolism, increase cerebral
strategies have been shown to sigrificantly reduce
blood flow and increase intracranial pressure in a
 inhalant anaesthesia requirement while retaining
dose-dependent fashion. The routine use of nitrous
good cardiovascular stability.
62   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Peri-operative support
techniques of temperature support are used to
minimise hypothermia; ideally, measures should
 Peri-operative support should be individual to
be taken before induction to maintain the patient's
the patient, and guided by factors that were iden-
body temperature.
tified during the pre-operative period. Ventilator
support may be required in many cases. Pre-
existing injuries to the head, cervical and thoracic
Postoperative considerations
 areas may impede adequate spontaneous ventila-
tion. The respiratory depressant effects of anaes-
Patient support must be continued through the
thetic and analgesic drugs administered may also
postoperative period. Continuation of resuscitative
result in respiratory compromise during anaesthe-
measures initiated during anaesthesia is critical
sia. Lastly, patient fatigue, as a result of increased
for optimising patient stability. Monitoring CNS
energy demands and stress response, may reduce
status, ventilation, blood pressure, cardiac rhythm
the patient's ability to maintain strong spontane-
and rate, body temperature, urine output and
ous ventilation during anaesthesia.
 Continued re-assessment and replacement of
from anaesthesia is complete.
fluid due to pre-existing fluid deficits and vascular
volume expansion associated  with
1 anaesthetic
agents or sepsis must be considered during this
Further reading
 period. Both crystalloid and colloid-based fluids
 may be appropriate, depending on the individual
 Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
case and clinician preference. Estimated blood
Critical Care for Veterinary Technician, 2nd edition.
losses greater than 25% indicate replacement with
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
blood components or whole blood product to
Bryant, L. (Ed.) (2010) Anaesthesia for Veterinary Techni-
provide adequate colloid balance and provide
cians. Wiley-Blackwell, Iowa.
(z raide aas) sanss cn Aed i uaxo
King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine 
 In addition to ensuring fluid balance is maintained
 and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 2nd edition.
during the perioperative period, specific therapy to
BSAVA, Gloucester.
 treat hypotension may be required. In these cases,
MacIntyre, D.K, Drobatz, K.J. Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
 dose modification or change in anaesthetic drug
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
administration technique is one option, although
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Seymour, C. and Duke-Novakovski, T. (2007) BSAVA
in many cases, inotropic agents such as dopamine
Manual of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia, 2nd edition.
(3-7μg/kg/min) or dobutamine (2-5μg/kg/min)
BSAVA, Gloucester.
 may be used to support blood pressure. Trauma
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
patients are labile in their core temperature due to
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
altered thermoregulatory ability, anaesthetic agents
Wingfield, W.E. and Raffe, M.R. (2002) The Veterinary
and visceral exposure at the surgical site. Standard
KU Book. Teton NewMedia, Wyoming.
7
Practical Laboratory Techniques
Introduction
blood gas analysis are also commonly assessed and
specific tests for critical patients such as lactate
Veterinary nurses are expected to have the knowl-
levels, as an indicator of tissue perfusion, and
edge and skill to perform a wide variety of lab-
central venous oxygen, as a measure of oxygen
oratory tests. Results should then be recorded
 delivery and uptake, are becoming increasingly
accurately on the patient's record. Having a thor-
common thanks to the availability of ‘bedside'
 ough understanding of the lab tests and how to
testing. Many other laboratory tests are collected
 interpret them will aid in providing the best pos-
to assess thyroid function (T4), adrenal gland
sible care of the patient. However, it should be
function (adrenocorticotrophic hormone [ACTH]
remembered that veterinary nurses are not per-
stimulation), drug levels (phenobarbital, potas-
mitted to make a diagnosis. Every veterinary
sium bromide, digoxin), and many others. This
nurse can make his/herself more valuable by
chapter focuses on testing routinely carried out
learning what each laboratory test means for the
in critical patients in order to monitor patient
patient. By recognising important abnormalities
status.
nurses can assist both the veterinary surgeon and
outpatients.
Electrolyte levels
Laboratory tests
Electrolyte levels are monitored frequently in the
ICU. Most patients that are critically ill will have
A wide variety of tests are preformed daily, or
concurrent electrolyte imbalances upon presenta-
more frequently, in the critical patient. Serum bio-
tion, or will occur during hospitalisation. Sodium,
chemical analysis, complete blood cell counts and
potassium and chloride levels should be moni-
electrolyte analysis are mainstays and are often
tored regularly. Magmesium should also be moni-
checked initially, then daily or even more fre-
tored in critically ill patients (see Chapter 5). It
quently as needed. Acid-base assessment and
should be noted that in some emergency or critical
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
64  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
patients, correction of these abnormalities is
required before a patient is haemodynamically
stable if the abnormality is affecting the patient's
condition.
Acid-base assessment
Bicarbonate, blood pH, TCO2 and PCO2 should be
monitored in all ICU and ER patients. Acid-base
assessment and continued monitoring can be an
 invaluable in the treatment of critically ill patients.
Determining if any acid-base derangements are
present and whether they are metabolic or respira-
tory in nature can be invaluable in the treatment of
patients (see Chapter 5).
Haematology
Packed cell volume (PCV), total protein (TP), com-
Figure 7.1  In house clotting time analyser
plete blood count (CBC), platelet estimates, blood
smear/differentials and reticulocyte counts are
valuable aids to assessing a patient's status. Saline
agglutination tests can also be useful in deter-
mining auto-immune causes of disease (a positive
saline agglutination makes Coombs' testing unnec-
essary in many cases).
Packed cell volume/haematocrit (PCV/Hct): checks
what percentage of the blood is comprised of
red blood cells. This, in combination with total
solids, can be an indicator of hydration.
White blood cell counts (WBC): indicator of
disease, infection or inflammation.
Differential: can determine the numbers of spe-
Figure 7.2  Veterinary nurse carrying out buccal mucosal
cific types of white blood cells present. Mor-
bleeding time (BMBT) in house.
phology of cells can be determined and check
for abnormalities.
Reticulocyte counts: evaluates number of imma-
[PT], activated partial thromboplastin time [APTT],
 ture red blood cells to determine if regenerative
buccal mucosal bleeding time [BMBT]) (see Figures
anaemia is present.
7.1 and 7.2), fecal analysis (for parasite detection),
viral testing (feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV],
feline leukaemia virus [FeLV], parvovirus) (see
Other tests
Figure 7.3), Ehrlichia and Lyme disease testing are
being increasingly used in house for rapid assess-
Urinalysis (chemistry strip, ultrasound sonogra-
ment of critical patients. All of these tests can be
 phy [USG], sediment analysis), clotting tests (acti-
 useful in determining the cause of illness in these
vated coagulation time [ACT], prothrombin time
patients.
Practical Laboratory Techniques  65
20℃
FoLL
1.360
FIU
1.355
50
1.350
40
1.345
30
1.340
20
1.335
10
00/51M
1.000
S.P
NDU.G
Figure 7.3  In house viral testing kit for feline leukaemia
Cint
virus (FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV).
Packed cell volume and total protein
Figure 7.4  Refractometer reading of total protein level.
PCV (or haematocrit) and TP are important tests in
the emergency and critical patient. They are quick
and simple to perform and give relevant informa-
tion about the status of the patient. PCV and TP
should always be interpreted together to interpret
the patient's status accurately. Whole blood should
be placed into either anticoagulant coated capillary
tubes, or drawn from a filled EDTA tube. Once the
sample has been spun the three layers of cells will
be evident, the PCV should be measured first then,
using a refractometer, the TP can be measured. This
is performed by splitting the capillary tube above
the buffy coat (the layer of white blood cells and
platelets), the plasma protein layer can then be
'blown' onto the surface of the refractometer using
a 1-ml syringe. The TP is measured by looking at
the scale labelled g/dl (usually on the left-hand
side, with the specific gravity scale being on the
right-hand side) (see Figure 7.4). The line where
Figure 7.5 Positive saline auto-agglutination test.
the shaded area meets the coloured area is the TP
reading. As with SG measurement, the refractom-
eter should be calibrated regularly using distilled
commonly used test to indicate immune-mediated
water which has an SG of zero.
haemolytic anaemia. The test is performed by
mixing one drop of blood with one drop of isotonic
saline on a microscope slide. The slide should be
Saline agglutination
gently rocked from side to side in order to mix the
saline and blood, and then observed for signs of
Auto-agglutination of red blood cells indicates
 macroagglutination (obvious to the naked eye) (see
anti-red blood cell antibodies are present and is a
Figure 7.5). Once this has been performed, the
66  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
blood-saline can be covered with a coverslip and
the slide examined under the microscope. Rou-
leaux can be differentiated from agglutination by
examination under a microscope, and the addition
of saline should disperse any rouleaux.
Prepare and examine blood films
Most practices have in-house analysers available.
However, these should always be used in conjunc-
tion with blood film examination, and this is a
Figure 7.6  Rapid dipping kit in an in-practice lab.
particularly useful technique for the emergency
 patient. In particular, WBC evaluation is not always
reliable, nor is the platelet count always correct,
avoid the build-up of stain precipitate. Periodically
especially in cats which have relatively small red
they should be scrubbed out using methanol to
blood cells and quite large platelet - most analysers
remove all stain. Stain-containing precipitate can
differentiate these cell types by their size. Further-
be filtered or discarded and replaced with fresh
more, platelet clumping also falsely lowers the
stain. With time, the red-orange dye can be inad-
platelet count. Breed also needs to be taken into
vertently carried over into the blue-purple dye
 consideration when assessing platelet counts, e.g.
resulting in weak staining. The only solution is to
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel may have abnor-
replace the blue-purple dye.
mally low number of platelets (thrombocytopenia)
 and oversized platelets (macrothrombocytopenia).
 Blood film examination will detect these errors
Film examination
and provides much information that is not avail-
able from the analyser. For white blood cells, a left
 To ensure all cell lines are examined properly, a set
shift, toxic neutrophils, reactive lymphocytes and
procedure of blood film examination should be
neoplastic cells can all be identified on a manual
routinely followed. Initially, the smear is checked
blood smear. When assessing anaemic patients,
for large platelet clumps by examining the feath-
examination of red blood cell morphology is vital,
ered edge at low power (20x). The smear is then
 both to distinguish between regenerative and non-
examined at higher power (40x or 100x) in the thin
regenerative anaemia and sometimes to identify
area in from the feathered edge, where the cells are
the cause of the anaemia (e.g. spherocytes found in
evenly distributed in a monolayer. The red blood
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia). Finally,
cells, white blood cells and platelets should then be
by counting the platelets seen on the blood film,
examined in turn.
the analyser can be verified or corrected.
Examination of red blood cells
Stains
Erythrocytes, commonly known as red blood cells,
 Romanowsky's stains include Wright-Giemsa and
are the oxygen carrying cells within the blood.
rapid 'dipping' kits (Diff-Quik kits). The latter are
When these cells are low in number, the patient is
more than adequate for in-house use (see Figure
 anaemic; this can be determined by measuring
7.6). These kits have a three-stage staining proce-
PCV or haematocrit. Examination of red blood cells
dure, which incorporates a fixative pot (usually
in blood smears should include an assessment of
five dips), orange-pink dye in the second pot
colour, size and shape, and a search for inclusions.
(usually three dips) and a blue-purple dye in the
Canine red blood cells (see Figure 7.7) have a pale
third pot (usually six dips). The stain is stored in
area in the centre of the cells (central pallor) which
glass jars which should be cleaned regularly to
 is not obvious in feline red blood cells (see Figure
Practical Laboratory Techniques   67
Figure 7.7   Normal red blood cells (canine),
Figure 7.9 Nucleated red blood cells.
Figure 7.8 Normal red blood cells (feline).
Figure 7.10  Spherocytes.
7.8), which are smaller. If the animal is anaemic,
Evaluation for a possible cause of anaemia
blood film examination helps determine if the
anaemia is regenerative.
The blood film can help identify several causes of
anaemia, including immune-mediated haemolytic
anaemia, babesiosis, feline infectious anaemia,
Features of regeneration
oxidant injury, microangiopathic haemolytic anae-
mia and iron deficiency.
 Polychromasia: these are young red blood cells
which stain a purple-lilac colour due to the
presence of ribosomes in the cytoplasm. Occa-
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
sional polychromatophils (one every 2-4 1000x
field) are seen in films from healthy animals.
This disease usually leads to circulating sphero-
Several per field would indicate a robust regen-
cytes (see Figure 7.10). These appear smaller than
erative response.
 normal red blood cells with a darker and/or denser
 Anisocytosis with large (young) red blood cells.
cytoplasm lacking central pallor. Care should be
 Howell-Jolly bodies: these are small but promi-
taken to look in the examination area monolayer
nent dark inclusions which are remnants of
and avoid looking at the tail of the smear where
nuclear material.
cells are flattened and lose their normal central
Nucleated red blood cells: do not confuse these
pallor, giving a false impression of spherocytes.
with lymphocytes. Nucleated red blood cells
Spherocytes are difficult to see in cats' blood
have smaller nuclei and the cytoplasm is a
because normal feline red blood cells have minimal
similar colour to polychromatic red blood cells
or no central pallor. NB Small numbers of sphero-
(see Figure 7.9).
cytes may be seen with other causes of anaemia.
68   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Babesiosis
Oxidant injury
 Babesia canis (see Figure 7.11) appear as large pear-
Ingestion of oxidants, such as onion or zinc, can
shaped organisms, usually in pairs. Babesia gibsoni
lead to the formation of Heinz bodies or eccentro-
organisms are much smaller, circular bodies. These
cytes with resultant anaemia. Heinz bodies are
parasites are more often seen in capillary blood
 seen as non-staining round bodies, usually pro-
(e.g. from an ear prick) and most frequently found
truding from the surface of the cell. Eccentro-
along the edges of films. However, these organisms
cytes (see Figure 7.13) have a pale area on one
are not always visualised and serology or poly-
side of the cell which is devoid of haemoglobin,
merase chain reaction (PCR) are more sensitive
but with a cell membrane visible around this
methods for diagnosis
pale area.
Feline infectious anaemia (haemotropic
mycoplasma infection)
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia
 Provided that samples are obtained during an
 Red blood cell fragmentation, e.g. due to vascular
episode of parasitaemia, organisms may be identi-
neoplasms such as haemangiosarcoma, results
fied using the Romanowsky stains. The organisms
 in the formation of schistocytes (see Figure 7.14)
stain blue-grey to pale purple with Romanowsky
and acanthocytes. Schistocytes are  irregularly
stains and appear as small cocci singly or in chains.
shaped, often with elongated fragments and an
Again, PCR is a more sensitive diagnostic tech-
 irregular spiked outline. Acanthocytes also have
nique. Figure 7.12 demonstrates the presence of
 irregular spiky projections but are roundish in
Mycoplasma felis on a blood smear.
shape.
Figure 7.11
Babesia canis.
Figure 7.13 Eccentrocytes.
电
Figure 7.12 Mycoplasma felis.
Figure 7.14 Schistocytes.
Practical Laboratory Techniques 69
Figure 7.15  Normal neutrophils.
Figure 7.16  Dohle bodies and foamy cytoplasm.
Iron deficiency anaemia
with parallel sides. Shallow indentations <50% of
the width of the nucleus may be present. Bands
This leads to defective haemoglobin synthesis, and
indicate acute inflammation.
so red blood cells are very pale with a wide area of
Toxic changes in neutrophils and bands are seen
central pallor and a thin rim of haemoglobin.
in severe inflammation when the body is forced
 to produce and distribute them rapidly, especially
associated with bacterial infection. Toxic changes
Examination of leucocytes
are listed below:
The morphological examination and differential
 Dohle bodies - indistinct blue-grey cytoplas-
count are important to validate (or refute) the anal-
mic inclusions (see Figure 7.16)
yser differential count, to identify a left shift and/
Increased cytoplasmic basophilia (but not as
 or toxic changes (which are important indicators
dark as monocytes)
 or inflammation) and to identify atypical, possibly
Foamy vacuolated cytoplasm
neoplastic cells. It is vital to evaluate a blood film
Cytoplasmic granules
prior to administration of any treatment and/or
Giant neutrophils
chemotherapy, rather than relying on the neutro-
Nuclear swelling
phil count produced by an in-house analyser.
Doughnut-shaped nuclei.
A differential white blood cell count is performed
by counting the leucocytes at both the edges and
the middle of the smear in the examination are
Band neutrophils
 because larger cells tend to be pushed to the edges
Characteristics of band neutrophils include:
of the smear and smaller cells tend to be more
concentrated in the middle. The percentage of
 Immature neutrophils
each cell type is then multiplied by the total white
An unsegmented, horseshoe-shaped nucleus
 blood cell count to determine an absolute count for
Released before fully mature due to increased
each cell type.
demand
 Their presence in blood smear is termed left
shift'
Neutrophils
 Can be regenerative or degenerative:
Neutrophils comprise approximately 50-70% of
 Regenerative - neutrophilia in which mature
white blood cells, forming a first defence against
neutrophils are present in greater numbers
infection and inflammation. Neutrophils have an
than band neutrophils; degenerative - a low
elongated, segmented nucleus and light blue-grey
to normal total neutrophil number with
cytoplasm without visible granules (see Figure
>10% band neutrophils
7.15). Band neutrophils should be counted sepa-
Generally a poor prognostic indicator, and
rately. These have U-shaped non-lobulated nuclei
there is a concern with the neutropaenic
70 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 7.17 Feline basophil and lymphocyte.
Figure 7.18  Canine eosinophil.
patient that they will become, or already be,
in septic shock.
Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes (see Figure 7.17) have a round
nucleus with condensed, smudged chromatin with
a narrow rim of basophilic cytoplasm. Lympho-
cytes vary in size but most are small, only slightly
larger than red blood cells. They have sparse cyto-
plasm, which is not visible all the way around
the nucleus. Medium-sized lymphocytes may
Figure 7.19 Feline eosinophil and basophil.
approach the size of neutrophils and have more
abundant cytoplasm, often completely encircling
the nucleus. Reactive lymphocytes are larger still
with a nucleus approximately 1.5 times the diam-
eter of a canine red blood cell and abundant deeply
Basophils
basophilic cytoplasm, often with a darker tinge at
Basophils are rare in blood smears from normal
the periphery.
animals. They are similar in size to eosinophils and
have an elongated 'ribbon-like' segmented nucleus
and variable numbers of cytoplasmic granules.
Monocytes
 In dogs these granules are sparse and dark purple,
Monocytes are larger than neutrophils and have
n cats they are abundant and pale lilac (see
abundant sky blue cytoplasm, often containing
Figure 7.19), sometimes with a few dark purple
clear discrete vacuoles and sometimes fine pink
granules.
dust-like granules. The shape of the nucleus is very
variable and can be round, kidney-bean shaped,
Atypical cells
 lobulated, U-shaped or S-shaped.
Atypical cells suggest leukaemia or ‘overspill' of
lymphoma into the blood, especially when such
Eosinophils
 cells are present in large numbers. Features that
Eosinophils are slightly larger than neutrophils
 would suggest leukaemia include large cells with
(see Figure 7.18), and are characterised by numer-
large round or convoluted nuclei, containing coarse
ous prominent pink cytoplasmic granules. Eosino-
 Or stippled chromatin and sometimes nucleoli
phils are often seen in cases where there is an
Suspicious cases should be reviewed by an experi-
allergic response, e.g. inflammatory bowel disease.
Enced cytopathologist.
Practical Laboratory T'echniques
transudate, modified transudate or exudate. The
classification criteria includes colour, clarity, pro-
tein content, number of nucleated cells and cyto-
logical characteristics.
Pure transudates have low total protein counts
(<25g/l) and low nucleated cell counts (<500-
1000cells/μl They typically occur secondary to
alterations in Starling's forces caused by increased
hydrostatic pressure or decreased oncotic pressure
00.19
(hypoalbuminaemia). Disease processes that cause
Figure 7.20 Image of normal platelet count on a
pure transudates include congestive heart failure,
high-powered field.
inflammatory bowel disease and chronic liver
disease.
Modified transudates also have a slightly
Platelets
increased total protein count (25-50g/l) and a
higher nucleated cell counts (500-8000cells/μl)
These are small round structures with no nucleus.
than a pure transudate because in this case there is
They are one-quarter to half the diameter of red
inflammation associated with the transudate. This
blood cells with pink cytoplasm and fine granules.
often suggests nothing more than a chronic accu-
Platelet numbers can be estimated by counting the
mulation of a pure transudate. In addition to the
number of platelets seen in a 1000x field (i.e. 10x
above causes certain neoplasms may cause modi-
eyepiece and 100x objective), having first deter-
fied transudates.
mined that no platelet clumps are present. Five
Exudates are f
fluids with a high total protein
fields are counted and a mean value is calculated.
moo [ao paeaonu yoy e pue (1/8og<) nmos
The normal count is 10-30 platelets per 1000x field.
(>3000 cells/μl). They most commonly accumulate
because of i
15 x 10°/l. Thus, if 10 platelets are seen per 1000x
They are subclassified as septic or non-septic. Neo-
field, the platelet count is approximately 10 x 15
plasia may also cause a non-septic exudate.
= 150 × 10°/l. Animals with severe thrombocyto-
paenia (<30 x 10/l) have only 0-3 platelets per
field. Any patient with less than 5 platelets per high
Fluid analysis
power field should be monitored closely for wors-
ering of thrombocytopaenia. Large'shift' platelets
The gross examination of an effusion is as impor-
suggest active thrombopoiesis.
. A normal platelet
tant as any other examination procedure but can
count equates to approximately 8-15 platelets per
often be overlooked. The colour, consistency and
high-powered (100x) field (see Figure 7.20)
smell of the fluid may provide information about
the pathological process. Fluid should be collected
into EDTA, plain and sterile plain tubes. The EDTA
Cytology of effusions
tube is used for total nucleated cell count (TNCC)
and cytology. EDTA anticoagulant is required to
Cytological analysis is normally associated, and
p n m   ans a saaand
complemented with, the assessment of biochemi-
 to disruption of cell morphology and decreased
cal parameters such as protein content, pH, choles-
 TNCC. The plain tube is used for measurement of
terol, creatinine, glucose and lactate.
TP and other biochemical tests, and the sterile
plain tube is for bacterial culture if required.
A PCV, protein level, white blood cell count,
Classification
and microscopic examination of the fluid to evalu-
ate white blood cell morphology as well as the
One of the first steps in the interpretation of an
presence of bacteria should be performed on
effusion is the classification into effusion type:
every sample that is collected. The microscopic
72  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
evaluation should be performed on a centrifuged
with a piece of card or paper. If you do not have
sample. The total protein content of the fluid can
eough distilled water to rinse it off properly, run
be used to help classify the effusion. TP can be
the back of the slide under the cold tap: better to
measured using a refractometer, whilst TNCC can
alter the staining a litle than to have too much
be measured using a haematology cell counter
stain precipitate to deal with.
or haemocytometer. In abdominocentesis samples,
the entire slide should be systematically evaluated
because the presence of even a single intracellular
Tip
bacterium confirms a diagnosis of septic peritoni-
 It is often easier to screen for bacteria using these stains
tis. The fluid should be cultured if bacteria are
(where nearly all stain deeply) than to use a Gram
present. In the dog, a blood glucose concentration
stain, where Gram-negative bacteria are pink and
that is at least 1mmol/l more than that in the
 therefore difficult to see against what is usually a pink
abdominal fluid is strongly supportive of septic
counterstained background.
peritonitis. A blood to fluid lactate difference of
Bacteria must be seen inside neutrophils to indicate
less than 2mmol/l is also suggestive of septic peri-
sepsis rather than contamination.
tonitis in the dog.
Fungi and mycobacteria may not take up stain at all,
so be sensitive to 'negative images' with unstained
elements within the stained background, or, in the case
Rapid stains
of mycobacteria, inside cells.
Diff-Quik (a registered trade mark of American
Scientific products), Rapi-Diff and others are modi-
Glucose monitoring in the critical patient
fied Wright's stains. These are convenient, user-
friendly and require no complicated staining
Blood glucose measurements and serial blood
apparatus, but the trade-off is that detail, especially
glucose monitoring should be performed on all
nuclear detail, may not be ideal. As with all stains
critically ill patients as abnormalities in glucose
they should be replaced regularly.
concentration are common. For patients presenting
omn an emergency basis, a blood glucose measure-
ment should be performed at the time of initial
Directions
presentation to the veterinary hospital, especially
There are many variations in recommended timings
if clinical signs such as altered mental status,
for the different solutions for optimal staining ·
seizures or coma are present (see Figure 7.21). It is
unfortunately, they vary as the stain becomes
also prudent to monitor the blood glucose of
exhausted. The instructions below should
be
patients who are at risk of becoming septic such as
regarded as a very rough guide: ideally, watch how
 patients with parvovirus or postoperative foreign
the slide takes up the stain and keep going until it
body. It is wise to carry out glucose monitoring
looks right.
along with other diagnostics throughout anaesthe-
sia in patients that are already septic. Hospitalised
1)
 Smear slide and air dry
patients should have blood glucose measurements
2）
 Dip slide 5 × 1 second in fixative solution (pale
 performed at least once daily or more often depend-
blue). Allow excess to drain after each dip
ing on the underlying disease process or adminis-
3）
 Dip slide 5 x 1 second in Stain Solution 1 (red)
tration of therapies, such as dextrose-containing
4)
 Dip slide 6 x 1 second in Stain Solution 2 (deep
fluids or insulin, which are known to affect blood
blue)
glucose concentration.
5)
 Rinse slide with distilled water or Weise's
buffer pH 7.2 (Merck)
6)Air dry before examination.
Lactate measurement in the
critical patient
There is a gold-coloured scum that ends up on
the surface of Solution 2 after you have used it a
Lactate is an end product of anaerobic metabolism
lot (precipitate forming) - this should be removed
and is formed by conversion of pyruvate to lactic
Practical Laboratory Techniques  73
ST
口
四
4B0
000
ENPETDIS
CG4+
Figure 7.21  Glucometer.
Figure 7.22 i-STAT hand-held blood gas analyser.
acid. Lactic acid is produced during normal physi-
perfusion and shock; type B can be classified into
ologic activity (i.e. exercise) and by pathological
 one of four groups: systemic illness; drugs and
processes. When tissue oxygen delivery is inade-
toxins; heredity and congenital abnormalities; and
quate, hypoxic areas must switch to anaerobic
miscellaneous.
metabolism. Anaerobic glycolysis causes far less
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to be produced than
during aerobic glycolysis. This causes energy defi-
Interpretation of results
cits in the cell which eventually leads to cell death
Normal lactate 
measurement:
<2.5mmol/l
be maintained. Elevated lactate serves as an early
(dog); <1.5 mmol/l (cat)
indicator of tissue hypoxia which, if left untreated,
Mild increase: 3-5mmol/l
yeap pue uonoumysap uesno ol ssaioid pmon
Moderate increase: 5-10 mmol/1
Therefore, lactate is the single best marker of perfu-
Severe increase: >10 mmol/l.
sion. Hyperlactataemia is common in conditions
associated with shock, dehydration, sepsis, throm-
A one-off lactate reading should not be used as
 boembolic disease, regional ischaemia (e.g. gastric
a progmostic indicator for clients and frequent
dilation and volvulus, aortic thromboembolism)
monitoring and re-checking is necessary as it is
and neoplasia. Serial lactate concentrations
are
not uncommon to see a patient with GDV with a
especially useful in monitoring the effectiveness of
lactate level of 13 mmol/1. However, many of these
fluid therapy and as a prognostic factor. Measure-
patients will go on to survive the surgical correc-
ments of lactate are also useful in the peri-operative
tion with appropriate fluid therapy and supportive
period, where fluid losses, hypotension and myo-
care. The ability to measure lactate is now widely
cardial depression can all combine to create tissue
available to general practitioners with the use of
hypoxia.
dry chemistry analysers, iStat blood gas analysers
 There are two types of lactic acidosis: type A,
(see Figure 7.22) and hand-held monitors (see
acidosis as a result of tissue hypoxia, poor tissue
Figure 7.23).
74 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
tion. Casts may be the only abnormality presenting
 n early renal disease. During storage other changes
may occur including cellular disintegrations and
pH alteration, the longer the storage time and the
higher the temperature, the more pronoumced the
changes.
Specific gravity
The SG of urine is a useful indicator of renal con-
centrating ability The SG of urine is always greater
than that of distilled water (which has an SG of
1.000), the SG of urine is increased by the large
amounts of glucose, protein and lipids.
 SG will vary in healthy patients depending on
hydration status and fluid intake. Under normal
conditions SG ranges 1.015-1.040 in dogs and
1.036-1.060 in cats. Ideally, SG should always be
measured in combination with dipstick analysis.
This is because a marked increase in glucose or
Figure 7.23 Lactate monitor.
protein concentrations in urine will result in an
increased SG, which may be misinterpreted as
a patient with better urine-concentrating ability
Urinalysis
than it has in reality. Other factors to be taken into
consideration include water intake, medication,
Urine analysis is a valuable laboratory test for criti-
dlinical condition, haematology and biochemistry
cal patients. Despite being a simple, cheap and
results.
non-invasive procedure, it will provide informa-
SG is invaluable in the interpretation of renal
tion not only about the urinary tract, but also about
function and concentrating ability. The loss of con-
other body systems. A complete urine analysis
centrating ability is one of the first indicators for
(including dipstick, specific gravity [SG] and urine
renal tubular disease.
 sediment examination/microscopy) should be car-
ried out. Urine analysis results may be analysed in
combination with biochemistry results to give an
Ketones
overall picture of the patient's condition.
Ideally, new, clean, clear containers should be
Ketones are commonly tested in the critical patient,
used to obtain and collect free-catch urine samples.
particularly to detect for ketoacidosis in diabetic
Aseptic collection techniques should be used if the
patients. If urine is not available at the time of
urine is likely to be required for culture (cystocen-
initial presentation, serum can be tested for ketones
tesis, catheterisation). Urine analysis should be
using the test strips to identify ketonuria (see
carried out as quickly following collection as pos-
Figure 7.24).
sible, ideally within 30 minutes. If this is not
 achievable then the sample should be refrigerated
immediately following collection, and stored for
Urine sediment
 no longer than 6-12 hours. Before analysis, refrig-
erated urine should be returned to room tempera-
Another important component of a routine uri-
ture and thoroughly mixed. Casts are particularly
nalysis is the microscopic examination of the sedi-
vulnerable to disintegration and will only be de-
ment. Animals with acute renal insult will have
tected if fresh urine is examined soon after collec-
urine sediment with tubular casts and degenerate
Practical Laboratory Techniques  75
Urine protein : creatinine ratio
A urine protein:creatinine ration is performed
in patients with proteinuria, usually detected on
urine dipstick. The extent of the proteinuria will be
more accurately assessed using this test as protein
and creatinine are excreted in relatively constant
amounts through the glomerulus. Normal urine
protein:creatinine ration is <1.0.
Further reading
Figure 7.24
Testing serum on ketostix for the presence of
ketones.
Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
Critical Care for Veterinary
/ Techmicians, 2nd edition.
epithelial cells. Granular casts can be seen with
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
pyelonephritis and hyaline casts with nephrotoxic-
King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine
ity. Conversely animals with chronic renal failure
 and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 2nd edition.
will usually have urine with no cells or casts.
BSAVA, Gloucester.
Patients with urinary tract infections will have
MacIntyre, D.K, Drobatz, K.J. Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
increased numbers of white blood cells in their
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
urine sediment, unless immunosuppression or
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
hyperadrenocorticism is present. If a portosystemic
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
shunt or severe liver disease is present, patients
Villers, E. and Blackwood, L. (2005) BSAVA Manual of
may have ammonium biurate crystals (golden
Clinical Pathology. BSAVA, Gloucester.
 brown ‘flame'-shaped crystals). In ethylene glycol
Wingfield, W.E. and Raffe, M.R. (2002) The Veterinary
toxicity calcium oxalate (coffin-shaped) crystals
ICU Book. Teton NewMedia, Wyoming.
may be seen. Ideally, patients receiving potentially
nephrotoxic drugs should have their urine sedi-
ment checked on a daily basis.
Techniques for Oxygen
Supplementation
Introduction
Stage 4: reduced cardiac output, hypovolaemia,
distributive shock.
Oxygen is frequently administered to emergency
 patients as part of their stabilisation, as ongoing
Oxygen supplementation should be adminis-
therapy or for pre-oxygenation prior to induction
tered wherever there is a suspicion that oxygen
of general anaesthesia. The delivery of oxygen
delivery to tissues is compromised by any means
from the atmosphere to the tissues of the body
(see Figure 8.1). It should not be reserved only for
relies on:
dyspnoeic animals, although this the most common
ndication.
1）
 Oxygen being efficiently inhaled via the respi-
ratory tract, to the alveoli
 Oxygen being exchanged across the alveoli
Oxygen supplementation techniques
membrane
3）
 Oxygen being carried via haemoglobin in red
Room air has an inspired oxygen concentration of
blood cells
-addns uaxo laaal eas ie %1z Aaeuxoidde
4) Red blood cells reaching the required tissues
mentation aims to increase this percentage. Several
via the circulation.
techniques exist, each of which have their own
advantages and disadvantages (see Table 8.1).
So, any animal, with a problem at each stage of this
Which technique is selected depends on patient
process, will benefit from their inspired oxygen
size, conformation, temperament, likely duration
levels being increased. Examples include:
and available equipment.
Stages 1 and 2: dyspnoea, obstruction, pneumonia,
Oxygen source
pulmonary oedema
Stage 3: anaemia or formation of methaemoglobin
A variety of oxygen sources can be used, and their
due to toxicity
 selection will vary between individual practices,
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing. First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Techniques for Oxygen Supplementation   77
Figure 8.1 A cat with a diaphragmatic rupture receiving
Figure 8.2 An oxygen humidifying unit. The oxygen passes
oxygen supplementation prior to induction of anaesthesia.
through sterile water to increase the water content before
reaching the patient.
Table 8.1Comparison of oxygen supplementation
techniques
Approximate
Humidification
Oxygen
% oxygen
For long-term oxygen therapy it becomes neces-
 supplementation
 Suggested O2
 obtained in
technique
flow rate
inspired air*
sary to humidify the inhaled gas to prevent irrita-
tion and dessication of mucous membranes. In
Oxygen cage
10-12 I/min
40-50
practice, it is recommended that any oxygen sup-
Mask
2-5 Vmin
40-50
plementation over an hour's duration should be
humidified. This is achieved by a chamber where
'Hood'
 2-5 Vmin
30-40
the oxygen is passed through sterile water (see
'Flow-by
2-1 0 l/min
30-40
Figure 8.2) (some commercial oxygen cages have a
 Nasal tube
50-100 ml/kg/min
30-50
built-in humidification system). Without humidifi-
cation the dry gas causes an increase in viscosity
 Transtracheal
10-50ml/kg/min
40-60
of secretions in the respiratory tract, leading to
Endotracheal
Dependent on
100
impaired mucociliary clearance and an increase in
tube
anaesthetic
the risk of respiratory infection. In the normal situ-
circuit used
 ation, inspired air is humidified in the upper
* Normal room air is approximately 21% oxygen at sea level.
airway as it passes through the nasal chambers;
any supplementation technique that bypasses the
upper airway (nasal catheter, transtracheal cathe-
dependent on the facilities available. Most com-
ter) should be humidified from initiation.
 monly, the practice will select from the following:
 Direct from an oxygen cylinder using oxygen
Short-term methods of oxygen
tubing
supplementation
 Direct from a piped oxygen source
 Using a breathing system attached to an anaes-
When a patient in respiratory distress presents at
thetic machine.
the practice, a brief targeted examination should be
78 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 8.3Oxygen supplementation via a loose-fitting
ma sk.
Figure 8.4Using "flow-by' to supplement oxygen in a
dyspnoeic dog.
performed (focusing on the respiratory, cardiovas-
pnoeic patient, using a loose-fiing mask, the
cular and neurological systems) and initial stabili-
actual percentage of inspired oxygen may actually
sation of the patient should be carried out. During
be as low as 35-55%. This technique is best reserved
this period oxygen should generally be supple-
for collapsed or weak patients who are unable to
mented using non-invasive techniques, commonly
move, and are not likely to panic.
via mask or flow-by techniques (see Flow-by, below).
However, these techniques require a member of
Flow-by
staff to administer them continuously in order for
them to be effective, hence these are generally
By holding the end of an anaesthetic circuit near to
viewed as short-term measures and, if required,
the nostrils or mouth of a patient, oxygen can be
the facilities to administer oxygen for a longer
supplied with less stress than a mask, although the
period may need to be organised.
technique is inefficient; the inspired oxygen con-
centration is unlikely to exceed 40% (see Figure
8.4). This technique is suitable for administering
Mask supplementation
 Oxygen to animals during examination. The equip-
Using a mask to supplement oxygen is a straight-
ment is readily to hand, and is less stressful for a
forward and relatively effective technique, with no
 dyspnoiec animal than having a mask placed over
requirement for specialised equipment. An appro-
the muzzle. Flow rates of 2-10l/minute are suit-
Aue ch paie aq ues ys uahxo pazis Apaeid
able, with the oxygen outlet as near to the nose or
anaesthetic circuit (see Figure 8.3). Tight-fitting
mouth as is comfortable (patients tolerate this tech-
 masks should be avoided; dyspnoeic animals will 
 nique if the stream of oxygen is directed perpen-
struggle and this becomes counterproductive 
as
dicular to their nostrils rather than directed up the
their oxygen demand will increase, and dangerous 
nares).
as they are in a fragile state. Tight-fitting masks
also promote rebreathing of expired carbon dioxide
Transtracheal oxygen supplementation
and can cause hyperthermia. Suggested oxygen
flow rates range from 1l/min (for cats and small
In patients with severe respiratory distress caused
dogs) through to 10l/min (for giant breeds). Ahigh
by upper airway obstruction that do not respond
percentage of inspired oxygen (80-90%) can be
 to flow-by oxygen administration, it is possible to
achieved in sedated or anaesthetised healthy
place a percutaneous catheter into the trachea and
animals using a tightly fitting mask. In the dys-
administer oxygen into the respiratory tract at a
Techniques for Oxygen Supplementation   79
Figure 8.6 A nasal catheter placed in a hospitalised
patient.
pliable nature is best tolerated (5 French catheter
for cats, and 8-10 French in larger dogs). A single
siaaal uaxo paids aseaun uen ralaen jese
to 40-50%; placing a second catheter in the other
nostril may increase levels to 60-70%. These levels
assume the animal is not mouth breathing or
Figure 8.5 An intravenous catheter has been placed into
 the lumen of the trachea to provide transtracheal oxygen
panting; if this is the case, then mixing of air in the
supplementation.
pharynx occurs and reduces the efficiency of this
techmique (see Practical techniques at the end of the
chapter).
level below that of the obstruction (see Figure 8.5).
This technique is useful in dogs weighing over
Nasal 'prongs'
10kg that have a sufficiently large trachea to allow
a catheter to be confidently placed (see Practical
-paw ueumq ul pasn Aquouon ane ,ssuoid, [esen
techniques at the end of the chapter).
icine, and can be useful in veterinary patients. The
and are available in adult or paediatric sizes,
Longer term oxygen supplementation
although even the smaller size will be too large for
cats or small dogs. The prongs are easily dislodged
The short-term supplementation techniques men-
by restless or fractious patients, and usually need
tioned above are suitable for initial stabilisation
to be secured with adhesive tape (see Figure 8.7).
and assessment. Following this period it is likely a
Applying local anaesthetic to the nostrils may im-
dyspnoeic patient will need ongoing supplementa-
 prove tolerance. As with nasal catheters, this tech-
tion; ideally, this supplementation can be carried
 nique becomes relatively inefficient in the panting
 out while the animal is calming down in a cage or 
patient.
 kenmel. Suitable longer term means of oxygen sup-
 plementation include the following.
Buster collar and clingfilm ('Crowe collar')
Nasal catheters
Oxygen may be administered into an Elizabethan
collar enclosed with clingfilm. Collars improvised
Oxygen can be supplied directly into the respira-
in the practice should have a small gap left at the
tory tract using a nasal catheter placed in one or 
 top of the collar to allow the venting of humid air
both nostrils and then connected to an oxygen
de au (s's ami aas) eaau saaard ci
source (see Figure 8.6). Silicone feeding tubes are
has no effect on oxygen concentration; oxygen
usually most suitable for this use as their soft
being heavier than air descends to the lower part
80 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 8.7 Human nasal 'prongs' used on a dyspnoeic dog.
Often, these prongs need to be secured with adhesive tape
over the top of the muzzle.
Figure 8.9  A cat receiving oxygen supplementation in a
paediatric incubator.
manent oxygen cages can be incorporated into a
bank of kennels. However, oxygen cages are not
their use to cats and small dogs, some cages do not
Aew yom %os aaoqe uaaxo panndsul aseanu
be insufficient, and problems of hyperthermia can
occur if there is no thermostatic temperature or
humidity control. Oxygen cages also tend to isolate
the patient and make monitoring difficult as each
Figure 8.8 An improvised 'Crowe collar', made using an
time the door is opened to examine the animal, the
Elizabethan collar and clingfilm. Note the gap left at the top
 oxygen level drops.
of the collar to prevent hyperthermia.
Improvised cages can be made, or cat carriers
 placed in large clear polythene bags and an oxygen
supply connected.
of the collar. The technique is tolerated well by
most dogs. A high flow rate is needed initially to
Incubators
fill the collar with oxygen, and then a rate of
approximately 1l/minute is generally adequate
Paediatric human incubators are readily available
Ue ul imsal pmous pue Sop pazis-umipaw e 1oj
and can be purchased second-hand from auctions.
 inspired oxygen of approximately 60%.
 Incubators are useful for small patients; high
 oxygen concentrations can be reached (80-90%),
Oxygen cages
they have a thermostat for temperature control,
 and small access ports enable some monitor-
 Jo sueau Asea pue juanuaauon e aie saben uasAxo
 ing without opening the whole door and reduc-
increasing inspired oxygen in the longer term.
ing
oxygen concentrations dramatically (see
Lightweight collapsible cages are available, or per-
Figure 8.9).
Techniques for Oxygen Supplementation  81
Figure 8.10  Performing endotracheal intubation in a
dyspnoeic patient.
Endotracheal intubation
There are emergency situations where endotra-
Figure 8.11 Palpating the trachea prior to transtracheal
cheal intubation becomes necessary (see Figure
catheter placement. The area has been clipped and
8.10). These include the following:
prepared.
● Inability to maintain a clear airway
 Inability to raise oxygen saturation by non-
is more of an issue in human medicine where
invasive supplementation
patients may be supplemented long term.
 Cardiorespiratory arrest - to perform ventila-
tion of the lungs
 Maintenance of general anaesthetic to carry out
Practical techniques
 an emergency procedure.
Transtracheal catheterisation (see Figures
 Minimal equipment is needed for endotracheal
8.11, 8.12 and 8.13)
intubation, and it is valuable if members of the
nursing team are familiar with the technique. For
Equipment:
example, in the case of cardiorespiratory arrest,
the sooner the animal is intubated and positive
14 or 16 gauge Intravenous catheter (over-the-
pressure ventilation initiated, the better the likely
needle type)
outcome of resuscitation (see Practical technigues
 Anaesthetic circuit and oxygen supply
at the end of the chapter).
 3-mm endotracheal tube cormector (or 7-mm
endotracheal tube connector with barrel of a
2-ml syringe)
Oxygen toxicity
 1) Preparation of the ventral neck overlying
the trachea should be quick and stress-free
Exposure of the lungs to an inspired oxygen frac-
as far as is possible. Hair is clipped and the
tion >60% for longer than 24-72 hours can lead to
skin aseptically prepared.
 Oxygen toxicity. This causes damage to the alveoli,
2) A large bore 14 or 16 gauge catheter is
jasand aseasip Suml Aue Suasiom Aenuaiod
inserted percutaneously into the lumen of
Ideally, oxygen supplementation should be kept
the trachea, between the tracheal rings 4
below 60% for longer term supplementation. This
and 5, or 5 and 6.
82  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
3)Once the stylet is within the trachea, the
catheter is advanced into the tracheal
lumen in the direction of the carina and the
stylet removed.
4）
 Oxygen is then administered in a flow-by
fashion directed at the catheter hub so that
 Oxygen is drawm in as the animal inhales.
5）
 A greater inspired oxygen level is achieved
if a 3-mm endotracheal tube connector is
inserted on to the hub of the catheter. This
can then be connected to an anesthetic
circuit supplying oxygen direct into the
trachea.
61
Alternatively, the catheter can be connected
to a 2-ml syringe barrel, then a 7-mm endo-
 tracheal tube connector used to attach the
anaesthetic circuit.
Technigue for nasal catheter placement
Figure 8.12 The catheter is inserted between tracheal rings
(see Figures 8.14, 8.15, 8.16 and 8.17)
5 and 6, and advanced prior to the stylet being removed.
Equipment:
Silicone or PVC feeding tube
 Proxymetacaine drops
Adhesive tape
Lubricating jelly
Tissue glue or skin suture/staple.
1)
）Pre-measure the catheter, by measuring
from the nostril to the medial canthus of
the eye, and mark the tube (a pen can be
used).
2)A few drops of 0.5% proxymetacaine are
placed into the selected nostril 10 minutes
before placement to desensitise the nostril,
reducing sneezing and struggling.
3）
 The patient is gently restrained with their
nose pointing dorsally and the catheter
should be gently advanced into the ventral
meatus.
4）
Aiming the catheter ventromedially helps
aid correct placement (aim towards the
base of the ear on the opposite side of the
head).
5)If the catheter is not placed in the ventral
meatus, it will not advance to the pre-
Figure 8.13 The connector from a 3-mm endotracheal tube
 measured distance as the dorsal and middle
has been used to connect the catheter direct to an
meatuses end at the ethmoid turbinates
anaesthetic circuit to increase the level of inspired oxygen.
rather than in the nasopharynx.
Techniques for Oxygen Supplementation  83
Figure 8.14  Applying local anaesthetic drops to the nostril
Figure 8.17 Once in place the catheter can be secured
 of the patient prior to inserting a nasal oxygen catheter.
with tissue glue, skin staples or sutures.
6)Once the catheter is in situ it should be
secured in place using sutures, staples or
tissue glue attached to ‘butterfly wings' of
tape around the catheter.
7）T
The catheter should loop around the alar
cartilage with fixation close to the nasal
orifice to prevent dislodgement.
8
The catheter is then looped dorsally be-
tween the eyes.
9
Once in place an Elizabethan collar should
be placed to prevent displacement of the
catheter by the patient.
Figure 8.15  A silicone feeding tube is pre-measured (from
Endotracheal intubation (see Figures 8.18,
the nostril to the medial canthus of the eye) and inserted
8.19 and 8.20)
into the nares in a ventromedial direction into the ventral
meatus.
Equipment:
 Endotracheal tubes: cuffed 3-14mm; uncuffed
 2-6 mm. Tubes should be cut to approximate
suitable length, and have connectors inserted.
Laryngoscope, with a range of blade sizes. The
use of a laryngoscope is strongly advised in the
emergency situation for a number of reasons:
 increased speed of intubation in critical patients,
to overcome problems of swelling/exudates/
foreign material, for increased ease of intuba-
tion for those less familiar with the technique.
Syringe or cuff inflator, and clamp for cuff.
！
Stylet for use in narrow tubes.
KY jelly.
Figure 8.16 The catheter is advanced until it is inserted the
Tape or bandage to tie in tube.
pre-measured distance.
Lidocaine spray for intubating cats.
84  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 8.18 Preparing to intubate a patient in sternal
recumbency; an assistant lifts the head by holding the lateral
aspects of the muzzle.
Figure 8.20 The endotracheal tube is advanced through
the rima glottis into the trachea.
1)Intubation is often easier with the animal in
sternal recumbency.
2）
An assistant lifts the head and supports the
weight by holding the lateral aspects of the
 muzzle, or the zygomatic arches in cats and
smaller dogs. The mouth is opened, and the
tongue grasped and pulled forward.
3）
The blade of the laryngoscope is inserted in the
midline. Ventral pressure with the tip of the
blade will reveal the pharynx, epiglottis and
larynx.
4）
 Often in dogs, the epiglottis remains hooked
over the soft palate - the soft palate can be
disengaged with the tip of the blade, or with
the end of the tube.
5) In cats, the larymx should be desensitised to
 prevent laryngeal spasm.
6
The tube is the passed through the rima glottis,
and advanced so it is siting in the trachea. If
it is difficult to pass the tube, rotating the tube
by 45 or 90° often helps.
Figure 8.19 The tongue has been pulled forward and the
blade of the laryngoscope is applying ventral pressure to
7
If it is difficult to pass the tip of the tube
reveal the epiglottis and larynx.
through the rima glottis, a stylet can be placed
Techniques for Oxygen Supplementation  85
first, then the endotracheal tube tube slid
along it.
It is essential that correct positioning is checked
to ensure the tube is not in the oesophagus. This
may be easy with a laryngoscope, as visualisation
of the rima glottis is possible. If still uncertain,
some people compress the chest and listen or feel
for expiration up the tube. An alternative tech-
nique relies on the difference in structure between
the trachea and oesophagus - as the oesophagus is
non-rigid, any suction placed on an oesophageal
placed tube will cause the walls to collapse and no
air will be suctioned. In contrast, suction on a tra-
cheal tube should give an easy flow of air from the
Figure 8.21 An improvised device to check endotracheal
rigid trachea (see Figure 8.21).
tube positioning. If suction is applied to a tube placed in the
 oesophagus the walls will collapse and prevent air being
drawn into the syringe.
9
Nursing the Dyspnoeic Patient
Introduction
Initial presentation
Patients with respiratory distress are commonly
Initial stabilisation of the dyspnoeic animal requires
seen as emergency
trauma or due to a longer standing pathology.
Regardless of the actual cause of the respiratory
 a rapid thorough physical exam, before allowing
distress, all patients show similar outwardly
the animal to rest with further oxygen therapy
evident signs of laboured respiratory effort which
prior to further work-up or treatment. The rise in
demonstrates inability to ventilate (physically
blood oxygen levels will also result in a calmer and
 move air in and out of the pulmonary system) or
 less panicky animal,
(the physical
to respire (the ability to exchange oxygen and
sensation is difficulty inl
breathing) will be re-
carbon dioxide in the lungs) efficiently. General
duced (see Figure 9.1).
The
 extremely dyspnoeic
signs include increased respiratory rate, adopting
animal that cannot adequately ventilate and oxy-
different postures, open mouth breathing
and
alterations in respiratory patterns.
require anaesthesia to intubate and gain control
These cases need urgent attention to avoid the
 of the airway, and to instigate positive pressure
risk of respiratory failure, cardiac arrest or hypoxic
ventilation.
damage to tissues. The key to a successful outcome
Gaining
intravenous access allows adminis-
is rapid localisation of the problem and stabilisa-
tration of drugs, fluids and, if necessary, allows
tion; to achieve this the most useful tools are the
intravenous anaesthesia to be rapidly adminis-
history and a thorough physical examination. If a
tered; this may be necessary if the patient decom-
working diagnosis can be obtained with this infor-
pensates
pue
 endotracheal intubation to gain
mation alone, without resorting to any stressful
control of the airway is required. But if the animal
procedures that may cause decompensation, then
is too stressed by restraint to allow a catheter to
a u raa yn paaiei aq uen Adea sads
be placed, then supplement oxygen and try again
treatment period.
later.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Nursing the Dyspnoeic Patient  87
Sitting or lying in sternal recumbancy, and
shifting positions.
Changes in breathing pattern
Normal respiration is at 15-30 breaths per minute;
little chest movement is seen as the diaphragm
 does most of the work. Inspiration is usually equal
in length to expiration. Abnormalities include the
following:
Figure 9.1  Providing oxygen supplementation whilst a
dyspnoeic patient is examined.
Abdominal effort - contraction of abdominal
muscles to help with expiration.
 Paradoxical breathing - severe dyspnoea, inter-
 costal muscle contraction draws the diaphragm
forward and the abdomen is sucked in.
 Inspiratory phase longer than expiratory phase,
or vice versa.
Physical examination
Mucous membrane colour and capillary refill time
 provide useful information about the respiratory
system. Cyanosis gives a blue coloration to the
mucous membranes; this is typically what students
Figure 9.2 A severely dyspnoeic animal exhibiting postural
are told to look out for as an indication of low
changes: extended neck, abducted elbows, sternal
blood oxygen levels. Cyanosis will only be present
recumbency.
in severe hypoxaemia (<80% arterial blood satura-
tion), so while it is definitely a sigm supplementary
Oxygenation is required, the absence of cyanosis
does not mean all is well. The moderately hypoxic
Observation
animal will still have pink mucous membranes.
Pulse oximetry can be useful in confirming the
Initially observing the patient prior to a physical
presence of hypoxaemia.
 examination is invaluable in recognising dyspnoea.
Auscultation of the respiratory system as part of
a rapid physical examination provides vital infor-
Changes in posture
mation to help localise the cause of respiratory dis-
tress. The cervical trachea, lung fields and heart
The patient will adopt positions to minimise any
should be auscultated. Abnormal sounds, or asym-
restriction to air flow, restraining the patient pre-
 metry in sounds from one lung compared with the
vents these adaptations and can lead to decompen-
 other are relevant (see Figure 9.3). Abnormalities
sation (see Figure 9.2). Postural changes include
may include the following:
the following:
Wheezes: narrowing on the airways likely (e.g.
Flared nostrils, open mouth breathing
inflammation, masses). If heard on inspiration,
Extension of the neck, and lifting the head
upper airway pathology is suspected. If wheeze
Abduction of elbows to minimise chest wall
occurs on expiration, suspect lower airway
compression
disease (e.g. feline asthma).
88  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 9.4  A patient with a pharyngeal foreign body (a
rubber ball). Anaesthesia has been induced to gain control
 over the airway.
complete obstruction. This may be due to a number
Figure 9.3  Auscultation of the chest: imaginary lines are
made on the chest wall to divide the lung fields into a grid
of factors:
pattern. This allows comparison of dorsal with ventral,
 Brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
cranial with caudal, and left with right. This helps confirm
any asymmetry of sounds noted.
(BOAS)
Foreign body
Space occupying lesions (abscess, neoplasia)
Laryngeal paralysis
 Laryngeal or pharyngeal oedema
 Crackles: air bubbling through fluid, or opening
Trauma.
and closing of small airways. Often indicate
pulmonary oedema, haemorrhage or exudates
Patients with upper respiratory tract obstruction
in the alveoli.
tend to present with audible inspiratory noise
Mufled sounds: suspect pleural space disease,
(stridor) with a long drawn out inspiratory phase.
liquid, air, or diaphragm rupture.
In cases with an acute onset, such as a foreign body,
 Heart sounds: in dogs the absence of a murmur
the patient is often very stressed and panicked.
or dysrhythmia means heart failure as a cause
 Stabilisation relies on oxygen supplementation,
of dyspnoea is unlikely. This is more difficult in
which helps to calm the patient; gentle technique
cats, as they usually develop myocardial disease
is required as patients often resent handling of
rather than valvular disease.
 the face or neck. Cases of laryngeal paralysis will
often respond to cooling, anti-inflammatories to
History, observation and physical examination
combat oedema and low doses of sedative as an
should help to localise the cause of dyspnoea to
anxiolytic.
one of four areas: upper airway, lower airway, lung
In cases where there is no response to medical
parenchyma or the pleural space. Having localised
management, or where a foreign body is suspected,
the source of the problem, specific stabilisation 
then urgent control over the airway needs to be
techniques can be applied where suitable.
gained (see Figure 9.4). Following pre-oxygenation,
general anaesthesia is induced and the patient
intubated with an endotracheal tube (see Practical
Upper airway
techniques in Chapter 8). If intubation is not pos-
 The upper airway consists of the nose, mouth,
sible, the clinical team should be ready to immedi-
pharynx, larynx and trachea. Causes of respiratory
ately place a tracheostomy tube (see Practical
distress at this level are related to partial or
 techniques at the end of the chapter).
Nursing the Dyspnoeic Patient 89
Lower airway disease
Pulmonary oedema
Neurogenic pulmonary
oedema (choking.
Disease of the lower airway usually refers to prob-
lems with the small bronchi, and coughing is
strangulation, seizures)
 Pneumonia
common (non-productive). Dyspnoea, with expira-
 Pulmonary contusions
tory effort, and wheezes audible on auscultation
Pulmonary haemorrhage
are common findings. Common disorders include
the following:
 Pulmonary inflammatory diseases.
Patients often present with hypoxaemia, harsh
Feline asthma
Bronchial irritation
lung sounds and crackles, and a productive cough
 and nasal discharge may be present. Careful
Bronchitis
Foreign body
auscultation of the heart should be carried out
 Smoke inhalation.
to try to ensure congestive heart disease is not
present (e.g. mitral valve murmur in dogs, gallop
rhythm in cats).
These animals usually present due to crises or flare
Thoracic radiographs are useful; the distribu-
ups of existing problems, or when the disease
tion of pathology can be an aid to identifying
becomes end stage.
the underlying cause. If radiographs cannot be
 If lower airway disease is suspected, radiogra
obtained due to severe respiratory distress, then
phy is helpful, and should show a ‘bronchial
treatment should be initiated based on the likely
pattern' with minimal signs of alveolar disease (see
Figure 9.5). As well as oxygen supplementation,
diagnosis given both history and physical find-
ings. Pneumonia may be due to respiratory tract
treatment may include bronchodilators, corticoste-
pathogens, or secondary to aspiration of foreign
roids and antibiotics.
material or gastric contents. Broad spectrum anti-
biotics with nebulisation and coupage are indi-
Lung parenchymal disease
cated where bacterial pneumonia is suspected;
diuretics are indicated in suspected cases of pul-
The alveoli are concerned with gas exchange. Inter-
monary oedema.
ference with the ability to expel carbon dioxide and
absorb oxygen in the alveoli will give rise to dys-
pnoea. Interference in the process may be caused
by filling or collapse of alveoli, or an increase in the
Pleural space disease
thickness of the diffusion barrier due to infiltration.
Common disorders include the following:
The pleural space is the potential space that exists
between the pleura of the lungs and the pleura of
the chest wall. Accumulation of air, fluid or soft
tissue within the pleural space leads to reduced
ventilation and so poor respiratory function (see
Table 9.1). The most important physical finding
Table 9.1  Common causes of pleural space disease
 Pneumothorax (open or closed)
Pleural effusion:
Transudate (e.g. congestive heart failure)
0
Pyothorax
0
Haemothorax
 Feline infectious peritonitis
 Neoplasia
Figure 9.5 A radiograph demonstrating a 'bronchial
Diaphragmatic hernia
pattern' in a cat with lower airway disease.
90  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
with these patients is the presence of dull or dimin-
(a)
 ished lung and heart sounds.
Common presenting signs in pleural space
disease are as follow:
Increased respiratory rate and effort
Dyspnoea
Cough
 Dull or muffled lung and heart sounds.
Stabilisation relies on oxygen supplementation,
minimal stress and vascular access followed by
thoracocentesis. It is important that in all cases of
suspected pleural space disease thoracocentesis
is performed before any attempts at radiography.
Thoracocentesis is both diagnostic and therapeutic,
and will rapidly improve the condition of patients
with pleural effusion or pneumothorax (see Prac-
tical techniques at the end of the chapter). Tho-
racic radiographs can then follow thoracocentesis;
b}
 removal of effusion will also now make underlying
pathology easier to visualise. The results of thora-
cocentesis coupled with radiography should allow
a diagnosis to be made (see Figure 9.6).
 If repeated thoracocentesis is required due to
'aeds emad a u ue dn suimq e no p
a chest drain is indicated (see Practical techniques
at the end of the chapter).
Patients with diaphragmatic rupture usually
benefit from a period of stabilisation prior to cor-
rective surgery. Indications for immediate surgery
include entrapment of the stomach with gaseous
bloat, or suspicion of ruptured gastrointestinal
tract.
(c)
Thoracic radiography
Radiography is a useful diagnostic tool in the dys-
pnoeic animal, but is no substitute for a thorough
physical examination. In suspected cases of pleural
space disease, thoracocentesis should always be
performed first. Obtaining radiographs is stressful
for the animal and potentially life-threatening, so
may not be indicated for the animal with severe
problems. Where there is a clinical benefit, and the
animal is stable enough, radiography should be
performed with as little stress as possible. Con-
tinue oxygen supplementation throughout the
Figure 9.6 Radiographs of patients with pleural space
disease. (a) A patient with a unilateral pneumothorax. (b) A
procedure.
patient with a pleural effusion. (c) A patient with a
diaphragmatic rupture.
Nursing the Dyspnoeic Patient  91
Figure 9.8 The patient is placed in dorsal recumbency and
the ventral neck clipped and prepared.
Figure 9.7 Radiographing a dyspnoeic cat. The cassette has
been placed inside the cage, beneath the cat.
Tip
Figure 9.9 The sternohyoid muscles are separated and the
A dorso-ventral view with the animal in sternal recum-
trachea exposed.
bency is usually least stressful. In some instances cats can
be radiographed within a cage or container to remove the
tress of restraint (see Figure 9.7).
possible clip the hair from the ventral neck and
carry out an initial preparation of the skin before
inducing general anaesthesia.
Procedure:
Practical techniques
Clip the ventral region of the neck, position the
Tracheostomy tube placement
animal in dorsal recumbency (see Figure 9.8).
A ventral midline incision is made over the
Equipment:
trachea from the caudal larynx to the seventh
tracheal ring.
 Tracheostomy tube (size approximately 60-70%
Subcutaneous tissue is incised, and the sterno-
of diameter of trachea; in an emergency an
hyoid muscles bluntly separated in the midline
endotracheal tube can be adapted)
(see Figure 9.9).
Surgical kit
Place Gelpi retractors to expose the trachea.
 Self-retaining retractors
An incision is made circumferentially between
Monofilament suture material
the fourth and sixth tracheal rings (no more
Tape ties to secure the tube around the neck.
than 40% of the circumference).
Stay sutures are placed around the tracheal
The procedure is generally carried out under
rings proximal and distal to the tracheotomy
 general anaesthetic. Preparing the patient as far as
(see Figure 9.10).
 possible beforehand reduces anaesthetic time; if
Introduce the tracheostomy tube.
92  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 9.10S
Stay sutures are placed each side of the
Figure 9.12  Instilling sterile saline into a tracheostomy
tracheotomy incision.
tube.
Figure 9.11  Tape is used to secure the tracheostomy tube
Figure 9.13 The tracheostomy suction catheter is pre-
around the patient's neck.
measured to the level of the carina.
 Partially close the proximal and distal parts of
The following procedure should be followed for
the skin wound, but leaving the tracheostomy
the suctioning of the tracheostomy tube:
fully accessible.
 Secure the tube by tying tape in a bow around
1）
loy pateuaAxo-and aq pmous juaged au
the neck (see Figure 9.11).
several minutes by applying a source of
Apply antibiotic cream to the area surrounding
oxygen close to the opening of the tube.
the wound and apply a sterile dressing.
Aseptic
technique
eshould be followed
throughout the following procedure, which
includes the use of sterile surgical gloves.
Tracheostomy tube care
3）
A suitable suction catheter is selected, which
should be soft, pliable and sterile.
The correct postoperative care of the patient and
4)
Sterile saline should be instilled, dependent
their tracheostomy tube is vitally important in
upon the patient's size, usually 1-5ml, not
 order to ensure patient survival and prevent post-
more frequently than hourly (see Figure 9.12).
operative complications.
5）
The inner canmula of the tracheostomy tube,
Main points for the management of the trache-
if used, is removed and cleaned.
ostomy tube:
6
 The suction catheter is inserted to the level of
the carina without a vacuum (see Figure 9.13).
 Maintaining a patent airway
Intermittent light suction is applied while the
Asepsis
catheter is withdrawn in a circular motion.
Patient comfort.
Suction can be applied either via a suction
Nursing the Dyspnoeic Patient  93
Figure 9.14 The catheter is inserted to the pre-determined
level, and suction applied as the catheter is withdrawn.
unit or by using a sterile 20-50 ml syringe (see
Figure 9.14).
8)
The entire suction time should not exceed
15 seconds - if repeated suction is required
then the patient should be allowed to relax
 and pre-oxygenate again before repeating the
Figure 9.15 A tracheostomy tube removed from a patient
process.
that was showing signs of increasing dyspnoea. The tube is
9)
Re-insert a sterile inmer cannula while the
obstructed with exudates and blood.
removed cannula is cleaned and sterilised. If
no inner cannula is being used, then it may
be necessary to carefully clean the opening
Coughing
of the tube using cotton buds and saline,
Harsh sounds from the tracheostomy tube
to remove any build-up of secretions. Scrub
Discharge from the tube
solutions should be kept away from the tube
Patient discomfort.
and the incision as irritation may occur.
10)
 The skin around the tube should be cleaned
Thoracocentesis
using a chlorhexidine solution.
11)
The stay sutures should be examined along
Removing fluid or air from the pleural space
with the cleanliness of the ties. If the ties are
contaminated, then new ties should be placed
disease. It is a low-risk procedure, and is performed
before the removal of the contaminated ties.
without sedation or general anaesthesia in most
12)
 Ensure that the patient's airway is patent and
cases (see Figure 9.16).
the tube is secure. Make sure the patient is
If pleural space disease is suspected on initial
comfortable. Sterile swabs may be placed
examination, perform thoracocentesis before radi-
beneath the phalanges of the tube to improve
ography. In these cases thoracocentesis will be
comfort; a sterile dressing should also be
therapeutic and diagnostic.
applied to cover the skin surrounding the
tracheostomy site, e.g. Primapore, Smith &
11
A wide area around the intended site is clipped
Nephew.
 and surgically prepared.
2）
A butterfly needle with an incorporated exten-
Clinical signs that the tube requires suction and /
sion set, or an intravenous catheter with a
or cleaning (see Figure 9.15):
separate extension set, is used, connected to
a syringe via a three-way tap. By using the
Dyspnoea
extension set the animal is allowed some
Distress
movement without it dislodging the needle.
94  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 9.16  Performing thoracocentesis in a patient to
Figure 9.17
 Preparing to insert a chest drain in a patient
remove pleural effusion.
with a pyothorax.
The point of insertion is the seventh or eighth
intercostal space, cranial to rib.
4）
If there is just air present, the needle is inserted
in the dorsal third, if an effusion is present
drainage is more efficient in the ventral third,
and if there is a mixture of air and fluid, drain
from the mid-point.
5）
The needle is inserted at 45° to the chest wall
with the bevel facing the lung to try to mini-
mise trauma.
Large volumes may be present.
7
 If more than one pathological process is going
on, the volume removed may be smaller than
clinical sigms suggested, e.g pulmonary contu-
sions and pneumothorax.
Drain both sides of the chest, and take radio-
Figure 9.18  Advancing the drain off of the stylet.
graphs afterwards to assess how efficient the
drainage has been and whether the cause of
Thoracic drain (see Figures 9.17, 9.18, 9.19
the effusion is now obvious.
and 9.20; see also website video:
Thoracostomy tube placement)
Thoracic drains are placed for the evacuation of air
 or an effusion (e.g. pyothorax, haemothorax) from
Tip
the chest cavity to re-establish the negative pres-
If the there is uncertainty whether the needle is positioned
sure which is normally present and essential to
within the chest cavity. then a 'hanging drop' technique
ventilation.
can be used. A drop of saline is placed in the hub of the
If the patient is cooperative it should be possible
catheter. As the tip of the catheter passes into the thoracic
to clip a large area of the required side of the chest
cavity, the negative pressure will 'suck' the drop down the
catheter.
ais u jad a m h aedad Ans pe
recumbency and being re-oxygenated. The patient
Nursing the Dyspnoeic Patient  95
Suture material (monofilament)
Lidocaine 2%
Sedation or induction agents
Chest drain (thoracostomy tube)
Three-way tap
Method of aspiration
 50-ml syringe
 Dressing materials.
Procedure:
11
 Sedate and administer local or general anaes-
thetic (the procedure may be carried out in
the conscious patient in an emergency situa-
tion although adequate analgesia should
Figure 9.19 With the drain in situ, suction is applied.
always be provided).
2）
Clip the side of the chest where the drain is
to be placed and prepare aseptically.
3)1
Measure and mark the tube (from the point
of introduction to the level of the second rib).
4）
When placing a drain with a trochar, a skin
incision is made in the dorsal third of the
chest over the tenth intercostal space.
5）
 The trochar is introduced into the incision
and tunnelled subcutaneously in a cranioven-
tral direction, until the tip of the trochar lies
over the seventh intercostal space.
6）
At this stage the trochar handle is elevated
so that it is perpendicular to the chest wall,
and the heel of the hand used to push the
trochar firmly through the intercostal muscles,
whilst the other hand grips the trochar tightly
 2 cm from the tip to prevent it penetrating
too far.
7) Once into the chest, the trochar is withdrawn
Figure 9.20  Flocculent exudate being removed from the
slightly so the tip does not cause damage, the
thoracic cavity.
handle is lowered again, and the trochar is
advanced a few centimetres in a cranioventral
direction.
8
 The drain is then pushed off the trochar and
advanced to a pre-measured level.
can then be anaesthetised and intubated, then
9）
 The tube must be clamped before the stylet is
 rolled into lateral recumbency prior to placing the
fully removed.
drain.
10)
The drain is connected to a three-way tap
Equipment:
with bungs (see Figure 9.21) or a collection
system.
 Sterile surgical gloves
11)
The drain is then attached to the body wall
Surgical kit
using a Chinese fingertrap suture or a com-
Surgical blade
mercial fixation device.
96  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 9.22  Radiograph of the patient in Figure 9.21 to
check drain positioning.
Figure 9.21 Chest drains are secured to the chest wall, and
two points of closure applied: a clamp on the drain and a
three-way tap at the end.
 Drains can be placed without a trochar, using hae-
lateral and dorsoventral views are required. It is
mostats, or over a guide wire using the Seldinger
vital that the positioning of the tube is checked to
technique.
make sure it will drain efficiently, it will be as com
It is important the positioning of the tube is con-
fortable as possible for the patient and that obvious
firmed. Radiographs should always be taken. Both
complications can be avoided (see Figure 9.22).
10
Nursing the Cardiac Patient
Introduction
standing and more progressive. Acough is common
(caused by pulmonary oedema and cardiomegaly),
Cardiovascular system emergencies are a common
especially at night, and tends to be mild and non-
reason for the presentation of patients, often as an
productive. Episodes of syncope may have been
acute deterioration or decompensation of a longer
witessed, often induced by exercise or excite-
term problem. The presenting sigms of the animal
ment, where the dog is seen to ‘faint’ and lose
can vary grealy depending on the nature of the
consciousness. Owners may have noticed abdomi-
cardiovascular disease. Owners report respiratory
nal enlargement due to ascites.
distress, coughing, syncope, collapse, weakness,
 In the cat, lethargy is more common than exer-
ascites and cachexia.
cise intolerance due to behavioural differences.
None of these presenting signs are seen exclu-
Coughing and ascites are rare in cats with heart
sively in cardiac patients, identical signs can be
failure, but pleural effusions are common, so dys-
seen in a wide variety of problems with entirely
pnoea is commonly seen. Cats tend to self-regulate
different organ systems. It is therefore essential
their own activity, so often display few clinical
that by triage, examination, history taking and
signs until they acutely decompensate.
further investigation, the clinical team are able to
recognise whether a problem is cardiovascular in
origin, and stabilise appropriately.
Clinical signs
At triage, Table 10.1 shows clinical signs suggestive
History
of cardiovascular disease. As for all triaged patients
(see Chapter 1), if a problem is spotted with any
Differences tend to exist between cats and dogs
major organ system the examination should stop
when they are presented with cardiovascular
while measures are taken to stabilise the problem
disease. With dogs, the owner will often report
before continuing with the rest of the examina-
 exercise intolerance, which may be acute or longer
tion. In the instance of a cardiovascular patient
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
98  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 10.1  Triage examination findings for the cardiac
Initial stabilisation of the cardiac patient
patient
1)
Oxygen: immediate oxygen supplementation
Triage examination 
Findings
should be provided during the initial examina-
Respiratory system
Increased respiratory rate
tion of the patient, initially by 'flow-by’ so as
Dyspnoea
not to interfere with the examination, and to
Crackles on auscultation
avoid the panic that a mask can sometimes
 Open mouth breathing
cause. For ongoing supplementation, nasal
Cough*
prongs, nasal catheter or oxygen cages are
Muffled lung sounds
suitable (see Chapter 8). The major disadvan-
Pale or cyanotic mucous
membranes
tage of the oxygen cage is that the animal is
isolated from physical monitoring and therapy
Cardiovascular
Muffled heart sounds
which cannot be given without interrupting
system
Tachycardia
the oxygen supply.
Bradycardia
Irregular rhythm and pulse
2）
Intravenous access: an intravenous line should
deficits
be placed immediately as the patient is likely
Gallop rhythmt
to require medications via the intravenous
Murmurs
route for rapid effect.
Weak pulses
3) Reduction of pulmonary oedema: furosemide is
Jugular distension and pulsation
a potent loop diuretic which can be adminis-
Slow CRT
tered as a bolus (24 mg/kg IV or IM) and
CNS
Dull
repeated every 1-2 hours until respiratory rate
Weakness
Syncope
and effort start to improve. If furosemide is
Collapse
administered intravenously, the drug has addi-
tional vasodilatory effects.
 Abdominal
Ascites
4）
 Nitroglycerin ointment (available as a 2% prepa-
palpation
Hepatomegaly
ration): a venous dilator that causes direct
CRT, capillary refill time.
relaxation of venous smooth muscles and sub-
*Coughing is uncommon in cats with cardiovascular
sequent decrease in preload. The ointment
disease.
(0.25in for cats and 0.25-2 in for dogs every 8
+Gallop rhythms are more common in cats.
 hours) is applied directly on the pirma or tongue
+Murmurs are more common in dogs.
every 8 hours during the first 48 hours
(see
Figure 10.1).
. Gloves should always be used
when handling this medication and the oint-
 ment ideally covered with a labelled dressing.
presenting with respiratory problems then oxygen
5)
Relieve anxiety: achieved
with
the
cautious
supplementation would be administered before
use of a sedative drug, e.g. butorphanol (0.2-
continuing to examine the cardiovascular system.
0.4mg/kg IV or IM every 4-6 hours).
When examining the cardiovascular system it
6
present
is important to differentiate between hypovolae-
, it can be
mic and cardiogenic shock (see Chapter 3), as the
removed by
thoracocentesis (see Chapter 9).
stabilisation of each is distinctly
different. The
This
s procedure is both therapeutic and diag-
clinical history should help, but close attention
nostic (see Figure 10.2).
should be paid on physical examination. Both
7
Perfusion deficits due to hypovolaemia: should be
syndromes could
1 produce pale
mucous
mem-
treated with small volume fluid resuscitation
branes, cold extremities, weak pulses and reduced
using isotonic balanced crystalloids titrated to
arterial blood pressure. The presence of murmurs,
effect (5-15ml/kg bolus in dogs; 1-5ml/kg
arrhythmias, pulmonary oedema, pulse deficits or
bolus in cats):
irregular pulses would increase the suspicion of
：
A low dose test bolus of crystalloids can
cardiac disease.
be infused to determine if hypotension is
Nursing the Cardiac Patient 99
Figure 10.3
 Central venous pressure measurement being
carried out.
Figure 10.1  Application of nitroglycerin ointment to the
pinna of a dog with congestive heart failure.
Figure 10.4 Blood pressure measurement and
electrocardiogram (ECG) carried out on a critical patient.
of measuring blood pressure are most convenient
(e.g. Doppler sphygmomanometer) but rely on
Figure 10.2  Needle thoracocentesis being performed on a
the detection of a distal pulse, so in hypoten-
cat with a pleural effusion.
sive patients this may not be possible. Direct
measurement of arterial blood pressure via an
volume related. An increase in blood pres-
arterial catheter can provide continuous monitor-
sure with decrease in heart rate, in response
ing and assess response to treatment; this is the
to fluid bolus, implies hypovolaemia.
'gold standard’ method of arterial blood pressure
Hypotension not responsive to fluid infu-
measurement.
sion implies low output cardiogenic causes.
Hypotension is usually taken to mean a systolic
3
Ideally, central venous pressure monitor-
pressure below 90mmHg, and a mean arterial
ing should be performed on patients with
pressure (MAP) below 65mmHg. A MAP of 70-
cardiac disease receiving large volumes of
 80 mmHg is necessary to provide perfusion of vital
intravenous fluids, e.g. for treatment of
organs (see Figure 10.4).
hypovolaemia (see Figure 10.3).
Arterial blood gases
Assessment
Arterial blood gas analysis (see Chapter 6) is useful
Arterial blood pressure
in assessing the impact of congestive heart failure
(CHF) on respiration. Hypoxaemia and hyper-
Measuring arterial blood pressure is useful in as-
ventilation are typically seen where pulmonary
sessing cardiovascular function. Indirect methods 
5 oedema is compromising respiration.
100  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Radiography
cause a diffuse interstitial pattern initially and
-q re m ud eoe u o ssand
Thoracic radiography can provide useful infor-
chograms. Dogs with CHF commonly have
mation regarding heart size and shape, the pres-
pulmonary oedema and the peri-hilar region is
ence of pulmonary oedema and pleural effusions.
the most common site.
However, the stress of restraining and positioning
 Pulmonary vascular pattems can be assessed
an animal for radiographic studies should not
on dorsoventral (DV) and lateral views, with
be underestimated, and anaesthesia is contraindi-
pulmonary venous distension being indicative
cated because of the cardiosuppressive effects of
of cardiac disease.
most anaesthetic agents. In the initial assessment
Pleural effusions are readily diagnosed on
of the cardiac patient, pulmonary oedema and
lateral and DV views.
pleural effusion can usually be (
diagnosed and
nation alone (see Figure 10.5).
Electrocardiography
Radiographs can be taken once the animal has
been stabilised:
An electrocardiogram (ECG) provides valuable
information on rate and rhythm and is essential
Cardiomegaly is common in canine patients
to assess arrhythmias. Arrhythmias are clinically
with CHF. The individual chambers should
important; they may cause or exacerbate low car-
be assed for enlargement and the whole heart
diac output states. It may be impossible to resolve
 silhouette can be assessed using the vertebral
heart score.
concurrent arrhythmias. Arrhythmias can contrib-
 A large globe-shaped cardiac outline may indi-
 ute to myocardial ischaemia.
cate pericardial effusion.
The ECG is the 'gold standard' for identification
 Pulmonary parenchyma should be assessed
of an arrhythmia. It should be remembered that the
for evidence of pulmonary oedema. This may
ECG is not sensitive in detecting cardiac chamber
enlargement (echocardiography and radiography
are much more sensitive). An ECG provides no
information about the ability of myocardium to
contract, nor does it provide any information about
the heart valves or endocardium. The ECG is
the only way to diagnose the actual arrhythmia
 and hence provide appropriate treatment for the
patient.
 Cardiac arrhythmias can contribute to morbidity
and mortality in critically ill dogs and cats. Suc-
cessful management of arrhythmias often involves
investigation and correction of an underlying non-
cardiac disorder, and management of contributing
factors in cases with severe systemic illness. In
animals with primary cardiac disease, arrhythmia
management is usually accomplished with drug
 therapy or cardiac pacing.
Echocardiography (ultrasound examination)
Ultrasound examination is the most effective
method of assessing heart chamber enlargement,
Figure 10.5
Thoracic radiography being carried out.
valve regurgitation and myocardial contractility.
Nursing the Cardiac Patient  101
Other uses are to confirm pericardial or pleural
history of CHF and may be on treatment already,
effusions and assist in ultrasound-guided drainage
or this may be the first time a cardiorespiratory
(see Figure 10.6).
problem has been noticed by the owner Patients
are usually dyspnoeic at presentation and require
immediate stabilisation before further investiga-
Common emergency presentations
tions can be carried out.
Canine patients with myxomatous mitral valve
Congestive heart failure
disease (MMVD) and dilated cardiomyopathy
(DCM) are commonly affected. Cats with hyper-
Congestive heart failure occurs as a result of
trophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM) and restric-
chronic cardiac insufficiency and the body's own
tive cardiomyopathy (RCM) are also frequently
attempts to compensate for this insufficiency. If the
presented.
left ventricle begins to fail, pulmonary oedema
 Patients often present with a history of collapse
occurs (peripheral venous congestion); if the right
 and breathing difficulties, with or without a cough.
ventricle begins to fail then systemic venous con-
On examination they have pale or cyanosed
gestion is seen, resulting in ascites, hepatic conges-
mucous membranes, marked abdominal respira-
tion and, occasionally, peripheral oedema.
tory effort, expiratory pulmonary crackles sugges-
Why the heart should fail can be due to a number
tive of oedema, ventral dullness on auscultation
of causes (see Table 10.2). Patients may have had a
of the chest suggestive of pleural effusion, rapid
respiratory rates and anxiety.
 The diagnosis will be made based on the history
 and clinical examination; radiography and echo-
cardiography should always be reserved until the
patient is stable.
The most significant problem for these patients
is the marked pulmonary oedema, or in the case of
cats more frequently pleural effusion. The patients
should receive oxygen supplementation and the
following medications.
Diuresis: furosemide. Potassium levels should be
monitored when high rates of loop diuretics
Figure 10.6 Cardiac ultrasound examination.
are being used as hypokalaemia is possible.
Table 10.2  Causes and examples of cardiac failure
Cause of failure
Effect on cardiovascular system
Examples
Systolic failure
 Poor contraction of the myocardium results in poor
 Dilated cardiomyopathy
'pumping' of blood
Diastolic failure
Prevention of the ventricle from fully relaxing and
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
flling during diastole
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
 Pericardial effusion
Valvular disease
Pathology of the valves of the heart leads to reduced
Endocardiosis
efficiency
Valvular dysplasia
Endocarditis
Rhythm disturbances
Poor coordination of the contraction of atria and
Tachydysrhythmias
ventricles leads to reduced output
Bradydysrhythmias
102  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Additional use of a potassium-sparing diuretic
because of the need for physical restraint). Most
(e.g. spironolactone) should be considered.
patients can be drained while conscious although
Vasodilation:
sedative combinations may be necessary in more
0
Nitroglycerin
ointment. Systolic
arterial
fractious animals.
 blood pressure should be measured regularly
 during the use of this potent vasodilator and
it should never be used in hypotensive
Rhythm disturbances
animals.
0
 Hydralazine (1-2mg/kg orally) can be given
Bradyarrhythmias
as it is a potent arterial dilator. This should
also be avoided in hypotensive patients.
Bradyarrhythmias can be divided into the follow-
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
in
ing (see Figure 10.7):
hibitors such as benazepril cause peripheral
vasodilation and counteract many of the neg-
Sinus bradycardia
ative neurohumoral consequence of CHF and
Second and third degree AV block
should be considered for chronic therapy.
Sinoatrial block
 Inotropic support:
 Sinus disease
 Dobutamine is used in patients with poor
Atrial standstill.
 contractility and systolic failure. It is a potent
 positive inotrope and is given via continuous
Symptoms include weakness, exercise intolerance
rate infusion (CRI) at low doses initially then
 and syncope. Ascites may develop in prolonged
titrating upwards (2-15μm/kg/minute in
cases.
dogs and 1-5μg/kg/minute in cats).
Bradyarrhythmias may be caused by:
Pimobendan (0.1-0.3mg/kg b.i.d. orally) is
an inodilator that increases cardiac contractil-
Primary cardiac conduction disorders (sinus
ity as well as causes vasodilation. It takes
disease, myocardial fibrosis)
several hours to have full effect and is not as
Structural primary heart diseases (cardiomy-
 potent as dobutamine.
opathies, valvular heart disease)
Extracardiac causes
Patients with pleural effusion should receive
Excessive vagal tone
therapeutic intervention immediately. The fluid
Hypothermia
can be confirmed ultrasonographically or using
Respiratory, intracranial diseases, etc.
a diagnostic tap (radiographs are contraindicated
Metabolic diseases (e.g. hyperkalaemia)
P8012Ee5
25mm
Figure 10.7
 Atrial standstill seen on ECG.
Nursing the Cardiac Patient   103
Endocrine diseases
Sustained ventricular tachycardia (e.g. ventricu-
Drugs:
lar tachycardia lasting >30s in duration) is associ-
 Sedatives/anaesthetics (e.g. acepromazine,
ated with a medium to high risk for sudden death
alpha-2-adrenergics)
due to development of ventricular fibrillation. Ven-
？
Anti-arrhythmics (e.g. digoxin, calcium
tricular tachycardia also significantly decreases
antagonists).
cardiac output and can worsen CHF and contrib-
ute to weakness or collapse. Ventricular arrhyth-
Tachyarrhythmias
mias in systemically ill animals (e.g. vehicular
trauma, splenic disease, gastric dilation and volvu-
Ventricular tachycardia
lus [GDV]) that occur at a slow rate of 100-150
 beats per minute (bpm) (also termed idioventricu-
Ventricular arrhythmias cause in interruption in
lar tachycardia or accelerated ventricular rhythm)
sinus rhythm by a wide-complex QRs-T wave-
An p sn jis A e aso Aa
forms of unusual appearance. Ventricular prema-
do not create problems during anaesthesia - in fact
ture contractions (VPCs) typically have a large T
these arrhythmias are often less frequent during
wave in the opposite direction of the QRS complex
anaesthesia than they are in the awake animal.
(see Figure 10.8), no ST shelf, and no discrete rela-
Identification and elimination of inciting factors is
tionship to P waves. Many clinical associations
recommended.
exist for ventricular arrhythmias in dogs and cats
Treatment of ventricular tachycardia is usually
with or without underlying cardiac disease. Ven-
 indicated in an awake animal with clinical signs
tricular arrhythmias are most commonly seen in
resulting from the arrhythmia (weakness, worsen-
association with significant cardiac disease in cats.
ing CHF, collapse or syncope) and in animals with
Isolated VPCs, by themselves, pose little risk to
-uaa (udqooz-0st<) pide1 pue (s0g<) paueisns
mortality and have minor effects on cardiac perfor-
tricular tachycardia. Treatment may be initiated
mance and therefore cause few clinical signs and
if the above criteria are not present in animals
are not treated. In any patient with occult DCM,
with DCM who are known to be at high risk
particularly Doberman I
Pinschers and Boxers,
of sudden death (i.e. Doberman Pinschers and
VPCs can be an early indicator of cardiomyopathy
Boxers). Haemodynamically unstable ventricular
and may identify individuals at risk for anaesthetic
tachycardia in the awake dog may be treated with
complications.
IV lidocaine bolus(es) at 24mg/kg IV slowly,
5mm/mV
96/min
5mm/mV
120/min
5mm
eadofi
III
05-35Hz
F50
5
0.05-
P88I2E05
Figure 10.8 Ventricular premature contractions (VPC) seen on ECG in a patient post gastric dilation and volvulus.
104  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
PP
Figure 10.9 Sustained ventricular tachycardia in a patient with a ruptured splenic mass.
up to four times at 10-minute intervals, followed
Supraventricular tachycardia
by 40-80 μg/kg/minute as a CRI. If this is ineffec-
tive then procainamide can be used (20-50 μg/kg/
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is recognised
min IV or 6-15mg/kg IM every 4-6 hours) (see
by tachycardia with QRS-T complex thatis (usually)
Figure 10.9).
of similar appearance to the normal P-QRS-T. This
 Limited experience is available for slow IV amio-
arrhythmia typically results in a narrow QRS
darone administration in the setting of severe ven-
complex tachycardia (unlike ventricular tachycar-
tricular arrhythmia (3-5mg/kg boluses up to
dia), and P waves may be identified but can be
10mg/kg). Several reports indicate that IV amio-
superimposed on the QRS or T wave. SVT can
 darone, in the dog, can be associated with hypo-
sometimes be differentiated from sinus tachycar-
tension, collapse and allergic or anaphylactic-like
dia based on the response to a vagal manoeuvre,
reactions with hyperaemia or urticaria.
with sinus tachycardia responding with a gradual
 For chronic oral therapy, a variety of medications
slowing in heart rate and rebound to the prior rate
can be used, although the list is getting shorter as
following
termination of the 
：vagal
manoeuvre.
procainamide is no longer available and mexiletine
 SVT typically does not respond with a change in
becomes more difficult to obtain (and will likely be
heart rate or the result is an abrupt drop in heart
removed from the market). Choices include other
rate with termination of the arrhythmia. Atrial
class I anti-arrhythmic drugs such as flecainide or
stretch-dilation can contribute to the development
beta-blockers (sotalol, atenolol, metoprolol or pro-
of SVT (especially in dogs with endocardiosis) and
pranolol). Long-term management
of
sustained
hypoxaemia, respiratory disease, or intoxication
ventricular tachycardia in dogs include sotalol
with digoxin, theophylline or thyroid hormone can
(1-3.5mg/kg twice daily [b.i.d.]),
 mexatiline
also cause this arrhythmia. While SVT is usually
(5-8 mg/kg three times daily [t.i.d.])
combined
associated with a low risk for mortality due to
with atenolol (0.25-0.6mg/kg b.i.d.)
or amioda-
the arrhythmia, sustained arrhythmia can lead to
rone (10-15mg/kg b.i.d. for 7 days, then 5-10 mg/
weakness, syncope and CHF. Dogs with chronic
kg s.i.d.). Doberman Pinschers (and certain other
valvular disease and SVT often have advanced
 breeds) are prone to a hepatotoxicity when treated
heart disease and may be prone to anaesthetic
with amiodarone. A new anti-arrhythmic drug.
complications.
dronedarone, has just been approved for use
in1
 Drug therapy is appropriate for animals with
people, although there are no reports yet regarding
rapid supraventricular arrhythmias (rates above
clinical use of this drug in dogs or cats. Drug com-
260 bpm in the cat or above 220bpm in the dog) or
binations that have proved effective in Boxers with
for slower or non-sustained SVT when seen in
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
association with CHF or severe systemic disease.
 include sotalol, mexiletine with atenolol, or mexi-
 In cases where emergency treatment is required,
letine with sotalol.
IV diltiazem can be administered in an initial
Nursing the Cardiac Patient  105
0.25mg/kg IV bolus over 3-10 minutes. Subse-
heart, and on ECG, low QRS voltage, electrical
quent 0.25mg/kg boluses can be repeated at 15-
 alterns (alternating large and small QRS com-
minute intervals until conversion occurs or to a
plexes), arrhythmias and morphological changes
maximum dose of 0.75mg/kg. Alternative drugs
to secondary complexes caused by hypoxia).
include verapamil (0.05 mg/kg slow IV boluses up
The aspiration of even a small volume of peri-
to a total dose of 0.15 mg/kg), propranolol (0.02-
 cardial fluid can be vital to bring about an improve-
0.06 mg/kg slowly IV every 8 hours) and the short-
ment in patients with pericardial effusion.
acting beta-blocker esmolol (incremental doses of
0.05-0.1 mg/kg every 5 minutes up to a maximum
dose of 0.5mg/kg). The effects of esmolol are
Procedure for draining pericardial effusion
short-lived, and if arrhythmia conversion does not
(see Figure 10.10)
occur then other drugs with negative inotropic
properties (i.e. diltiazem or verapamil) can usually
1)
Administer 100% oxygen to the patient via a
be safely given 30 minutes after esmolol admin-
mask, flow-by, etc.
istration. For chronic management of SVT, oral
2
Ensure an IV catheter is placed and com-
therapy is accomplished using either digoxin,
mence IV fluid therapy.
calcium chanmel blockers (diltiazem, verapamil) or
3）
 Connect a syringe (20 or 50 ml), large-bore
 beta-blocking drugs (propranolol, atenolol, meto-
catheter, three-way tap and extension set, and
 prolol, sotalol) or amiodarone.
have some method of collecting the removed
fluid.
4)
 Position the patient in sternal or left lateral
Pericardial effusion
recumbency.
5）
 If necessary sedate the patient; do not use
Pericardial effusions in dogs are commonly associ-
hypotensive
 sedatives, e.g. acepromazine.
 ated with neoplasia (e.g. haemangiosarcoma, che-
A combination of butorphanol (0.2mg/kg
modectoma, metastases). Other causes include
IM and midazolam 0.2mg/kg IM can be
benign idiopathic pericardial effusion, coagulopa-
effective).
thies, haemorrhage and pericardial cysts. Pericar-
6
Commence ECG monitoring throughout the
dial effusion is rarely seen in cats, but it may arise
procedure (if the catheter makes contact with
due to bacterial infections, feline infectious perito-
 the epicardium a ventricular arrhythmia may
nitis, CHF and tumours.
be observed).
Pericardial effusion results in cardiac tampon-
/
 The patient should be clipped from the third
ade; this occurs when intra-pericardial pressure
to the eighth right intercostal space (in the
exceeds the diastolic pressure in the right ventricle,
region of the costochondral junction).
leading to compression of the heart. This provokes
jau u aseanu ue indino seipien ui aseaiap e
rate and a decrease in blood pressure, which may
result in cardiogenic shock. Associated symptoms
may be acute or chronic, but characteristic clinical
signs include dyspnoea and signs of bradycardia
(exercise intolerance, weakmess, syncope).
 Physical examination generally reveals mufled
heard sounds (weak heartbeat), tachycardia, a weak
apex beat on palpation of chest wall, weak periph-
eral pulses, jugular distension/pulsation, pale
 mucous membranes, hypotension and ascites.
Ultrasonography is the most effective diagnos-
tic method for detecting pericardial effusion and
establishing its severity It may be apparent on tho-
Figure 10.10  Drainage of a pericardial effusion using a
racic radiographs as a 'basketball' globular shaped
large-bore catheter, three-way tap and 50-ml syringe.
106  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
8)1
Make a 3-mm incision using a scalpel blade
Depression
in the fifth intercostal space to allow the inser-
Dyspnoea.
tion of the catheter without burring'.
9
 Slowly introduce the catheter cranially and
Predisposing factors
at a slight angle, at a tangent into the cra-
nial edge to avoid damaging the intercostal
Atrial or ventricular endothelial lesions
vessels.
Stagnation of blood in dilated left atrium; in-
10）
The area should be infiltrated with lidocaine
ability to empty into small, stiff ventricle
(2ml lidocaine 1%)
Feline platelets are highly reactive.
11)
When fluid appears at the base of the catheter,
remove the stylet and connect the connection
In most cats, thromboembolism will affect both
system.
rear limbs, although a single limb (rear or front)
can be embolised. Occasionally, if affected to a
Possible complications:
 ran 'sisared aa1y A je e 'anap rassa
paralysis (paraplegia). Physical examination of
 Heart puncture: if this is a concern, as suggested
cats with aortic thromboembolism may reveal the
by the development of arrhythmias on ECG,
following:
gently withdraw the catheter Measure the hae-
matocrit to differentiate from active bleeding
The absence of femoral pulses
from the pericardial haemorrhage fluid, or check
Firm to hard cranial tibial and gastrocnemius
whether the fluid removed coagulates.
muscles
 Laceration of a coronary artery (very rare if the
Cyanotic, cold foot pad (see Figure 10.11)
 tap is performed via the right-hand side).
 The absence of deep pain response
 Pulmonary laceration: causing pneumothorax
 The absence of limb motion below the upper
心
or haemothorax.
thigh
 Pleural infections, following contamination by
Hypothermia
the pericardial fluid.
Lack of anal tone and a distended bladder
Abdominal pain (if the mesenteric artery has
also been embolised)
Feline thromboembolism
Tachypnoea and tachycardia (seen with cardio-
vascular compromise, stress and pain)
Thromboembolism in cats usually occurs as a
Bradycardia or irregular cardiac rhythm
result of cardiac disease, with a clot most com-
Heart murmurs or gallop sounds
monly lodging in the distal aorta and iliac arteries.
Varying degrees of depression.
The arterial occlusion in itself is not the only cause
of reduced circulation; rather, the effects of the
thrombus lead to a cascade of vasoconstrictive
events that reduce collateral circulation.
Clinical signs
In many cats, thromboembolism may be the first
manifestation of cardiomyopathy. Clinical sigms
reflect both the direct consequences of thrombo-
embolism and the associated cardiac disease and
include the following:
 Acute rear limb paralysis
Figure 10.11  Difference in perfusion of foot pads in a
Severe limb pain
patient with aortic thromboembolism.
Nursing the Cardiac Patient  107
Treatment
Electrocardiography
Immediate treatment
Patient positioning and restraint:
The initial problems that coexist with thromboem-
bolism are associated with cardiomyopathy and
1)F
 Right lateral recumbency is the standard posi-
tion if you want to compare measured ECG
include:
intervals with published reference ranges.
Standing or sternal recumbency may be prefer-
Respiratory distress due to pulmonary oedema
 able and safer in stressed or dyspnoeic patient
 or pleural effusion
(if only concerned with rhythm diagnosis; see
Cardiovascular shock.
Figure 10.12).
2）
The patient should be placed on a non-
Pain and anxiety, meanwhile, occur as a result of
the thromboembolism. Tachypnoea and dyspnoea
conductive surface to minimise ECG arte-
fact. The patient should be comfortable, to
are frequenly present and the reason for these
minimise struggling, which would produce
signs may not be clear without thoracic radiogra-
artefact.
phy to determine whether there is coexisting pul-
monary oedema and/or pleural effusion. Ideally,
31
The right arm of the person restraining the
animal should rest over animal's neck. The left
the thrombus would be removed within 4 hours,
 arm should rest over the hindquarters.
but this is unlikely in practice as the procedure is
4）
 Legs should be kept parallel with each other
not commonly available and also it is not known
whether cats can survive such surgery.
but not touching. Forelimbs should be kept
perpendicular to the long axis of the body.
5
With calm, gentle handling, sedation is not
Administration of streptokinase 90,000 IU/cat
usually necessary. Some drugs (e.g. diazepam
over 30 minutes followed by 45,000 IU/cat/
and ketamine hydrochloride) have an anti-
hour for 3 hours.
 arrhythmic effect and may mask abnormalities.
Tissue plasminogen activator (TPA), to limit the
6
 Use flattened crocodile clips - quick and easy
amount of cell death and hence reduce the
to apply: RA (red) attaches to right foreleg;
problems of reperfusion injury.
LA (yellow) attaches to left foreleg; LL (green)
attaches to left hind leg: N (black) (neutral/
Additionally:
 ground lead) attaches to right hind leg. Ensure
●Provision of analgesia
●Monitor serum potassium and creatinine levels.
Long-term management
The aims in the longer term are to:
Treat the underlying
cardiac disease and
manage CHF, if present
Administration of 25 mg/kg heparin every 24
hours
 Prevent re-embolisation
 Facilitate recovery of the limbs from the throm-
boembolic event.
Return of function is generally gradual, if at all,
Figure 10.12 Patient with ventricular premature
contractions post gastric dilation and volvulus (GDv) in
over 7-14 days and is complete by 6-8 weeks.
sternal recumbency for ECG; note the non-conductive
Residual paresis is common.
rubber mat beneath the patient.
108   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
correct clip position: just below elbows on each
 Nursing tips for the cardiac patient
forelimb; just below stifles on each hindlimb.
7
The jaws of the crocodile clips should be flat-
 Avoid stress when handling dyspnoeic patients, in par-
tened or filed to prevent skin pinching. Alter-
ticular cats, as they have severely compromised respi-
natively, a less traumatic customised clip such
ratory reserve. Physical restraint should be avoided
as Comfy Clips or ECG pads may be used. If
and chemical restraint should be used cautiously.
clips are used these should be attached directly
Continuous  monitoring of patients'  cardiovascular
to skin whereas pads can be applied to the
parameters is essential in order to detect early signs of
pads of the feet. Moisten skin and the electrode
deteriorating function. Particular attention should be
paid towards mucous membrane colour, capillary refill
using commercial conductive gel or spirit (gel
time, heart rate and rhythm, pulmonary parenchymal
may be better tolerated by cats than spirit).
sounds and pulse quality. Be sure to alert the vet imme-
diately if there are even mild deteriorations in cardio-
vascular parameter as interventional therapy may
prevent deterioration and possible arrest.
Tips for ECG
 Fluid therapy should be used with extreme caution as
patients in CHF already have volume overload and are
An ECG provides no information about the ability of 
at risk of exacerbating pulmonary oedema and ascites.
myocardium to contract nor does it provide any infor-
A crash box with appropriate drugs for resuscitation,
mation about the heart valves or endocardium.
endotracheal tubes and appropriate anaesthetic circuit
If a lead ll rhythm srip has been obtained and the
for the size of the patient should be kept to hand in
diagnosis is unclear then additional limb leads are
Case of cardiorespiratory arrest.
recommended. A chest lead may also help in identifi-
Try and keep  all patients with
cardiorespiratory
cation of small P waves or in differentiation of supra-
disease in sternal recumbency, especially when under-
ventricular from ventricular arrhythmias.
going procedures such as catheter placement or
 Finally, a longer period of ECG recording may help in
thoracocentesis.
identification of the rhythm.
The use of injectable medications is much safer than
ECGs should be obtained while the animal is in right
 oral preparations in these patients as it prevents unnec-
lateral recumbency: other positions will alter the
essary handing.
findings.
 Do not overlook the need for appropriate analgesia in
Label ECGs with the patient's name, date, recording
patients with feline aortic thromboembolism (FATE)
speed and millimetre/millivolt (mm/mv).
and HCM.
A normal ECG does not mean that the myocardium is
Water should be readily available as patients receiving
functioning normally.
diuretics at high dosages will be polydipsic and a lack
 An abnormal ECG does not necessarily mean that there
of water puts the patient at risk of dehydration and
is abnormal cardiac function or output.
hypovolaemia.
Congestive heart failure cannot be diagnosed by an
 Patients will also be polyuric on high dosages of diuret-
 ECG - only abnormalities in the electrical system.
ics and should be allowed to toilet frequently.
Further reading
Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
MacIntyre, D.K., Drobatz, K.J., Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
Critical Care for Veterinary
y Technician, 2nd edition.
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Fuentes, V.L., Johmson, L. and Denmis, S. (2010) BSAVA
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiorespiratory Medi-
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
cine. BSAVA, Gloucester.
Wingfield, W.E. and Raffe, M.R. (2002) The Veterinary
King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine
KU Book. Teton NewMedia, Wyoming.
and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 2nd edition.
BSAVA, Gloucester.
11
Nursing the Acute Abdomen
Patient
Introduction
that patients are stabilised as far as possible before
udertaking surgery (see Figure 11.1).
Patients presenting as emergencies due to intra-
abdominal pathology are commonly referred to
as ‘acute abdomens'. There is a wide variety of
Presentation and history
potential causes, some of which can be rapidly
life-threatening to the animal. With such a wide
The presenting clinical sigms in acute abdomen
variety of causes comes a wide variety of symp-
cases vary enormously and depend on underly-
 toms and presenting signs. It is worth bearing in
ing pathology, the duration of the process and the
mind that not all of these cases are painful, and
temperament of the patient. Some cases will present
not all will be immediately obvious that the
with vague,
non-specific
 symptoms such as an-
abdomen is involved, e.g. a dog with
1gastric
orexia, lethargy
and
vomiting.In some instances,
dilation and volvulus (GDV) will
often have
such as rapid intra-abdominal bleeds, the first sign
obvious abdominal distension with pain and non-
the owmer
tou
may
simply be collapse. Other
productive vomiting, whereas a dog with a bleed-
yns suais sioads Aisnoiaqo arou aaeu Aeu sasen
ing splenic mass may just present as a collapsed
as abdominal enlargement due to gas distension,
 patient with signs of hypovolaemia. See Table
or accumulation of fluid effusions.
11.1 for an outline of common causes of an acute
The history of any acute abdomen case is very
abdomen.
important. Start by gaining information on the
 These patients require prompt stabilisation and
 signalment of the animal, ask about the age, sex,
often urgent medical or surgical intervention based
whether neutered and the breed. This information
on rapid diagmostic evaluation. Cases that can be
Aa ar sasonep luara aos ae e
managed medically should be identified. In some
than others; pancreatitis is more common in some
cases, a definitive diagnosis may not be possible
breeds of dogs, parvovirus is more likely in young
without exploratory surgery, but it is important
unvaccinated puppies and pyometra can only
that indications for surgery are recognised,
,and
occur in urneutered females.
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
110 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 11.1
Summary of common causes of an 'acute
examination should focus on the respiratory sys-
abdomen'
tem, the cardiovascular system and neurological
deficits before moving on to an examination of the
Possible causes of acute
 Organ system
abdomen
abdomen.
The initial examination of the emergency patient
 Pathology of 
Gastric volvulus, intestinal
 ison  s q 'i d  aa si
gastrointestinal
obstruction, perforation,
the acute abdomen patient are as follows.
tract
mesenteric torsion
Pathology of
Uroperitoneum, bladder
Respiratory system
urinary tract
rupture, urethral obstruction
Pathology of liver
Haemorrhage, laceration,
Animals may have tachypnoea due to pain, or in
 and biliary tree
abscess, bile duct obstruction,
some acute abdomen cases, distended organs or
bile peritonitis
large abdominal effusions may press on the dia-
Pathology of the
Neoplasia, haemorrhage,
phragm causing respiratory compromise. Bear in
spleen
torsion 
mind that vomiting animals are also at risk of aspi-
Others
 Pancreatitis, septic peritonitis,
ration pneumonia.
penetrating abdominal wounds,
prostatic abscess, pyometra,
uterine torsion
Cardiovascular system
Assessment of perfusion parameters (heart rate,
pulse quality, capillary refill time [CRT], mucous
membrane colour) will identify patients that are
hypovolaemic (see Chapter 4). Hypovolaemia is
common in patients with abdominal crises. Large
rhoea. Fluid may also be sequested into distended
or strangulated intestines. If peritonitis is present,
then the inflammation of the serosal surfaces of
the peritoneum leads to much fluid leaking from
vessels into the abdomen.
 Patients may present with signs of distributive
shock, or systemic inflammatory response syn-
drome (SIRS) due to a inflammatory stimulus such
 as septic peritonitis, or severe pancreatitis. In these
Figure 11.1Stabilisation of a hypovolaemic acute
'brick red'), CRT israpid and tachycardia is present.
abdomen patient.
Neurological deficits
The triaging nurse should ask about vaccination
status, worming, existing medical problems and
current medication, possible foreign body inges-
In addition to assessment of mentation, a quick
tion and access to toxins or human medication.
appraisal of gait, posture and proprioception helps
to prevent cases of spinal pain or trauma from
being confused with abdominal crises.
Clinical examination
Abdominal examination
On initial presentation a rapid primary examina-
tion should be performed, targeting the major
Abdominal examination may give an indication of
a uaed ouaraua Aue noy se 'suass Apoq
 intra-abdominal pathology:
Nursing the Acute Abdomen Patient 111
Figure 11.2  Palpating the abdomen of an acute abdomen
 patient.
Visual assessment for distension, asymmetry,
subcutaneous swelling or bruising
 Percussion to detect tympany from gas disten-
sion, or a fluid ‘thrill' or ripple effect
Figure 11.3 A patient with gastric dilation and volvulus
(GDV) receiving isotonic crystalloids at shock rates. To
Palpation is useful to detect the presence of
enable this rapid administration of fluids, two IV lines have
diffuse or localised pain. In some instances pal-
been placed, one in each forelimb, using wide-bore
pation may reveal an intestinal foreign body,
Catheters.
intussusceptions, etc.
Tip
cated; dose rates being dictated by the degree
An assistant can lift the animal's forelimbs off the ground 
of hypoperfusion present (see Figure 11.3). Initial
to allow improved palpation of the cranial abdomen (see
 stabilisation can be started and continue during
Figure 11.2).
further work-up.
Even if hypovolaemia due to abdominal bleed-
ing is suspected, unless blood products are readily
Stabilisation
available, crystalloids are indicated. The risk of
anaemia due to haemodilution is less of a risk than
Before moving on to diagnostic evaluation
to
the effects of continued hypoperfusion due to
determine the exact cause of the acute abdomen, it
reduced circulating volume.
is important that initial stabilisation of the patient
 If septic peritonitis is suspected, broad spectrum
is initiated. Many patients will have evidence of
antibiotics should be administered intravenously
hypovolaemic shock, others may have distributive
(see Figure 11.4).
shock. It is important suitable intravenous fluid
 If the animal is in pain, analgesia can be started.
therapy is administered as soon as these syndromes
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be
are identified to minimise the effects of hypoperfu-
avoided where hypovolaemia is present or intesti-
sion on tissues, and to stabilise the animal prior to
nal damage is suspected - this probably means
anaesthesia should it become necessary. Shock rate
most acute abdomen cases at presentation; for this
boluses of balanced istonic crystalloids are indi-
reason, opioids are preferred.
112   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
[a}
Figure 11.4  Potentiated amoxicillin is commonly used to
provide broad spectrum antibacterial cover in suspected
septic peritonitis cases. The addition of metronidazole gives
greater cover of anaerobes.
Diagnostic techniques
The focus of diagnostic evaluation of the acute
abdomen must be on identifying those patients
that require surgical management from those cases
where medical management is possible.
Figure 11.5 (a) Visible gastric foreign bodies, in this case
 fragments of a rubber ball. (b) Distended loops of small
Clinical pathology
intestine caused by a radiolucent foreign body (a sock)
lodged in the jejunum.
Blood samples and, if possible, urine samples
should be obtained. As well as giving information
an increased risk of intra-operative bleeding and
on possible aetiology, this also provides a bench-
allow planning for provision of blood products
 mark of the current metabolic and haematological
where necessary.
status, helping to guide stabilisation and judge the
effectiveness of fluid resuscitation based on serial
samples. A minimum database recommended from
Radiography
blood is: packed cell volume (PCV), total solids by
refractometer (TS), blood urea levels, blood glucose
Orthogonal radiographs of the abdomen should
levels and, where possible, electrolyte analysis. A
be inspected closely for any free abdominal gas,
specific gravity measured from the urine sample is
abnormal soft tissue masses, dilated portions of the
 useful to assess renal perfusion and concentrating
gastrointestinal tract and intestinal obstruction (see
ability.
Figure 11.5). Foreign bodies may be visible, or if
 If possible, a full biochemistry and haematology
they are not radio-opaque, then there may be asso-
profile should be obtained. The biochemistry
in
ciated signs of gut dilation and obstruction. Large
particular may point towards more specific causes
 peritoneal effusions may reduce contrast and make
of acute abdomen.
interpretation difficult (see Figure 11.6).
A coagulation profile is useful in patients where
Occasionally, contrast studies may be required,
abdominal surgery is indicated; this may highlight
 especially in animals with a partial gastrointestinal
Nursing the Acute Abdomen Patient 113
Figure 11.8
Performing ultrasonography on a suspected
haemoabdomen following trauma.
Figure 11.6  Abdominal effusion leading to loss of serosal
detail, and a generalised 'ground glass' appearance.
Ultrasound examination
Ultrasound examination of the abdomen is useful
in detecting even small amounts of peritoneal effu-
sion (see Figure 11.8). Focused assessment with
sonography for trauma (FAST) is a technique origi-
nally described in human medicine which is
equally useful in animals to assess for the presence
 of peritoneal effusions (see Practical techniques at
the end of the chapter). FAST is a simple, rapid
techrique that can be performed by clinicians with
minimal ultrasound experience.
Abdominocentesis
Abdominocentesis is a quick and easy technique to
obtain samples of free abdominal fluid for analysis,
something that can be vital to establish the cause
Figure 11.7 Contrast radiography of a suspected partial
of an acute abdomen (see Practical techniques at
intestinal obstruction, using barium impregnated spheres.
the end of the chapter). There are few contraindica-
The larger spheres have failed to leave the pylorus.
tions (e.g. coagulopathy, distension of a viscus),
A duodenal partial obstruction was found at exploratory
and perforation of organs is rare. A single point can
surgery.
be tapped, or a four quadrant tap can be carried
 out (see Figure 11.9). If only small amounts of fluid
are present, diagnostic peritoneal lavage can be
performed (see Practical techniques at the end of
obstruction. Barium contrast agents are used for
the chapter). This increases the volume by dilution,
gastrointestinal studies, either as a liquid or in
waxn aq isnu siu pmg at jo sisaieue Sunmp os
impregnated beads (see Figure 11.7). Water-soluble
iodine contrast agents are recommended in some
into account.
Once a fluid sample has been obtained, there
texts where gastrointestinal perforation is sus-
 is much valuable information that can be gained
pected (as barium is irritant to the peritoneum). In
from it:
practice, if perforation is suspected, then explor-
at se uoos se paunojrad aq pmous Aiams Arone
The fluid is visually examined to assess
 patient is stable enough to undergo anaesthesia.
turbidity.
114 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
m
Figure 11.9  Performing abdominocentesis on the patient
seen in Figure 11.8; ultrasonography had confirmed the
presence of an effusion, abdominocentesis will allow
analysis to determine the source of effusion.
Figure 11.11  Measuring the glucose content of an
abdominal effusion, to allow comparison with blood glucose
levels, and in so doing help to detect septic peritonitis.
blood levels indicates bile leakage. Similarly,
fluid with creatinine levels higher than blood
levels indicates urine leakage.
 A very quick and easy test for septic peritonitis
is to measure glucose levels of the effusion with
a hand-held glucometer. If a septic exudates is
present, bacteria and white blood cells will be
metabolising glucose in the effusion, resulting
in a lowered glucose levels. So, if effusion
Figure 11.10 Measuring total protein content of an
abdominal effusion using a refractometer.
glucose levels are low, septic peritonitis is sus-
pected. If effusion glucose levels are normal,
but sigrificantly lower than concurrent blood
The PCV of the fluid can be measured to assess
glucose levels, again septic peritonitis is almost
any abdominal haemorrhage.
certain to be established (see Figure 11.11).
The total protein levels of the fluid can indicate
if the effusion is a transudate or an exudate (see
Figure 11.10).
Indications for surgery
 Microscopic examination of a Diff-Quik stained
smear will reveal cytology. The presence of
Disease processes that can be managed medically
toxic neutrophils with intracellular bacteria
(e.g. pancreatitis, hepatitis, viral enteritis) must
indicates septic peritonitis. Bilirubin crystals
be distinguished from those that require urgent
are visible in cases of bile peritonitis. Faecal
surgery.
 material and food fibres may be present in cases
of bowel rupture.
may not be possible until the initiating cause has
Biochemical testing may be required. This can
been treated surgically. The provision of IV fluid
be performed with in-house biochemistry anal-
 and other treatment may improve the patient, and
ysers. Fluid with bilirubin levels higher than
 make it more stable for anaesthesia and surgery,
Nursing the Acute Abdomen Patient 115
Figure 11.12 A radiograph of a GDV in a Welsh Corgi.
The stomach has rotated so that the pylorus is visible dorsal
to the fundus.
Figure 11.14  Multiple penetrating wounds over a cat's
abdomen caused by shotgun pellets. An indication for
exploratory surgery.
Splenic torsion
Abdominal haemorrhage in patients that are
not stabilising
Free gas in the abdomen
Evidence of septic peritonitis
Bilirubin or creatinine levels in abdominal fluid
that are higher than blood levels
jous uma io saq se yons sanmu suenaan
wounds (see Figure 11.14).
Figure 11.13  A radiograph of a mesenteric torsion in a
German Shepherd dog.
Surgical considerations
but ultimately the patient will not recover unless
 surgery is performed. The timing of the required
Anaesthesia
surgery will depend on the disease process, and
how rapidly the patient's status improves with the
Anaesthetic agents used should have minimal
initial treatment prior to operating.
effects on the cardiovascular and respiratory
 Indications that exploratory surgery is required
systems. Adequate use of analgesia should help to
include:
reduce levels of inhaled anaesthetic agents to a
minimum. Nitrous oxide should be avoided where
GDV (see Figure 11.12)
there are trapped gas pockets, such as in GDVs and
Gastrointestinal tract obstruction and foreign
intestinal obstructions (nitrous oxide will diffuse
bodies
into the air-filled space and increase the volume of
●Mesenteric torsion (see Figure 11.13)
the trapped gas).
116   Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 11.15  Following abdominal surgery an abdominal
drain (left of picture) and a feeding tube (right of picture)
have been placed.
Patient preparation
For exploratory coeliotomy, a large incision is
made from xiphoid to caudal to the umbilicus, this
Figure 11.16  The patient has been positioned with the
allows full exploration of the abdomen. The area
table tilted to relieve pressure on the abdomen from a
clipped should be such that the incision can be
distended abdomen. A hot air blanket is being used to help
maintain body temperature.
extended caudally if needed. Additional proce-
 dures may be deemed necessary during surgery
(the placement of feeding tubes or abdominal
Body temperature
drains); the clip should be large enough to allow
this (see Figure 11.15). Enteral access should be
Patients undergoing abdominal surgery are at risk
 considered during surgery; this can be achieved by
of developing hypothermia. Heat loss is pro-
the placement of oesophagostomy, gastrostomy or
 nounced from open abdomens, and further cooling
jejunostomy tubes.
 may occur due to lavage fluids and prolonged
anaesthetic times. Heat pads and warm air blan-
kets are useful to maintain body temperature.
Patient positioning
Abdominal lavage
Acute abdomen patients often have large and
heavy fluid-filled viscuses, abdominal masses or
 Sterile Hartmarn's solution should be warmed to
large abdominal effusions. When the patient is
 body temperature ready for abdominal lavage, to
positioned in dorsal recumbency this increase
remove any contamination at the end of the proce-
 in abdominal volume can cause respiratory com-
 dure. The volume required isnot clearly defined and
promise by pushing on the diaphragm. Tilting
varies with the level of contamination, but a figure
the table or raising one end of the positioning
of 200ml/kg body weight is advocated (a cat's
cradle relieves some of the pressure against the
abdomen would require approximately 1l of fluid
diaphragm and improves ventilation by allowing
to be lavaged, and a Labrador approximately 5-6 1).
greater lung expansion (see Figure 11.16).
All lavage fluid should be removed with suction.
Nursing the Acute Abdomen Patient  117
Peritoneal drainage
Postoperative management
Where there is concern regarding bacterial con-
Animals recovering from acute abdominal disease
tamination of the abdominal cavity, provision
need intensive nursing, with plarming of monitor-
should be made to allow ongoing peritoneal drain-
ing, analgesia and enteral nutrition.
age. Open peritoneal drainage is achieved by
loosely apposing the linea aiba at the end
of
 surgery, and maintaining an absorbant sterile
Nutrition
dressing over the area until definitive closure is
carried out. Open peritoneal drainage has several
Gut stasis and ileus are common in the postopera-
disadvantages (risk of hospital acquired infection,
tive period. Feeding patients early on promotes
frequent dressing changes, risk of herniation) and
restoration of gut motility. The concept of resting
 [auad paso, Aq papasiadns Arar uaaq seu
the intestinal tract following surgery is no longer
drainage' using continuous closed suction drains 
 recommended. Delaying feeding promotes ileus
(e.g. Jackson-Pratt drains). This technique has the
and leads to death of enterocytes that line the
advantage of allowing ongoing drainage, without
gut, leading to the risk of bacterial translocation.
associated risks (see Figure 11.17).
Feeding increases the mucosal blood supply and
improves healing and the return of strength to any
enterotomy or anastamosis site.
 Patients should be encouraged to eat on the
same day as surgery, once they are suitably recov-
ered from the anaesthetic. Patients that are reluc-
tant to eat should be coaxed or syringe fed. In cases
where anorexia persists, feeding tubes should
be used (see Chapter 16). The requirement for
a feeding tube should be anticipated during sur-
[enaua puonas e ioy paau au juaaand o Aiaa
anaesthetic.
Monitoring
Regular physical monitoring, and recording the
findings so as to spot trends, is essential. Tempera-
ture, heart rate, pulse rate and quality, CRT and
(b)
respiratory rate should all be recorded. Many
patients remain haemodymamically unstable and
ongoing IV fluid therapy must be tailored towards
clinical findings.
 Patients are at risk of developing complications
and SIRS. The most common complication fol-
lowing acute abdomen surgery is likely to be the
development of septic peritonitis. Causes include
spillage of gastrointestinal contents during sur-
gery, dehiscence of enterotomies, development of
abscesses (often associated with retained swabs)
Figure 11.17 (a) Placing a Jackson-Pratt drain in a cat at
the end of exploratory surgery (to investigate septic
 Or gastrointestinal perforation. Dehiscence is most
per itonitis). (b) Following Closure the drain is connected to a
common 34 days after surgery. Animals with
vacuum reservoir to form a 'closed system'.
pyrexia, ‘left shiff on haematology, increasing
118  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
pain, decreased mentation and poor perfusion
saline in large GDV patients: this enables a smaller
should be suspected of developing peritonitis.
volume of fluid to be administered more quickly,
whilst bringing about similar volume expansion.
Once fluid resuscitation is underway, the clinical
Analgesia
team can then tum to the other important area of
stabilisation: decompression of the stomach. By
Analgesia should be continued in the postop-
decompressing the stomach venous return
is
erative period. Opioids such as buprenorphine,
improved, gastric mucosa perfusion is improved
 morphine and methadone are usually used. It is
and the animal is much more comfortable. An oro-
important to keep monitoring the patient for signs
 gastric tube is carefully passed into the stomach
of pain or discomfort (see Chapter 6). As well as
(see Practical techniques at the end of the chapter).
being a welfare issue, ongoing pain has physio-
This is usually well tolerated in the conscious
logical effects that are detrimental to recovery:
patient (see Figure 11.18). If the tube carmot be
 immune suppression, delayed wound healing and
passed, needle flank decompression is carried out
ventilation-perfusion mismatch.
 to remove gas from the stomach (see Figure 11.19).
Management of common presentations
Gastric dilation and volvulus
The diagnosis of GDV can normally be made
rapidly, based on history, physical examination
and radiography. When undertaking treatment,
there are three stages to consider to help maximise
the chances of a successful outcome:
1)
Stabilisation of the patient prior to surgery
2）
Surgical exploration: de-rotation of the stomach
and assessment of viability
3）
 Permanent gastropexy: to prevent recurrence of
Figure 11.18 Orogastric intubation in a GDV patient prior
volvulus.
to surgery.
Stabilisation must concentrate initially on cor-
recting haemodynamic instability that exists in
these patients on presentation. The distension of
the stomach leads to compression of the caudal
vena cava and portal vein, causing reduced venous
return to the heart, reduced cardiac output and
therefore tissue hypoperfusion. Aggressive intra-
venous fluid therapy needs to be started as soon as
-lon aq ol spaau sanssh jo uoisnjradodu (aiqissod
rected as a matter of urgency.
 Usually, isotoric crystalloids are administered at
shock rates. To achieve the administration rates
required (90ml/kg over 15 minutes) it is usually
necessary to place two intravenous cannulas, en-
suring the widest bore possible is used. Raising the
Figure 11.19 Flank needle decompression in a GDV
asanoui oi sdau anssand suidde pue seq pm
patient where it has not been possible to pass an orogastric
flow. Some authors advise the use of hypertonic
tube.
Nursing the Acute Abdomen Patient  119
Figure 11.20 Following stabilisation of the GDV patient,
Figure 11.21   Abdominocentesis: abdominal effusion is
corrective surgery is performed. Here the stomach is visibly
collected from a needle into a container. In this case the
distended prior to de-rotation.
effusion is blood.
After needle decompression, orogastric intubation
should be attempted again, often, the distension of
the stomach is less and it is now possible to pass
the tube
 Careful monitoring of perfusion parameters
 allows an appreciation of improvement in haemo-
dynamic stability. Once stabilised to a satisfactory
degree the patient is anaesthetised for corrective
surgery (see Figure 11.20).
Haemoabdomen
A common finding in emergency cases is the
accumulation of blood in the peritoneal space.
Figure 11.22 Splenic laceration discovered in a cat at
The most common causes are neoplasia and
exploratory surgery. The patient presented with a
abdominal trauma, but other causes include splenic
haemoabdomen following trauma, and failed to stabilise
torsion or iatrogenic causes. An abdominocentesis
with conservative management.
sample of non-clotting sanguinous fluid, of similar
PCV to a venous blood sample, is diagnostic (see
be indicated, but few practices will have sufficient
Figure 11.21).
volumes for this initial resuscitation.
Cases of trauma where there is uncontrolled
 'Hypotensive resuscitation' has been suggested
abdominal bleeding are commonly seen, and are
 in patients with active haemorrhage. The idea is
often the result of splenic or hepatic laceration (see
to maintain a slightly hypotensive state using
Figure 11.22). These animals will present with per-
limited fluid resuscitation, rather than aiming for
fusion deficits due to hypovolaemia, which should
normotensive or hypertensive state (in humans, a
be addressed urgently as with other cases of hypo-
mean arterial pressure [MAP] of 40-60mgHg is
volaemic shock. Isotonic crystalloids are suitable,
 suggested). The aim is to prevent problems associ-
and re-establishing circulating volume takes prior-
ated with aggressive therapy with large volumes
ity over any concerns regarding haemodilution.
of fluid: breakdown of soft clots, haemodilution
Hypertonic saline should not be used where un-
leading to reduced viscosity and reduced coagula-
controlled bleeding exists. Blood products would
tion factors.
120  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
These findings come from human trauma and
military studies where fluids are reduced or even
withheld until the haemorrhage has been con-
trolled (often by definitive surgical treatment), and
access to large surgical teams and blood products
are available. As prolonged hypotension leads to
systemic inflammatory response and organ failure,
the use of hypotensive resuscitation is not advised
 in veterinary patients.
More suitable for veterinary patients is con-
trolled or restricted resuscitation. Low volume
boluses are administered to maintain normal tissue
perfusion and the patient monitored very closely
to check for deterioration. Cases of traumatic hae-
 moabdomen can often be managed without surgery
provided careful ongoing monitoring of perfusion
Figure 11.23 Focused assessment with sonography for
trauma (FAST) ultrasound investigation of an abdomen
parameters, PCV and TP are used to assess whether 
following trauma. The numbers correspond to the four
the patient is stabilising or whether haemorrhage
regions mentioned in the text.
is ongoing.
through 45° in a cranial to caudal, and a left to
Practical techniques
right direction.
5) If free fluid is visualised, direct abdominocen-
Focused assessment with sonography for
tesis or needle-guided abdominocentesis can
trauma (FAST) procedure
 be performed to obtain a sample.
6）
In the case of haemoabdomen, if only a minor
This technique is adapted from a rapid stan-
volume is detected, follow-up FAST studies
dardised ultrasound examination developed for
can be performed to assess if the haemorrhage
evaluation of human patients following trauma.
is ongoing.
The aim is to quickly identify free abdominal fluid,
 such as blood or urine, following traumatic injury.
1)
The
 a  a si  
Abdominocentesis
recumbency.
 Depending on the size of the patient, a 5 or
1）
 A single point can be tapped, usually just
7.5MHz curvilinear probe is used.
caudal to the umbilicus, or a four quadrant tap
3）
Transv erse and longitudinal views are obtained
performed where the whole of the abdomen is
in each of four regions (see Figure 11.23):
 assessed by attempting to draw fluid from four
Subxiphoid area - ① (looking for fluid
points.
around liver lobes)
2)
The animal is usually placed in left lateral
Midline caudal abdomen, over the bladder
recumbency (this reduces the likelihood of
 ② (fluid against the urinary bladder)
spleric trauma during the procedure).
Right flank, sub-lumbar fossa - ③ (fluid be-
31
After clipping of hair and routine aseptic skin
tween right kidney and liver caudate lobe)
preparation a needle or intravenous catheter is
Left flank - ① (fluid around the left kidney
attached to a syringe and introduced into the
and spleen).
abdomen (see Figure 11.24).
4）
 The probe is moved at least 4 cm at each loca-
41
Suction is applied to the syringe to remove a
tion, and at each point the probe is fanned
sample of abdominal fluid for analysis.
Nursing the Acute Abdomen Patient 121
Figure 11.25 Pre-measuring a stomach tube prior to
orogastric intubation. The tube is marked at the desired
Figure 11.24   Abdominocentesis being performed at a
point with adhesive tape; this acts as a marker to prevent
single point, caudal to the umbilicus in the midline.
over-insertion of the tube.
5)  Some people prefer to use a needle without a
 syringe, and collect any fluid as it drips from
the needle hub - this technique is fine, as long
as it is not done before radiographs are taken.
The reason for this is that an open needle can
introduce air into the abdomen, which may
be mistaken for free abdominal gas on the
radiograph.
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage is a similar technique
to abdominocentesis, but when the catheter is
 inserted in the midline, 20 ml/kg body weight of
sterile saline is introduced into the abdomen. The
fluid is left in place for several minutes (the animal
can be gently rolled to distribute the fluid). The
fluid is then collected and analysed; the saline will
have diluted the small amount of peritoneal effu-
sion and made it easier to collect.
Figure 11.26 Orogastric intubation of a GDV patient, using
 a rolled bandage as an improvised gag.
Orogastric intubation ('stomach tubing')
1) A suitably sized stomach tube is pre-measured
 3)  In the conscious animal a gag of some descrip-
against the patient (from the tip of the nose
tion is required, to avoid damage to the tube
to the last rib) and marked, usually with adhe-
 or injury to the clinical team. A rolled bandage
sive tape; this prevents over insertion (see
works well; it acts to prevent the dog biting
Figure 11.25).
down, and the tube can be passed down the
2) The tip of the tube is lubricated.
hollow centre (see Figure 11.26).
122 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
4)The tube is advanced gently so as not to trau-
6
Once the tube has passed into the stomach, it
matise the stomach. If the tube does not enter 
is advanced to the pre-measured distance.
the stomach it should not be forced.
Gaseous distension is usually relieved, liquid
5) In the case of the GDV patient, moving the
 and solid stomach contents may need gentle
patient to lateral recumbency may help. If the
lavage with warm water to enable removal.
stomach tube cannot be passed, needle flank
decompression is performed before another
attempt is made.
12
Nursing Urinary Tract
Emergencies
Introduction
 acidosis and often hypovolaemia. Hypovolaemic
animals need volume resuscitation with an isotonic
The most commonly seen urinary tract emergen-
crystalloid to correct hypoperfusion. Fluid boluses
cies include urinary tract obstruction, leakage of 
appropriate to the degree of hypovolaemia present
 urine due to trauma and acute renal failure. Any
should be administered, and any further require-
 of these conditions can lead to life-threatening
 ments determined by response to treatment.
renal dysfunction, and the patient is likely to need
Hyperkalaemia  can  be  life-threatening.
The
a period of stabilisation prior to sedation or general
rising potassium levels have an effect on the myo-
anesthesia to allow urinary tract catheterisation,
cardium and cause cardiac arrhythmias; ani-
urinary diversion techniques or peritoneal drain-
mals are often recumbent and semi-conscious. If
age and dialysis.
a bradyarrhythmia is detected, an electrocardio-
Other emergency or critical care patients without
gram (ECG) should be performed (see Chapter 10).
urinary tract disease may also require urinary cath-
eterisation. This may be for accurate measurement
drainage will 1
reduce
 potassium levels, but often
of urine output to allow assessment of renal perfu-
additional treatment is required. This is especially
sion, or simply to prevent urine scalding in the
the case where sedation to relieve an obstruction
recumbent patient.
and place a urinary catheter is required. The car-
Urinary catheters or diversion tubes need to be
diotoxic effects of hyperkalaemia greatly increase
connected to a ‘closed’ collection system; this
anaesthetic risks. Calcium gluconate 10% solution
reduces the risk of ascending infection in the sus-
administered slowly by intravenous injection (0.5-
ceptible debilitated patient (see Figure 12.1).
1.5ml/kg) is very useful. While it has no effect on
serum potassium levels, it stabilises the threshold
potential of the myocardial cells; the effect lasts for
Stabilisation
20-30 minutes. For cases where the hyperkalaemia
 pe A ui oa) oo aq cn  si
Urinary tract obstruction or leakage of urine
or acute renal failure), intravenous neutral insulin
will usually result in azotaemia, hyperkalaemia,
 and glucose can be administered. The resulting
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
124 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 12.3  An intra-operative view of a cystotomy to
remove multiple uroliths from a dog's bladder.
Figure 12.1  A patient with an indwelling urinary catheter
 granulomatous lesions can also cause a blockage.
connected to a urine collection bag, forming a 'closed
Cats with feline lower urinary tract disease may
system.
present in a similar fashion, whilst there may be no
physical obstruction, the pain and muscle spasm
associated with the condition may lead to a 'func-
tional' obstruction.
Owners often report stranguria, dysuria or
anuria. Females are less commonly presented than
males, due to having wider, shorter urethras. The
dinical condition of the patient depends on the
duration of obstruction and whether the obstruc-
tion is complete or partial (the animal being able
to pass some urine). Although the animal will be
showing discomfort, systemic sigms may not be
apparent in the first 24 hours until azotaemia
develops. Careful palpation of the abdomen will
usually reveal a large tense bladder; care must be
taken not to cause rupture.
Following stabilisation, sedation or anaesthesia
 is usually necessary to enable a urinary catheter to
Figure 12.2  Radiograph of a male dog with radio-opaque
be passed and the obstruction relieved. As with all
uroliths obstructing the urethra at the level of the os penis.
critical animals, the minimum possible dose of
sedative or anaesthetic agent should be used.
uptake of glucose and potassium into cells reduces
Agents are selected to minimise the effect on the
serum potassium concentrations.
cardiovascular system.
 In male dogs, uroliths most commonly lodge at
the narrowing of the urethra just proximal to the
Urinary tract obstruction
 Os penis. Most uroliths lodged in this position can
be ‘hydropulsed’ (flushed with saline) back into
In most cases urinary obstruction occurs at the
the bladder and removed surgically via a cystot-
level of the bladder or urethra, although occasion-
 omy later (see Figure 12.3). Once the obstruction
ally a ureter can become blocked. The obstruction
 has been hydropulsed the catheter can be advanced
is most commonly due to uroliths (see Figure 12.2),
into the bladder to drain it. If the obstruction
or urethral plugs in cats, although neoplasia and
 cannot be dislodged, attempts can be made to pass
Nursing Urinary Tract Emergencies   125
Figure 12.4  A double contrast pneumocystogram of a male
Figure 12.5 Ultrasound-guided cystocentesis.
dog with radiolucent uroliths in the bladder.
a very narrow catheter past the obstruction into
the urinary bladder as a temporary measure, but
usually a pre-scrotal urethrostomy is required to
remove the stone surgically.
Tip
Bear in mind some uroliths (e.g. urate stones) are radio-
lucent and will not show on radiographs. They will require
contrast studies to outline them (see Figure 12.4).
Relief of obstruction in male cats requires ure-
thral catheterisation. Some cases may have an
intra-penile obstruction; usually the penis will look
cyanotic, and it may be possible to break down the
obstruction manually with massage. For catheteri-
sation, a 3 French catheter with open tip is used,
and saline flushed through the catheter as it is
Figure 12.6 From left to right; Jackson' cat catheter (note
advanced (see Practical techniques at the end of
side holes only), lachrymal catheter and 22G intravenous
the chapter). In some cases where catheterisation
Catheter.
proves difficult, emptying the bladder via cysto-
centesis can ease catheter placement, as the full
bladder is no longer pushing caudally on the
urethra. If cystocentesis is necessary, then it should
be performed with as narrow a gauge needle as
Tip
possible to minimise damage to the bladder wall
and reduce the risk of urine leakage (see Figure
Most cat catheters have side holes but no end hole, which
12.5). If the obstruction cannot be cleared,
a
makes trying to flush obstructions more difficult. Use a
tube cystostomy may be necessary (see ‘Urinary
22 G IV catheter with the stylet removed, or a nasolacrimal
diversion').
Cannula to flush the obstruction clear (see Figure 12.6).
126 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Where a urinary catheter is to be left in place
(indwelling), it should be connected to a closed
collection system to prevent ascending infection
(see Urine collection systems). Where an indwell-
ing catheter is to be placed it is important to mini-
mise discomfort, and trauma from the presence of
the catheter. Foley catheters are suitable in the dog
and bitch (a stylet is helpful to assist in placing
them) as they are soft, and can sit in the bladder
neck rather than having a long length of catheter
in the bladder Once the balloon has been filled
with saline, the catheter can be pulled caudally to
seat the balloon in the bladder neck; this prevents
removal of the catheter.
Figure 12.7  Retroperitoneal fluid in a dog following
trauma. Note the ventral displacement of the colon, and
'streaking' seen in the retroperitoneal space.
Urinary tract trauma
Rupture of the urinary bladder is commonly
Trauma can result in injury to the urinary tract
associated with blunt trauma to the abdomen.
anywhere along its length, with the potential for
Large deficits in the bladder wall will result in the
leakage of urine into the surounding area. Blunt
rapid loss of urine into the abdomen and rapid
trauma (such as road traffic accidents, kicks or
onset of clinical signs, but smaller leaks may take
falls) is the most common reason for damage to the
several days to produce recognisable symptoms.
urinary tract, but penetrating trauma (bite wounds)
The presence of urine in the abdomen initiates a
ballistic injuries) or trauma secondary to obstruc-
chemical peritonitis, and being hyperosmolar, the
tion may also be seen. Leakage of urine from the
urine draws water from the extracellular space
kidney or the majority of the length of the ureter
into the abdomen, causing dehydration. The rapid
will lead to accumulation of urine in the retroperi-
equilibrium of electrolytes across the peritoneal
toneal space whereas leakage from the distal ureter,
membrane results in hyperkalaemia and acidosis.
urinary bladder or the proximal urethra will result
Diagnosis is usually made by abdominocentesis
in uroperitoneum as the fluid fills the abdomen.
Leakage from the more distal urethra results in
increased creatinine level compared to blood cre-
urine accumulating in the tissues of the perineal
atinine concentrations, it is suggestive of uroabdo-
area, causing inflammation and often sloughing of
 men (creatinine is a relatively large molecule, and
the skin.
as such does not equilibriate across the peritoneal
Urine leakage into the retroperitoneal space
membrane, whereas urea - being smaller - rapidly
-ep oh s aq ae aam no Aaup au w
 crosses). Abdominal ultrasound and retrograde
nose; the fluid does not enter the abdomen, so
urethrocystograms may also be useful in making a
carmot be detected by abdominocentesis. Plain
diagnosis of bladder damage.
radiographs may show an increase in the size or a
change in density (seen as 'streaking’ due to the
Tip
different radiographic densities of fat and fluid) of 
the retroperitoneal space (see Figure 12.7). Diagno-
Being able to palpate a bladder does not rule out bladder
sis is assisted by the use of iodine contrast agents
rupture. Also, animals with bladder rupture are often able
saup p uderom araoxa uad c
 to pass apparently normal streams of urine.
may require partial or complete nephrectomy.
 Ureter trauma may be debrided and repaired with
Animals that have had a uroabdomen for some
anastomosis or implantation of the end of the
time will require stabilisation prior to exploratory
ureter into the bladder.
surgery and repair. The goals of stabilisation are to
Nursing Urinary Tract Emergencies   127
Figure 12.9  A radiograph of a cat with a tube cystostomy
Figure 12.8  A retrograde positive contrast urethrogram
in place. The inflated balloon of the Foley catheter is visible
demonstrating urethral rupture following a dog bite.
within the bladder.
 correct fluid deficits and electrolyte imbalances by
 a combination of fluid therapy and urine drainage.
Dehydration and hypovolaemia should be cor-
rected with intravenous isotonic crystalloid fluids.
Drainage of urine from the abdomen can be
managed by abdominocentesis, passing a transure-
thral catheter into the abdomen, or by placing a
fenestrated abdominal drain under local anaesthe-
sia (see Practical techniques at the end of the
chapter). Urine collection must be into a 'closed'
system.
 Urethral damage can result from fractures of the
Figure 12.10 The same patient as seen in Figure 12.9. The
pubis, bite wounds to the perineum, penetrating
Cystostomy tube is anchored to the body wall with a
'Chinese finger trap' friction suture. Note the sloughing skin
wounds in the pelvic area or secondary to obstruc-
tion and traumatic catheterisatior. Retrograde ure-
as a result of urine leakage subcutaneously from urethral
trauma.
thrography is usually necessary to confirm the
diagnosis (see Figure 12.8). Diversion of urine via
 a tube cystostomy may be required to allow healing
cystostomy (or pre-pubic catheterisation), this is
of the urethra.
preferable to repeated cystocentesis while stabilis-
ing a patient pre or post surgery.
Tube cystostomy catheters are usually Foley
Urine diversion
catheters. They can be placed during bladder sur-
gery or via a mini-laparotomy just for this purpose.
 In some situations it may be impossible to pass a
The catheter is placed through a stab incision in
urinary catheter into the bladder: it may be unde-
the centre of a purse string suture in the bladder
sirable to have urine enter the urethra, or longer
wall, the balloon is then inflated and the purse
term drainage of the bladder may be required. The
string tightened (see Figure 12.9). The catheter
urethra may need to be bypassed and a means of
is exited through a stab incision in the body wall,
urine drainage placed direct into the bladder via
 and the bladder anchored intermally with sutures
the body wall. This technique is known as a tube
to the body wall (see Figure 12.10). The catheter
128 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
may then be connected to a closed collection system
as possible as this is the time of greatest risk for
for continuous drainage of the bladder or the
introduction of bacteria into the system.
catheter can be capped and intermittent drainage
 Commercial collection bags have the advantage
performed.
of having a built-in measurement scale, and can
The catheter must remain in place for at least 7
usually be emptied via a tap at the bottom of the
days to ensure strong adhesions between the
bag. This avoids disconnecting and connecting the
bladder and the body wall have formed and so
system, as this is when there is greatest risk of
prevent leakage of urine into the abdomen after
contamination being introduced to the system.
removal.
Some collecting bags also have an anti-reflux
Percutaneous catheter placement systems can
chamber to avoid backward flow from the bag to
also be used (locking loop pigtail catheter, placed
the bladder (see Figure 12.12).
via a Seldinger technique), which are placed with-
out laparotomy, through the abdominal wall and
into the bladder.
Monitoring urine output
 Urine output is one of the most important indica-
Urine collection systems
tors of renal function in the critical patient (see
Chapter 2). Normal urine output is 1-2ml/kg/
Where an indwelling urinary catheter is placed, a
hour in the normal animal, but may be reduced in
closed collection system must be used. Leaving an
am gn shaa ru rn sad pa
open urinary catheter to drip urine runs the risk of
urine scald to the skin and ascending infection.
An indwelling catheter connected to a closed col-
lection system is also preferred to allow accurate
measurement of urine output. Closed collection
systems can either be commercially available, or an
emptied intravenous fluid bag can be used (saline
or Hartmann's, not glucose-containing fluids), con-
nected via a sterile giving set (see Figure 12.11). The
collection bag is placed below the patient to allow
urine to drain by gravity, but avoid placing on the
floor to reduce the risk of bacterial contamination.
 Closed systems should be 'broken' as infrequently
as possible. If the bag needs to be emptied, or cath-
eter disconnected, it should be done as aseptically
Figure 12.12  A commercial urine collection bag
incorporating an anti-reflux valve (to prevent flow back to
the patient) and a tap to allow drainage without
Figure 12.11  A closed urine collection system improvised
disconnection. Marked graduations allow urine output to be
from a sterile giving set and emptied intravenous fluid bag.
measured.
Nursing Urinary Tract Emergencies 129
output may be seen in patients receiving large
indwelling catheters. Antibiotics should not be
volume of intravenous fluids.
given routinely to patients with indwelling cathe-
Urine output should be measured every 24
ters to prevent infection; studies have shown this
hours. As well as an indicator of renal problems,
 to lead to the development of resistant infections.
falls in urine output may be due to pre-renal or
It is preferable to wait until the catheter is removed,
post-renal factors. In a hypovolaemic animal, capil-
 and then treat any infection on the basis of a culture
lary beds in the body may be closed down to con-
and sensitivity.
serve circulating volume and ensure perfusion
Complications can be avoided by correct tech-
of vital organs. The blood supply to the kidneys
nique, and placing the catheter in as aseptic a
is one of the last to be affected, so if urine output
 fashion as possible. Hair should be clipped from
is not maintained, greater fluid volumes are
around the vulva in dogs and cats, and the pre-
required. Post-renal azotaemia and reduction in
puce in cats. The area around the vulva or prepuce
should be cleaned, and the vulva or prepuce
or with rupture of the ureter, bladder or urethra
flushed with dilute chlorhexidine or pevidene. If
leading to a uroabdomen. (But bear in mind
an indwelling catheter is to be left in place, an
 animals with ruptured bladders can still appear to
 antibiotic ointment can be placed in the prepuce or
urinate normally.)
vulva to help prevent ascending infection.
 Urine output can be massive in cases where an
 obstruction has been relieved; cats frequently have
 post-obstruction dieresis and urine outputs of
Acute renal failure
50ml/kg/hour are possible. Measuring the urine
 output allows intravenous fluid therapy to be
Acute renal failure (ARF) is a sudden, severe reduc-
matched to ongoing losses, i.e. matching ‘ins' to
tion of kidney function, usually caused by toxic,
outs' (see Chapter 4).
ischaemic or infectious damage. Toxic insults tend
to be more commonly seen, and can be induced by
medication (e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
Complications of urinary catheterisation
drugs [NSAIDs] or household toxins such as
ethylene glycol, or lily plants. Ischaemic injury is
Trauma
associated with hypovolaemia or hypotension
resulting in reduced renal blood flow. Infectious
Trauma can usually be avoided by using smooth,
causes may be systemic infections (e.g. leptospiro-
flexible catheters and good technique. Trauma
sis) or localised (e.g. pyelonephritis). It is possible
needs to be avoided as it may predispose the
for animals suffering from chronic renal failure
 patient to bacterial infection as it will damage
to suffer an acute deterioration, or an ‘acute-on-
normal defence barrier mechanisms. Haematuria
chronic’ renal failure.
caused by trauma will interfere with accurate uri-
The impaired glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
nalysis
S - disease processes may have greatly
seen in ARF leads to an elevation of blood urea
increased the vascular supply to the bladder and
nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine. These blood
urethra and made it more fragile.
changes may be mild or marked depending on the
severity of impairment in GFR. Hyperkalaemia is
likely, and a metabolic acidosis may develop as
Infection
phosphates and sulphates build up in the blood.
Anorexia,
.vomiting, dehydration and sudden
The urine in the kidneys, ureters and bladder of
changes in urine output are seen with ARF. Depend-
cats and dogs is usually sterile, whereas the distal
ing on the cause there may be swelling and oedema
 urethra, vagina and prepuce normally contain bac-
 of the kidneys leading to abdominal pain.
teria. Infection is a risk even with careful catheteri-
Affected animals are likely to be oliguric
or
sation, as these bacteria may be carried into the
anuric; normal urine output is considered to be
bladder. There is an increased risk of iatrogenic
2.0ml/kg/hour, less than this is considered oligu-
infection with repeated catheterisation, and with
ria, output of <0.5ml/kg/hour is anuria.
130  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Treatment is aimed at increasing urine output.
membrane and into a removable fluid (the dialy-
Catheterisation of the bladder is invaluable to
 sate). Peritoneal dialysis is most commonly used
allow urine output to be measured and assess
in veterinary medicine. Fluid is infused into the
response to treatment. The first priority is to re-
abdomen, and the large surface area of the peri-
store normal circulation volume in hypovolaemic
toneum acts as the semi-permeable membrane.
animals. If the animal is hypovolaemic or dehy-
Solutes are transported from the blood, across the
drated then urine output is going to be below
peritoneum and into the dialysate which is then
acceptable levels. A balanced isotonic crystalloid
drained again from the abdomen (see Practical
should be administered in incremental boluses
techniques at the end of the chapter).
until normovolaemia has been achieved.
 If restoration of circulating volume fails to im-
prove urine output, then administering diuretics is
Practical techniques
regarded as the next stage of treatment. Mannitol
is an osmotic diuretic; due to its hypertonicity it
Catheterising male cats (see Figure 12.14)
draws fluid into the tubular lumen increasing
urine output. Because of its mode of action, man-
The
patient
is
positioned inlateral
nitol cannot exert its effect unless some glomerular
recumbency.
filtration is present, otherwise it carnot be filtered
2
 The thumb and index finger are used to push
into the tubular lumen. If the patient is completely
the prepuce cranially exposing the glans penis.
anuric the repeated doses can cause problems due
3)
The tip of a lubricated catheter is inserted asep-
to the tonicity. Furosemide is a loop diuretic that
tically into the penile urethra.
works on the loop of Henle; incremental doses can
4
Once the catheter is in the penile urethra, the
be administered to try to induce diuresis.
prepuce is grasped and pulled caudally to
 If a patient remains oliguric following volume
straighten the urethra and allow safe passage
expansion and diuretics, then peritoneal dialysis
of the catheter.
or haemodialysis can be performed to address life-
5
 The catheter is gently advanced until urine 
threatening electrolyte or acid-base disturbances
appears at the catheter hub.
(see Figure 12.13). Before embarking on this step.
6
In cats with a blockage caused by a urethral
the prognosis, underlying disease and the animal's
plug it may be necessary to use a catheter with
temperament should be considered. In some cases
a very small gauge and an aperture at the tip.
dialysis can ‘buy time' whilst the kidneys recover.
 such as the cannula of a 22-gauge intravenous
Dialysis works due to the movement of electrolytes
catheter, or a lachrymal catheter. The catheter
and solutes from the blood, across a semi-permeable
is advanced whilst flushing with copious
saline.
Figure 12.13  Performing peritoneal dialysis in a dog with
acute renal failure.
Figure 12.14 Placing a urinary catheter in a male cat.
Nursing Urinary Tract Emergencies   131
Figure 12.15 Placing a urinary catheter in a female cat.
Figure 12.17 Placing a urinary catheter in a female dog.
 The os penis is grasped and the prepuce re-
 tracted caudally to expose the glans penis.
A suitable catheter is lubricated with water-
soluble gel and then inserted into the urethra
in an aseptic fashion.
4）
As the catheter reaches the level of the os penis
the grasp on the penis can be relaxed to allow
further passage of the catheter.
5)As the catheter enters the bladder, urine will
appear in the hub of the catheter, and passage
should cease.
Catheterising female dogs (see Figure 12.17)
Figure 12.16 Placing a urinary catheter in a male dog.
11
)The patient should be in lateral or dorsal recum-
bency. The hind limbs are pulled cranially.
Catheterising female cats (see Figure 12.15)
2）
 A vaginal speculum is inserted into the vagina,
with the slit positioned ventrally, avoiding the
1)
 The
patient
is
 positioned
lin
lateral
ventrally placed clitoral fossa.
recumbency.
3）
 The raised external urethral orifice is visu-
2)
 The vulval lips are grasped and the tip of the
alised on the ventral floor of the cranial
catheter passed along the ventral midline of
vestibule.
the vestibule.
4
A suitable catheter is lubricated with water-
3）
 The external urethral orifice is a depression on
soluble gel, and inserted into the urethra in an
the vestibular floor and the cather tip should
 aseptic fashion. If a Foley catheter is to be used,
pass into the urethra without the need to
a stylet stiffens the catheter and makes inser-
visualise.
tion easier.
4)The catheter is advanced until urine is seen at
5）
The catheter is advanced until urine is seen at
the catheter hub.
the catheter hub.
Catheterising male dogs (see Figure 12.16)
Abdominal drain (see Figure 12.18)
1)The patient should be standing, or in lateral
An abdominal drain can be placed to manage a
recumbency.
uroabdomen whilst the patient is stabilised, or the
132 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
4)Make sure all fenestrations on the drain are
within the abdomen, and secure the drain to
the abdomen with a purse string suture fol-
lowed by a Chinese finger trap friction suture.
5}
 If draining a uroperitoneum the drain can now
be attached to a closed collection system. If the
drain is to be used for peritoneal dialysis, a
three-way stopcock is attached to allow infu-
sion and collection of fluid.
Peritoneal dialysis
 Fluid is infused into the abdomen through a drain,
left in the abdomen for 45 minutes and then drained
Figure 12.18  Placing an abdominal drain in a dog with a
from the abdomen. Commercial fluid (dialysate) is
uroabdomen. A skin incision has been made, and a chest
available, or lactated Ringer's solution can be used
drain with a stylet is being inserted.
with dextrose added. Fluid containing 1.5% dex-
trose is used in normally hydrated patients; fluid
drain can be used to administer peritoneal dialysis.
containing 4.5% dextrose is used in patients that
Commercial peritoneal dialysis catheters can be
have fluid overload, this more concentrated solu-
purchased either with a stylet, or over-the-wire
tion draws water from the circulation, helping to
type. Alternatively, chest drains can be used, sterile
 reduce the overload.
feeding tubes with additional fenestrations made
or a Jackson-Pratt drain.
1)
 Attach a three-way stopcock to the abdominal
drain. Connect the dialysate bag to another
1）
 The mid-caudal abdomen is clipped and surgi-
port of the stopcock, and the collection bag to
cally prepared, strict aseptic technique
is
the third.
essential.
2)
Warmed dialysate is infused into the perito-
 The point of insertion is 1-2 cm caudal to the
neal space at a rate of 20ml/kg. Observe care-
umbilicus. Local anaesthetic is placed in the
fully for sigms of that excessive fluid has been
skin and abdominal wall.
infused: increased respiratory rate, abdominal
3）
 An incision is made through the skin and sub-
distension or anxiety.
cutaneous tissue down to the linea alba. For
3
The stopcock is closed and the fluid left in the
drains with a stylet, the drain can now be
peritoneal space for 45 minutes.
advanced through the linea alba, directed cau-
4
The stopcock is then opened to the collection
dally toward the pelvic inlet. If using a drain
bag to allow the fluid to drain by gravity.
without a stylet, the incision must be contin-
51
The process is repeated every hour initially, the
ued through the linea alba and the drain then
frequency can be reduced to every 4-6 hours
introduced with haemostats.
once the patient stabilises.
13
Nursing the Poisoned Patient
Introduction
and have suitable equipment and medication to
hand.
Poisoned (or intoxicated) animals are regularly
In many instances the owner may not have wit-
seen in practice. The patient may come into contact
nessed their pet ingesting a toxin, but aspects of the
with the poison accidentally or the poison may
be
history may make intoxication likely. A sudden
administered to the animal maliciously. In many
-iadnsum uaaq seu jad e rae suoidus jo jasu
cases, the owners may be the cause of the problem,
vised for a period of time is suspicious. Also, access
either by administering human medication to their
 to a new environment followed by sudden symp-
pet or by accidentally overdosing with a prescribed
toms, e.g. dogs gaining access to garden sheds or
veterinary product.
 garages, or getting into a neighbour's garden. If an
Due to the wide variety of toxins and their very
animal shows very rapid onset of gastrointestinal
varied effects on animals, recognising an intoxi-
signs, neurological signs, renal or hepatic failure,
cated patient can be difficult; many intoxications
then the owner should be questioned about the
give similar symptoms to other diseases.
possibility of access to toxins. Question the owner
If the owner has wimessed their animal ingest-
about any possible exposure to garden chemicals,
ing a toxin, it is important they find any associated
human prescription medications or even illicit
packaging. Get the owner to read out over the
drugs.
phone any printed information available such as
the active ingredients and the concentration of the
active ingredients. Try and get an estimate of the
Treatment of the poisoned patient
amount ingested or find out how much is missing
from the packaging. This information, along with
Treatment of poisoned patients should concentrate
an estimate of the size of the animal, means you
on the following areas:
can start to calculate the likely dose the animal has
consumed while the owner is on their way to the
1)
Emergency stabilisation and supportive care
surgery. Finding out this information allows the
2）
Reducing further absorption of the toxin
 linical team to prepare for the patient's arrival,
Using a specific antidote, if one exists
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
134 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 13.1Supportive care of an intoxicated patient;
intravenous fluids, anticonvulsant medication and oxygen
supplementation.
4)Increasing elimination of the toxin
5）
Treating effects of the toxin.
Supportive care
What supportive care is required will depend on
the condition of the patient at presentation. As with
Figure 13.2  Inducing emesis in a canine patient that had
pe Searq emie ssasse 'sases Aruasraa e
recently ingested a large amount of raisins.
circulation (ABC) initially and address any prob-
lems that are highlighted. Common supportive
care includes oxygen supplementation, intrave-
 nous fluids and controlling body temperature
If the toxin has been ingested, then vomiting can
either active warming or cooling of the patient (see
be induced (see Figure 13.2). Emesis should only
Figure 13.1). Some patients will need to be sedated,
be induced after considering a number of factors.
or have anti-convulsants administered. It is impor-
Emesis is usually only effective if the substance
tant that recumbent patients such as these receive
has been consumed within the past 90 minutes
extra nursing care; they will need regular tuming
(although for some slowly digested toxins, emesis
to prevent lung congestion and pressure sores
may still be effective after 2-3 hours). Emesis is
Many poisons do not have a specific antidote,
 contraindicated if the substance is caustic or if aspi-
or a specific treatment, but close observation and
ration of vomit is likely - such as in an animal with
careful supportive care can make all the difference.
reduced levels of consciousness, an animal that is
seizuring or is dyspnoeic.
Apomorphine is commonly used as an emetic in
Reducing absorption
the dog; it is reliable and effective (see Figure 13.3).
Vomiting is usually seen within 5-10 minutes fol-
If the toxin has been absorbed through the skin,
lbwing subcutaneous injection. Apomorphine is
then clipping off the hair in that area and washing
contraindicated in cats, so xylazine injection is
the skin with mild soap or detergent will decrease
often used. Both apomorphine and xylazine will
uogdnosqe
have some sedative effects. Household agents can
Nursing the Poisoned Patient  135
THEINJECTION
Figure 13.3  Apomorphine is an effective injectable emetic
in canine patients.
Figure 13.4  Performing gastric lavage on an anaesthetised
 be given orally in an emergency (salt, washing
patient.
se aq iou Im inq (pmbi dn Suusem pue epos
effective as recognised injectable emetics, and they
should be used with caution in case they them-
selves cause toxic issues (e.g. salt).
If emesis is ineffective or contraindicated (where
the animal is at risk of aspirating vomit due to
reduced mentation), then gastric lavage can be
used as a means of gastric evacuation. Gastric
lavage must be performed under general anaesthe-
sia, with a cuffed endotracheal tube in place. A
stomach tube is pre-measured and marked, and
then inserted into the stomach. Warm water, at a
dose of 10 ml/kg body weight, is then introduced
into the stomach, and siphoned out again (see
Figure 13.4). The process is repeated until the water
runs clear and no more stomach contents are
Figure 13.5
Administering activated charcoal suspension to
removed (see Practical techniques at the end of the
a patient.
chapter).
Adsorbants such as activated charcoal are useful
to reduce further absorption from the gut. They
bind the toxin in the gut so it cannot be absorbed,
Antidotes
 and so passes through the body. Activated charcoal
made from vegetable matter is considered the most
Some commonly encountered toxins have specific
effective, and is available as powder, tablets, gran-
antidotes (see Table 13.1). These can be used as
ules or ready mixed as a suspension. Adsorbants
soon as they are available. It may not be practical
are administered orally after emesis (see Figure
to stock all antidotes, but it is sensible to know
13.5), or via a stomach tube after gastric lavage.
which antidotes exist.
Administering activated charcoal with dog food
Recently, attention has been directed to the use
does have some reduction in its ability to adsorb
of intravenous lipid emulsions (IVLE) as a tool
toxins, but the reduction in efficacy is unlikely to
in managing intoxications with lipophilic drugs,
be clinically significant.
kmown as 'lipid rescue'. IVLE is usually used as a
136
5 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 13.1
Antidotes commonly stocked in veterinary
practice
Antidote
Toxin
100m
Acetylcysteine
Paracetamol
(Parvolex)
Atropine
Organophosphates
Calcitonin
Vitamin D or calciferol
Fresenius Kabi
10EL1324/10/2013
Antivenom
Snake bites
 Ethanol
 Ethylene glycol
4-Methylpyrazole
(dogs only)
Vitamin K1
Anticoagulant rodenticides
Methylene blue
Paracetamol, nitrates and
Figure 13.6  Intravenous lipid emulsion.
chlorates
Desferroxamine
lron
Naloxone
Opioids
If the toxin or its metabolites are mainly excreted
via the kidneys, then intravenous fluids and diure-
 Penicillamine
Heavy metals
sis will increase elimination. Creating more alka-
line urine with sodium bicarbonate, can help with
the excretion of weak acids such as ethylene glycol,
source of calories when administering parenteral
via ion trapping.
nutrition. Patients affected by toxins such as local
Peritoneal dialysis is indicated in some cases to
anaesthetics (lidocaine, bupivicaine), permethrin
aid elimination while also helping to manage con-
and avermectin parasiticides (e.g. ivermectin, mox-
sequences of toxicity such as acute renal failure
idectin) are potentially suitable for therapy with
(see Chapter 12).
IVLE. The mode of action is uncertain at present,
one possibility is that the lipid acts as a 'sink' for
the lipophilic drugs, so keeping them away from
Treat known likely effects of the toxin
their target receptors and preventing their effects.
In cardiotoxic drugs the lipid may provide an
In cases where the toxin is known, treatment can
energy source to the myocardium to increase per-
'sioaa Aaxil au jua aaid on An ct paiaarei aq ose
formance. An initial bolus is given intravenously.
For example, if the toxin is likely to cause gastric
followed by an infusion over 1-2 hours (see Figure
ulceration,
, administer drugs to reduce stomach
13.6). Potential complications include
 the return
acid production, and medication to speed the heal
of toxic signs as the lipid is metabolised and the
 ing of any ulcers that may have already formed.
toxin ‘freed' again. See website documents: Intra-
venous Lipid Emulsion Monitoring sheet.
Common toxicities
Increase elimination
Metaldehyde poisoning
By encouraging the body to eliminate a toxin more
Metaldehyde is the active ingredient found in slug
quickly, we can reduce the risk of continued
pellets. Dogs are commonly affected by metalde-
absorption. Laxatives can be given in addition
hyde poisoning, either from eating the pellets from
to adsorbants. This speeds up gut transit times.
the ground where they have been scattered, or by
Magnesium sulphate and sodium citrate
are
 gaining access to a garden shed and chewing the
examples.
container. Cases tend to be seen most often in
Nursing the Poisoned Patient 137
Figure 13.8  A syringe driver being used to administer a
propofol infusion to control seizures.
Figure 13.7 A patient with metaldehyde poisoning
receiving supportive care. Note green staining to the
 perineum due to the dye contained in slug pellets.
spring or summer when slug pellets are more
likely to be used in the garden.
Figure 13.9 Ecchymoses on the skin of a dog with
Metaldehyde causes a reduction in inhibition
anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning.
of the central nervous system - because of this
effect early clinical sigms are restlessness, twitch-
ing, tremors and salivation. These clinical sigms
Anticoagulant rodenticides
 may be seen as early as 30 minutes after ingesting
slug pellets. Later, clinical signs progress to sei-
Most rodenticides have their effect due to an anti-
zures, tachycardia and hyperthermia. If there is no
coagulant action. Intoxication is most common in
kown access to metaldehyde, these symptoms
dogs who gain access to poisoned bait positioned
may be confused with other causes of seizures.
to control rodent populations.
Sometimes the animal will pass bright green faeces
Due to the effect of the poison, the patient may
due to the dye in the pellets (see Figure 13.7).
show clinical signs of coagulopathy. These signs
Early treatment relies on reducing absorption
often develop 1-3 days after ingestion, but can
using emesis or gastric lavage, followed by acti-
vary widely. Depending on the location of haemor-
vated charcoal. Seizures and hyperthermia must be
rhage, the patient may show petechial haemor-
controlled with anti-convulsants (see Figure 13.8)
rhages on the mucous membranes, or mild trauma
and active cooling. Most animals make an unevent-
may cause epistaxis or haematomas on limbs.
ful recovery if treated in the early stages, but there
Some patients may bleed into body cavities and
is the risk of renal and hepatic damage, so follow-
present due to signs associated with a haemoabdo-
up blood samples are indicated.
men or a haemothorax (see Figure 13.9).
138 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
If the patient presents early enough, then gastric
Ethylene glycol (antifreeze)
decontamination is advised, followed by activated
charcoal. Vitamin K is used as an antidote to anti-
The main use of ethylene glycol is as antifreeze
coagulant poisoning. The anticoagulants work by
agent in the cooling system of cars. It has a sweet
blocking the body's use of vitamin K in the produc-
taste and is very palatable to pets. Ethylene glycol
tion of important clotting factors. By introducing
itself is not toxic, but it is rapidly metabolised
more vitamin K into the body by injection, fol-
after absorption from the gastrointestinal tract; it is
lowed by tablets, the body's levels increase and
these metabolites that are harmful. Alcohol dehy-
clotting factors can be synthesised again. The initial
drogenase is the enzyme in the liver that metabo-
vitamin K is given by subcutaneous injection, as
lises ethylene glycol into gycoaldehyde, which
intramuscular injection runs the risk of causing a
 in turn forms glycolic acid. Glycolic acid leads to
significant haematoma.
acidosis, and forms oxalate, which causes renal
Animals showing signs of coagulopathy benefit
damage. Cases are sometimes seen where ethylene
from plasma transfusion to increase circulation
glycol is maliciously mixed with food and left out
clotting factors; frozen plasma is suitable (as well
for cats.
 as fresh frozen plasma), as the necessary clotting
 Clinical signs are often seen in three overlapping
factors survivelong-term storage (see Figure 13.10).
phases:
Rodenticides with other modes of action exist
(e.g. colecalciferol), so identification of any active 
1) Phase 1 occurs 14 hours after ingestion, and
ingredient and it likely effects is essential.
ataxia, depression, vomiting, polyuria and
polydypsia are seen.
2!
Phase 2 occurs 4-6 hours after ingestion and
coincides with the onset of metabolic acido-
sis caused by metabolites of ethylene glycol.
Cardiopulmonary signs such as tachypnoea,
tachycardia and pulmonary oedema can be
seen. If large doses have been taken, signs may
proceed to coma and death.
3)
If the animal survives phase 2, they may go on
to develop renal failure in phase 3, 24-72 hours
later, due to metabolites and reduced blood
flow resulting from renal oedema.
Unfortunately, many animals do not present
until later on in the process, when the progmosis
much less favourable. Diagnosis can be difficult
as the symptoms can mimic other multi-system
disease processes such as acute renal failure, gas-
2
troenteritis and pancreatitis. The animal will often
be azotaemic, but with a low blood calcium level,
as oxalate binds to calcium to form calcium oxalate,
 so lowering blood calcium levels.
Treatment of early ethylene glycol toxicity cases
relieson
1 preventing toxic metabolites being
formed, and speeding elimination of the unchanged
ethylene glycol from the body. In cases where
metabolism of the toxin is already advanced,
treatment concentrates on managing acute renal
failure, and addressing acidosis and hyperosmalar-
Figure 13.10 A patient receiving a plasma transfusion.
ity issues.
Nursing the Poisoned Patient  139
 In cases where ingestion has just been wimessed,
Paracetamol
 gastric decontamination should be carried out and
administration of an antidote initiated. Antidotes
Poisoning  with
1paracetamol may be due to
act as a preferred substrate for alchohol dehydro-
owner administration to their pets, or accidental
 genase, preventing metabolism of ethylene glycol
access to tablets or children's paracetamol syrup.
and allowing it to be excreted unchanged.
Cats are particularly sensitive to the effects of
Ethanol can be administered to symptomatic
paracetamol.
cases within 24 hours of ingestion, although it is
 Paracetamol poisoning causes damage to both
most effective if given within a few hours, and the
the liver cells and red blood cells. The liver nor-
sooner the better. Azotaemic animals have already
mally metabolises paracetamol by conjugation;
metabolised ethylene glycol so ethanol will have
paracetamol is combined with another molecule to
no effect. 4-Methylpyrazole (4-MP) also inhibits
make it inactive. If the liver is overwhelmed, then
alcohol dehydrogenase, and is used in humans as
a toxic metabolite is formed, which causes damage
an antidote. 4-MP has been used successfully in
to hepatocytes and red blood cells. The haemoglo-
dogs, although its poor availability and high cost
bin in the red blood cells is converted to methae-
mean use is not widespread.
moglobin and is unable to carry oxygen.
If the animal presents with azotaemia, then
Clinical signs include depression, weakness,
 ingestion was at least 24 hours ago and emesis will
vomiting and tachycardia. Cats show facial oe-
be of no use. Fluid therapy will help increase the
dema. The mucous membranes of affected patients
excretion of ethylene glycol and its metabolites.
are described as being ‘muddy' in appearance
Fluid diuresis and diuretics are usually required to
this is due to the brown coloration of methaemo-
combat oliguria (see Figure 13.11). Peritoneal dialy-
globin, which causes the patient's blood to be
sis is useful in helping to reduce blood levels of
chocolate brown (see Figure 13.12).
ethylene glycol, as well as urea, creatinine and
If ingestion is known to have occurred, or is
potassium (see Chapter 12).
suspected, early action should be taken to mini-
mise absorption. Emesis or gastric lavage should
be followed by administration of activated char-
coal. Oxygen supplementation is useful as the
 patient's blood will have reduced ability to carry
oxygenn.
The antidote for paracetamol poisoning is N-
acetylcysteine, a precursor of glutathione, which
the liver uses to conjugate paracetamol. Providing
large amounts of glutathione prevents the liver
from being overwhelmed, so preventing the for-
mation of toxic metabolites. N-acetylcysteine is
given initially as an intravenous infusion, then as
oral dosing every 6 hours for seven doses. N-
acetylcysteine has a very unpleasant taste and
smell, so oral dosing can be difficult.
Some drugs, such as methylene blue or ascorbic
acid, may be used to help convert methaemoglo-
bin back to haemoglobin, so improving oxygen
transportation.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Figure 13.11  A cat receiving fluid diuresis.
Araaa pue umu yoq ui Aapim pasn ane
140 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
(b}
Figure 13.12
(a) 'Muddy' coloration of mucous membranes in a dog with paracetamol toxicity. (b) A blood sample from the
same patient, showing 'chocolate' brown coloration of the blood.
medicine. Toxicity may occur due to accidental
should be administered to maintain renal perfu-
overdosage with veterinary products, owners
sion and try to prevent renal damage.
dosing pets with human products, or patients
gaining access to medications.
NSAIDs have their effect by inhibiting prosta-
Chocolate
glandin synthesis and so, by reducing prosta-
glandin inflammatory mediators, this reduces
Theobromine is a xanthine derivative (similar to
inflammation. However, prostaglandins also have
caffeine) found in cocoa beans. The higher the
many routine functions, such as the regulation
cocoa solids content of the chocolate, the higher the
of blood flow through the stomach mucosa and
levels of theobromine present in the chocolate. A
through the kidney - and it is due to influences on
fatal dose of theobromine is 100-250mg/kg; choco-
these processes that ad verse effects occur.
late high in cocoa solids poses a much greater risk
The most common clinical sigmns are gastrointes-
than milk chocolate.
tinal and renal symptoms. Gastrointestinal signs
 Clinical signs include hyperactivity, tachycardia,
include gastritis, vomiting, haematemesis and
 tremors, convulsions and arrhythmias. Symptoms
gastric and duodenal ulceration. Renal damage
can persist for 12-30 hours.
 includes interstitial nephritis, papillary necrosis
Absorption of chocolate from the stomach is slow,
and acute and chronic renal failure.
s0 even if more than 90 minutes has passed it may
Early treatment relies on limiting adsorption
still be worth inducing emesis provided it is safe to
with gastric decontamination. Unfortunately, most
do so (see Figure 13.13). Supportive care with intra-
 NSAID preparations are designed to be absorbed
venous fluids should be provided. In severe cases,
rapidly, so decontamination must be as soon after 
anti-convulsants will need to be administered.
ingestion as possible. Antacids such as H2 blockers
 Metabolites of theobromine can be re-absorbed from
 -u dumd uoond no (aupnui no apna oa)
the bladder and re-enter the circulation, due to this
hibitors (e.g. omeprazole) are indicated to reduce
 it is advisable to use an indwelling urinary catheter
stomach acid production. Intravenous fluid therapy
 in recumbent animals to keep the bladder empty.
Nursing the Poisoned Patient 141
fluid therapy should be administered for at least 48
hours, whilst monitoring renal function.
Xylitol
Xylitol is a 5-carbon sugar alcohol, and is used as
an artificial sweetener. It is commonly found in
'sugar-free' chewing gum and sweets, in tablets
and medications, or as a sugar substitute in baking.
Xylitol increases insulin secretion in dogs, lead-
ing to a 2.5- to 7-fold increase in production. This
seen commonly 30-60 minutes after ingestion,
although the effect can be delayed. The increase in
 insulin leads to hypoglycaemia, which becomes
evident as vomiting, ataxia, tachycardia, seizures
and coma. Ingestion of larger amounts can lead to
acute liver damage.
 Treatment is by gastric decontamination, fol-
lowed by blood glucose monitoring and dextrose-
supplemented intravenous fluids if required.
Where larger amounts are ingested, liver protec-
tants (e.g. S-adenosyl-L-methionine) are indicated,
Figure 13.13  A dog that had recently eaten a large box of
and cases that develop coagulopathy will require
chocolates (including wrappers), following induction of
emesis.
fresh frozen plasma
Permethrin
Grapes, raisins and sultanas
Permethrin is an insecticide that is found in topical
Both fresh and dried grapes (Vitis vinifera) have
ectoparasite treatments. Whilst common in prepa-
been recognised as a cause of toxicity in dogs. The
rations for dogs, it can be fatal in cats if they come
exact mechanism by which they have their effect is
into contact with it. Absorption is usually via the
 not known, but both red and white grapes, sulta-
skin after inadvertent application; the area should
nas, raisins and currants have all been identified
 be washed to limit further uptake. Clinical signs
as causing acute renal failure in dogs. Possible
include tremors, tachycardia and convulsions.
causes suggested are tannins, mycotoxins, ocra-
Anti-convulsants administered via continuous rate
toxin, polyphenolics or excessive vitamin D intake.
infusions are indicated. There is some anecdotal
As the mechanism of toxicity is poorly understood,
no safe limits of ingestion are established, although
lipid infusion ('lipid rescue′).
it appears the effect on dogs is idiosyncratic, with
reaction differing widely between individuals.
Early signs after ingestion are usually diarrhoea,
Lilies
lethargy and anorexia. Acute renal failure may
develop 24-72 hours later.
Some lily plants of the Lilium or Hemerocallis genus
Digestion of grapes or raisins is slow in dogs, so
 are highly toxic to cats, resulting in rapid onset of
gastric decontamination should be carried out,
clinical signs culminating in acute renal failure.
followed by administering activated charcoal. To
The plants are commonly found in gardens, as
try to prevent renal failure, aggressive intravenous
houseplants or as cut flowers. The mechanism of
142 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 13.15 Preparing to perform gastric lavage. The tube
is pre-measured and marked to avoid over-insertion and
damage to the stomach.
Figure 13.14  A cat with lily pollen staining to the face and
forelimbs.
toxicity is not understood, but all parts of the plant
appear toxic, and result in renal failure due to renal
tubular necrosis.
 Ingestion occurs from cats chewing at the leaves,
 or often grooming the pollen of the flower from
their fur (see Figure 13.14). Initially, vomiting
is seen (2-6 hours after ingestion), later clinical
signs of renal failure develop 24-72 hours after
exposure.
Treatment should be initiated rapidly, initially
concentrating  on  gastric decontamination  via
emesis or lavage, followed by aggressive fluid
therapy over 48 hours with monitoring of renal
blood parameters.
Practical techniques
Figure 13.16  The tube is lubricated and passed into the
Gastric lavage
stomach.
1）
 The animal should be lightly anaesthetised
with a cuffed endotracheal tube in place. The
Nursing the Poisoned Patient   143
should then be marked, this prevents over-
insertion which could damage the stomach.
The tube is inserted into the stomach; this is
the egress tube (see Figure 13.16).
3)
A smaller bore tube is also measured and
inserted into the stomach alongside the
egress tube. The smaller tube is used for
ingress.
4)
Warmed water at a dose of 10ml/kg body
weight is instilled via the ingress tube, and
 gastric contents drained via the egress tube.
Figure 13.17  Using a twin lumen tube to provide egress
5）
 Lavage is repeated until the egress fluid runs
and ingress tubes.
clear. Moving the animal from right to leff
lateral recumbency helps effective lavage.
6）
An alternative technigue is to use only the
patient is positioned with their head lower
large bore for both ingress and then egress, this
than the body.
has the disadvantage of being more time con-
2
Alarge-bore stomach tube should be measured
suming. Commercial gastric lavage tubes fea-
against the patient, from the tip of the nose to
turing a twin lumen are also available (see 
the thirteenth rib (see Figure 13.15). The tube
Figure 13.17).
14
Nursing the Trauma Patient
Introduction
 travascular coagulopthy, reperfusion injuries and
distress due to pain.
Animals presenting with trauma require rapid,
accurate  triaging and  ongoing monitoring 
to
prevent complications. A preliminary examina-
Abdominal trauma
tion of the patient should focus on the respira-
tory, cardiovascular and central nervous systems
Abdominal trauma may result from penetrating
(CNS) (the ABCD protocol - airway,
breath-
injuries (e.g. bite wounds) or blunt force injuries
ing, circulation, disability). Cardiovascular func-
(e.g. motor vehicle accidents). Life-threatening
tion and tissue perfusion are assessed based on
 problems include severe haemorrhage, uroperito-
physical examination and diagnostic tests (see
 neum and septic peritonitis.
Chapter 1).
The abdomen should be examined for distension
 If a problem is detected, it should be treated
and bruising (particularly around the umbilicus as
and the patient stabilised. Only then should a sec-
this can indicate haemoperitoneum), and palpated
ondary examination be performed, involving the
 to determine the presence of an intact bladder. On
creation of a treatment plan. This may include
plain radiographs a loss of serosal detail indicates
abdominal and thoracic radiography,
ultraso-
effusion (which may include haemorrhage, urine
 nography, abdominocentesis and the treatment of
leakage or a developing peritonitis). Ultrasonogra-
fractures, luxations and wounds. Frequent re-
phy is a useful technique to detect peritoneal fluid.
evaluations help to detect trends thiat can indicate
 Ideally, peritoneal fluid should be obtained for
a change in the patient's condition. An intravenous
examination by ultrasound-guided abdominocen-
catheter should always be placed.
tesis. For further information on abdominal trauma
The patient with multiple injuries is at a greater
pasnooy pue
d assessment with sonography
for
risk of complications, including disseminated in-
 trauma (FAST) scan technique see Chapter 11
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Nursing the Trauma Patient 145
Figure 14.1   Radiograph of a thoracic knife wound, with
the weapon still in place.
Figure 14.3 Rib fractures in a patient following a dog
attack, demonstrated on radiography.
penetrating chest injuries include stabbing, impale-
ment and airgun pellet or gunshot wounds.
Figure 14.2  Feline patient with a flail segment as a result
Blunt trauma to the chest commonly results in
of a dog bite injury.
lung contusions. Rarely, rib fractures may cause
lung laceration (see Figure 14.3). Blunt chest trauma
Thoracic trauma
is more often associated with trauma to other organ
systems or body areas.
Penetrating chest trauma presents several chal-
lenges including rapid assessment, accurate diag-
nosis and effective management of potentially
Initial management and stabilisation
life-threatening injuries.
 Bites are the most common cause of penetrating
In cases with inadequate ventilation immediate
chest trauma in small animals. These are often the
intubation and assisted ventilation is indicated.
results of fights. Compressive and tensile forces are
Bite wounds to the neck may disrupt the larynx
 [ews e saxeus pue sanq sop Siq e uaum paidde
or trachea causing subcutaneous emphysema (see
dog, and open or closed pneumothorax, single or
Figure 14.4).
multiple rib fractures, flail chest, pulmonary contu-
Animals with marked dyspnoea caused by
sions, lung lacerations and intrapleural haemor-
pneumothorax should have an immediate thoraco-
rhage can result (see Figures 14.1 and 14.2). In
centesis which will usually provide substantial
addition, bites will often avulse soft tissue result-
relief. If the pneumothorax recurs, chest drain
ing in large amounts of devitalised tissue that can
placement and continuous drainage may be
result in infection, sepsis and systemic inflamma-
 required. When a pneumothorax is secondary to an
tory response symdrome (SIRS). Other causes of
 open 'sucking' chest wound, a chest drain should
146  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 14.4 Puncture wound to a patient's trachea due to a
dog bite wound.
Figure 14.5 Lateral view of a patient following a hand gun
be placed through the wound and the wound
wound. This, in combination with the radiograph in Figure
covered with an occlusive dressing. The pneumo-
14.6, allowed accurate positioning and eventual removal of
 thorax can then be drained. The pain associated
the projectile.
with rib fractures and flail segments substantially
limits the tidal volume; this may be relieved with
carefully titrated dose of opioids or intercostal
nerve blocks.
Pulmonary contusions can cause substantial
ventilation-perfusion mismatch and hypoxia. This
may be improved by oxygen supplementation, but
 im severe cases assisted ventilation using positive
sases ul Aressanau aq Aeu amssaid Arojeiidxa pua
without evidence of substantial haemorrhage but
with indications of pulmonary damage, crystal-
loids should initially be limited to a bolus of 10-
15ml/kg
Further investigations
Orthogonal  thoracic  radiographs  allow  further
evaluation of injuries. Not all penetrating thoracic
wounds show radiographic evidence of pneumo-
thorax. Radiographs are useful for evaluating the
position and track of a radiopaque projectile. Addi-
tional imaging techniques may be indicated (see 
Figure 14.6 Dorsoventral view of the patient in Figure
Figures 14.5, 14.6 and 14.7).
14.5, with the projectile identified as being within the
muscle overlying the scapula.
Surgical exploration
costal blocks and systemic pain medication as
 Pain management is vitally important in the tho-
appropriate.
 racic trauma patient, and a multi-modal approach
Anaesthesia and surgical exploration may be
should be utilised including epidural anaesthesia, 
 needed in some cases and ideally should take place
intrapleural installation of local anaesthetic, inter-
 once the animal is stabilised. However, complete
Nursing the Trauma Patient  147
Figure 14.7 Removal of the projectile from the patient seen
Figure 14.9 Head trauma as a result of a machete attack.
in Figures 14.5 and 14.6.
seen in practice. The trauma is often caused by
 road traffic accidents, but also falls, kicks, gunshot
wounds and penetrating injuries (see Figure 14.9).
These injuries can often produce severe clinical
signs, but if managed correctly the majority can
recover enough function to return to normal life
as a pet. There are few specific medical or surgical
interventions that specifically improve outcome,
but there is a lot of incorrect management that will
definitely result in a worse outcome. Appropriate
nursing and management will make the most dif-
ference. As with most trauma patients, it is essen-
Figure 14.8 Median sternotomy to perform a lung
tial to monitor and take care of the basics.
lobectomy to remove a leaking bulla.
stabilisation may not be possible. A lateral thora-
Brain injury
cotomy provides easier access to defined unilateral
lung lesions, fractured ribs and certain parts of the
Primary brain injury
heart. A median sternotomy provides access to
This occurs immediately post-trauma; the effects
both hemithoraces, the heart and great veins and
can be haemorrhage, contusion, concussion and
can be extended into a ventral midline laparotomy
laceration. This injury is often irreversible and we
when necessary (see Figure 14.8). Before perform-
can make no difference to it.
ing anaesthesia for the exploration of thoracic
trauma, the nurse should prepare all equipment to
carry out intermittent positive pressure ventilation
Secondary brain injury
(IPPV) should a thoracotomy be required.
This is the delayed consequence of the primary
injury, hours or days later, and relates to release of
Monitoring the head trauma patient
inflammatory mediators, injured axons and contin-
ued haemorrhage and oedema, and ultimately
Traumatic injuries to the head leading to brain
alterations in intracranial pressure. It is in the treat-
 ment of secondary brain injury (and the prevention
148 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
juawaseueu mo jeu (mu uenq Anepuosas jo
Neurological assessment
will dictate outcome.
The examination can now move to the head.
Check for the presence of haemorrhage in nasal
Intracranial pressure
sinuses, ear canals, nasopharymgeal area and orbit,
as this often indicates skull fractures. Palpate
The brain is enclosed in a rigid box (the calvarium).
gently for crepitus and the presence of subcutane-
The contents of that box are brain tissue (86%),
ous emphysema.
cerebrospinal fluid (10%) and blood (4%); all these
 Neurological assessment should include the
contents are non-compressible. If normal intracra-
level of consciousness, breathing pattern, respon-
nial pressure (ICP) is to be maintained, if one of
siveness of the pupils, ocular position and move-
these three components increases in size, the others
ments, and skeletal motor responses.
must decrease - this is volume buffering. Once
A scoring system allows grading of neurological
buffering is no longer effective, ICP will rise, and
small mistakes in management will lead to massive
son to measure progress and help offer prognosis.
increases in ICP. Any increase in ICP leads to
Amodification of the Glasgow Coma Score (MGCS)
reduced blood perfusion pressure.
is used, sometimes referred to as the Small Animal
Coma Score (SACS) (see Table 14.1).
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP)
Three categories are measured:
= mean arterial pressure (MAP) - ICP,
1)  Level of consciousness
2）
 Motor activity
 3) Brainstem reflexes.
so any increase in ICP, or decrease in MAP, will
lead to less blood reaching the brain.
Each category is scored 1-6, and a total calculated.
The score itself gives a suggested progmosis but, as
with all monitoring, it is trends that are important.
Assessment
See website documents: Small Animal Coma Score
sheet.
Assessment of the head trauma patient is initially
exactly the same as any trauma patient. Assess and
Treatment
attend to the ABC, but avoid manipulation of the
head and neck, and never compress the jugular
Treatment should focus on systemic support, not
vein.
specific neurological therapies, i.e. look after the
The immediate focus should not be on the
basics, and above all, do not make things worse.
patient's neurological status. If the animal is
What are we aiming for?
-aeloaody st ro Kmlu Aojendsai ot anp oxodau
mic, then any depression of mentation will be
Neurological exam
SACS score >15
 increased. Assess respiratory function by ensuring
Blood pressure
MAP 80-120 mmHg
-endsan buou pue Kemie juaied e seu juaned au
Pulse oximetry
>95%
 tory rate and pattern. Is any alteration due to brain
Blood glucose
4-7mmol/l
injury, or chest trauma? Pulse oximetry and arterial
Heart rate/respiratory
 Normal for patient 
blood gas analysis can objectively assess function.
rate
size, etc.
MAP can be valuable, as this relates closely to
Electrolytes
Within normal range
cerebral blood flow, a systemic blood pressure
below 50mmHg will lead to decreased cerebral
Patient positioning
blood flow.
So, before we assume all changes in mentation
Sounds minor, but this is a very important consid-
are due to brain damage, we make sure that blood
eration. The animal should have its head elevated
is being oxygenated correctly and that the circula-
at 30° to improve arterial supply and venous drain-
tion is capable of delivering that blood to the brain.
age to the head. Make sure any collars or padding
Nursing the Trauma Patient  149
Table 14.1
 Modified Glasgow Coma Scale
Neurological criteria
Score
Motor function activity
Normal gait, normal spinal reflexes
6
Hemiparesis, tetraparesis or decerebrate activity
5
Recumbent, intermittent extensor rigidity
4
Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity
E
Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity with opisthotonus
2
Recumbent, hypotonia of muscles, depressed or absent spinal reflexes
1
Brainstem reflexes
Normal pupillary light reflexes and oculocephalic reflexes
6
Slow pupillary light reflexes and normal to reduced oculocephalic reflexes
5
Bilateral unresponsive miosis with normal to reduced oculocephalic reflexes
4
 Pinpoint pupils with reduced to absent oculocephalic reflexes
E
Unilateral, unresponsive mydriasis with reduced to absent oculocephalic reflexes
2
Bilateral, unresponsive mydriasis with reduced to absent oculocephalic reflexes
Level of consciousness
 Occasional periods alertness and responsive to environment
6
Depression or delirium, capable of responding but response may be inappropriate
5
Semicomatose, responsive to visual stimuli
4
Semicomatose, responsive to auditory stimuli
E
Semicomatose, responsive only to repeated noxious stimuli
2
Comatose, unresponsive to repeated noxious stimuli
1
Total
Prognosis poor
8-6
Prognosis guarded
9-14
Prognosis good
15-18
used to achieve this are not pressing on the jugular
vein.
Oxygenation
Supplemental oxygen should be supplied to main-
 tain a pulse oximeter reading of >95%. Low oxygen
concentrations lead to increased cerebral blood
flow so increasing ICP. Initially, this can be by mask
or flow-by, later by nasal catheter or transtracheal
catheter. Oxygen cages can hamper ongoing moni-
toring due to poor patient access. Nasal catheters
Figure 14.10 Head trauma patient receiving supplemental
should be avoided in the head trauma patient as
 Oxygen in an incubator.
te u nmsan  ynum zaaus anpu A Aa
increase in ICP (see Figure 14.10).
Hyperventilation to lower carbon dioxide blood
 Restoring circulating volume in a trauma patient is
levels, leading to cerebral vasoconstriction and so
reduce ICP has been used in the past, but it is
vital to ensure normotension and cerebral blood
flow. Maintaining low blood pressures and dehy-
not currently recommended due to the potential
to reduce cerebral circulation.
dration is detrimental to cerebral metabolism.
Initial fluid resuscitation usually involves hyper-
Fluid therapy
tonic saline bolus, sometimes with a colloid to
maintain volume expansion. This avoids the initial
 The aim of fluid therapy is to maintain a normo-
use of large volumes of crystalloids which will
volaemic state and maintain MAP at 80-120 mmHg.
extravasate within an hour and may make oedema
150 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
worse. After the use of hypertonic saline and col-
loids, maintenance fluids must be provided.
Osmotic diuretics
Where neurological status deteriorates in the pres-
ence of correct supportive care, osmotic diuretics
can be used.
 Mannitol should be administered as a bolus over
15 minutes, it will take 15-30 minutes to reduce
brain oedema, and the effects last for 2-5 hours.
Mannitol has an effect for two reasons:
Figure 14.11 Wound on the forelimb of a Labrador
1）
 The well-kmown osmotic effect reduces extra-
following a road traffic accident. The wound was a
vascular fluid volume in normal and damaged
combination of degloving and shearing, and further
brain
complicated by an underlying fracture.
2)1
 Plasma-expanding effect that reduces blood
viscosity, increasing cerebral blood flow and
Oxygenation, which leads to vasoconstriction
tamination. Open wounds may be covered with a
sterile dressing until the patient is stabilised (see
and a reduction in ICP.
Figure 14.11). Many patients may be in pain from
Repeated doses of mannitol cause diuresis that can
their injuries, so appropriate analgesia is impor-
lead to volume contraction and hypovolaemia and
tant. Fractious patients may require sedation or
ischaemia, so use only in deteriorating patients, or
 general anaesthesia for wound evaluation to be
those with a SACS <8. There is no evidence that
performed.
mannitol is contraindicated other than in dehy-
Wounds can be classified by their cause and the
drated patients.
type of tissue damage caused: incisional, abrasion,
-iad io amund urraus (uaoap ro) usmae
Other therapy
forated, and burns.
 There is no evidence that corticosteroids are of any
Treatment
use, and are contraindicated in human medicine.
An increase in metabolic rate increases the
Bleeding should be controlled. Direct pressure is
brain's need for oxygen, so control infection and
applied using sterile swabs or by bandaging. Addi-
seizures.
tion of diluted adrenaline to swabs may help by
Vomiting increases intracranial pressure, so use
causing vasoconstriction, but should not be used
anti-emetics if necessary.
on extremities or in the presence of cardiac arrhyth-
Nutritional supportisessential,naso-oesophageal
mias. Pressure can be applied to brachial or femoral
tubes or oesophagostomy tubes can be used.
arteries if arterial haemorrhage is present.
Gatrostomy tubes may be indicated if a brainstem
 A tourniquet can be applied above the wound if
injury results in poor oesophageal function.
it is on a limb. Narrow elastic tourniquets put sig-
nificant pressure on neurovascular structures and
should only be used for up to 5 minutes. Bands
Wounds and fractures
5-10 cm wide can be used for up to 30 minutes.
Blood pressure cuffs can be placed proximal to
Wounds
the wound and inflated to 20-30 mmHg higher
than arterial pressure and can be left in place
Definite wound management may need to be
10J papaau aq Aeu uonea1T 'smou 9 o1 dn 1oj
delayed as the treatment of life-threatening injuries
larger vessels.
takes priority. Emergency management should
After achieving haemostasis, the wound should
prevent any additional injury and minimise con-
be covered with a sterile dressing. Using aseptic
Nursing the Trauma Patient  151
Figure 14.13 Radiography, including the use of contrast
media, to explore the extent of a stick injury.
Lavage solutions containing antibacterials or deter-
gents should be avoided; they can cause cell
damage, slow wound healing and may result in
bacterial resistance. Lactated Ringer's solution
Figure 14.12  Wound packed with water-soluble gel which
(LRS) is the best choice, it is the least cytotoxic and
is lavaged from the wound following clipping, to minimise
has a near neutral pH. In heavily contaminated
further contamination to the wound.
wounds tap water is adequate. The initial tap water
lavage should be followed by sterile LRS.
The pressure for lavage solution needs to exceed
techniques, the wound is packed with sterile gel or
the adhesive and cohesive forces of the contami-
soaked swabs and hair clipped from the wound
nant, yet avoid pushing debris into the tissues and
outwards (see Figure 14.12). The wound can then
causing_ damage to vital tissues. The suggested
 be lavaged with copious saline or lactated Ringer's
force is 5-10 psi. In practice this can be achieved by
solution (Hartmarn's) and a protective bandage
using a bag of fluid with an 18-20 gauge needle
applied.
fitted to the end of an attached giving set. The
In traumatic and infected wounds, antibiotics
volume of lavage solution is equally important.
should be administered as soon as possible. A first
 For small, superficial wounds, 0.5-11 is generally
generation cephalosporin or clavulanic acid poten-
tiated amoxicillin are good first line choices.
lavage solution may be needed (see Figure 14.14).
Once the patient is stable a more thorough evalu-
Any traumatic wound will require the debride-
 ation may be carried out. Appropriate chemical
ment of devitalised tissues and foreign material
restraint may be required for examination. Prior to
in order to prevent infection and necrosis and to
their administration, it is important to evaluate
promote optimal wound healing. Debridement
distal neuromuscular and motor function. Diag-
janap jo aqumu e Susn pawojad aq Aeu
nostic imaging may be used to check for foreigmn
methods.
material, penetrating injuries, associated fractures,
Sharp debridement involves the use of a scalpel
dislocations and tendon or ligament damage. A
blade or scissors and may be carried out carefully
management plan should take into account the
Au qn se aanasnd on rapno un sis u
wound's location, size, damage to local structures 
tissue as possible. Subcutaneous tissue, fat, skin,
and the amount of tissue loss (see Figure 14.13).
fascia and muscle can generally be freely debrided
Lavage reduces the number of bacteria present,
(see Figures 14.15 and 14.16). Tendons, vessels,
and helps to loosen necrotic tissue and debris.
 nerves and bone should be debrided much more
152 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 14.14 Lavage of the wound in Figure 14.11.
Figure 14.16Post-debridement of a wound.
conservatively. In some situations necrotic tissue
    q  si   s
there is a line of demarcation.
Mechianical debridement involves the use of
dressings (e.g. wet to dry; see Figure 14.17), irriga-
tion or hydrosurgery. Wet to dry dressings are com-
monly used in veterinary practice but their use
requires sedation or anaesthesia as removal is
painful. Autolytic debridement involves the use of
wound dressings and solutions, e.g. hydrogels,
and is not recommended in infected wounds.
Following debridement, a decision needs to be
made about wound closure. In clean and clean-
contaminated wounds, surgical closure to allow
first intention healing may be the best option. If
there is any doubt about the tissue viability or the
risk of infection, the wound should be allowed to
heal using open wound management. Damage to
uderlying structures such as tendon and bone
may delay the healing of the overlying tissue and
require specialist treatment. If there has been sig-
Figure 14.15 Pre-debridement of a wound.
 nificant skin loss then skin flaps or grafts may be
needed.
Nursing the Trauma Patient 153
Figure 14.18  Shearing injury prior to adequate
debridement and wound dressings.
Grade 2: a penetrating extermal wound causes a
fracture ('outside in'). The bone is not usually
Figure 14.17 Wet to dry dressing in situ.
exposed.
Grade 3: a high degree of tissue damage, com-
Fractures
monly with contamination or infection and
exposed bone (see Figure 14.18).
Emergency treatment
Extremities below a fracture should be assessed for
the presence of blood supply, pain sensation and
the systemic condition of the animal, and reduce
any oedema (indicating impaired venous and lym-
complications when it comes to fixation. Adequate
phatic returm).
analgesia should be provided. Large amounts of
The perfusion of the distal limb needs to be
blood can be lost from the circulation into the frac-
assessed by its warmth compared with other limbs,
ture site, especially in femoral, humeral and pelvic
the colour of pads/nail beds and capillary refill.
fractures. Cats with pelvic fractures will commonly
The pulses can be assessed by palpation or Doppler
be markedly anaemic a day or two after initial
ultrasound. Neurological function in a limb can
stabilisation.
be simply assessed by firmly pinching the digits.
 Clinical signs such as deformity, swelling, crepi-
Absence of deep pain sensation carries a poor
tus, instability and pain will often be present.
prognosis, although false negative results can
Important factors to assess are the position of the
occur if the animal is obtunded or moribund due
fracture, its relationship to critical structures and
to systemic disorders.
whether it is open or closed. Open fractures are
Swelling and soft tissue damage can result from
those where the skin has been broken. Open frac-
instability. In some cases the application of a suit-
tures should be covered with a sterile dressing.
able supportive padded dressing can minimise
then clipped, lavaged and dressed again. Open
movement at the fracture site, preventing further
fractures are graded as follows:
soft tissue damage and increasing patient comfort
(see Table 14.2; Figures 14.19 and 14.20). Support
Grade 1: a bone fragment penetrates the skin
dressings applied above the elbow or the stifle are
(inside out'). The fragment usually retracts in
less effective. They often slip, and a pendulum
again, leaving a puncture wound.
effect causes more fracture movement and pain.
154  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 14.2  Dressings for fractures
 Fracture site
Stabilisation technique
Mandible
No dressing required or tape
azznw
Maxilla and cranium
None
Cervical spine
Neck splint (see Figure 14.19)
Figure 14.19 Ventral fracture of second cervical vertebrae
 Scapula or humerus
None or full spica splint 
following a road traffic accident.
Radius and ulna or
Support bandage, e.g.
tibia
Robert Jones, or splinted
bandage
Carpus or tarsus and
Support bandage
all bones distal
Thoracolumbar
Back splint (see Figure 14.20)
spine
Caudal lumbar spine
None
Pelvis
None
Femur
None or full spica splint
Figure 14.20 Thoracolumbar spine fracture - luxation.
Further reading
Platt, S. and Garosi, L. (2012) Small Animal Neurological
Emergencies. Manson Publishing, London.
Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
Critical Care for Veterinary Technician, 2nd edition.
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
Williams, J.M. and Moores, A. (2009) BSAVA Manual of
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine
Canine and Feline Wound Management and Recon-
and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 2nd edition.
struciton. BSAVA, Gloucester.
BSAVA, Gloucester.
Wingfield, W.E. and Raffe, M.R. (2002) The Veterinary
KCU Book. Teton NewMedia, Wyoming.
MacIntyre, D.K., Drobatz, K.J., Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
15
Nursing the Reproductive Patient
Introduction
result from maternal or fetal factors that prevent
normal delivery taking place. It is important to
Many of the reproductive abnormalities f
that
ensure that clients are well educated and able to
present as emergencies are straightforward and
identify impending difficulties. Once dystocia has
relatively easy to resolve. Treatment of these dis-
occurred, there is only a small window of oppor-
eases, however, requires knowledge of the under-
tunity to intervene and save the litter.
lying pathophysiology as well as the options
Of canine and feline pregnancies, 5-6% require
available for dealing with such emergencies. Many
intervention. Uterine inertia, the failure to initiate
breeders are well informed about the latest devel-
and maintain sufficient uterine contractions, is the
opments and expect their veterinary practices to be
most common cause of dystocia accounting for
  a ssss  s  n
two-thirds of the dystocias in the bitch and queen.
reproductive diseases that present to the emer-
 Fetal causes include abnormally large puppies,
 gency clinic and outines the treatment options and
malpresentation or dead fetuses. Fetal malpresen-
recommendations.
tation is the most common fetal cause of dystocia.
Maternal causes include uterine inertia, mechanical
obstruction (abnormal pelvic canal), overstretching
Female reproductive disorders
(large litters), insufficient stimulation (small litters),
systemic disease and maternal anxiety.
Normal parturition
Once the expected due date has passed, the dam
should be evaluated. Even without evidence of
See Tables 15.1 and 15.2.
maternal distress, early intervention will likely
improve fetal survival. A complete physical exam
is important to assess the health of the bitch. Radio-
Dystocia
 graphs will confirm a term pregnancy and are best
to assess and fetal numbers, the pelvic canal and
Dystocia is defined as the inability to expel fetuses
fetal presentation. Ultrasound is more sensitive in
through the birth canal during parturition and may
determining fetal viability.
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
156 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 15.1  Normal gestation periods in cats and dogs
Species
 Gestation length
Canine
57-72 days (average 65 days)
Feline
63-65 days
Table 15.2 Stages of whelping for cats and dogs
Stage of
whelping
Duration
Clinical signs
Stage 1
6-12 hours
Signs of restlessness,.
panting, apprehension,
nesting, hiding and
anorexia
Figure 15.1   Oversized fetus resulting in dystocia.
Stage 2
2-12 hours
Active expulsion of fetuses.
First fetus generally
 Indications  for emergency caesarean section
delivered within 1hour of
include the following:
onset of second stage (cats)
and 4 hours (dogs)
●Pelvic obstruction
业
Oversized fetus (see Figure 15.1)
Stage 3
15 minutes-
Expulsion of the placenta,
hours
慢
Fetal malpresentation or obstructions than
one placenta per fetus
cannot be manipulated
●Fetal death (ultrasound).
Attempts at manual removal are limited to
Some of the signs and indications for immediate
puppies and kittens protruding from the vaginal
veterinary care include the following:
vault. Use of water-based sterile lubricant and
gentle traction with fingers is the safest approach.
History of previous dystocia
Once maternal and fetal obstructions have been
Systemic signs of illness
ruled out with radiographs, l
uterine inertia is
Flank biting or severe abdominal discomfort
usually successfully managed with oxytocin. Oxy-
No signs of labour 24 hours after the tempera-
tocin is given at a dose of 1-2IU/kg (maximal dose
ture drop in the full-term bitch
20IU) IM in the bitch and 2-4IU IM in the queen.
More than 24 hours' anorexia in the full-term
The dose can be repeated at 30-minute intervals. If
queen
 no puppy is born after two doses of oxytocin then
Haemorrhagic
or
foul-smelling
vaginal
a caesarean section is indicated. Oxytocin should
discharge
not be used in cases of narrowed birth canal, fetal
Normal
lochial
(brown-green)
vaginal
dis
malpositioning or fetal oversize.
charge without the production of a fetus
Calcium
gluconate increases
6the strength of
 A fetus or fetal membranes protruding from the
myometrial contractions while oxytocin increases
vulva for more than 15 minutes
the frequency of the contractions. Calcium gluco-
More than 4 hours passed after the onset of the
nate 10% administered over 5 minutes (2-10ml IV
second stage of labour (rupture of the chorioal-
for the bitch and 1-2ml IV for the queen) is given
lantois and contractions)
for ineffective, weak uterine contractions or after
Strong, active, non-productive contractions for
several unsuccessful doses of oxytocin. Ideally an
more than 30 minutes
ECG should be performed whilst the calcium glu-
More than 2 hours between fetuses or failure to
conate is administered. If the dam fails to produce
deliver all fetuses within 12-24 hours (bitch) or
a fetus with medical management, a caesarean
24-36 hours (queen).
section is indicated.
Nursing the Reproductive Patient 157
Retained placenta
Depending on the severity of the disease, the bitch
may also be anaemic and dehydrated. Untreated,
The placenta should
1 pass within 5-15 minutes
pyometra leads to worsening dehydration, endo-
 of each puppy or kitten. If a placenta is retained
toxaemia, shock, coma and ultimately death.
within the uterus it can predispose the dam to
The diagnosis of pyometra is commonly based
metritis. Clinical signs include a foul-smelling dis-
 on clinical signs but this method can be unreliable
charge, fever, vomiting, anorexia, lethargy, toxae-
and closed pyometra often cannot be diagnosed
mia and possibly death. Retention of the placenta
without further investigation. Abdominal radio-
is suspected based on clinical sigmns and palpation,
graphs may lend supportive evidence if a soff
and can be confirmed using ultrasound. Treatment
tissue density, tubular mass in the area of the
with antibiotics, oxytocin and, if necessary,
IV
uterus is seen. It can be difficult to differentiate
fluids should be instituted. Be aware that if the
early pregnancy from pyometra. Abdominal ultra-
bitch is not watched very closely she may eat the
-m e q enamd ansuuap Keu pmos
placenta before it is seen. Puppies or kittens should
defined tubular structure with a hypoechoic to
be allowed to nurse if the dam is not systemically
anechoic lumen. It may be challenging to differen-
affected.
tiate pyometra from the surrounding intestines if
they are of similar size.
 nitial medical stabilisation may be required in
Pyometra
pyometra patients with significant illness. Animals
presenting in shock will need immediate resus-
Pyometra is an endocrine-related disease in the
citation prior to any diagnostic procedures. Intra-
bitch. Although a bacterial infection is involved,
venous antibiotic therapy should be started as
it is the presence of progesterone (during dioes-
soon as possible; the drug should be bactericidal
trus) that has allowed the disease to occur. The
and effective against E. coli. Rapid bacterial death
 disease occurs almost exclusively in bitches in the
following antibiotic therapy can lead to a sys-
2 months following oestrus. It tends to be a disease
temic release of endotoxin resulting in acute endo-
of middle-aged dogs and the frequency of occur-
toxic shock. For this reason antibiotic therapy
rence increases with increasing age. It has been
should not be started until the animal is initially
reported in dogs from 4 months to 18 years of age
resuscitated.
with an average age of 6-8 years. The cause of
The recommended treatment of pyometra is
 pyometra is related to progesterone-induced excess
 ovariohysterectomy. Medical therapy with prosta-
glandular activity, low myometrial activity and
glandin administration (PGFzα) should only be
cervical closure, causing an accumulation of secre-
considered in young, valuable, breeding animals
tions that result in bacterial overgrowth. The most
that are essentially healthy. Medical therapy of
common bacteria involved is Escherichia coli.
animals with a closed pyometra is to be considered
 Most animals have pyometra for days to weeks
with caution as there is an increased risk of uterine
before the animal shows any symptoms. Patients
rupture. Prostaglandin therapy takes at least 48
 can present with acute clinical sigms related to
hours to start having an effect and it is not recom-
sepsis and a systemic inflammatory
Iresponse.
mended for use in the clinically sick.
More commonly, patients have a slow onset of
Ovariohysterectomy
is
a
routine
surgery
disease typified by non-specific clinical signs such
although it is important the surgeon takes care to
as polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD), inappetance,
prevent rupturing a friable uterus (see Figure 15.2)
vomiting and weight loss. Pyometra can be catego-
rised as open or closed depending on whether the
 cervix is open or closed, respectively. Patients with
Mastitis
a d e a m d uo u
discharge in comparison to those patients with a
Septic mastitis is most commonly due to E. coli,
closed pyometra. Owners may be less likely to
beta-haemolytic streptococci or staphylococci. One
detect a problem in patients with a closed pyome-
or more glands may be affected. The source of bac-
tra,
delaying their presentation to the clinic.
 terial infection is most commonly via an ascending
158 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
09
antsInitials/Nun
CIA
WoundMeasuringGuide
3M Health Care
Figure 15.4S
 Severe mastitis resulting in necrosis of the
mammary gland.
Figure 15.2(
Ovariohysterectomy for the treatment of
pyometra.
The majority of animals with mastitis do not
required hospitalisation unless they are signifi-
ds amn a a asn ymu  a
sation for fluid therapy and nursing care. Animals
with septic mastitis require systemic antibiotics.
Care must be taken with drugs such as enrofloxa-
cin and tetracyclines which can have detrimental
effects on the puppies. Antibiotics selected should
be effective against E. coli, streptococci and staphy-
lococci until culture and sensitivity results are
available. Warm compresses of affected glands
may provide some comfort to the patient. Puppies
Figure 15.3 Mastitis resulting in abscess formation in a cat.
should be encouraged to continue nursing as it will
promote drainage of the glands but owners need
 infection but penetrating wounds or haematoge-
to ensure puppies are receiving adequate nutrition.
nous spread are other possible causes. The affected
 Daily weighing of puppies is a good means of
gland becomes very inflamed and painful. It can
monitoring their continued growth. Supplemental
lead to abscessation (see Figure 15.3) and even
feeding of puppies may be required in some cases.
necrosis of the gland (see Figure 15.4). In severe
 If puppies are not feeding from the glands then
cases the animal can develop significant systemic
manual stripping is required to ensure adequate
 illness and deaths have been reported.
drainage. If glands are abscessed (see Figure 15.3)
Mastitis should be considered in any lactating
or necrotic (see Figure 15.4), they may require sur-
/pue asieieu uappns sdopaaap jeq uaanb no yoi
gical debridement and/or drainage followed by
or discomfort. Clinical signs of bacterial mastitis 
frequent flushing and open wound management.
include pyrexia, lethargy and inappetance. Com-
In these situations it is often necessary to remove
monly, the affected mammary gland will become
 the puppies and hand raise them. In severe necrotic
hot and painful, any milk produced from these
 mastitis a mastectomy may be indicated.
glands is usually discolored and if the animal is
still nursing the neonates may be weak and crying
because they have been unable to feed. Animals
Uterine prolapse
with non-septic mastitis are generally systemically
healthy, although again the glands are swollen and
Uterine prolapse usually occurs during whelping
painful.
 or in the 48 hours following whelping or queening
Nursing the Reproductive Patient 159
when the cervix is open. It is more commonly
coagulation disorders. Treatment with oxytocin
reported in cats than dogs. Both horns of the uterus
injections and calcium to assist in uterine involu-
can prolapse, usually after the entire litter is deliv-
 tion is helpful to stop bleeding. IV fluid therapy
ered. On some occasions a single uterine horn will
may be necessary to treat shock and fluid loss.
prolapse, the remaining horn may still have viable
 Puppies or kittens should be allowed to nurse in
puppies/kittens present. External reduction should
 order to stimulate endogenous oxytocin produc-
be attempted as soon as possible, because the
tion. If PCV continues to drop blood transfusion
longer the tissue is exposed the higher the risk of
may be necessary. Surgery to stop the bleeding
contamination, trauma and necrosis. The animal
and/or spay the dam may be necessary in extreme
should be anaesthetised and sterile lubricant
cases.
 applied liberally to the exposed tissue. The uterine
horn is flushed with sterile saline under pressure.
Topically applied mannitol or hypertonic saline
Eclampsia/hypocalcaemia
can be used to reduce oedema if necessary before
attempting reduction. Once the uterus is replaced,
the animal should be given 5-10IU oxytocin IM to
this is a moderately common condition in bitches
cause uterine involution. If the uterus remains
but has been only rarely reported in cats. The term
reduced for 24 hours, further risk of prolapse is
eclampsia is often used to describe this condition
unlikely because the cervix should be closed. If the
in the bitch; however, this can cause some confu-
tissue is damaged or necrotic, ovariohysterectomy
sion as 'eclampsia' is also used to describe peripar-
is recommended. Internal reduction of the prolapse
turient disorders in other species that are not
can usually be achieved through a ventral abdomi-
associated with hypocalcaemia. Hypocalcaemia is
nal incision. In some cases, reduction is impossible
a medical emergency in affected animals. The con-
due to extreme engorgement of
f the prolapsed
tissue. In these cases, the external segment can be
(especially when nursing large litters), usually
amputated followed by ovariohysterectomy.
within the first 1-4 weeks after whelping when the
metabolic stress of lactation is highest but can also
 occur prior to delivery as mammary glands begin
Uterine haemorrhage
to produce milk.
Early signs include restlessness, panting, pacing.
The volume of normal blood loss during whelping
whining, salivation, tremors and stiffness. Sigmns
and queening varies widely. The fetal fluids mixed
progress to tonic-clonic muscle spasms, fever,
 in with the blood may make volumes of blood lost
tachycardia, seizures and death. Any periparturi-
during the birthing process appear to be larger,
ent dam presenting to the emergency clinic with
especially to the inexperienced breeder. Although
suspicious sigms should have a blood calcium level
rare, it is possible for blood loss to be excessive.
(ideally, ionised calcium) evaluated. Treatment
This can happen due to rupture of uterine vessels,
must be administered immediately, based on the
uterine rupture, haemorrhage from the placental
history, clinical signs and blood calcium levels
sites or coagulation disorders. Clinical signs in-
(total  calcium <1.6mmol/l  or ionised  calcium
clude passage of bright red blood from the vulva,
<0.8mmol/l). However, if suspected, treatment
passage of large blood clots, pale mucus mem-
should not be delayed for the confirmation of
branes, weakness, neglect of puppies, shock and
hypocalcaemia as response to treatment is also
deathi.
diagnostic. Treatment consists of 10% calcium
Diagnosis of excessive haemorrhage involves
gluconate (50-150mg/kg calcium) administered
demonstration of a low packed cell volume (PCV),
slowly IV until signs improve (the required dose
especially one that is trending downward. Ultra-
is generally 0.5-1.5ml/kg of 10% solution). Too
sound of the uterus can occasionally identify
rapid an infusion can cause bradycardia, cardiac
rupture of the wall or a blood-filled uterus but is
arrhythmias and/or cardiac arrest. The patient
not always diagnostic. Coagulation panels or clot-
should be monitored closely during administra-
ting times may be helpful to diagnose underlying
tion by auscultation of the heart or with an ECG.
160 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Fever, dehydration, tachycardia and hypoglycae-
mia should be treated with intravenous fluids. Oral
calcium treatment (50-250mg/kg body weight
ti.d.) as well as vitamin D (10,000-25,000IU)
should be continued throughout the rest of the lac-
tation. Puppies should be removed from the bitch
and supplemented with milk replacer for a period
of 12-24 hours based on the severity of clinical
signs and response of the dam. After that period
the puppies are allowed to nurse and should be
hand raised only if the problem reoccurs.
Male reproductive system emergencies
 It is important to recogmise the common presenta-
tions of male reproductive emergencies as well as
their potential for life-threatening complications.
Many of the common presenting conditions of
male dogs that owners present for emergency care
may not be life-threatening: however, accurate
Figure 15.5 Paraphimosis post mating.
diagnosis and early intervention preserve the
future reproductive capability of those dogs.
the penis into the prepuce can often be accom-
plished with lubrication and digital pressure,
although physical and/or chemical restraint may
Penile disorders
be needed. If the penis is oedematous, lavage with
 a hyperosmolar solution (50% dextrose or manni-
Paraphimosis
tol) may assist with replacement. Surgical widen-
 Paraphimosis is a fairly common genital reason for
ng of the prepuce can be performed if digital
males to seek emergency care. It is the inability of
 replacement is not possible and may require place-
the penis to retract into the preputial cavity It may
ment of a temporary indwelling urinary catheter.
be caused by a small preputial orifice, a ring of fur
encircling the penis, ineffective preputial muscles,
Penile trauma
preputial hypoplasia, trauma, infection, neoplasia
or it may be idiopathic (see Figure 15.5). Due to the
Penile trauma is relatively common and can be a
devastating consequence of penile necrosis and the
result of breeding injuries or other trauma such as
resulting need for penile amputation, exposure of
lacerations from fence jumping or crushing injuries
the penis should be treated as an emergency and
as a result of being hit by car for example. Clinical
addressed as soon as possible to avoid permanent
signs can vary based on the extent of the trauma
damage to the penis. The exposed penis is suscep
and include deviation of the penis, dysuria, hae
tible to drying, excoriation, ischaemia and thrombo-
maturia, pain, crepitus, distention of urinary
sis, and secondary urethral obstruction may result.
bladder, swelling, bruising and abdominal pain.
 If constriction is present, penile necrosis can result
in permanent damage to the penis and necessitate
Testicular/scrotal disorders
penile amputation. Determination of the underly-
ing cause is required for effective treatment.
Testicular torsion
Treatment of paraphimosis involves protecting
the penis from desiccation and replacing the penis
Testicular torsion (torsion of the spermatic cord)
 into the sheath. If presented early, replacement of
(see Figure 15.6) is a genuine emergency, in that it
Nursing the Reproductive Patient  161
palpation and ultrasound. If erection and semen
collection is possible, semen samples can be cyto-
logically evaluated and submitted for culture and
sensitivity; however, often these dogs are in too
 much pain for semen collection. In those instances,
fine needle aspiration of the affected testicle can be
performed.
Prostatic disorders
Diagnosis of prostatic disorders is made by rectal
as well as abdominal palpation of the prostate,
radiography and ultrasonography. Evaluation of
prostatic fluid can be obtained by collection of the
third fraction of the ejaculate if not contraindicated
due to discomfort, prostatic lavage, fine needle
aspiration of the prostate or prostatic biopsy.
Benign prostatic hypertrophy
Figure 15.6Testicular torsion.
Benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) is the most
common prostatic disorder in intact male dogs
01 Aqeu ue se Aouaiaa uo juasaid uen pue
must be detected rapidly and operated on imme-
defecate or as blood in the urine. A metabolite of
diately. Dogs suffering from testicular torsion are
testosterone, 5a-dihydrotestosterone, stimulates
generally very weak, have difficulty moving and
growth and secretion of the prostate. In older dogs,
 may present with kyphosis and pain on abdominal
there is an increase in the oestrogen:androgen
palpation. The most characteristic symptom is
ratio in the prostate and this change in hormone
hypertrophy of one of the testicles, which may
influence results in squamous metaplasia of the
become completely numb in advanced cases. If the
prostate. Many dogs with BPH are asymptomatic.
testicle is intra-abdominal, the dog will present
The most common presenting complaint is bloody
with symptoms of acute abdomen. Doppler ultra-
preputial discharge. Other clinical signs include
 sonography can be used to confirm the diagnosis.
haematuria, rectal tenesmus, abdominal discom-
Treatment is surgical and involves ablation of the
fort and infertility. Enlargement of the prostate can
testicle under general anaesthesia and stabilisation
arr pu) non a ssarn pue aaaas aag
of the patient.
the urethra), resulting in partial colonic obstruction
and clinical signs of ribbon-like stool and abdomi-
 nal discomfort. In men, increased prostatic prolif-
Orchitis/epidid ymitis
eration around the urethra commonly presents
Orchitis/epididymitis is more commonly seen
as dysuria; this is rarely seen in dogs. Differential
 in younger dogs, but should be suspected with
diagnoses include prostatitis, prostatic abscess,
any acute onset, painful swelling of the scrotum.
prostatic cysts and neoplasia.
 Other clinical signs may include pyrexia, lethargy.
hindlimb lameness, hunched posture, scrotal
Prostatitis
oedema and purulent penile discharge. Differential
diagnosis for orchitis/epididymitis includes scrotal
 Prostatitis is common in dogs with BPH, occurring
hernia, torsion of the spermatic cord, testicular
when bacteria colonise the prostatic parenchyma.
neoplasia, hydrocoele, vasculitis and sperm granu-
The source of bacteria is usually the urethra,
loma. Diagnosis is made by visual inspection,
although haematogenous spread is also likely. All
162  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
dogs with prostatitis should be tested for brucel-
Further reading
losis. Factors predisposing to infection include
disruption of normal parenchymal architecture
 Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
such as seen with disorders such as BPH, urethral
Critical Care for the Veterinary Technician, 2nd edition.
disease, urinary tract infections, altered urine
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
flow, altered prostatic secretions and reduced host
England, G. and von Heimendahl, A. (2010) BSAVA
immunity. The prostate may be painful on palpa-
 Manual of Reproduction and Neonatology. BSAVA,
tion. In most cases of chronic prostatitis, systemic
Gloucester.
 King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine
signs are not seen. Occasionally, dogs may present
and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 2nd edition.
 a g  s e m a 
BSAVA, Gloucester.
titis that can cause systemic sigmns of shock and
MacIntyre, D.K, Drobatz, K.J., Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
infection.
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
Prostatic abscess
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
Prostatic abscess can occur when the microab-
Wingfield, W.E. and Raffe, M.R. (2002) The Veterinary
 scesses typical of BPH form and coalesce, causing
KCU Book. Teton NewMedia, Wyoming.
larger abscesses. Abscess rupture can occur and
these cases may present with septicaemia, perito-
nitis and cardiovascular collapse.
16
Small Animal Critical Care and
Hospitalised Patient Nutrition
Introduction
of the patient's nutritional status. This evaluation
is based on the patient's medical history and phys-
The majority of hospitalised patients will not have
ical examination.
Once an assessment of the
sufficient voluntary food intake to meet even
patient's nutritional status and food intake have
minimal nutritional needs. When dealing with
been performed, these factors along with the sever-
critical patients, this situation is even more acute.
ity
of the
patient's current illness and whether
All too often is it perceived that this lack of ade-
quate food intake, whilst not desirable, will have
tions can be taken into consideration. This assess-
no serious implications on the patient's clinical
ment will assist when deciding upon whether
outcome. For many patients this will be the case;
some type of :
assisted feeding will be required for
however, the more serious the illness, and the
the patient,
an
 proactive the approach should
more metabolically stressed the patient is, the
be to
initiatir
Too frequently,
 more likely that the patient's nutritional status will
 and amount of food and the
deteriorate to an extent where it may suffer nutri-
tionally related complications such as immunosup-
situation
pue
critically
ill hospitalised patients.
pression or poor wound healing.
.Whilst the more
In addition to diet history, the physical examina-
critical patients can be more challenging in terms
tion should carefully evaluate the patient for the
of providing assisted feeding, the initial nutritional
 body condition score, muscle atrophy, peripheral
assessment will greatly help in the process
of
oedema, ascites, pleural effusion and risk factors
choosing the route of feeding a suitable diet, and
for anorexia or vomiting.
the development of a plan
1for monitoring
the
Additionally, laboratory markers of malnutrition
patient during feeding so that problems or compli-
are 1
important considerations when formulating
cations can be prevented or at least recogmised
a feeding plan for each patient. In non-stressed
early and quickly addressed.
starvation, the body uses carbohydrates and fat
Individual
patient's
nutritional
assessment
stores for energy purposes. However, during the
serves several purposes. It allows a determination
stressed starvation that is associated withi a variety
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
164 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
of illnesses, the body's normal mechanisms to com-
feeding, particularly carbohydrates, can contribute
 pensate and preserve lean muscle mass are super-
to respiratory acidosis and increased patient mor-
ceded by the massive release of inflammatory
bidity. Overfeeding early in the course of illness,
cytokines, glucocorticoids and catecholamines
particularly after a long period of anorexia or
which cause peripheral insulin resistance and
weight loss, can result in hyperalimentation and
allow proteolysis, muscle wasting and lipolysis.
're-feeding syndrome'. Because of this, nutritional
The nutritional assessment will help determine
assessment of each patient should occur on an indi-
which method or route of feeding will be safest,
vidual basis, depending on the patient's primary
most effective and best tolerated by the patient.
illness, the expected time that the patient will need
The type of food to be administered should be 
nutritional supplementation, the patient's toler-
based upon the patient's underlying condition as
ance to enteral or parenteral feeding, anaesthetic
well as the route of administration selected. Finally,
risks and underlying illnesses including pancreati-
this assessment will help to identify potential prob-
tis, gastric stasis, oesophageal motility disorders
lems that may occur and allow for planning of
and severe diarrhoea.
nutrition in order to prevent these problems, or
to at least anticipate and monitor for their pres-
ence. Too frequently, lack of nutritional support
Patient selection
contributes to protein-calorie malnutrition, leading
to increased length of hospital stay, increased
 As a general guide, the earlier nutritional support
patient morbidity, depressed immune function,
is commenced the better, so wherever possible
delayed wound healing as well as increased patient
the need should be anticipated. All fluid and
mortality.
electrolyte deficits should be addressed first and
The resting energy expenditure (RER) is the
then nutritional support should be introduced
amount of calories necessary for a non-stressed
 over the following 2-3 days. Nutritional support
animal in the post-prandial state in a calm, thermo-
should be started if the patient exhibits any of the
neutral environment. In other words, it is the
following:
 amount of energy necessary for basic functions not
including obtaining and digesting foodstuffs. In
?
Recent weight loss of more than 10% body
patients over 2kg, the linear formula:
weight, not due to dehydration. This is relevant
even in obese animals. It should be remem-
(30 x BWkg) +70 = kcal/day = RER
bered that fluid gains and losses will interfere
(other sum for less than 2kg) can be used to calcu-
with the assessment of weight changes so this
late daily resting energy expenditure. The meta-
should be borne in mind when performing the
bolic energy requirement (MER) is the amount of
nutritional assessment.
calories required for an animal in a thermoneutral
Partial or complete anorexia for more than 3
environment with basic activity to obtain, digest
days, as enterocyte atrophy occurs within 48
and absorb foodstuffs. The IER is the energy
hours of anorexia and lack of trophic stimuli
requirement associated with illness, injury, infec-
within the gut lumen. Early enteral nutrition
tion and inflammation. The illness energy require-
has been shown to decrease patient morbidity
q p    si ) 
in patients with parvoviral enteritis. Within
the RER to combat the proposed increase in caloric
24
4 hours of hospitalisation, fluid, acid-base
requirements associated with various forms of
and electrolyte balance should be normalised,
illness. However, studies have found no increase
pue
1 exogenous nutritional support should
in RER in numerous hospitalised patients, so this
commence in any anorexic patient or patient
value is generally the value selected when calculat-
that is not tolerating oral feeding (see Figure
ing the patient's nutritional requirements. This is
16.1). This includes animals in catabolic states,
thought to occur because of the down-regulation
E.g. patients with severe burns, draining sepsis
of metabolism and associated euthyroid sick syn-
such as pyothorax, neoplasia, major surgery or
drome that often occurs with critical illness. Over-
severe trauma, malabsorption (see Figure 16.2).
Small Animal Critical Care and Hospitalised Patient Nutrition 165
it has been shown that you risk complications if
you overdo the calories in hospital.
What food should we give?
Anorexic patients with concurrent injury, infection
or neoplasia are effectively suffering from an accel-
erated form of starvation. In uncomplicated starva-
tion, food deprivation results in a decrease in blood
glucose which stimulates reduced levels of insulin
Figure 16.1  Staffordshire Bull Terrier post badger attack,
and increased glucagon secretion. This reduction
where it was anticipated the patient would be unlikely to
in insulin leads to a reduction in the insulin-
eat for more than 3 days, so an oesophagostomy tube was
responsive conversion of T4 to the more active T3
placed at the time of surgery.
which results in a lowering of RER. The increased
glucagon causes hepatic  glyconeogenesis  and
glucose release: hepatic gluconeogenesis from
amino acids, lactic acid and glycerol; release of
glycerol and fatty acids from fat stores (lipolysis
facilitated by a reduction in insulin).
The consequences of these changes are as follow:
1)  RER is actually below normal in uncompli-
cated starvation
 2) A shift is seen from using carbohydrate for
energy to using protein and fat.
Initially, glucose is obtained from glycogen. This
is rapidly used up and following on from this the
main source is breakdown of body protein, so an
initial rapid decline is seen in the first few days.
Gradual changes over the following week whereby
Figure 16.2  German Shepherd dog with severe burns.
the body begins using stored fat as the main fuel.
This occurs as an increase in blood ketone levels
change enzymes in tissues including brain and
How much food to give?
heart to use ketone bodies more. Then, in late star-
vation, as fat stores are used up, there is a shift back
The patient's daily food requirement should be cal-
to using body protein as the energy source. Addi-
culated using resting (or basal) energy requirement
tionally, some tissues are obligate glucose users
(RER):
and cannot use fat or ketones (due to low mito-
chondria or poor oxygenation - fat oxidation is
RER (kcals) =30 x body weight
 mitochondrial and uses oxygen): red blood cells,
+ 70 (dogs and cats over 2 kg)
renal medullary cells, nervous tissue, also fibro-
blasts for wound healing and some tumours.
RER (kcals) = 50 x body weight in cats.
Anorexic and sick animals suffer from an accel-
erated form of starvation; they differ from starving
Previously, we would multiply the patient's RER
animals in that they are hyperdynamic. Anorexia
 p pn m  ssa,  q
in these animals starts the same metabolic changes
the severity of the disease. We no longer do this as
but these are complicated by the neuroendocrine
166  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
responses to stress (sympathetic nervous system
of the diet is also very important. Very low viscos-
stimulation, catecholamine, adrenocorticoid and
ity foods should be used for naso-oesophageal
1  hormone release) which override 
：the
tubes to minimise blockages. Thicker 'gruel' con-
growth
normal down-regulation of RER that occurs in
sistency foods can be used in larger tubes, such as
umcomplicated starvation, i.e. get reduced insulin
gastrotomy tubes. The food selected should be iso-
secretion and increased glucagon but no reduction 
osmolar to prevent diarrhoea. The food should also
in the T4 to T3 conversion. Also, neuroendocrine
be warmed, as cold food can induce either vomit-
changes make patients relatively insulin resistant,
ing or rapid gastric emptying which may cause
i.e. high dose glucose infusions will not completely
diarrhoea, If food is too cold, e.g. just removed
 stop gluconeogenesis in these animals whereas
from the refrigerator, the patent has to expend
they may do in healthy patients.
energy in warming it.
 Early feeding is vitally important. It helps immu-
nity, wound healing and prevents the loss of lean
body mass. In paitents with tumours, it may not
Recommendations for avoiding
increase survivial time but it does improve guality
 complications of the re-feeding
of life, with faster recovery after therapy and
syndrome
imcreased immumocompetence.
It is important not to feed a restricted protein
Re-feeding
 symdrome has been identified in
food unless specific indication (hepatic encepha-
 humans in some starving or malnourished patients
lopathy or severe uraemia). Critical care diets spe-
receiving total parenteral nutrition (TPN), dextrose
cifically manufactured for cats and dogs should be
infusions or high carbohydrate diets. The syn-
used as human critical care foods are too low in
drome has also been reported in tube-fed cats.
protein (see Tables 16.1 and 16.2). The consistency
The mechanism of re-feeding syndrome is poorly
understood (not all susceptible patients succumb)
but is ascribed particularly to hypophosphataemia
Table 16.1 Recommended levels of fats, proteins and 
with or without changes in potassium, magnesium
carbohydrates in critical care diets
and sodium. Phosphate has important functions
in glycolysis, phospholipids and ATP formation.
Protein
Fat
Carbohydrate
 Severe hypophosphataemia causes haemolysis,
Species
(%)
(%)
(%)
muscle weakness, leucocyte dysfunction and a
Dog
20-30
30-55
15-50
reduction in red blood cell (RBC) levels of 2,3-
Cat
25-35
40-55
15-25
diphosphoglycerate, which increases the affinity of
RBCs for oxygen so reducing oxygen delivery to
 Percentage energy requirements not dry matter.
tissues. Carbohydrate and insulin release cause
an increase in cellular uptake of phosphate and
increased glucolysis and protein synthesis, which
Table 16.2F
Recommendations for avoiding complications
 leads rapidly to hypophosphataemia as total body
 of the re-feeding syndrome
phosphate is depleted. Advice in these patients is
Recovery
Maximum
to increase calories gradually, monitor electrolytes
loddns
a/d
calorie
carefully and do not use high carbohydrate diets
or dextrose infusions.
Energy density
1 kcal/ml
1.2 kcal/ml
2.1 kcal
Protein
%EE
%67
1)
 Anticipate the problem whenever a patient is
%6E
'at risk' and re-feed with formulations known
Fat
55%
54%
66%
to contain adequate levels of phosphorus,
Carbohydrate
6%
13 %
5%
potassium and magnesium.
Tube suitability
2
Use initial nutritional re-feeding rates not to
>8 Fr
Manufacturer
exceed the patient's RER (30 x weight in kilo-
Royal
Hill's Pet
lams
Company
grams) + 70. Consider re-feeding a high-fat
Canin
Nutrition
low-carbohydrate diet to patients who have
Small Animal Critical Care and Hospitalised Patient Nutrition  167
not eaten in more than 5 days, if their condition
would not contraindicate such a diet.
3)  Monitor phosphorus, potassium, magnesium,
packed cell volume and total protein at least
daily, more often if indicated. Monitoring
should start within 12 hours of re-feeding.
4）
 Supplement as needed, either IV or with the
food.
5)
 Monitor closely for signs of fluid overload and
congestive heart failure.
How to feed?
There are two important rules for feeding:
Figure 16.3  Syringe feeding a patient.
1) Use the simplest route possible that avoids
stress to the patient
2)If the gut works use it!
aspiration, particularly in collapsed patients where
it should really be contraindicated (see Figure
16.3).
Methods of encouragement
 It is essential if using either of the above tech-
niques to ensure the patient is receiving more than
Simple techniques such as the warming of food or
88% of their calculated requirements daily. It is
using foods with strong smells such as sardines can
very easy to spend long periods of time trying to
sometimes be successful. It is important to check
 aaa jae e pue pd e paa a
with the owner the type of food the patient nor-
its energy requirements down.
mally eats at home as feeding the usual diet is more
likely to increase the chance of the patient eating
Tube feeding
in the hospital. Cats particularly can be very fussy
 eaters and have differing personalities, e.g. some
Prior to each feeding through enteral tubes, tube
cats are likely to eat when being fussed and stroked,
location must be checked by gentle application of
whereas others will prefer privacy. The use of med-
negative pressure (by aspiration) to the end of the
 ication can sometimes be successful in stimulating
feeding tube. The aspiration of nasogastric and
patients’ appetites and giving them a reminder of
 gastrostomy tubes also allows the measurement of
what they are missing. Current drugs used to sim-
residual gastric contents, which indirectly assesses
ulate appetite include cyproheptadine (Periactin),
gastric motility. Oesophagostomy tubes should
a serotonin antagonist, at 24mg/kg/day PO and
contain no residual material if they are correctly
mirtazapine (Zispin), a tetracyclic antidepressant,
located in the oesophagus. Because the jejunum
at one-eighth 15 mg tablet PO every 2-3 days.
. The
 administration of 0.05-0.2mg/kg valium IV may
residual contents has little value. Radiography can
also be used.
also be used to verify tubelocation. Contrast agents
are usually not required, as most tubes are radi-
Force feeding
opaque (see Figure 16.4).
This technique occasionally may be helpful to 'kick
start' animals into eating, particularly cats, puppies
Choice of feeding tube
and kittens, but it is usually poorly tolerated by the
patient and stressful for both the patient and staff.
The best feeding tubes for prolonged use are made
Care needs to be taken with this technique to avoid
of polyurethane or silicone. For short-term feeding
168 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 16.4  Radiograph of an oesophagostomy tube post
Figure 16.5 Unclogging of a blocked oesophagostomy tube
placement. Contrast medium has been used to confirm
using a carbonated drink.
placement.
(<10 days), polyvinylchloride or red rubber tubes
the incidence of oesophageal strictures and for
can be used. These latter tubes are not appropriate
 these reasons should not generally be placed unless
for long-term feeding because they tend to become
gastric syphoning is required, e.g. parvovirus,
stiff with prolonged use and may cause the animal 
gastric dilation and volvulus (GDV) patients.
discomfort. Silicone is softer and more flexible
Because of the small internal diameter of these
than other tubing materials and has a greater
 tubes, only liquid enteral diets can be used. Feeding
tendency to stretch and collapse. Polyurethane is
may be delivered via a syringe pump as a continu-
stronger than silicone, which allows for thinner
ous rate infusion or as bolus feedings. If a syringe
tube walls and a greater internal diameter, despite
 pump is used, the delivery equipment must be
the same overall French size. Both silicone and
juaaaid diau ci smou z Araaa paueuo Alaaiduon
polyurethane tubes do not disintegrate or become
bacterial growth within the system. Clogging of
brittle in situ. The French (Fr) unit measures the
these tubes is a common problem, due to the
outer lumen diameter of a tube; each unit is equal
narrow bore, but the incidence can be decreased
to 0.33mm.
by using a syringe pump or flushing the tube well
before and after bolus feedings. A column of water
should always remain within the feeding tube
Naso-oesophageal and nasogastric tubes
in between feeds. If the tube becomes clogged,
Naso-oesophageal tubes can be inserted using
replacement may be necessary, or carbonated
minimal equipment and standard techniques.
drinks may be used to remove the blockage (see
Nasogastric tubes are inserted in a similar fashion
Figure 16.5). Diluting the liquid diet with water
 as naso-oesophageal tubes, but they should be long
 may also help prevent clogging, but this decreases
enough to reach 7-10cm past the last rib. Both
the caloric concentration of the diet and increases
 types of tubes are useful for providing short-term
the volume necessary to meet caloric needs.
nutritional support (usually <7 days). They can
 Maintenance of the tube should be carried out
be used in animals with a functional oesophagus,
by cleaning the extemal nares gently using a warm,
 stomach and intestines. Naso-oesophageal tubes
 damp cotton wool ball. If tubes do become blocked
 are contraindicated in animals that are vomiting.
then carbonated drinks may be used to unclog the
comatose, lack a gag reflex or have respiratory dis-
blockage. The tube can be removed at any point
eases. Complications include epistaxis, intolerance
following placement. When removing the tubes,
of the insertion procedure and inadvertent removal
 they are simply pulled out after the skin adhesive
by the animal. Nasogastric tubes increase the risk
or sutures are removed (see Table 16.3; Figures
of gastro-oesophageal reflux and thus may increase 
16.6, 16.7, 16.8, 16.9, 16.10 and 16.11).
Small Animal Critical Care and Hospitalised Patient Nutrition   169
Table 16.3 Indications and contraindications of nasogastric and naso-oesophageal tubes
Indications
Contraindications
Anorexic animals with functional lower gastrointestinal
 Uncontrollable vomiting
tract
Surgery on mouth, pharynx, oesophagus
 Short-term feeding by tube (2-3 days)
Trauma or oesophageal stenosis
 Spontaneous feeding contraindicated or impossible
- mandibular fractures, post oral surgery
 Oesophageal motility disorder
Alteration in level of consciousness
Decompression of stomach/oesophagus (see Figure
16.6)
Delayed emptying of stomach
Fractures of nasal cavities or rhinitis
Severe thrombocytopaenia/pathy
Head trauma or raised ICP (increases ICP due to sneezing)
Comatose, recumbent or dysphoric patients (due to risk of
aspiration)
Equipment 
Pros:
Cons:
 Easy, fast and cheap to set up
 Short-term use (<7 days)
No equipment or GA required
Uncomfortable tube, small diameter
Patient able to eat and drink with tube in place
Large volumes of liquid food required due to small
 No minimum wait before tube can be used or
diameter tube
removed
Elizabethan collar must be worn to prevent removal by
 patient
 Preparation
Equipment:
 Naso-oesophageal tube
 Lidocaine spray/drops 
Lidocaine gel
 Non-absorbable monofilament suture material and/or Cyanoacrylate adhesive or stapler and adhesive tape
Elizabethan collar
Patient:
 Placement of lidocaine into nostril
Patient ideally sitting or in sternal recumbency
Neck in flexion
Insertion
1}
The tube should be pre-measured from the nasal meatus to the seventh intercostal space (for naso-oesophageal tubes)
(2'gl ainal aas) paseld adel jo uad ylm payjew ag pinous s!yl (sagnt 2jnsesoseu joj) aneds lesosiaju yjuaall jo
2}
Lidocaine drops/spray should be placed into the nostril to be used for insertion
E
Lidocaine/water-soluble gel should be placed around the tube (see Figure 16.8)
4}
The tube should be inserted in a ventromedial direction until the pre-measured location (aiming towards the base of
the opposite ear). This means the tube will pass into the ventral meatus of the nasal cavity (see Figure 16.9)
5
This can be achieved by pushing the nasal planus dorsally, which will help direct the tube ventrally (see Figure 16.10)
6
The tube should be secured in place using suture/glue/staple through a butterfly 'wing' of tape or a finger trap suture
(see Figure 16.11)
7}
If required, the correct positioning of the tube can be verified via radiography/endoscopy or by flushing with 5-10ml
saline, which should not elicit a cough
8
An Elizabethan collar should be placed to prevent removal by the patient
(Continued)
170 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 16.3  (Continued)
Post insertion
Supportive care:
Complications/withdrawal:
 Feeding can be commenced immediately following
Overfeeding (nausea, reflux, vomiting, diarrhoea)
placement of the tube 
Aspiration pneumonia
Gradual refeeding of the patient over 2-3 days.
 Epistaxis or sinusitis: discharge, sneezing 
whereby half or one-third of the calculated daily
Gastro-oesophageal reflux
calorific requirement is administered on the first 
 Obstruction of tube
day, full or two-thirds the requirement on day 2
 Accidental withdrawal by patient 
and then the full RER by day 3
 Daily requirement should be divided into multiple
(5 or 6) feeds per day
Pre feeding the tube should be aspirated (to check
for stagnant food), and then post feeding the tube 
should be flushed with lukewarm water (to prevent 
obstruction/blockage). A column of water should 
remain in the tube between each feed
If flushing of the tube elicits a cough, feeding
should be discontinued as the tube may have
become dislodged. Radiographs should be taken to 
confirm tube position 
GA, general anaesthetic; ICP, intracranial pressure.
See website video: Naso-oesophageal tube placement.
Figure 16.7The tube should be pre-measured from the
nasal meatus to the seventh intercostal space (for naso-
oesophageal tubes) or thirteenth intercostal space.
Oesophagostomy tubes
Oesophagostomy tube placement requires general
anaesthesia, with the animal intubated and in
Figure 16.6 Dogue de Bordeaux puppy with a nasogastric
lateral recumbency (see Table 16.4; Figures 16.12,
tube in place to allow gastric syphoning.
16.13, 16.14, 16.15, 16.16, 16.17, 16.18, 16.19, 16.20
Small Animal Critical Care and Hospitalised Patient Nutrition 171
Figure 16.8  Water-soluble gel should be placed around the
Figure 16.11  The tube should be secured in place using
tube for lubrication.
suture, glue or staple through a butterfly 'wing' of tape or a
finger trap suture.
allows the feeding of a gruel recovery diet, some-
times without dilution with water. These catheters
are also easy for owners to use and maintain, as
long as vomiting is not a problem. The tube may
simply be pulled out after the sutures are removed.
The exit hole is allowed to heal by second inten-
tion. A light bandage may be applied over the exit
site for the first 12 hours (see Figure 16.22).
Oesophagostomy  tube  removal  After  every
Figure 16.9 The tube should be inserted in a ventromedial
bolus feeding the tube will require a flush of water
direction until the pre-measured location.
to rinse it of food debris. The tube exit site will
require topical cleaning using sterile saline or
chlorhexidine solution, the use of topical antimi-
crobials rather than antibiotic cream at the stoma
site should be encouraged. A light bandage is
applied and the entire dressing is changed every
2-6 hours. When the tube is no longer needed it is
simply removed by cutting the skin sutures and the
tube is pulled out. The wound can be stapled or
 left to granulate. The exit site will granulate within
a few days.
Gastrostomy tubes
Figure 16.10 Pushing the nasal planus dorsally, which will
help direct the tube ventrally.
Gastrostomy tubes can be inserted blindly using
 specialised equipment, placed with the aid of a
gastroscope (i.e. percutaneous endoscopic gastros-
and 16.21). Complications include tube displace-
asau paras Asms aq ro (aq [ad] 
ment from vomiting, removal or damage to the
tubes can be placed in any animal that can with-
tube by the animal, and skin infection around the
stand general anaesthesia. A minimum of 12 hours,
exit site. Depending on the insertion technique
preferably 24 hours, is needed for a temporary
used and the size of the animal, an 8-20 Fr catheter
stoma to form before feeding can begin, and the
may be used. The large bore of these catheters
feeding tube should be left in place a minimum of
Table 16.4 Indications, contraindications and procedure for oesophagostomy tube placement
Indications
Contraindications
 Enteral nutrition >7 days
Uncontrollable vomiting
 Prolonged anorexia >3 days 
sapiosip leaseydosao Arepuosas lo Aiewids
 Postoperative mouth and head surgery
Foreign body, surgery or oesophageal tumour
Oral cavity disorders (cleft palate, tumours, mandible or
Delay in emptying of stomach
maxillary fractures,) or pharynx disorders with oesophagus and
Surgery of the hepatic ducts
stomach intact and correct Gl function
 Contraindications of naso-oesophageal tubes
 Equipment
Paediatric feeding tube in PVC or silicone
Diameter (Fr)
Length (cm)
Cats, small dogs
6-10
43
Percutaneous oesophagostomy sets with trochar or curved
Medium dogs
haemostat forceps
11-13
53
Large dogs
14-18
80-125
Giant dogs
30
Pros:
Cons:
Well tolerated and fairly cheap
 General anaesthesia needed
Long-term nutrition (1-12 weeks)
 Surgical procedure
Large diameter tubes
Preparation
Clippers
Animal
No 11 blade
General anaesthesia with intubation
Oesophagostomy set with trochar or curved haemostat forceps
Gag placed
 Non-absorbable monofilament suture material
Right lateral recumbency
Gag
Clip left cervical area
Surgical drape
Surgical aseptic prep site
 Sterile gloves
 Dressing and topical antimicrobial
Insertion
1)  Measurement of tube length (from one-third proximal oesophagus (proposed incision site) to eighth rib. Location by
(el'gl pue zl'gl sains!g aas) sujan lelej-eo pue jeing!puewonal 'jejnn! jo uojssaiduos
Forceps technique (see website video: Oesophagostomy tube forceps technique)
2}
 Introduction of curved artery forceps down the oesophagus with outward pressure caudal to hyoid apparatus and
entrance to larynx (see Figure 16.14)
1E
Tips of forceps opens and a 'cut down' performed over tips (see Figure 16.15)
4}
Forcep tips used to grasp oesophagostomy tube which is then drawn back up the oesophagus and out of the patients
mouth (see Figure 16.16)
 Oesophagostomy tube then reintroduced retrograde down the patients oesophagus until the pre-measured point (see
Figure 16.17>
van Noort technique (see website video: Oesophagostomy tube van Noort technique)
6}
Introducer placed into the oesophagus with outward pressure, caudally to hyoid apparatus and the entrance to the
larynx (see Figure 16.18)
7}
 Needle and peel-away sheath introduced percutaneously into the notch in the introducer. Needle is removed leaving
sheath in place (see Figure 16.19)
¥8
palaad, s! yieays ayl uoesol palios ayi ul aruo "yieays ayl jo uaunl ayp umop pajasu! s! aqni Awojsoseydosao
away' leaving the oesophagostomy tube in place (see Figure 16.20)
6
 For both techniques the tube is sutured in place using Chinese finger trap or butterfly tape and sutures (see Figure
16.21)
Small Animal Critical Care and Hospitalised Patient Nutrition  173
Table 16.4 (Continued)
Post insertion
Supportive care:
Complications/withdrawal:
Monitoring the stoma and dressing changes 2-4 times daily
Overfeeding (nausea, reflux, vomiting, diarrhoea)
Wait 24 hours before feeding via the tube
 Punctuation of jugular vein during insertion
Gradual refeeding of the patient over 3 days
Incorrect placement (not into oesophagus)
 Pre feeding the tube should be aspirated (to check for
 Oesophageal reflux, vomiting/regurgitation 
stagnant food) and then post feeding the tube should be
Local infection at stoma site 
flushed with lukewarm water (to prevent obstruction/
Occlusion of tube
blockage). A column of water should remain in the tube
between each feed
Gl, gastrointestinal.
Figure 16.12
2 Measurement of tube length (from one-third
Figure 16.14  Introduction of curved artery forceps down
proximal oesophagus (proposed incision site) to eighth rib
the oesophagus with outward pressure caudal to hyoid
using forceps.
apparatus and entrance to larynx.
Figure 16.15 Tips of forceps opens and a 'cut down'
performed over tips.
Figure 16.13  Measurement of tube length (from one-third 
proximal oesophagus (proposed incision site) to eighth rib
using the van Noort technique.
174 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Figure 16.16  Forcep tips used to grasp oesophagostomy
tube which is then drawn back up the oesophagus and out
of the patient's mouth.
Figure 16.19 The needle and peel-away sheath introduced
percutaneously into the notch in the introducer. The needle
is removed leaving the sheath in place.
Figure 16.17
 Oesophagostomy tube should be re-
introduced in a retrograde fashion down the patient's
oesophagus until the pre-mea sured point.
J川
Figure 16.20 The oesophagostomy tube is inserted down
Figure 16.18 The introducer is placed into the oesophagus
the lumen of the sheath. Once in the correct location the
with outward pressure, caudally to hyoid apparatus and the
sheath is 'peeled away' leaving the oesophagostomy tube in
entrance to the larynx.
place.
Small Animal Critical Care and Hospitalised Patient Nutrition  175
animals requiring feeding tubes over a long dura-
tion, the initial gastrotomy tube can be replaced
with a low profile silicone tube. The low profile
silicone tube can be placed through the external
stoma site without an endoscope. Sedation or
anaesthesia may be necessary based on the indi-
vidual animal but in stoic patients it may be pos-
sible to perform this procedure in a conscious
patient. Until recently, red rubber catheters or
Foley catheters were placed as gastrotomy tubes;
however, this may be problematic as rubber cath-
Figure 16.21  For both techniques the tube is sutured in
eter has a useful life of 12-16 weeks, which is ade-
place using Chinese finger trap or butterfly tape and sutures.
quate for most cats with hepatic lipidosis and for
postoperative feedings in dogs, but this duration
may not provide enough time. Silicone catheters
have a useful life of >1 year, depending on main-
tenance and care, so these should generally be
selected as the first choice as gastrotomy tubes.
 If the tube has been in place <16 weeks, it may
simply be removed manually. This is best accom-
plished by placing the animal in right lateral
recumbency. The tube is grasped with the right
hand close to the body wall and the left hand
holding the animal. The tube should be pulled
firmly and consistently to the right, in an upward
motion, with some force. It is also helpful to fast
Figure 16.22 Antimicrobial disc placed at an
the animal prior to tube removal and to place a
oesophagostomy stoma site.
towel over the stoma site to catch any residual
material that leaks out as the tube is removed. If
 7-10 days to allow a permanent stoma to form
the tube has been in >16 weeks, the incidence of
 before removal. These tubes can be left in long term
tube breakage is much higher. Depending on where
(1-6 months), often without replacement.
the breakage occurs, the remaining portion of the
Complications associated with
1PEG
tubes
tube may need to be retrieved endoscopically.
include those that arise acutely during tube place-
Larger animals can easily pass retained parts, but
ment (e.g. splenic laceration, gastric haemor-
smaller animals often need to have them retrieved.
rhage, pneumoperitoneum) and those that are
The exit hole is allowed to heal by second inten-
delayed (e.g. vomiting, aspiration pneumonia,
 tion. A light dressing should be applied for the first
tube removal, tube migration, peritonitis and infec-
24 hours after removal (see Table 16.5; Figures
tion around the stoma).
16.23, 16.24, 16.25, 16.26, 16.27, 16.28, 16.29, 16.30
Most animals are able to eat normally with gas-
and 16.31).
trostomy tubes in place, and the tubes can easily
be used as a source of additional nutritional sup-
Jejunostomy tubes
plementation until the animal is eating normally.
For animals that are difficult to medicate or require
Jejunostomy tube feeding is indicated when the
long-term medications, many medicines can be
upper gastrointestinal tract must be rested or
given through the feeding tube.
when decreased pancreatic stimulation is desir-
The major disadvantages of gastrostomy tubes
able. Jejumal tubes can be placed either surgically
are the need for general anaesthesia during inser-
or threaded through a gastrostomy tube (transpy-
tion and the risk of peritonitis from inadvertent
loric placement) (see Figure 16.32). Standard gas-
removal before a permanent stoma develops. For
 trojejunal tubes designed for humans are unreliable
Table 16.5 Indications, contraindications and placement of gastrotomy tubes
Indications
Anorexic animals with functional lower digestive system and impossibility of using the proximal digestive system
Only if schedule to use for >l week
Contraindications
Stomach disorders (ulcers, tumours, gastritis, obstruction to gastric emptying, gastric paresis)
Ascites, peritonitis or risk of dehiscence of the abdominal wall (immunodeficiency)
For PEG placement: 
Trauma or oesophageal stenosis (risk of perforation)
Mega-oesophagus (risk of aspiration pneumonia)
Equipment
Gastrotomy tube diameter >8 Fr
Two commonly used methods of insertion:
Percutaneous endoscopic (PEG)
Surgically placed
Many types of tube:
Most common: balloon or Pezzer tip catheter
Pros:
Cons:
Appropriate for long-term feeding at home (several
 Delicate and time-consuming insertion
months)
Risk of peritonitis
 Large diameter tubes
General anaesthesia required
PEG: faster, cheaper and less invasive technique
Minimum wait of 7 days before removal and 24
Surgically placed: good visualisation of the
hours before use
implantation site and assurance of stomach-
Difficulty inserting in obese patients
abdominal wall apposition 
 PEG: absence of gastropexy so increased risk of
peritonitis in the event of accidental removal
Preparation
Equipment:
Animal:
 Clippers
General anaesthesia with intubation
Gastrotomy tube
Right lateral recumbency
 PEG kit or surgical laparotomy equipment
Clip up left side of patient for PEG placement or
Non-absorbable monofilament suture material
midline for surgical placement
Sterile drapes and sterile gloves
 Prep patient aseptically
Dressings
Antiseptics
Sterile swabs
5-ml syringe
 Elizabethan collar
Insertion
 PEG (see website video: PEG tube placement)
1}I
Introduction of the endoscope into the stomach which should be dilated using the endoscope. The light from the
endoscopy may be visible through the patient's abdominal wall(see Figure 16.23)
21
Puncture the skin and the stomach using the trochar from the PEG kit (see Figure 16.24)
 Passage of a guide thread or wire via the trocar, which is gripped by the endoscope forceps and then withdrawn 
 out of the stomach, through the oesophagus and out of the patient's mouth (see Figure 16.25)
4}
Trocar withdrawn
5
Gastrotomy tube end is secured to the PEG guide attachment (see Figure 16.26)
6
The gastrotomy tube is then pulled, by pulling the thread or wire, back through the patient's mouth, down the
oesophagus and out through the stomach wall (see Figure 16.27)
71
The gastrotomy tube should then be sutured to the abdominal wall, held firmly in place (see Figure 16.28)
8
Antimicrobial ointment/dressings should then be used to dress the stoma site
Small Animal Critical Care and Hospitalised Patient Nutrition 177
Table 16.5
(Continued)
Surgical placement
1) Laparotomy, the gastrotomy tube entering the abdominal wall using an 'outside in' approach and stomach incision
made
21
Double purse tring suture placed around the stomach incision (see Figure 16.29)
Gastrotomy tube should be placed in the stomach (in the centre of the purse string suture) and the suture tied to
ensure a watertight seal (see Figure 16.30)
4}
Stomach and gastrotomy tube should be gastropexied to the abdominal wall (see Figure 16.31)
5
Gastrotomy tube secured to the skin (via Chinese finger trap or securing device)
¥9
Antimicrobial ointment/dressing placed at stoma site plus sterile dressing, then abdominal dressing or stockinette
used to maintain tube in place
7}B
 Elizabethan collar placed
Post insertion
Supportive care:
Complications/removal:
 Monitoring the stoma site and dressing change 2-4
Overfeeding (nausea, reflux, vomiting, diarrhoea)
times daily
 Rate of complications for PEG and surgically placed 
Wait 12 hours before use of PEG and 24 hours
tubes approximately the same
before use of surgically placed tube
 Pruritus at point of entry of tube
Gradual re-feeding of the patient over 3 days
 Accidental removal by patient
Pre feeding the tube should be aspirated (to check
Obstruction of tube
for stagnant food) and then post feeding the tube
Peritonitis
should be flushed with lukewarm water (to prevent 
Local infection at fixation point
obstruction/blockage). A column of water should
remain in the tube between each feed
Figure 16.23  Introduction of the endoscope into the
Figure 16.24 The skin and the stomach and punctured
stomach. The light from the endoscopy is visible through the
using the trochar from the percutaneous endoscopic
patient's abdominal wall.
gastrostomy (PEG) kit.
in dogs because of the frequent reflux of the jejunal
the tube site, preventing leakage into the abdo-
portion of the tube back into the stomach so for this
men. Completely changing the delivery equipment
reason ‘weighted' tubes should be selected.
Common complications of jejunostomy tubes
within the system. Clogging is a common problem.
include osmotic diarrhoea and vomiting.
It is
 Use of a syringe or intravenous pump and flushing
recommended that the jejunal tube be left in place
the tube well every 4 hours may help to decrease
for 7-10 days to allow adhesions to form around
the incidence of clogging.
178 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
When removing the tube, it may simply be
Feeding via a tube
pulled out after the sutures are removed. The exit
hole is allowed to heal by second intention. A light 
 It is important to start feeding any patient with a
dressing should be applied for the first 12 hours 
feeding tube in place gradually. The patient's full 
following removal.
RER should be introduced over 2-3 days. This
allows the patient's gastrointestinal tract and
metabolism time to adjust to tube feeding. It is
 generally advised to start with one-third to half the
calculated amount of food diluted with water and
gradually increase the volume fed each day. A
 good protocol to use is 10 ml/kg every 2-3 hours
on day 1, increasing gradually to 50 ml/kg 34
times per day. A minimum of three feeds should
be given per day. Food must be iso-osmolar and
given slowly (over 10-15 minutes) and warmed
to approximately body temperature (see Figure
16.33).
Complications
Hyperglycaemia and electrolyte disturbances are
 potential complications of tube feeding, but these
Figure 16.25 The guide thread or wire is passed into the
stomach via the trocar, which is gipped by the endoscope
usually only occur with enterotomy feeding (jeju-
forceps and then withdrawn out of the stomach, through the
nostomy tubes). Hypoglycaemia may occur if
oesophagus and out of the patient's mouth.
feeding is withdrawn too quickly.
Figure 16.26 The gastrotomy tube end is secured to the PEG guide attachment.
Small Animal Critical Care and Hospitalised Patient Nutrition 179
Figure 16.29
Double purse string suture placed around the
stomach incision.
Figure 16.27  The gastrotomy tube is pulled, by pulling the 
thread or wire back through the patient's mouth, down the
oesophagus and out through the stomach wall.
Figure 16.30  Gastrotomy tube should be placed in the
stomach (in the centre of the purse string suture) and the
Figure 16.28  The gastrotomy tube is then sutured to the
suture tied to ensure a watertight seal.
abdominal wall.
Diarrhoea may occur, particularly if patients are
fed too quickly, if food is too cold, which causes
rapid stomach emptying, or if food is hyperosmo-
lar. If vomiting or diarrhoea occurs, reduce the
volume of food fed, warm it and dilute it.
It is also important to check there is not too much
gastric residual food before feeding through a gas-
trotomy tube. If more than one-third of the previ-
 ous feed is aspirated then no further feeding should
be attempted and the patient should be re-assessed
in a few hours. If residual food is less than one-
third, feed but reduce the amount given accord-
Figure 16.31  Stomach and gastrotomy tube should be
ingly. If no residual food is found, feed the entire
gastropexied to the abdominal wall.
calculated amount.
180 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
How long to feed?
Patients should be tube fed until they voluntarily
being eating more than 85% of their calculated
daily requirements. Tube feeding should be with-
drawn gradually, just as it was introduced gradu-
ally, to allow the necessary gastrointestinal and
 metabolic adjustments.
 It is important to continue feeding a specialist
diet at increased requirements for a period after the 
patient goes home. The following periods are cur-
Figure 16.32 Jejunostomy placed down the lumen of a
rently used by the author:
gastrotomy tube.
2weeks
sfollowing
 uncomplicated  major
surgery
24 weeks after trauma
 412 weeks after major trauma including head
trauma
Months
in
cases of chronic disease and
neoplasia.
Further reading
 Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
Critical Care for Veterinary Technician, 2nd edition.
Figure 16.33 Feeding via the jejunal port of a feeding tube
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
allowing feeding via gastrotomy and jejunostomy route,
King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine
dependent on patient requirements.
 and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 2nd edition.
BSAVA, Gloucester.
Procedure
Lindley, S. and Watson, P. (2010) BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline Rehabilitation, Supportive and
Unplug the tube, then flush the tube with 5-10 ml
Palliative Care: Case Studies in Patient Management.
BSAVA, Gloucester.
sterile water, 10-20ml warm water after each feed.
MacIntyre, D.K, Drobatz, K.J., Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
Avoid cold water as this can induced vomiting and
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
diarrhoea and the animal also has to expend energy
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
to warm it. The tube should be flushed regularly
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
even when not in use.
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
17
Nursing the Emergency
Ophthalmology Patient
Introduction
Trauma
Management of more complicated ophthalmologi-
During the triage and initial stabilisation of the
cal emergencies may require referral to more
emergency multiple trauma patient, attending to
5De
cialised clinicians with access to equipment such as
an eye injury is unlikely to be a priority as the team
concentrates on addressing problems identified
most cases can be dealt with using basic equip-
with the major body systems. Once stabilisation
ment, and those cases that need to be referred must
is underway, steps can be taken to prevent any
 be managed adequately prior to leaving the prac-
further damage to the eye prior to more detailed
tice to maximise their chances of a favourable
ophthalmalogical examination. Injured eyes should
progmnosis.
be lavaged and lubricated, and the patient pre-
 Some ophthalmic patients require special
conl
vented from causing any self-inflicted trauma by
sideration when handling them. Patients 
with
using an Elizabethan collar. Consideration should
raised intraocular pressure (IOP), or ocular condi-
always be given to analgesia, as some conditions
tions such as deep corneal ulcers or penetrating
of the eye can be particularly painful (see Figure
foreign bodies must be handled carefully. A tight
17.1).
lead around the neck or strong restraint can occlude
the jugular veins temporarily and increase IOP,
potentially worsening ocular pathology.
Prolapsed globe
Patients with loss of vision can become dis-
tressed in unfamiliar surroundings. It is important
Prolapse of the globe is an acute displacement of
ma u Amo cu a pou Aa ams aeu ol
the globe from the orbit, beyond the plane of the
cage, and to give them some waming of approach
eyelids. This may occur as a result of impact or
by talking to them and maintaining physical
trauma to the head resulting from dog fights or
contact.
motor vehicles (see Figure 17.2). Brachycephalic
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
182 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
lavaged with sterile lactated Ringer's solution, and
a topical sterile lubricant applied frequently while
the animal is assessed and stabilised. Eyes that
have ruptured, or have avulsed most of the extra-
ocular muscles, should be enucleated once the
patient is stable. Eyes that may still be viable
should be replaced in the orbit under general
anaesthetic, and the eyelids sutured closed tempo-
rarily (temporary tarsorrhaphy) to protect the
cornea and prevent recurrence of prolapse (see
Practical techniques at the end of the chapter). A
small space is left at the medial canthus to allow
topical medications to be applied. The sutures are
Figure 17.1 Laceration to dog's lower eyelid caused by
usually left in place for 14-21 days.
barbed wire.
Ocular haemorrhage
Ocular haemorrhage in the anterior chamber
(hyphaema) is commonly seen as a result of trauma.
If no other signs of trauma are evident, then sys-
temic causes of spontaneous haemorrhage (bleed-
ing disorders, hypertension and vasculitis) should
be ruled out to make sure there is no underlying
life-threatening condition.
Corneal laceration
Clinical sigms of corneal laceration will be similar
to those seen with ulceration, including epiphora
and blepharospasm. The laceration itself will often
be oedematous at its edges, causing the cornea
to become opaque in these areas. Lacerations can
ocur from tooth or claw wounds, or from foreigm
bodies (see Figure 17.3). The laceration may be
Figure 17.2 Prolapse of globe as a result of a dog fight
superficial, or in some instances the laceration will
be deep enough to perforate the eye.
The aim of treatment is to prevent infection,
breeds are more susceptible due to shallow orbits
and to protect and support the wound. Topical
and exophthalmus, and as such, more minor
 antibiotic drops are applied to the eye. If there is
 trauma or even restraint of the animal can result in
 perforation then systemic antibiotics are usually
proptosis. The amount of damage to the eye will
administered. Wounds that are large or deep
be related to the severity of the trauma; therefore
should be sutured; simple interrupted sutures
brachycephalic breeds that are more prone to
of 7/0 or 9/0 Vicryl are usually used. In some
proptosis due to minor trauma may have a more
instances a conjunctival pedicle flap (see Practical
favourable prognosis.
techniques at the end of the chapter) will also be
 On initial presentation it is important to prevent
used to support the wound, and bring in new
the eye from drying out. The globe should be
 blood supply and nutrition.
Nursing the Emergency Ophthalmology Patient 183
Figure 17.3  Corneal laceration as a result of a cat scratch.
Figure 17.4  Penetrating corneal foreign body; a fragment
of leaf embedded in the cornea.
Foreign body
Foreign bodies are sometimes encountered in
emergency patients; often these are organic matter,
i.e. plant or tree material (thorns, splinters), but
glass, metal or other material may be seen.
Animals presenting with sudden onset of severe
conjunctivitis should be carefully examined to rule
 out a foreign body such as a grass seed lodged
beneath the eyelids. These can often be removed
following the application of topical anaesthetic
drops, using a moistened cotton wool bud. Some-
times linear abrasions will be seen on the cornea
where the foreign body has abraded the surface as
Figure 17.5 Perforating corneal foreign body; a thorn has
the animal blinks.
entered the anterior chamber.
Penetrating corneal foreign bodies
humour may be seen leaking from the cornea, and
Smaller foreign bodies may embed themselves
fibrin may be evident within the anterior chamber.
within the cornea; these are often splinters, or
These may necessitate surgery to remove them.
sometimes fragments of cat's claw. If they cannot
This decision whether to operate is based on the
be dislodged by gentle irrigation, then sedation or 
time elapsed, concurent damage to the eye and
 anaesthesia is often needed to remove these foreign
the likely composition of the foreign body (see
bodies. A 25-G hypodermic needle is useful to dis-
Figure 17.5).
lodge the material, taking care not to push it any
deeper (see Figure 17.4).
Corneal ulcers
 Perforating corneal foreign bodies
A corneal ulcer is a break or hole in the corneal
Foreigm bodies will occasionally travel through the 
epithelium. Ulcers are classified according to their
cornea to become intraocular. The wound will have
depth: superficial or deep. If ulcers become suffi-
the appearance of a puncture, and the foreign body
ciently deep, Descemet's membrane (the inner
may be visible in the anterior chamber. Aqueous
 most layer of the cornea) may protrude through the
184  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
ulcer and form what is known as a descemetocoele.
prevent further damage. Sterile lactated Ringer's
Descemetocoeles are at imminent risk of corneal
solution (Hartmarn's solution) should be used.
perforation, with leakage of aqueous humour and
The fluid bag can be connected to a giving set in
collapse of the anterior chamber.
the usual marner, and the fluid directed from the
Common causes of comeal ulceration include:
end of the giving set onto the cormea and conjunc-
tiva. Lavage should be performed for 30 minutes.
Trauma
 Treatment of ulcers includes topical application
Foreigm bodies
of antibiotic drops 4-6 times a day. Atropine drops
Eyelid disorders
help to reduce pain from the ulcer. A useful addi-
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
tion in deep infected (melting) ulcers is the use of
Infection (melting ulcers)
an anticollagenase (some bacteria, especially Pseu-
Chemical burns.
domonas and Streptococcus, release an enzyme, col-
lagenase, that destroys the collagen of the cornea)
 to reduce the damage done by bacteria. This can be
Diagnosis
acetylcysteine, or the animal's own plasma can be
used. To prepare plasma drops, blood is collected
The animal's head should be handled gently, as
from the patient into EDTA blood tubes and cen-
 rough handling and pressure applied to the eyes
 trifuged to separate off the plasma. This can then
can lead to the risk of rupturing a deep ulcer.
be harvested with a pipette and stored in a sterile
A Schirmer tear test should be carried out to
dropper botle, in a refrigerator. Anticollagenases
make sure that reduced tear production from KCS
need to be applied every 20 minutes to 1 hour
is not the cause. Ulcers are usually diagnosed
nitially.
based on the uptake of fluorescein dye during
Deep ulcers, descemetocoeles and perforated
examination of the eye (see Figures 17.6 and 17.7).
ulcers require surgery to allow healing to progress.
Suturing a conjunctival pedicle graft on to the
 affected area provides physical support and pro-
Treatment
tection. As the pedicle is living tissue, it provides
a source of fibroblasts to help seal the defect, and
If a chemical bum is suspected as the cause of
a blood supply, which helps with the delivery of
damage to the cornea, then copious lavage needs
anticollagenases and antibiotics (see Practical tech-
to be carried out to flush out the caustic agent and
niques at the end of the chapter).
Figure 17.7 An extensive superficial ulcer stained with
Figure 17.6 An example of an infected 'melting' corneal
fluorescein, caused by a corrosive acid splashing into the
ulcer in a dog.
eye.
Nursing the Emergency Ophthalmology Patient 1 85
Anterior uveitis
Anterior uveitis is inflammation of the iris and
ciliary body. Uveitis may occur as a manifestation
of a systemic disease, or as a result of processes
confined to that eye: trauma, corneal ulcers and
lens leakage or rupture.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs. The signs vary
depending on the stage of the process or its sever-
ity. Pain is present and causes blepharospasm, pho-
tophobia and lacrimation. The eye appears red due
to circumlimbal vascular congestion. Ciliary spasm
 leads to a miotic pupil, and the iris appears swollen
Figure 17.8 A patient suffering from glaucoma.
and dull. Inflammatory cells and exudate, or blood,
may be seen in the anterior chamber.
very recent, or with chronic glaucoma, where the
Treatment
 problem has been present longer.
The aqueous humour in the anterior chamber
- q pos s s  
of the eye is constantly being produced and
dressed, otherwise treatment is symptomatic,
drained. If the drainage fails, the production con-
consisting of mydriatics to dilate the pupil and
tinues and the increase in volume of aqueous
anti-inflammatories.
  sa    s 
Atropine causes pupil dilation, reducing iris-
eye (see Figure 17.8).
lens contact and minimising the risk of adhesions
Glaucoma may be primary or secondary. In
forming. Pain from ciliary muscle spasm is also
primary glaucoma no abnormality is visible on
reduced. Atropine is much less effective in an
examination to explain the rise in IOP. Secondary
inflamed eye and should be given frequently ini-
glaucoma occurs when aqueous humour filtration
tially to effect, aiming for a reasonably dilated
is affected by other intraocular pathology. Primary
pupil.
glaucoma is most common in dogs, and certain
 Topical steroids such as dexamethasone or pred-
breeds tend to be predisposed. Secondary glau-
nisolone should be used intensively (e.g. every 24
coma is more common in cats, likely causes include
hours initially). In severe cases, oral prednisolone
uveitis, lens luxation and hyphaema.
or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
may be used.
Diagnosis
Glaucoma
The IOP of the affected eye must be measured to
confirm the presence of glaucoma (see Practical
Glaucoma occurs when the pressure within the
techniques at the end of the chapter). A normal eye
globe (IOP) rises above normal. This increase in
has an IOP of 15-22mmHg. If the reading is more
pressure leads to degeneration of the optic nerve
than 35mmHg then emergency treatment needs
and damaged vision. The patient may present with
to be started urgently, as permanent optic nerve
acute glaucoma, where the increase in pressure is
 damage can ocur within hours of IOP rising.
186  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Other clinical signs include pain, absent pupil-
lary light reflex, negative menace reflex, dilated
 pupil and increased globe size.
Treatment
Treatment aims to rapidly decrease the IOP. This
can be achieved by a combination of systemic and
topical treatment. Systemic treatment can be used
to draw fluid out of the vitreous humour of the
eye, reducing its volume; the osmotic diuretic man-
nitol is often used for this purpose. Topical treat-
ment aims to increase drainage of the aqueous
humour, and reduce its production. Pilocarpine
 drops constrict the pupil and open the drainage
angle' carbonic anhydrase inhibitors reduce the
 production of aqueous humour. The IOP must be
measured at intervals to ensure treatment is effec-
Figure 17.9  Using a digital tonometer to measure
tive and the risk of permanent damage is reduced
intraocular pressure in a cat's eye.
(see Figure 17.9).
Lens luxation
Lens luxation occurs when the lens becomes dislo-
cated from its normal position. This can happen
due to trauma, as a breed-related problem (usually
terriers), or secondary to glaucoma. Clinical signs
of lens luxation may include abnormal iris move-
 a     
increased IOP (see Figure 17.10).
Cases of suspected lens luxation must have their
IOP measured. Lens luxation can occur secondarily
to glaucoma, or lens luxation can cause glaucoma
if the lens luxates into the anterior chamber.
If increased IOP is detected, this should be
Figure 17.10 Anterior lens luxation; the lens is visible
addressed medically. The definitive treatment of
positioned in front of the iris.
lens luxation is surgical removal of the lens.
1) The pupil size should be observed in normal
Practical procedures
room light first. The lights are then dimmed
nd a yn paa n q e pue
Assessing pupillary light reflex
of one eye.
2
）The amount of constriction, and the speed at
When a bright light is directed into a pupil, the
which it occurs, should be observed. The con-
pupil will normally constrict. The constriction of
sensual PLR in the opposite eye should also be
the illuminated pupil is the direct pupillary light
observed.
reflex (PLR). Any constriction in the other pupil is
3）
 The normal response is initial pupil constric-
the consensual PLR.
tion followed by slight redilation. How much
Nursing the Emergency Ophthalmology Patient 187
the pupil redilates depends on the intensity of
and can vary with individuals; any reading
the light source and the duration.
should be considered alongside clinical signs.
4）
 Pupil size and PLR will vary from animal to
animal, with technique, with different light
sources and with the animal's demeanour
Fluorescein
(anxious patients will have larger pupils and a
slower response).
Fluorescein is an orange dye that becomes green
after contact with saline or the tear film. The dye
is lipophobic; it will not adhere to the lipid-
Schirmer tear test
containing cells of the intact corneal membrane. It
 is also hydrophilic; so it will adhere to any exposed
The Schirmer tear test uses graduated strips of
corneal stroma. Therefore positive staining indi-
filter paper to measure the aqueous tear produc-
 cates a defect in the corneal epithelium. In deep
tion of the eye. If poor tear production is suspected,
ulcers, exposed Descemet's membrane will not
then the test should be performed before any drops
take up fluorescein, indicating the depth and sever-
are applied to the eye. The strips are supplied
ity of the ulcer.
in sterile packs of two, usually marked ‘left' and
'right'.
1)  Use only single-use disposable sources, sterile
impregnated paper strips or single-use vials.
1）
 Before removing the strip from the packet,
The strip is wetted and then touched to the
bend the strip at the notch near the end.
bulbar conjunctiva. Alternatively, a drop of
2) The short end of the strip is then placed in the
fluorescein from a vial is applied.
lower conjunctival sac, in the lateral half (see
 The eye is then irrigated with saline to remove
Figure 17.11). The notch should be at the level
excess dye.
of the lid margin, with the tip in contact with
41
The use of a blue light source will help to dem-
the cornea. Holding the eyelids closed usually
onstrate tiny areas of uptake.
prevents the strip from falling out.
3
After 1 minute the strip is removed and the
flow of aqueous tears up the strip recorded in
Measuring intraocular pressure
millimetres.
4
The normal measurement in the dog is 15-
 Measurement of IOP is essential for diagnosing
20 mm. The figure is usually lower in the cat
glaucoma and monitoring the response to treat-
ment. When measuring IOP it must be remem-
bered that various other factors can temporarily
cause an increase in IOP, e.g vigorous restraint,
tight collars or leads, forced eyelid opening and
pressure on the globe. The most accurate method
in practice is the use of an applanation tonometer
to measure the force required to ‘applanate' or
flatten an area of the cornea.
 A sterile disposable cover is placed over the tip
of the tonometer
2)
Local anaesthetic drops are applied to the
eye
3
The tonometer is then tapped gently several
times against the cornea
4)
An averaged value of the IOP is given by a
digital readout on the tonometer
Figure 17.11  Performing a Schirmer tear test in a patient.
 5) Repeat the measurement to ensure accuracy.
188 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Readings of IOP should be analysed with respect
to clinical findings.
Surgical procedures
Equipment:
Sterile gauze swabs
Sterile saline
Povidone-iodine solution (mot ‘scrub' which
contains soap)
Sterile ophthalmic lubricant
Surgical kit/ophthalmic instruments
Figure 17.12 The appearance of a conjunctival pedicle
Suture material: 3/0 or 4/0 nylon for tarsor-
graft 4 weeks after surgery.
rhaphy, 7/0 or 9/0 Vicryl for corneal lacerations
and conjunctival flaps.
canthotomy to make the opening larger. The eyelids
are gripped with forceps, or stay sutures are used
to pull the eyelids up and out, whilst applying
Preparation for eye surgery
gentle pressure to the lubricated eye to enable it to
First, the cornea should be covered and the con-
be replaced. Once the eye is reduced, horizontal
junctival sac filled with a sterile gel or lubricant,
mattress sutures are placed across the eyelids, the
then a small area around the surgical site is clipped
sutures are pre-placed prior to tying. Stents (e.g.
with fine clipper blades. Next, use sterile gauze
giving set tubing) are used to prevent the suture
swabs soaked in sterile saline to remove hair, debris
 material cutting into the eyelids. A gap must be left
and gross contamination from the eyelids and
near the medial canthus to allow topical medica-
margins. The cornea and conjunctival sac can be
 tion to be applied to the eye whilst the sutures are
flushed with sterile saline to remove any hair or
in place. Once the mattress sutures are tied, the
debris with the gel, from the surface of the eye.
lateral canthotomy is sutured.
Surgical scrub solutions or alcohol solutions should
 not be used near the eye. Skin preparation is com-
Conjunctival pedicle flap
pleted using diluted povidone-iodine solution (not
scrub), and a similar solution can be used to flush
Conjunctival flaps adhere quickly to the cornea,
the conjunctival sac:
and as well as offering physical support, they bring
with them a blood supply that delivers leucocytes,
Eyelid preparation: povidone-iodine diluted to
nutrients, antibodies and anticollagenases.
give a 1% v /v solution
The conjunctival flap must be as thin as possible,
 Conjunctival sac: povidone-iodine diluted to give
and have no tension on it. This makes breakdown
a 0.2% v/v solution.
less likely, and is more comfortable for the patient.
To create a pedicle flap the conjunctiva is incised
2 mm from the limbus, and then the flap is elevated
Temporary tarsorrhaphy following proptosis
by blunt dissection and advanced to cover the
The eye is first returned to the orbit. To enable this
corneal deficit. The graft is sutured in place using
it is sometimes necessary to perform a lateral
 7/0 or 9/0 Vicryl suture material (see Figure 17.12)
18
Cardiopulmonary Arrest
and Resuscitation
Introduction
fore be given to whether CPR is appropriate for all,
with maybe those patients arresting as a result of
Whenever a patient goes into cardiopulmonary
reversible causes being those on which CPR is per-
arrest (CPA) it is a very stressful situation for the
formed. Table 18.1 lists the common causes of CPA.
entire practice team. This stress can be minimised,
When CPA does occur it is vital to identify the
as much as is possible, by ensuring all staff have a
underlying cause, so that it can be treated appro-
priately. A useful tool that can be used in veterinary
tation (CPR) process and have been well prepared.
medicine is the 6 H's and 6 T's (see Table 18.2).
Access to the correct equipment and skills
are
Ruling out these factors can help assist the clinician
essential and provision should be made to ensure
in identifying the cause of CPA, which will be nec-
all equipment is quickly at hand and that staff are
essary in order to gain a favourable outcome.
involved in regular mock CPR sessions to ensure
their skills are up-to-date. Full CPA can be defined
as the sudden cessation of spontaneous and effec-
Immediate recognition
tive respiration and circulation. CPR provides cir-
culatory and respiratory support; this takes place
A rapid triage assessment of any unresponsive
whilst efforts are made to produce the return of
animal is essential for recognising CPA. Anticipa-
spontaneous circulation with the ultimate goal of
tion and recognition of patients who present to the
recovering a neurologically intactpatient. Although
hospital with a high risk for CPA will allow you to
published survival rates in veterinary patients fol-
identify an arrest as it occurs, or catch patients in
lowing CPR are low (around 5-10%), it is obvious
a pre-arrest state. Even though CPA carries a poor
from studies that patients fall into two categories:
progmosis, recognising both reversible and
lirre
those that arrest due to irreversible causes (i.e. as
versible causes will help guide resuscitation efforts
the end stage of their disease) and those that have
toward the best possible outcome and the early
reversible causes such as anaesthetic overdose or
recognition of CPA cases will improve the outcome
electrolyte imbalance. Consideration should there
for the patient.
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
190 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 18.1(
Common causes of cardiopulmonary arrest
(CPA)
Cardiac disease
Pulmonary disease
Multi-system trauma
Upper airway obstruction
Traumatic brain injury
Sepsis
Coagulopathies
Severe anaemia
Hypovolaemia
Hypotension
Hypoxia
Acidosis
Cardiac arrhythmias
Hypoglycaemia
Electrolyte abnormalities
Figure 18.1Cardiopulmonary arrest in a Cavalier King
Hypothermia
Charles Spaniel. Note the presence of dilated, unresponsive
Anaesthetic complications
pupils.
Cardiac tamponade
Tension pneumothorax
Thrombosis of the coronary/pulmonary arteries
respiratory rate, depth or pattern including agonal
Vasovagal syncope
respirations, agitation and vocalisation. The veteri-
 nary nurse is often vital in recognising these signs
and alerting all staff. Early recognition of CPA
will help prevent reversible CPA and facilitate
Table 18.2
The 6 H's and 6 T's
early CPR.
H's
T's
Tablets (drug
Early intervention
Hypovolaemia
overdose, accidents)
 Most veterinary patients will develop CPA due to
Hypoxia
Tamponade (cardiac)
progressive systemic illness, trauma or other pro-
Hydrogen ion - acidosis
Tension pneumothorax
cesses resulting in hospitalisation. The best method
Thrombosis, coronary
 to improve survival from CPA is to prevent it from
 Hyperkalaemia/
hypokalaemia
(ACS)
occurring in the first place. Successful CPR relies
on good preparation and teamwork; this involves
 Hypothermia
Thrombosis,
early 1
recognition of, and a quick response to,
pulmonary (embolism)
impending arrest. Nurses often have a critical role
Hypoglycaemia and other
Trauma
 in this care as they spend the majority of the time
metabolic disorders
with the patients at risk, so their observations can
ACS, acute coronary syndrome.
make all the difference in vital situations.
Ideally, there should be access to a well-stocked
crash box, containing all the likely
awdmba
 required to run a successful resuscitation attempt
Impending CPA includes a variety of sigms that
(see Table 18.3). One member of the team should
differ depending on the species and the disease
have the responsibility of checking the crash
process. Common signs seen in the pre-arrest
trolley /box on a daily basis. Team members should
setting include altered mentation through uncon-
have practiced the necessary techniques on a
sciousness, bradycardia or high-risk tachyar-
regular basis so that CPCR can be commenced as
rhythmias, hypotension, hypothermia, dilated to
quickly as possible. Resources should include a
uresponsive pupils (see Figure 18.1), changes in
central treatment room/arrest station with a hard
Cardiopulmonary Arrest and Resuscitation   191
Table 18.3 Crash trolley contents
 Endotracheal tubes (range of sizes 2.5-14 mm)
Ambu bag
Anaesthetic breathing systems
Laryngoscope
Suction device
Assorted intravenous catheters
Assorted hypodermic needles
Lactated Ringer's solution
Pressure bag for rapid infusion of fluids
50% dextrose solution
Adhesive tape
Polyurethane urinary catheters
Three-way taps
Tracheostomy tubes (range of sizes)
Tracheostomy kit
 Chest drains
Thoracostomy kit
Clippers
4% chlorhexidine gluconate or 10% povidone-iodine
70% surgical spirit
Electrocardiogram monitor, leads, clips and conduction gel
Figure 18.2  Crash trolley.
Defibrillator
 Emergency drugs, e.g adrenaline, atropine
Sterile gauze swabs
 If additional personnel are available, the following
Suture material
Bandage materials
additional roles may be assigmed:
4)
 Drug administrator
5)
Recorder.
surfaced table, stools for compressors to stand on,
crash trolley with consumables and medications,
The team leader is the individual directing the
Oxygen, airway and ventilatory equipment, elec-
CPR process. The compressor is responsible for
trocardiography (ECG) with or without defibrilla-
chest compressions and should rotate every 2
tion, monitoring equipment, protocol flow charts
minutes with the breather to prevent tiredness and
and drug dose charts (see Figure 18.2). Maintain
ineffective technique. The breather is responsible
equipment and supplies with a daily checklist.
for ventilations and should rotate every 2 minutes
CPR'practice' sessions are essential in having a
withthe
compressor.
The drug administrator
well-rehearsed, coordinated team; sessions should
draws up and administers drugs as directed by
be carried out on a regular basis so any weaknesses
the leader, and should anticipate needs and draw
can be identified.
up drugs that may be required in advance. The
recorder maintains a record of everything that
is done including timing, monitors cycles of CPR
The resuscitation team
(every 2 minutes) and arnounces the end of each
cycle, and keeps track of frequency of drug admin-
A CPR requires a team of individuals operating
istration, suggesting when administration should
efficiently and with excellent communication.A
occur.
minimum of two personnel is required for effective
Effective communication is essential for a suc-
CPR. The ideal team consists of:
cessful resuscitation effort.  Roles of all team
members must be clearly defined.A leader must
1)
 Team leader
be identified immediately, and subsequently
2)
 Compressor
quickly assigns roles to the other team members.
3)
Breather.
Clarity of communication is another key concept.
192 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
All messages should be specifically directed at an
individual, and requests should be clearly and suc-
cinctly stated. Orders should not given ‘to the
room', but directed at an individual, with that indi-
vidual responding that he /she understands.
Early CPR
 Resuscitation at the cellular level requires oxygen
delivery to the vital organs. In recent years the
sequence of Airway-Breathing-Circulation has
 been changed to Circulation-Airway-Breathing in
all but known asphyxial causes. This allows for
compressions to be initiated earlier on; this is vital
when faced with a difficult airway or gathering
Figure 18.3 The use of a Doppler probe to detect pulsatile
blood flow in the eye.
supplies. Supporting arguments for this change in
sequence to C-A-B state that during low blood
flow states such as CPR, oxygen delivery to the
Tab[e 18.4
 Basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation procedure
heart and brain is limited by blood flow rather than
by arterial oxygen content. Therefore, compres-
 Push hard and fast - depress one-third chest diameter,
 sions are more important than ventilations during
at least 1 00 compressions/minute
the first few minutes of resuscitation. Additionally.
Allow complete chest recoil
Minimise interruptions in compressions - not more than
chest compressions cause air to be expelled and
every 2 minutes, <10 second duration
 Oxygen to be drawn in passively through the elastic
Rotate compressors every 2 minutes
recoil of the chest. This, in theory, may help main-
30: 2 (compression to ventilation) ratio until advanced
airway in place
tive pressure ventilation can be initiated. Routine
Avoid excessive ventilation rates - 8-10 breaths/minute
pulse checks have been de-emphasised due to the
(every 6-8 seconds)
difficulty in assessing the absence or presence of
pulses, even for experienced personnel. Any delays
for pulse checks should be no longer than 10
 seconds. Checking for pulses during compressions
is not indicated. Remember that the lack of valves
in the inferior vena cava allows retrograde blood
flow within the venous system and therefore may
produce pulsations that have no clinical relevance.
 One useful technique for assessing pulses during
CPR is to place a well-lubricated Doppler probe on 
the cornea, as this, along with ECG monitoring.
will help detect the return of spontaneous circula-
tion (ROSC) (see Figure 18.3).
Figure 18.4 Chest compressions in a feline patient, using
The guidelines in Table 18.4 have been formu-
the cardiac pump technique.
lated to optimise blood flow with the intent of per-
fusing the heart and brain. During CPR efforts,
 cardiac output is approximately 25-33% of normal,
(cardiac pump theory) between the ribs (see Figure
 SO optimising compressions is important. Com-
18.4). In larger patients, forward blood flow is
pressions are performed using two different
related to changes in intrathoracic pressure that
methods based on patient size. In smaller patients
is transmitted to the major vessels (thoracic pump
(<7kg), it is feasible to directly compress the heart
theory).
Cardiopulmonary Arrest and Resuscitation   193
Figure 18.5 'Barrel' chested breeds should be placed in
Figure 18.7  Even pressure should be applied using the heel
dorsal recumbency for cardiac massage.
of one or both hands.
through the heel of your hand (see Figure 18.7).
Compressors will probably have to stand on a foot-
compressions effectively. ‘Push hard and fast'
means a 1:1 ratio of compression to relaxation,
allowing for complete chest recoil. Incomplete
chest recoil has been associated with increased
intrathoracic pressure and decreased perfusion.
Compressions should be performed in 2-minute
cycles with the break in between each cycle <10
 seconds. This break time is used for checking
pulses, ECG assessment, defibrillation or perform-
ing a difficult intubation or catheter placement.
After each 2-minute cycle, rotate compressors.
Fatigue is commonly seen in compressions per-
formed by a person for longer than a 2-minute
cycle, which leads to decreased effectiveness.
Interposed abdominal compression is a three-
rescuer technique that includes conventional chest
Figure 18.6 The elbows should remain “locked' during
compressions combined with alternating abdom-
'aiy luans Aldde oi japio ui alesse reipien 
inal compressions. The dedicated rescuer who
provides manual abdominal compressions will
Place your patient on a rigid surface, generally
compress the abdomen midway between the
in lateral recumbency, and supported as needed
 xiphoid and the umbilicus during the relaxation
to provide a stable compression surface. Dorsal
phase of chest compression. Hand position, depth,
recumbent positions may be used dependent upon
rhythm and rate of abdominal compressions are
a patient's chest conformation (see Figure 18.5). For
similar to those for chest compressions. This tech-
small patients, place your hands directly over the
 nique has been shown to increase aortic diastolic
heart for compressons at a rate of at least 100/
pressure and venous return, resulting in improved
minute. In larger animals, hand position is at the
coronary perfusion pressure. It is a viable tech-
widest part of the thorax, lock your elbows (see
nique to use in veterinary patients when an extra
Figure 18.6). This is important to ensure maximal
dedicated person is available and all are well
pressure is applied) and apply even pressure
trained in performing it. This technique should not
194 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
at any time impair the quality of two-person CPR
and is contraindicated with abdominal diseases,
 trauma or recent surgery.
 In open-chest CPR, the heart is accessed through
an emergency thoracotomy and compression is
performed using thumb and fingers or two hands,
at a rate of up to 150/minute. Use of this technique
generates forward blood flow and coronary perfu-
sion pressure that typically exceeds those gener-
ated by closed chest compressions. This technique
is indicated and may be the superior technique for
CPA involving pericardial tamponade, pleural
space disease, penetrating chest injuries or any
chest wall trauma, giant breed dogs or recent tho-
Hal a ie si yoeoidde Aouaiaua aui iams pioe
sixth intercostal space and using rib spreaders
to maintain access. An approach through the dia-
 phragm is available during abdominal surgery.
Excessive ventilation has been shown to have a
detrimental effect, resulting in increased intratho-
racic pressure and decreased perfusion. Because
cardiac output is lower than normal during cardiac
arrest, the need for ventilation is reduced. Until
 an endotracheal tube or other advanced airway is
Figure 18.8 Circle system with pressure gauge in place.
established, ventilate at two breaths following 30
compressions and maintain that ratio. Deliver a
tidal volume sufficient to produce a visible chest
in the oesophagus. Rescue breathing post resusci-
rise, each breath is given over 1 second. Once an
tation should be initiated at 10-12 per minute
advanced airway is in place, ventilate at a rate of
(every 5-6 seconds). While basic CPR is the foun-
 8-10 breaths per minute (every 6-8 seconds) using
dation of resuscitation, it is one part in the entire
100% oxygen, without a pause in compressions.
m  d   is go 
Hyperventilation should be avoided as this can
 members have pre-planned tasks for performing
result in cerebral and coronary vasoconstriction
additional therapies is necessary. This enables
and worsens ischaemia. When ventilating with
adding advanced life support measures and inter-
a pressure gauge, do not exceed 20cmHO (see
ventions without compromising high-quality CPR.
Figure 18.8).
The advanced airway of choice is still an endo-
tracheal tube; however, with the new regulations
Monitoring during basic life support and
we are challenged with intubating patients in
advanced life support
 lateral recumbency during compressions. If unable
to do so, delay intubation until the end of a 2-minute
Monitoring modalities during CPR fulfils multiple
compression cycle and then intubate within the
purposes:
10-second time limit. Preparation of supplies and
 a team approach will make this possible. Confir-
11
 Assessing the patient's response to CPR
mation of the airway can be made by bilateral tho-
2
Assessing the quality of CPR delivered by the
racic and stomach auscultation, visualisation of
rescuer(s)
tube in the trachea, direct palpation via the oro-
3）
 Triggering advanced life support interventions
pharynx or capnometry. Neck palpation of ‘two
such as defibrillation
tubes' indicates probable oesophageal intubation,
4
the trachea and the endotracheal tube positioned
51
 Recognising retum of spontaneous circulation
Cardiopulmonary Arrest and Resuscitation   195
31
Avoid ‘leaning' on the patient, i.e. allow
the chest to expand fully following each
compression
4）
 Avoid hyperventilation, to limit the duration 
of positive intrathoracic pressure
5）
Change compressor every 2 minutes to avoid
fatigue-related deterioration of chest compres-
sion quality
6
 Minimise interruptions in chest compressions
7
 If ETCO2 is <15mmHg despite optimal CPR
technique, try a different CPR method, e.g.
Figure 18.9 The use of end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) monitoring
open chest CPR
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
8
 If ETCO2 remains <10mmHg despite optimal
CPR, discontinuation of the
 resuscitation
 attempt should be considered.
6）
 Suggesting continuation or discontinuation of
ETCO2 is a very sensitive indicator of ROSC and
the resuscitation effort.
spontaneous circulation.
There is unfortunately no one method of moni-
The ECG allows the diagnosis of the arrest
toring CRP that can fulfil all the above goals. The
rhythm, the most common being asystole, pulsel-
 most useful equipment available is capnography
ess electrical activity (PEA) and ventricular fibril-
 and the electrocardiogram.
lation (VF) /ventricular tachycardia (VT). The ECG
If patients are intubated, and being manually
 is therefore used as a basis for decisions regarding
ventilated, capnography is a useful tool in assess-
medical management requirements and/or defi-
ing the efficacy of CPR. End-tidal CO2 (ETCO2)
brillation (if available).
values provide a very close estimate of the alveolar
CO2 partial pressure (VCO2), which in turn is
determined by the CO2 production, pulmonary
Effective advanced life support
capillary blood flow (cardiac output) and CO2
elimination (alveolar ventilation). ETCO2 can be
Advanced life support therapies are meant to
used as a measure of thoracic compression gener-
enhance basic life support efforts and improve the
ated pulmonary blood flow, and therefore the effi-
chance of successful resuscitation. These therapies
cacy of CRP in generating blood flow to the brain
include intravenous (IV) or intraosseous (IO) cath-
and heart (see Figure 18.9). This is not quite that
eterisation, ECG rhythm interpretations to guide
straightforward as there are other variables, such
drug therapy in addition to defibrillation, advanced
as the amount of ventilation delivered.
1.Ideally,
airway
 management, physiological monitoring
minute ventilation should be administered
lata
and any other therapies tailored to a specific cause
constant rate to make the best use of ETCO2 as a
of a cardiac arrest patient.
Obtaining venous access in patients in CPA can
an ETCO2 <10mmHg is 100% predictive for non-
be challenging
pue
time-consuming. Access is
survival. In a veterinary study by Hofmeister et al.
usually limited due to ongoing compressions and
they found only 6% of dogs with peak ETCO2
the patient's state of vascular collapse. If IV access
<15mmHg achieved ROSC.
is not obtained quickly, IO access should be
The following is therefore suggested as a guide-
pursued. In general, this means 1-2 attempts at IV
line for CPR if ETCO2 is <15mmHg:
the market, IO access is quick and easy for any
1）
 Push harder
sized patient and provides access to a non-
Push faster, with the aim of 100-120
collapsible venous plexus, enabling drug delivery
compressions/minute
similar to that achieved by peripheral venous
196 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
Table 18.5 Recommended drugs for inclusion in the crash
post-arrest patients should be avoided and passive
trolley or box
re-warming caried out at a rate no faster than
0.5°C/hour.
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
The period of hypoxia and ischaemia, no matter
Atropine sulphate
Calcium gluconate (1 0%)
how short, will result in metabolic acidosis and
Dobutamine
reperfusion injury to multiple organ systems.
Dopamine
Treatment for cerebral oedema and seizures is
Lidocaine
often necessary, careful monitoring of CNS signs
Mannitol
(mentation), heart rate and rhythm (ECG), periph-
Naloxone
eral pulse including arterial blood pressure mea-
Sodium bicarbonate
Magnesium sulphate/chloride
surement and palpation, packed cell volume, total
protein/solids, arterial blood gas and acid-base
parameters, electrolytes and urine production are
all essential. Patients should be carefully moni-
access at comparable doses. Intratracheal access is
tored for seizures and aggressively treated if they
no longer recommended due to unreliable absorp-
occur. Mechanical ventilation may be required for
tion; however, it may still be used if IV or IO access
many hours post-resuscitation in order to gain a
is not available - when this route is used the dose
successful outcome, and so the process of monitor-
 should be doubled. Drugs given via a peripheral
 ing these patients is very demanding.
IV site should be followed with a 0.9% saline flush
of 2-20ml, depending on patient size, to facilitate
movement into the central circulation. Routine use
Drugs in CPR
 of crystalloid fluid boluses is no longer recom-
 mended unless hypovolemia is a pre-existing
In small animal veterinary patients, the most
condition or there is ongoing volume loss during
common initial ECG rhythm is PEA, formerly
resuscitation. Studies have shown that excessive
kmown as electromechanical dissociation - 23% of
fluid resuscitation can actually decrease perfusion.
arrests. Also regularly seen is asystole (22%) and
See Table 18.5 for the suggested drugs to be avail-
ventricular fibrillation (19%). Sinus bradycardia in
able for CPR in the 'crash trolley'.
19% of the time. Atropine is an anti-cholinergic that
counteracts the high vagal tone decreases in heart
Integrated post-cardiac arrest care
rate and atrioventricular nodal conduction seen in
 CPA. Atropine is still recommended for symptom-
In the post-cardiac arrest phase, the chance of re-
atic sinus bradycardia. The past doses recom-
arrest is high (68% in dogs, 37% in cats). Post-
 mended for PEA and asystole are 0.02-0.04 mg/kg
resuscitation requires intensive monitoring and
IV or IO every 3-5 minutes up to three doses. The
aggressive supportive care. Maintaining adequate
dose for symptomatic bradycardia is usually 0.01-
ventilation and oxygenation can be achieved with
0.02 mg/kg IV. Vasopressors are used adjunctively
the use of monitoring waveform capnography,
in CPR to increase aortic and diastolic pressures
using caution not to hyperventilate
 and main-
 and therefore improve cerebral and myocardial
-ay aissa %a ts txo 
perfusion pressures. They are indicated in PEA,
capnia in the post-resuscitation phase is
not
asystole and refractory VF. Adrenaline (epineph-
recommended. Hypotension is treated with IV or
rine) is still most commonly used primarily because
 IO boluses of the appropriate fluid choices and
vasopressors.
     
Therapeutic hypothermia (32-34°C) used in the
pressures during CPR. The safety of adrenaline
first 12-24 hours post-resuscitation may improve
remains
controversial because of the beta-
neurological outcome. The efficacy of therapeutic
hypothermia in improving neurological outcome
demand. Based on this, dosing has changed back
following ischaemic brain injury in both humans
to using low doses at 0.01-0.02mg/kg IV or IO.
and dogs has been proven. Active re-warming of
Continued use at 3-5 minute intervals is still
Cardiopulmonary Arrest and Resuscitation  197
recommended. Vasopressin is an alternative vaso-
1)
 To facilitate an evidence review of the current
 pressor currently recommended. It works via direct
literature on veterinary CPR
stimulation of receptors in vascular smooth muscle,
21
To derive a draft set of clinical guidelines
has no beta-adrenergic effects and also retains
for veterinary CPR based on the evidence
effectiveness in the acidic and hypoxic environ-
review
ment of CPA where adrenaline will lose its vaso-
3
To collate and incorporate feedback from the
constrictor  effects. For t
these reasons 
AHA
veterinary community at large and develop a
guidelines list vasopressin as an acceptable alter-
set of consensus CPR guidelines
native to adrenaline. Vasopressin may be used in
4
To disseminate these consensus, evidence-
place of, or alternated, with adrenaline doses. The
based veterinary CPR guidelines widely.
dose is 0.2-0.8 IU/kg IV or IO every 3-5 minutes.
Anti-arrhythmics, in general, have not been
The RECOVER website is regularly updated with
shown to increase chance of survival when used
the latest CPR guidelines.
for VF or pulseless VT refractory to defibrillation.
Amiodarone is an anti-arrhythmic that showed
promise in certain clinical trials; however, is not
Further reading
viable in the veterinary seting. There are two IV
formulations of the drug: one has vasoactive sol-
Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
 vents that cause hypotension and bradycardia
Critical Care for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd edition.
unless delivered as a very slow infusion and the
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
other, without these solvents, is cost-prohibitive.
Boller, M. (2011) CPR Continuum of Care. 17th Interma-
Lidocaine is an anti-arrhythmic that is widely
 tional Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Sympo-
kmown and used. It is thought to decrease the fibril-
sium 2011, Pp. 329-32.
lation threshold; however, it may increase the inci-
Boller, M. (2011) Post-Resuscitation Monitoring. 17th
dence of asystole after defibrillation. It is only
 Intermational Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
recommended for VF refractory to electrical defi-
Symposium 2011, pp. 333-7.
Fletcher, D.J. (2011) Advances in CPR: Guidelines and
brillation and in the absence of amiodarone. The
Simulations for Educational and Clinical Training.
dosage is 2-4mg/kg IV or IO (cats 0.2mg/kg).
17th International Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Magnesium sulphate is recommended only
in
 Care Symposium 2011, p. 43-6.
the presence of torsades de pointes which is a
Hofmeister, E.H., Brainard, B.M., Egger, C.M., et al.
polymorphic VT with a prolonged QT interval.
(2009) Prognostic indicators for dogs and cats with
Amiodarone and lidocaine are most useful as anti-
Areoundopres Aq paiean isate Areuoundopen
arrhythmics in the post-arrest setting. Routine use
cerebral resuscitation at a university teaching hospital.
of either calcium gluconate or sodium bicarbonate
fournal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
is not recommended in CPA. However, in certain
235(1): 50-7.
situations involving pre-existing metabolic acido-
King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine
and Feline Emergency and Critical Care, 2nd edition.
sis, hyperkalaemia or tricyclic antidepressant over-
BSAVA, Gloucester.
dose, sodium bicarbonate can be beneficial.
MacIntyre, D.K., Drobatz, K.J., Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
 For the latest information regarding emergency
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
drug dosages and charts see the RECOVER (Reas-
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
sessment Campaign on Veterinary Resuscitation)
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
website. The RECOVER initiative has been created
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
with the following goals:
19
Nursing Considerations in the
Critical Patient
Introduction
for each patient (see Table 19.1). These plans look
at the requirements for that individual patient and
Veterinary nurses are a vital component in the
take into account that patient's specific needs.
management and ultimately the outcome of criti-
 These needs include physical, physiological and
 cally ill patients. Nurses working in emergency
psychological aspects of patient care. Such nurs-
and critical care (ECC) need to have a broad knowl-
-ambar s,juaned aut lle amsua o djay sueld Su
edge of both medical and surgical disorders as well
 ments are dealt with and that important aspects of
as understanding the potential complications that
yons jo sipadse Auen uanoioy iou ane ane
may arise. Nurses are responsible for the majority
o pno pans aq ci Al ane seld ars smu
of the monitoring and
reassessment of these
a u imq aon, a jo pd se sisq ep e
patients and have a vital role in the detection of
midst of drug orders, reassessment of parameters
deterioration and complications that could prove
etc., some aspects of nursing and patient care
life-threatening if not identified as early as possible
may be overlooked. Considerations include the
in the treatment plan. Nurses should take an active
following:
role in amending treatment plans, liaising with vet-
Evaluation of the nursing goals. Have these
Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the monitoring and
changed since the previous plan?
reassessment of these patients, and the techniques
 Provision of analgesia - use of pain scoring to
that may be used.
assess level of pain. See website documents:
CSU pain scoring charts.
Fluids ‘ins' and ‘outs' and whether these are
Nursing considerations and planning
adequate.
 Nutritional
1 requirements - is daily resting
Due to the amount of monitoring required in
u f pe ja aa () aaxa ra
nursing critical patients, it is both useful and
how can this be achieved?
important to create an individual nursing care plan
●Faecal output?
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Nursing Considerations in the Critical Patient 199
Table 19.1  General nursing care technique in emergency and critical care
 Basic nursing monitoring 
 Advanced nursing monitoring
Heart rate, pulse rate and quality, capillary refilltime,
 Blood pressure measurement continuous or every
mucous membrane colour every 2-12 hours
2-12 hours
Central venous pressure monitoring every 2-6 hours
hours
Rectal temperature every 4-12 hours
Continuous or intermittent ECG; note dysrhythmias
Measure or note urine output, or palpate bladder every 2-6
Pulse oximetry continuous or every 2-12 hours
hours
Mentation/Small Animal Coma Score every 2-6 hours (unless
End-tidal capnography continuous or every 2-12 hours
specific case, e.g. head trauma)
Note any regurgitation, vomiting or faeces production every
ou t a sie s i 
2-6 hours
 Assess adequacy of analgesia every 2-4 hours
Electrolyte measurement every 4-24 hours
Walk ambulatory patients, or turn recumbent patients every
4 hours
hours
Lubricate eyes if patient sedated/unable to blink every 2-4
 Check, clean and suction tracheostomy tube every 2-4
hours
hours
Check oxygen supplementation requirements,if necessary,
Aspirate chest drains every 24 hours, record volume
every 24 hours
of air and/or fluid removed
Check intravenous fluid type and rate every 2 hours
Record mechanical ventilator settings, airway pressure
 and tidal volume every 2 hours
Check patency of intravenous catheters and flush with
Peritoneal dialysis: infuse dialysate, dwell and drain
heparinised saline every 4-6 hours
every 1-2 hours, record volumes and quality of fluid
obtained
Check bandages for position, tightness and cleanliness every
4-6 hours, replace if necessary
Offer food and water (specify type and calculate RER) and
record volume ingested as directed/dictated by method of
feeding
RER, resting energy expenditure.
 Mental stimulation? Visits from owners, time
large volumes of crystalloids, colloids or blood
for tender loving care (TLC), outdoor access,
products. Itis vital to measure fluids in and out over
etc.
a period of time and the veterinary nurse should
Wound care, dressing changes, stoma care.
understand the period of time that these products
 Review asepsis and risk of hospital-acquired
are likely to be present in the patient's circulation
nfections.
before moving into the interstitium, or before being
broken down in the kidneys and passed out in the
urine (see Chapter 2 for more details). Fluid 'ins' can
Fluid balance
include water consumption, nutrition and paren-
teral fluids; fluid 'outs' include urine, faeces, vomit,
Many critical patients have an altered fluid balance.
wound drainage, third space losses. Patients should
Depending on theindividual case, they often receive
be weighed twice daily as an assessment of fluid
200  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
loss and gain, and this information can be used in
Intravenous catheters
combination with clinical examination and PCV/
TP to estimate fluid balance. See Chapter 2 for more
 Intravenous catheters (both peripheral and central)
information on fluid therapy and fluid balance.
should be placed aseptically, flushed every 4-6
hours, the dressing removed, the insertion site
checked for extravasation of fluid and infection,
Nutritional status
and dressing replaced once or twice daily. Once
the catheter is no longer required it should be
The nutritional status of the patient is a major con-
removed. If venous access is required at a later
sideration that should be addressed on a daily
time, another catheter can be placed. The date of
basis. Body weight, body condition score and
catheter insertion should be noted on the patient's
disease processes should all be taken into consid-
records and/or hospital sheet, and administration
eration when assessing the patient's nutritional
sets should be replaced every time a new catheter
requirements. The patient's daily RER should be
 is placed. Cormectors and injection ports should be
calculated and an estimate made as to whether the
swabbed with alcohol and allowed to dry before
patient is voluntarily consuming the requirement.
being used. Infections can be minimised by keep-
If not, then techniques to achieve this should
ing intravenous fluid lines as closed systems and
be considered, including appetite stimulants or
keeping disconnections to a minimum. See Chapter
assisted feeding techniques such as feeding tube
2 for more information on vascular access includ-
placement.
ing catheter care. See website documents: Hospi-
 Ensuring adequate nutrition is vital in the critical
talisation sheets.
patient and should be initiated as early as possible
in the hospitalised patient. See Chapter 16 for more
details.
Chest drains
Chest drains should be aspirated every 24 hours.
Care of indwelling catheters and tubes
Aseptic technique should be used whenever tubes
are handled, particularly for aspiration, and when
 Commonly, the critical patient will have numerous
 handling connection points, e.g. three-way taps.
indwelling tubes and drains, and it is vital that
 If a dressing was applied it should be removed
these devices are correctly managed and cared for
ideally twice, but certainly once daily, and stoma
 Patients hospitalised within the ICU are at highest
sites inspected for signs of infection. The area
risk of developing hospital-acquired infections,
around the stoma should be gently cleaned using
because of the presence of indwelling devices and
a dilute chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine solu-
decreased immune systems so correct protocols for
tion. Previously it was recommended that anti-
their care are vital. When handing devices, asepsis
biotic cream should be used around the stoma
should always be maintained, patency must be
site, but this is no longer recommended because
maintained to ensure catheters, drains, feeding
 of the incidence of multi-drug resistance becom-
tubes, etc. can function correctly, and complica-
 ng increasingly common, including resistance to
tions must be kept to a minimum. Additionally.
topically applied antibiotics, e.g. mupirocin. In-
bandages should be changed twice daily
asa
 stead, topical anti-microbial dressings, e.g. honey,
 minimum and the insertion or stoma sites checked
silver, polyhexamethylene biguanide (PHMB) are
for signs of redness, swelling, infection, etc. It is
recommended.
 also advisable to label these bandages so incorrect
medications are not administered into tubes or
catheters. Aseptic technique should be strictly
Tracheostomy tubes
adhered to whenever dealing with indwelling
devices. Ideally, sterile gloves, but certainly exami-
Twenty-four hour care is essential in patients with
 nation gloves should be worn throughout catheter
tracheostomy tubes in place as potentially fatal
and drain care procedures.
occlusion of the tube by exudate, mucus, bed-
Nursing Considerations in the Critical Patient  201
Figure 19.1   Blocked tracheostomy tube - the patient
presented to the surgery following a tracheostomy at the
referring practice. The tracheostomy tube was almost
completely blocked.
ding or skin folds may occur, as well as tube
dislodgement (see Figure 19.1). If present, the
inner cannula of the tube should be removed for
cleaning whenever an increased noise or effort
in respiration is detected, or initially every 2 hours
post-placement. The cannula should be cleaned
thoroughly using warm water, allowed to air dry
and then replaced. For tracheostomy tubes without
Figure 19.2  Nebulisation of a pneumonia patient.
an inmer carmula, the entire tube should be removed
for cleaning. Ideally, a spare sterile tracheostomy
tube should be available for immediate replace-
ment into the trachea following the removal of the
dirty tube. The stay sutures above and below the
tracheal incision should be used to gently bring
the trachea to the level of the skin and to open the
trachea.
Humidification  If the inner cannula or lumen of
the tracheostomy tube is repeatedly full of exudate
or mucous, then either nebulised air should be
used for periods for the animal to inhale (see Figure
19.2), or 0.1 mg/kg sterile saline should be instilled
Figure 19.3 Suctioning of tracheostomy tube.
into the tube every 2 hours (the instillation of the
tube may initiate transient coughing).
the suction tube. The suction catheter should
Suction  Suction of the tracheostomy tube should
remain within the tube during suctioning and only
be performed only as required. It is required more
inserted into the delicate trachea if absolutely
frequently in smaller dogs and cats (see Figure
necessary to clear an obstruction distal to the tra-
19.3). The patient should be pre-oxygenated for
cheostomy tube.
30-60 seconds before suction is performed. A sterile
The tracheostomy stoma should be inspected at
suction catheter should be introduced aseptically
least once, preferably twice, daily. The area should
into the tracheostomy tube and suction applied for
 be gently cleaned using sterile saline-soaked swabs.
no more than 10 seconds, whilst gently rotating
 If the above measures do not relieve breathing
202 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
difficulties then the entire tube should be changed.
 again post-feeding using 5-10ml lukewarm water,
 It is important that a veterinary surgeon is on-hand
to maintain a column of water within the tube
and the ability to perform endotracheal intubation 
between feeds to minimise blockages. If tubes do
and oxygen administration are readily available.
 become blocked they may be umblocked by using
The patient should be pre-oxygenated and the 
carbonated drinks, pineapple or cranberry juice to
trachea stabilised using the stay sutures around the
clear the blockage.
 tracheal rings, above and below the tracheostomy
site. The existing tube should be removed and a
new tube rapidly inserted.
Urinary catheters
Urinary catheters must be placed aseptically and
Feeding tubes
maintained as hygienically as possible to try to
minimise the incidence of infection. Before place-
For naso-oesophageal and nasogastric tubes, the
ment the prepuce or vulva should be flushed with
patient's nares should be cleaned using damp
a dilute chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine solu-
cotton wool twice daily. Oesophagostomy and
tion, and then the prepuce or vulva should be
gastrotomy tubes should be inspected and have
cleaned in the same marmner on a daily basis. The
the stoma site cleaned using chlorhexidine or
catheter should be handled aseptically and discon-
 povidone-iodine solution at least once, preferably
nections kept to a minimum to reduce the risk of
twice daily. As with intravenous catheters, antibi-
contamination. All connection sites should be
otic cream should no longer be applied around the
wiped using alcohol, and allowed to dry, before
stoma site and a topical antimicrobial dressing
and after handling. The external catheter should be
applied instead (see Figure 19.4). All tubes should
wiped in antiseptic solution four times daily and
be flushed before feeding using 5-10 ml lukewarm
the catheter removed as soon as it is no longer
water. Gastrostomy tubes should have the contents
required to minimise the risk of infection. Collec-
of the stomach aspirated before feeding. If there is
tion systems should be below the level of the
a delay in gastric emptying, and there is more than
patient at all times (see Figure 19.5).
half the previous feed in the stomach, then the
veterinary surgeon should be informed and the
meal reduced. In this situation motility modifiers
Nursing the recumbent patient
may be considered. The tube should be flushed
There are numerous reasons why a patient may be
recumbent and the nursing care of these cases can
be challenging for several reasons.
 Maintaining proper body position and care with
patients who are recumbent for prolonged periods
Figure 19.4 Antimicrobial dressing in situ in a gastrotomy
tube stoma.
Figure 19.5 Gastrostomy tube in place.
Nursing Considerations in the Critical Patient 203
Figure 19.6  Recumbent patient - this patient is receiving a
Figure 19.7   Decubitus ulcer formation in a recumbent
propofol continuous rate infusion to control its seizures.
patient.
is very important. Limbs and joints should be
exchange. The use of pulse oximetry is particularly
maintained in a neutral position to avoid loss of
useful in these patients.
muscle fibres which will be lost at a higher rate in
Decubitus ulcer (pressure sore) formation is
 a shortened position (see Figure 19.6). Providing
another concern in the recumbent patient. Patients
 padding under and in between joints is important
who lie or sit in one position for prolonged periods
to maintain air circulation to prevent moisture
of time are at risk of developing decubitus ulcers.
build up and pressure sores. Patient positioning is
 Their early appearance is erythema, oedema and
an important consideration as it is vital to maxi-
tenderness, which is followed by serum exudation
mise oxygen exchange. The patient's body position
and hair loss. Ischaemic necrosis results in rapid
should be alternated between left lateral, right
loss of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. Patients
lateral and sternal recumbency. This change in
should be assessed daily for any signs of ulcer
position should be carried out at least every 4
formation. Patients with decubitus ulcers are at
hours, ideally every 2 hours, and this position
risk of bacteraemia, with the potential risk of
changing schedule should be part of the patient's
infecting surgical wounds or surgical implants.
hospitalisation chart. This change in position is
Prevention of decubitus ulceration is much easier
important to decrease the secretions that will build
than its treatment. As written above, the patient
up in the dependent (lowest) lung field and will
should change position frequently (ideally every 2
also help to reduce the incidence of atelectasis.
hours), pressure relieving bedding should be pro-
 If this change in position is not carried out, and
vided, e.g. plastic covered mattress with at least
sometimes despite it being carried out, patients
10 nne wspaqaA oa Suippaq os jo rael auo 
may develop ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mis-
water beds can also be useful to reduce the inci-
match. V/Q mismatch occurs when the volume
dence of decubitus ulcer formation (see Figure
of circulating blood in the dependent lung field
19.7). It is vital that patients have sufficient bedding
increases, but the lung is unable to expand fully,.
between them and a hard surface. The bedding
therefore decreasing the ability to deliver well-
should be checked regularly to ensure it is clean
 Oxygenated blood to the body. If the patient has
and dry, particularly in non-ambulatory patients
a severely compromised lung field, they may
be
who do not have an indwelling catheter. VetbedTM
umable to tolerate a particular recumbency for
is ideal for these patients as urine is wicked away
extended periods of time. Close monitoring of the
from the patient to minimise urine scalding.
patient is vital, observing for increased respiratory
 Bladder care is another important consideration
rate and effort, and should this occur they should
in these patients. Some patients may have indwell-
be returned to a position that allows optimum gas
ing urinary catheters placed, which are attached to
204 Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
a closed collection system. The drainage bag on
the system must be emptied regularly. In non-
catheterised patients, manual expression may be
attempted, but it is also important to ensure
patients are consciously urinating and that urine
overflow is not occurring. This can be assessed by
palpating the abdomen to check the size of the
bladder following urination. In these patients
the application of a barrier film or cream (e.g.
Cavilon TM) to clean, dry skin is useful as it will help
 prevent urinary and also faecal scalding.
Faecal care is another consideration for the
recumbent patient. These patients may have de-
creased gastrointestinal motility, and they can
quickly become constipated. Hospitalisation charts
should note when faeces has been passed and if
 necessary enemas and laxative administration may
be required.
 It is important to perform standing or assisted
 standing exercises on recumbent patients to im-
Figure 19.8  Coupage being performed in a patient with
prove circulation, neuromuscular strength and
aspiration pneumonia.
proprioception.
and move cranially, gently striking the chest wall
in a rhythmic fashion (see Figure 19.8). Technique
 is much more important than force and should be
Eye and oral care
done at the level of the patient's comfort. Gener-
ally, this technique is most productive after stand-
Eye and oral care is important in all patients but
ing of walking exercises.
more so in the recumbent patient. The mouth
should be cleaned using mild oral antiseptic solu-
Vibration is a valuable technique used to assist
 the patient in mobilising secretions from the lower,
tion (e.g. diluted HexarinseTM) to reduce the bacte-
smaller airways into the larger airways to be
rial load and reduce the incidence of bacterial
coughed out. Vibration should be performed while
translocation to the chest and risk of pneumonia.
the patient is in lateral recumbency. With locked
The eyes should be cleaned regularly with sterile
arms vibrate the chest wall with the hands as the
saline, stained with fluorescein to check for ulcers
patient exhales. Perform vibration during 4-6
and a suitable eye lubricant applied. Many patients
 have reduced tear production or reduced blinking.
consecutive breaths. Percussion and vibration are
contraindicated in patients with rib fractures, chest
and so are at risk of ocular ulceration.
tubes, platelet count below 30,000, over open
wounds, or in animals with severe chest pain or
arrhythmias.
Coupage
Coupage is a useful technique for both the recum-
Embolus formation
bent and also the respiratory patient. It is an
extremely effective technique that utilises the
A potentially life-threatening complication that
percussive force of the hand to stimulate a cough
critical patients can develop is embolus formation.
response. It is performed by cupping the hands
Patients who are immobilised due to their critical
and placing them on both sides of the patient's
status are at a higher risk of thromboembolism.
chest. Begin at the caudal aspect of the lung fields
This is due to blood pooling in dependent regions
Nursing Considerations in the Critical Patient 205
creating erratic sedentary flow, circulation com-
promise due to injury and activation of clotting
factors due to inflammation. Rehabilitation and
physiotherapy techniques can help decrease the
need for heparin therapy or thrombus formation
during disseminated  intravascular coagulation.
Techniques such as standing or assisted standing.
massage and passive range of motion are a
all
extremely beneficial in resolving oedema and re-
establishing more normal blood flow.
Physiotherapy
Rehabilitation in the intensive care setting may
Figure 19.9  Recumbent patient demonstrating Schiff-
improve the animal's quality of life and reduce the
Sherrington posture.
complications associated with prolonged hospitali-
sation. The requirements should be determined on
an individual patient basis. The basic therapeutic
Pain management
modalities of massage, passive and active range of
motion exercises, postural drainage, therapeutic
Pain scoring should be performed to allow an
exercise, therapeutic ultrasound and electrical
stimulation can be used to decrease pain, improve
objective assessment of the patient. This is particu-
larly important when several members of staff may
furnction, maintain muscle tone, improve skin per-
be caring for the same patient. Nurses should be
fusion and reduce complications (e.g. oedema and
encouraged to communicate to the veterinarian in
decubitus ulcer formation).
charge of the animal if they think the analgesia
plan is not correct, and the hospital charts should
have provision to ensure regular pain scores are
Nursing the neurological patient
 performed. See Chapter 6 for more information on
analgesia.
These patients are commonly recumbent and so all
the above should be considered when nursing
these patients (see Figure 19.9). The re-assessment
Mental well-being
of these patients is vitally important in order to
determine deterioration or improvements in the
Another, often overlooked, consideration is that of
patient's condition. The Modified Glasgow Coma
the patient's mental well-being. Time should be set
Scale (or Small Animal Coma Scale) is useful in
aside for TLC and also to allow visits by the owners.
 both the initial and continuing assessments. Checks
 In the authors' hospital, pre-determined visiting
to be performed include assessment of mentation;
hours are built into the day and time slots are allo-
pupils; menace response; cranial nerve reflexes;
cated to the owners. If permitted, owners are able
pain sensation and withdrawal reflexes (see
 to feed and groom their animals and the time is
Chapter 14 for more detail). These checks should
taken to demonstrate physiotherapy and assisted
be carried out in combination with the usual basic
feeding techniques to the owners. Occasionally, a
 and advanced monitoring techniques, paying par-
patient is distressed by the owners' visits when
ticular attention to heart and pulse rate and sys-
they leave, and so in this situation the visits may
temic blood pressure which may indicate increased
be discouraged.
intracranial pressure and the secondary develop-
Rest is also important in the patient, particu-
ment of Cushing reflex.
larly in busy 24-hour hospitals. Lighting, barking,
206  Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing
infusion pump alarms and the general environ-
 Patients receiving antibiotic therapy, particu-
 ponad e anqissod anaum os pue Asiou aq uen juau
larly fluoroquinolones
of time should be provided whereby lights are
●Age (paediatric and geriatric patients are at
dimmed to allow the patients to rest. The timing of
greatest risk)
medications and feeds should also be taken into
Immumosuppressed patients
consideration to allow patients time to rest.
 Patients with open wounds
 Long-term hospitalised patients
Patients with owners who have had recent
healthcare contact.
Client communication
Awareness is vital in terms of reducing the
It is vital for clients to be kept up-to-date on every
risk of infection. Routine practices (hand hygiene,
aspect of their animal's condition and care. Time
risk reduction protocols, patient risk assessment
should be taken to ensure they have a thorough
and personnel education) are simple methods
umderstanding of the condition and much of the
of infection prevention that are very effective.
time it is the veterinary nurse who takes on this
The use of alcohol hand sanitisers should be
role. Part of this communication includes ensuring
Encouraged by placing them on each patient's
clients are aware of the ongoing costs of their pet's
kennel.
Alcohol solutions containing 60-95%
treatment, which can quickly become expensive
alcohol are most effective. These products are
during prolonged hospitalisation.
more effective at killing micro-organisms on the
hands than hand washing using antibacterial
soap (they are not as effective for the destruc-
Record keeping
tion of viruses, e.g. canine parvovirus, feline
panleukopaenia).
 Other risk reduction methods include wearing
The importance of accurate record keeping is vital
dedicated in-dlinic clothing that is laundered in
in ECC patients. This includes the patient's hospi
the practice. Examination gloves should always be
talisation charts, which need to be clear, legible and
instructional. The patient's clinical notes need to
worn when in contact with blood, body fluids,
be concise and regularly updated. In the authors'
secretions, excretions and mucous membranes, but
the use of gloves should not replace hand hygiene.
clinic they include details of all communications
 Gloves should be replaced following the handling
with owners including time spoken to owner
update of treatment and update of costs. Accurate
of a patient.
record keeping is vital in hospitals where several
Cleaning is an important aspect of infection
nursing and veterinary shifts are all caring for the
control. This should involve the removal of visible
 orgaric matter using detergent, followed by disin-
same patient.
fection to kill the remaining microbes that are not
removed by cleaning alone. Normal machine
washing at 60°C will reduce most pathogens, but
Infection control
laundry from animals with contagious diseases
should not be mixed with other clinic laundry.
 Critical patients are at high risk of hospital-acquired
Forced air tumble dryers are also important as
infections and particularly multi-drug resistant
the temperatures reached will reduce bacterial
infections such as methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
numbers. All practices need to ensure they have a
coccus aureus (MRSA) and methicillin-resistant
strict cleaning protocol that is reliably enforced and
Staphylococcus pseudointermedius (MRSP). Factors
regularly reviewed.
that place these patients at a higher risk include the
Barrier nursing of patients may be appropriate
following:
in certain cases and the ECC nurse is at the fore-
front of the management of such cases. Indiscrimi-
Patients with indwelling devices, e.g. intrave-
nate antimicrobial use is strongly discouraged in
nous catheters, chest drains, urinary catheters
all hospitalised patients.
Nursing Considerations in the Critical Patient 207
Further reading
MacIntyre, D.K, Drobatz, K.J., Haskins, S.C. and Saxon,
W.D. (2006) Small Animal Emergency and Critical
Battaglia, A.M. (2007) Small Animal Emergency and
Care Medicine. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Silverstein, D.C. and Hopper, K. (2009) Small Animal
Critical Care for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd edition.
Saunders Elsevier, Oxford.
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders Elsevier, Missouri.
King, L.G. and Boag, A. (2007) BSAVA Manual of Canine
Wingfield, W.E. and Raffe, M.R. (2002) The Veterinary
ICU Book. Teton NewMedia, Wyoming.
BSAVA, Gloucester.
'ABCD' assessment 3
Alkalaemia 42, 43
Abdominal drain 13,116, 127, 131, 132
drug administration in 44
Abdominal effort 4, 87
Alkalosis 42, 43, 48
Abdominal lavage 116
metabolic 43,44,47,48
Abdominal palpation 15, 98, 161
respiratory 44, 47
Abdominal trauma 119, 144
Allergic reactions/response 70, 104
Abdominocentesis 72, 113, 114, 119-121, 126, 127,
Alpha-2 agonists 54, 55, 56, 58, 59, 103
144
Alveolar ventilation 42, 43, 60, 195
Acanthocytes 68
Anaemia 12, 13, 66, 67, 68, 190,
Acepromazine 55, 103, 105
non-regenerative 66
Acidaemia 42, 43
regenerative 64, 66, 67
drug administration in 44, 47
Anaesthesia drug plan 54
Acid-base status 30, 42, 41, 47, 64, 164, 194
for cardiac patients 59, 61
Acidosis 42-44, 47-49, 123, 126,129, 138, 164, 190,
for high risk patients 55, 59, 60, 61
196, 197
Anaesthesia maintenance 61
Activated charcoal 135, 138, 139, 141
Analgesia 54-61, 111, 118, 153, 198, 199, 205
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 64
Anaphylaxis 33
Acute fluid therapy 40
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi)
Acute rate fluids 18
49, 102
Acute renal failure 50, 123, 129, 130, 136, 138,
Anisocytosis 67
141
Anterior uveitis 185
Addison's disease 49
Antibiotics 89, 111, 151, 157, 158
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 63
resistance to 206, 129, 200
Advanced life support 194, 195
Anticholinergics 196
Agglutination 9,64,65,66
Anticoagulant rodenticide 136, 137, 138
Alfaxalone 60, 61
Anti-inflammatory drugs
Practical Emergency and Critical Care Veterinary Nursing, First Edition. Paul Aldridge and Louise O'Dwyer.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
210Index
Aortic thromboembolism 49, 73, 106, 108
indirect 12
Apomorphine 134, 135
oscillometric 12
Appetite 163,167,200
Blood products 35, 37, 53, 62, 111, 112, 199
Arterial blood gas (ABG) 41, 42, 99
Body condition scoring 163, 200
Arterial blood pressure 39, 99
Body temperature 7, 14, 60, 116
Arterial catheter 27,44
Body weight 39, 165, 200
dorsal metatarsal artery 45
Bradyarrhythmia 102, 123
Aspiration pneumonia 15, 110, 170, 175, 176,
Bradycardia 5, 6, 49, 51,56, 190, 196, 197
204
Brain injury 13, 147, 148, 190, 196
Assessing
Breathing pattern 4, 87, 148
airway 3, 4
Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) 64
breathing 3, 4
Bupivacaine 59, 136
cardiovascular System 4, 5
Buprenorphine 55, 57, 58, 118
central nervous system 7
Burns 3,13,23,30,33,48,150, 164
 respiratory system 3, 4
Butorphanol 58, 98, 105, 157
Asthma 87,89
Asystole 195, 196, 197
Calcium 50
Arrhythmias 5,6,14, 48,-55, 100-106, 123, 140, 150,
blood calcium 46, 49, 50, 138, 159,
159, 190
calcium gluconate 49, 123,156,159,196,197
Atelectasis 15, 203
calcium oxalate 75, 138
Atropine 136, 196,
Calcium chanmel blockers 105
eye drops 184, 185
Canine parvovirus 64, 72, 109, 164, 168, 206
Atypical cells 70
Capillary refill time (CRT) 5, 7, 11, 12, 31, 32, 53,
Auricular vein 18
11, 87,98, 108, 110, 153, 199,
Auscultation 4
Capnography 59, 60, 195, 196, 199
 see also Respiration
Capsular history (table 1.2) 3
AV block 102
Carbon dioxide 10, 41, 42, 52, 61, 78,86,89, 149
Carbon monoxide toxicity 5, 121
Babesiosis 67, 68
Cardiac arrhythmias 5, 6, 14, 49-51, 53, 55, 100,
Balanced anaesthesia 54, 61
102, 103
Band neutrophils 69
Cardiac contractility
Basic life support 194
Cardiac output
Basophils 70
Cardiac preload
 Benazepril 102
 Cardiac pump theory, in CPR 191
 Benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) 161
 Cardiac tamponade
Benzodiazepines 55, 56, 61
Cardiogenic shock 31
Beta blockers 104, 105
Cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) 189, 190
Bicarbonate deficit 44
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 189, 192
Bicarbonate therapy 41, 44, 47-49, 64, 136, 194,
Cardiovascular system 53
197
 Care of indwelling catheters and tubes 200
Blood gas analysis 10, 41-44, 63, 73, 99, 148, 196,
Catheter(s)
199
arterial 12, 27, 44, 45, 59, 99
Blood glucose 14
butterfly 18, 21, 93
abdominal 72, 114
central 12, 15, 16, 17,20, 24, 25
peripheral 8, 72, 112, 141, 148, 165
embolisms 22
Blood loss 21, 31, 62
extravasation 21, 200
Blood pressure (BP) 11, 12, 62, 98, 99, 149
intraosseous 23, 26
 monitoring 12
intravenous 17, 199, 200
direct 12, 27
maintenance 21
Doppler 12
materials 18
Index  211
over-the-needle 18, 22, 24
Diaphragmatic hernia 89
placement of 8, 19, 20, 23, 191
Diarrhoea 2, 13, 19, 30-31, 35, 38, 40, 44, 47-48,
Central venous pressure (CVP) 12, 15-17, 40, 99,
50, 110, 141, 164, 166, 170, 173, 177,
199
179-180
Cephalic vein 18, 19,
Diazepam 55-56,59, 60, 107
Chest compressions in CPR 191-195
Diff-Quik stains 66, 72, 114
Chest drains 90, 94-96,145, 191, 199, 200
Digoxin 63, 103-105
Chlorhexidine 93, 200, 202, 129, 171
Dilated cardiomyopathy 101
Chloride 47,48,50, 51, 63
Diltiazem 104-105
Chocolate toxicity 140
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Client commurication 206
205
Closed urine collection systems 13, 60, 123, 126,
 Dissociative anaesthetic drugs 59
128, 132 204
Diuresis 47,50, 101, 130, 136,139, 150
CNS observation 1, 3, 7, 144
Dobutamine 62, 102, 196
Colloids 35-37,150, 199
Dohle bodies 69
dextrans 36
Dopamine 62, 196
gelatins 36
Doppler 12,59, 99, 153, 161, 192
starches 36
Dorsal common digital vein 18, 19
 Congestive heart failure 101
Dorsal metatarsal artery 27, 44-45
 Conjunctival pedicle flap 182, 184, 188
Drug selection 60
Conjunctivitis 102, 183
Dysfunction of the central nervous system 7
Constant rate infusions (CRI) 57, 104,
Dystocia 2-3,155-156
Corneal laceration 182, 183, 188
Corneal ulcers 181, 183, 184, 185
Eccentrocytes 68
Corticosteroids 89, 150
Ecchymosis 137
Coupage 89, 199, 204
Eclampsia (hypocalcaemia) 51, 159
Crackles 4, 53, 88, 89, 98, 101
Electrocardiogram (ECG) 11, 51, 59, 99-100, 102-
Crash trolley 190, 191, 196
103, 105-108, 123, 159, 191-193, 195-196,
Crowe collar 79, 80
199
Crystalloids 14, 16, 35-39, 98, 118, 119, 123, 1491
Electromechanical dissociation (EMD) 196
196, 199
Electrolytes 14,29, 35, 39-40, 46, 53, 63,126, 130,
Cushing's reflex 205
148, 196
Cut down 22,23,25
Embolus formation 204
Cyanosis 5, 12, 87
Emesis 134-135,137,139-142
Cyproheptadine 167
End tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) 61
Cytokines 164
Endocardiosis 101, 104
Cytology of effusions 71, 114
Endocarditis 101
Endotracheal intubation 81, 83, 86, 202
Decreased FiO2 see FiO2
Enteral fluids 34
Defibrillation 191, 193, 195, 197
Eosinophils 70
 Degenerative neutrophilia 69
Epididymitis 161
Dehydration 14, 29-31, 33-36, 38-40,47, 50,73,
see also Orchitis
108,126-127,129,149,157,160,164
Epinephrine 59, 196
Dexmedetomidine 56
Epistaxis 137, 168, 170,
Dexamethasone 185
Ethanol 136, 139,
Dextrans 36
Ethylene glycol toxicity (anti-freeze) 51, 75, 138
Diabetes mellitus 30, 47
Extracellular fluid 29-30, 33, 35
Diabetic ketoacidosis 14, 43-44
Extravasation 21, 24, 200
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage 113, 121
Exudate 30,38,40,71, 83,88,93,95, 114, 185,
Dialysate 130, 132, 199
200-201
212Index
Facilitative incision 22
Haematoma 137-138
Feeding tube 202
Haematrophic mycoplasma infections 68
gastrostomy 116, 167,171, 175, 177,202
Haemoabdomen 113, 119-120, 137
jejunostomy 116, 175, 177-178, 180
Haemoglobin saturation (SaO2) 41-42
nasogastric 167-170, 202
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis 14
0esophagostomy 34, 116, 150, 167, 170
Haemostasis 150
Feline infectious anaemia 67-68
Haemothorax 89, 94, 106, 137
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD) 124
Hartmarn's solution 35, 37, 116, 184
Feline thromboembolism 106
Head trauma 53, 147-149, 169, 180, 199,
 Female reproductive disorders 155
Heart 5-7, 11-12, 15, 31-32, 39-40, 47, 49, 53
Fentanyl 55, 57-58, 60-61
59-61, 71, 87-90, 97-102, 104-106, 108, 110,
Film examination 66-67
117-118, 147-148, 159, 165, 167, 192-196,
FiO2,42
199, 205,
Flail chest 4, 145
Heart failure 5, 11-12, 47,59, 71, 88-89, 97,
Flow by oxygen 78
99-101, 180, 167
Flow rate 17-18, 37, 77-78, 80
Heart rate 5-7, 11, 31-32, 39, 61, 99, 104-105, 108,
Fluid balance 13-14, 29, 40, 62, 199-200
110, 117,148, 196, 199
Fluid input 13
Heinz bodies 68
Fuid losses 30-31, 73,
Heparin 28, 46, 107, 199, 205
Fluid output 13
Hepatic encephalopathy 166
Fluid overload 132, 167
Hepatic lipidosis 175,
Fluid therapy 8, 12-15, 29-31, 33, 35-37, 39-40,
Hetastarch 36
46, 49-50,73, 105, 108, 111, 117-118, 127,
see also Hydroxyethyl starches
129, 139-140, 142, 149, 158-159, 200
Hospital triage 2
Flumazenil 55
Howell-Jolly bodies 67
Fluorescein 184, 187
Humidification of oxygen 77
 Focused assessment with sonography for trauma
Hydralazine 102
(FAST) procedure 120
Hydration deficits 33, 38, 47
 Force feeding 167
Hydration parameters 13, 39
Foreign body (ocular) 183
Hydration 10, 13-14, 29-31, 33-36, 38-40, 46-47,
 Fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 42
50, 64,73-74, 108, 126-127,129, 149
Fractures 3-4, 24, 127, 144-146, 148, 150-151,
Hydroxyethyl starches 36
153-154, 169, 172, 204
Hyperaemia 104
Frusemide 50
Hypercalcaemia 35, 50-51
Hypercapnia 42, 44, 54, 196
Gastric dilation and volvulus (GDV) 19, 73, 103)
Hyperchloraemia 47-48
107, 109, 111, 118 168,
Hyperkalaemia 6, 35, 44, 49, 53, 102, 123, 126,
Gastric lavage 135, 137, 139, 142-143,
129,190,197
Gastritis 140, 176
Hypermagmesaemia 50
Gastrostomy tube 167, 171, 175, 202
Hypernatraemia 44, 47
Gelatins 36
Hyperthermia 7, 14, 78-80, 137
General anaesthesia 19, 53-56, 59, 61, 76, 88, 91,
Hypertonic losses 30
93, 135, 150, 161, 170-172, 175-176
Hypertonic saline 35, 47, 119, 149, 150, 159
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 13, 148, 149, 205
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 101
Glaucoma 185-187
Hyperventilation 42-44, 47, 99, 149
Glucose monitoring 72, 141
Hyphaema 182, 185
Grapes, raisins and sultanas toxicity 141
Hypoadrenocorticism 50-51
Hypocalcaemia 44, 49, 51, 159
Haematocrit (Hct) 64-66, 106
Hypocapnia 42
Haematology 10, 64, 72, 74, 112, 117
Hypochloraemia 47-48
Index  213
Hypoglycaemia 13-14, 141, 160, 178, 190
Jejunostomy tube see Feeding tube
Hypokalaemia 35, 40, 44, 48, 101, 123, 190
Hypomagmesaemia 49-50
Ketamine 54-56, 59-60,79, 107
Hyponatraemia 46, 47
Ketones 42, 74-75, 165
Hypoperfusion 22, 31, 34-37, 111, 118, 123
Hypotensive resuscitation 119, 120
Laboratory tests 63
Hypothermia 54, 62, 102, 106, 116, 190, 196
Lactate 8,9,12,32,35,37,50,63,71-74,132,151,
Hypotonic crystalloids 35
182, 184, 191
Hypoventilation 42-44
Laryngeal paralysis 7, 88
Hypovolaemia 5-7, 11, 13-15, 29-32, 35, 37-38,
Left shift 66, 69, 117
40, 53-54, 76, 98-99, 108-111, 119, 123, 127,
Lens luxation 185, 186
129, 150, 190
Leucocytes
Hypovolaemic shock 6, 31-32, 35-37, 111, 119
examination of 69
Hypoxaemia 42-43, 87, 89, 99, 104
Lidocaine 27,45,54,57,59,61,83,95,103,106,
Hypoxia 7, 42, 54, 73, 105, 146, 190, 196
136, 169, 196, 197
Lily toxicity 129, 141-142
Ieus 13, 47, 117
Local anaesthesia 25, 59, 127
 lness energy requirement (IER) 164
Lower airway disease 87, 89
 Immune mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA)
Lung parenchymal disease 89
65-67
Lymphocytes 66-67, 70
 Induction drugs 61
Infection 7,18, 19, 21-22, 27, 64, 68-69, 75, 77,
Macrothrombocytopenia 66
105-106, 117, 123, 126, 128-129, 145,
Magmesium 46, 49-50, 63, 136, 166-167,
150-153, 157-158, 160, 162, 164-165, 171,
196-197
173, 175, 177, 182, 184, 199-200, 202,
Magmesium sulphate 50, 136, 196-197
206
Maintenance fluids 36, 40, 150
Initial stabilisation 20, 79, 86,98,111, 153, 181
Maldistributive shock see Shock
Insensible losses 13
Male reproductive disorders 160
Insulin 48-49, 72, 123, 141, 164-166
Marmitol 130, 150, 159-160, 186, 196
 Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)
Manometer 12, 15-16
147
 Mask oxygen supplementation 78
Interstitial fluid 14, 29-31, 35-36
Mastitis 158
Intestinal obstruction 110, 112-113, 115
Mechanical ventilation 42, 196
Intracellular fluid 29-31, 48
Medetomidine 55-57,59
Intracranial pressure (ICP) 6, 35, 53, 61, 147-148,
Medial and lateral saphenous veins 16, 18-20
150, 170, 205
Melbourne Veterinary Pain Scale 15
 Intraocular pressure (IOP) 181, 185-187
Mentation 7,13,32,39, 53, 110, 118,135, 148, 190,
Intraosseous fluids 34
196, 199, 205
Intraosseous needles and catheters 23, 25, 26-27
Metabolic acidosis 42-44, 129, 138, 196-197
 Intraperitoneal fluids 34
Metabolic alkalosis 42-44, 48
Intravascular fluid 29-30, 32, 35
Metabolic energy requirements (MER) 164
Intravenous catheter 8, 17, 19-22, 27,53, 79, 81,
Metaldehyde poisoning 136, 137
93,120,125,130,144,191,199,200,202
Methadone 55-58, 60,118
206
Methaemoglobin 5, 12, 139
Intravenous fluid therapy (IVFT) 13-14, 29, 31,
Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
33-37, 39,50,111,118,129,140
18, 21, 206
Intravenous lipid emulsion (IVLE) 135-136
Metritis 157
Iron deficiency anaemia 69
Metronidazole 112
Isoflurane 54, 61
Mexiletine 104
Isotonic crystalloids 14, 35, 37, 39, 111, 118-119
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia 67-68
214Index
Midazolam 55-56, 59-60, 105
 Opioid agonists/antagonists see Opioids
Minimum database 8-9, 112
Opioids 54-58, 60-61, 111, 118, 136, 146
Miosis 7, 149
Orchitis/epididymitis 161
Mirtazapine 167
Organ function 9, 10
Mixed acid-base disorders see Acid-base status
Organophosphate toxicity 136
Modified Pain Scale 15
Orogastric intubation see Stomach tube
Modified transudate 71
Osmolarity 30-35
Monocytes 69-70
Over the needle catheters 18
Morphine 55, 57-61, 118,
 Over the wire catheters (Seldinger technique) 18,
Mu-agonist opioid (pure) see also Opioids
42, 128, 24
Moxidectin toxicity 136
Oxidant injuries 68
Mucous membranes 5-6, 11-12, 14, 31-33, 39, 77,
Oxygen cages 77, 80, 98, 149
87,98,101, 105, 110, 137,139-140, 206
Oxygen haemoglobin dissociation curve 41, 42
Muffled lung sounds 98
Oxygen saturation (Sp02) 5, 10-12, 81, 192, 196
Mycoplasma felis 68
Oxygen saturation curve 11
Mydriasis 149
Oxygen supplementation techniques 76, 77
Oxygen therapy 77, 86
N-acetylcysteine 139
Naloxone 56, 58, 136,196
Oxygenation 41, 76, 87-88, 149-150, 165, 196
Nasal catheters 79, 149
Oxytocin 156-157, 159
Nasal prongs 98
 Nasogastric tube see Feeding tube
PaO2 see Partial pressure of oxygen
 Naso-oesophageal tube see Feeding tube
Packed cell volume (PCV) 8, 14, 34, 64, 112, 159
Nebulisation 89, 201
PaCO2 see Partial pressure of carbon dioxide
Neonate 34, 158
Pain management 52, 54, 60, 146, 205
Neuroleptanalgesia 55
Pain scoring 10, 14-15, 198, 205
 Neurological assessment 148
Pancreatitis 33, 47, 51, 109-110, 114, 138, 164
Neurological system 53, 78
Paracetamol 5, 12, 136, 139-140
Neutrophils 66, 69-70, 72, 114
 Paradoxical breathing 87
Nitroglycerin ointment 98, 99, 102
Paraphimosis 160
Nitrous oxide 61, 115
Paraplegia 106
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Parenteral nutrition 17, 20, 50, 136, 166
toxicity 140
Partial agonists 58
use of 54, 129, 185
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) 41,
Nucleated red blood cells 67
43-44
Nutrition 158, 163-164, 175,182, 198-200
 Partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) 10, 41-42
enteral 17, 117, 164, 172
Parturition 155
 guidelines for support 150-168
 Parvovirus see Canine parvovirus
parenteral 19-20, 50, 136, 166
 Patient monitoring 59
patient assessment 163-164
 Penetrating cormeal foreign bodies 183
Nutritional status 163, 200
 Penile disorders 160
Penile trauma 160
Obstructive shock see Shock
Pentastarch 36
Ocular haemorrhage 182
see also Hydroxyethyl starches
Oesophagostomy tube see Feeding tube
 Percutaneous endoscopic gastrotomy tube (PEG)
Omeprazole 140
171, 175-178
Ongoing losses 35-39, 129
 Perforating corneal foreign bodies 183
Open chest CPR 194-195
Perfusion parameters 5-7, 13, 31-32, 37-39, 110,
Open fractures 3, 153
119-120
Open mouth breathing 3, 10, 86-87, 98
Perfusion status 31
Index  215
Pericardial effusion 5, 6, 100-101, 105
Pulmonary contusions 89, 94, 145-146
 Peri-operative support 62
Pulmonary oedema 40, 44, 76, 88-89, 97-101,
Peripheral intravenous access 18
107-108, 138
 i    
Pulse 5,7,11-12, 27, 31-32, 39, 45, 53, 98-99, 105-
24
106,108,110,117,153,192-193,196,199,
Peritoneal dialysis 130,132, 136, 139, 199
205
Peritoneal drainage 117, 123
deficits 5, 98
Peritonitis 30, 33, 72, 89, 105, 110-112, 114-115,
oximetry 10, 41-42, 60, 87, 148-149, 199, 203
117-118, 126, 144, 162, 175-177
Pulseless electrical activity 195
Permethrin 136, 141
Pupillary light reflex (PLR) 7, 186, 187
Petechia 137
Pure transudate 71
Pethidine 57-58
Pyometra 30,33, 109-110, 157, 158
Phenothiazines 55
Pyrexia 4, 7,9, 117, 158, 161
Phlebitis 21-22, 39
Physiotherapy 205
Radiograph
Pimobendan 102
abdominal, 112, 115, 121, 126
Plasma lactate 32
bladder 127
Platelets 65-66, 71, 106
catheter embolism 22
count 66, 71
oesophagostomy tube 167,168
Pleural effusion 4, 89-90, 94, 97-102, 107, 163
thoracic 89-91, 100, 105, 107, 144, 146
Pleural space disease 4, 88-90, 93, 194
trauma 144-146,151
Pneumonia 15, 76, 89, 110, 170, 175-176, 201, 204
Raisin toxicity 134, 141
Pneumothorax 4, 9, 44, 61, 89-90, 94, 106, 145-
Ranitidine 140
146, 190
Record keeping 206
Polychromasia 67
Recumbency care 10, 15
Poor perfusion 5-7, 32, 118
Recumbent patient 15, 123, 134, 199, 202-205
 Positive end expiratory pressure 146
Red blood cells 14, 41, 64-67, 69, 76, 139, 165
Post renal azotaemia 129
examination of 66,67
Potassium
Re-feeding syndrome 164, 166
serum 14,35,44,46,48-49,53,61, 63,107,123-
Renal blood flow 53, 129
124, 139, 166-167
Replacement fluids 35, 37-39,62
supplementation 36, 39, 48-49
Respiration 29, 53, 87, 99, 189-190, 201
Prednisolone 185
Respiratory acidosis 43-44, 47, 164
Preload 98
Respiratory alkalosis 44, 47
 Premature ventricular complexes (VPCs) see
Respiratory effort 3-4, 9, 86, 101
Ventricular premature complexes
Respiratory pattern 4, 86
Premedication 55, 60
Respiratory rate 3, 9, 43, 53, 59, 61, 86, 90, 98, 101,
Prepare and examine blood films see Red blood
117,132,148, 190, 199,203
cells
Resting energy expenditure (RER) 164-166, 170,
 Primary brain injury see Brain injury
178, 198-200
Procainamide 104
Resuscitation 34-35, 37-38, 40, 81, 108, 119, 123,
Prolapsed globe 181
157, 189-192, 194-197
Propofol 55-56, 60-61, 137, 203
end points 195, 37
 Propranolol 104-105
cardiopulmonary 189, 192, 195
Proptosis 182, 188
fluid 23, 39, 98, 112, 118-119, 149
Prostatic abscess 110, 161-162
hypotensive 119-120
Prostatic disorders 161
team 191
Prostatitis 161-162
Retained placenta 157
Prothrombin time (PT) 64
Reticulocyte counts 64
PTT see Activated partial thromboplastin time
Romanowsky stain 68
216Index
Saline agglutination 9, 64-65
Tachycardia 5,6, 14, 32, 98, 103-106, 110, 137-141,
Schirmer tear test (STT) 184, 187
159-160, 195
Schistocytes 68
Tachypnoea 3-4, 9, 106-107, 110, 138
Secondary brain injury see Brain injury
Telephone triage 1, 2
Sedation 17-20,25,56-57,59,93,95,107,
Temperature 7, 10, 12, 14, 32, 39, 41, 60, 62, 74, 80,
123,-124, 150, 152, 175, 183
116-117, 134, 165, 178, 199, 206
High risk patients 55
Temporary tarsorrhaphy following proptosis 188
Sedatives 55, 103
Testicular torsion 160, 161
Seizures 3,44, 47, 50,51, 72, 89,137, 141, 150,
Testicular/scrotal disorders 160
159, 196, 203
Tetrastarch see Hydroxyethyl starches
 Seldinger technique see Over the wire catheter
Thoracic
Sepsis 162
drain 13, 94
Septic mastitis 157-158
pump theory 192
Septic peritonitis 114-115, 117, 144
radiography 89-90, 100, 105, 107, 144, 146
Sevoflurane 61
trauma 4, 145,147
Shock 5,23,29,31,33,39,47,52,59,73,157,159,
Thoracocentesis 18, 90, 93-94, 98, 99, 108, 145
162
Thrombocytopenia 66
cardiogenic 31, 98, 105, 107
Thrombophlebitis 21-22
distributive 76, 110-111
Thrombus 22, 106-107
endotoxic 157
 Through the cannula (peel away) catheter 18, 20
hypovolaemic 6, 31-32, 37, 111, 119
Through the needle catheters 18
maldistributive 31
Tissue perfusion 6, 11-12, 32, 49, 56, 59-60, 63,
obstructive 31
120, 144
septic 70
 Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) 166
Sinus bradycardia 102, 196
Total protein (TP) 14, 34, 40, 64, 65, 71-72, 167,
Sinus tachycardia 104
196
 SIRS see Systemic inflammatory response
Tracheostomy tube placement 91
syndrome
Tracheostomy tube 2, 191, 200-201
 Slide agglutination see Saline agglutination
Tramadol 57-59
Small Animal Coma Scale (SACS) 13, 148, 150,
Transcellular fluid 29, 30
205
Transfusion
Sodium 35-36,46-47,49, 63, 136, 166
fresh frozen plasma 139
bicarbonate 44,47,49,136,196-197
frozen plasma 139
chloride 35, 51
stored whole blood 159
Spherocytes 66-67
 Transport of a trauma patient 2
SpO2 10-11
 Transtracheal oxygen supplementation 77-79, 81,
Spironolactone 49, 102
149
Stertor 4
Traumatic brain injury 190
Stridor 4, 88
Treatment of the poisoned patient 133
Stomach tube 121-122, 135, 143
Triage 1-2, 6-7, 54-55, 60, 97-98, 181, 189
Stroke volume 5, 32, 61
Tube
Subcutaneous emphysema 4, 145, 148
cystostomy 125, 127
Subcutaneous fluids 34, 49
feeding 167, 175, 178, 180
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) 104
Synthetic colloids 36
Upper airway 77-78, 87, 190
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)
 Urethral catheterisation 125
31, 33, 110, 145
Urinalysis 64, 74, 129
Systemic pain management see Pain
Urinary
 management
catheterisation 74, 123, 125, 127, 129-130
Systolic arterial pressure 12
collection systems 126, 128, 202
Index217
tract obstruction 88, 115, 123-124, 49
Ventricular tachycardia 104, 193
tract trauma 123, 126
Vitamin D 50, 51, 136, 141, 160
Urine
Vitamin K 136, 138
diversion 127
Volume overload 37, 108
output 12-13, 31, 37, 39-40, 62, 123, 128-130,
Voluven see Pentastarch
199
Vomiting 2, 13, 15, 44, 47, 109, 129
urine sediment 74-75,
inducing vomiting see Emesis
urine specific gravity (USG) 8, 13, 64, 74
intravenous fluids 30, 35, 38
 Urine protein:creatinine ratio 75
non-productive 109
Uroliths 124-125
opioids 56, 57
Uterine
tube feeding 179, 189
haemorrhage 159
Von Willebrand's disease 20
inertia 155-156
prolapse 158-159
Water
body content 29, 30
Vasopressin 46, 196-197
intake 29-31, 34, 35, 40, 74
Vascular access 2, 19, 21 90, 171, 200,
loss 29-31, 34
Vasodilation 5,11-12, 32,33, 59,102
Wheezes 4, 53, 87,89
Venous
White blood cells (WBC) 64, 66, 69, 71, 75, 114
blood gas 17, 27, 41-44, 63, 73, 99, 148, 196, 199
Wounds 2, 3, 110, 127,144, 147,150, 182
filling 12
care 150-152, 199
Ventilation 86, 89,94, 116, 195
dosure 152
CPCR 191, 192, 194
healing 118, 151, 163, 165
positive-pressure 86,145, 146,147,196
gumshot 115, 126, 146, 147
Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch 118, 146,
203
X-ray see Radiograph
Ventricular asystole 195, 196, 197
Xylazine 134
Ventricular fibrillation 195
Xylitol 141
Ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) 103,
107
Zinc toxicity 68