RONALD L.BURK ·DANIELA.FEENEY
Small Animal Radiology
and Ultrasonography
ADIAGNOSTICATLAS ANDTEXT
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
SAUNDERS
An Imprint of Elsevier Science
11830 Westline Industrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
Small Animal Radiology and Ultrasonography
ISBN 0-7216-8177-8
A Diagnostic Atlas and Text
Copyright @ 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
lo suoaa sueau Aue Aq ro uroy Aue u panusuen ro panpoudar aq keu uonegnd su jo jed on
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Notice
Veterinary medicine is an ever-changing field. Standard safety precautions must be followed, but as new
research and clinical experience broadenourknowledge,changesintreatment and drugtherapymaybecome
necessary or appropriate.Readers are advisedtocheck the most currentproduct information provided by the
manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the recommended dose,the method and duration of
administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the treating veterinarian, relying on experi-
ence and knowledge of the animal, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual animal.
 Neither the publisher nor the editor assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to animals or prop-
 erty arising from this publication.
Previous edition copyrighted 1996
International Standard Book Number 0-7216-8177-8
Acquisitions Editor: Ray Kersey
Developmental Editor:Denise LeMelledo
Publishing Services Manager: Pat Joiner
Project Manager: David Stein
Desigmer: Renée Duenow
KI/MVY
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit isthe print number:987654321
PREFACE
Te (RLB and DAF) are the co-authors of this edition and are solely responsible
for its contents. We are grateful to Dr. Norman Ackerman-our good friend and
 the co-author of prior editions of this book-for his previous contributions
This edition was written to further the original goal of the first book (i.e.,to be a pic-
torial atlas that illustrates the radiographic and sonographic abnormalities of the common
diseases of dogs and cats). The complementary role that radiography and sonography
share is difficult to demonstrate in a limited number of illustrations, but it should be
emphasized that in most cases both radiographic and sonographic information should be
obtained and integrated to reach a complete diagnosis.As before,the text is offered to sup-
plement the pictorial information.
We continue to believe that every radiographic study should have at least two views
taken at right angles to each other and that every sonographic study should have multiple
imaging planes assessed. However, due the limitations of cost, we have limited the images
in the book to those best illustrating the lesions. We have also excluded computed tomog-
raphy, magnetic resonance imaging, and nuclear scans. Access to these modalities is still
limited, but they are becoming more available and we anticipate that future editions will
need to include these modalities.
As in the previous books, the author with primary responsibility for an area was
accorded final discretion relative to the method of presentation and ultimate importance
of specific material. Fortunately, disagreements were rare.
We appreciate all the work done by those who have directly or indirectly helped with
this project. We hope that we do suffcient honor to allthose who have contributed to the
literature in our extensive references. We are deeply indebted to those individuals and
institutions (Henry Bergh Memorial Hospital of the ASPCA, Purdue University, University
of Missouri, University of Georgia, the University of Minnesota, and the Animal Medical
Center) that have provided training and support in our past. We are also grateful to our
current institutions (Veterinary Specialists of South Florida and the University of
Minnesota) for their support. We are particularly grateful to Tacy Rupp, DVM, DACVIM
(Cardiology), for her review of the material on echocardiography. Any errors in this area
are solely Dr. Burk's responsibility.
Finally, we are exceedingly grateful to our spouses (Lisa Burk, VT, and Janet Feeney, BS)
for their support, patience, and encouragement. We are both very lucky to have someone
who has the love and patience to endure the trial that is a book.
Ronald L. Burk, DVM, MS
DACVR (Radiology, Radiation Oncology)
Daniel A. Feeney, DVM, MS
DACVR (Radiology)
CHAPTER ONE
Introduction
MEDICINE
The art and science of radiology became an integral part of veterinary medicine and sur-
gery shortly afer the exposure of the first radiographic flms. This subsequently led to the
d au u Aooi jo ioaiqns au uo ixai aenue usug is  jo susqnd
tice. Although many special radiographic procedures have ben described since then, sur-
vey radiography remains the standard for the majority of antemortem anatomical
diagnoses.
 The computer's ability to manipulate data has been applied to various imaging tech-
computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), nuclear scintigraphy,
and diagnostic ultrasonography. This technological explosion has called for an expansion
of veterinary expertise beyond traditional diagnostic radiology to include alltypes of diag
rapidly among both veterinary specialists and small animal practitioners. Although future
 developments in diagnostic imaging and the role for MRI, CT, and nuclear imaging remain
to be defined, it is clear that diagnostic radiology and ultrasonography will play an impor.
tant and expanding role in the practice of small animal medicine and will contribute to
 improved health for pets.
ESSENTIALS OF RADIOGRAPHIC AND ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
PHYSICS
The physics of radiology and ultrasonography are complex, and merely mentioning the sub-
ject to some individuals elicits a response that ranges from fear to boredom. Several text-
books explain radiologic and ultrasonographic physics in detail. Because our purpose is to
 emphasize radiographic and ultrasonographic diagnosis, these textbooks and articles should
be consulted if a more complete understanding of radiographic and ultrasonographic
 s p ssd  o sd   pm   espi s
ful for successful radiology procedures. X-rays are electromagnetic radiations with very short
wavelengths (high frequencies) and high energies. They are produced by bombarding a tung-
  e  q  i a s  n  e   s
photons of different energies. These x-ray photons may pass through or be absorbed by a
substance, depending on their energy and the relative density, thickness, and atomic number
of the substance. In film-based medical radiology, after passing through body fluids, tissues,
and organs, the photons ionize silver, which is contained in the emulsion of a photographic
type of x-ray film. This may occur either directly, by interaction of the x-ray photon with the
silver emulsion, or indirectly, by interaction of the x-ray photon with a fluorescent intensify-
ing screen producing blue or green light that exposes the film. This pattern of ionized silver
(the latent image) becomes visible after the film is chemically developed and fixed. Digital
detectors in lieu of x-ray film may also be used to create images. In this circumstance, the
interaction of the photons that have passed through the patient with a computer-compati-
ble detector creates thelatent image, which is then translated into a digital display on a com-
puter screen. The visible image as visualized using film or a computer is a composite picture
of the structures through which the x-rays passed before reaching the film. For the rest of this
2
text, reference will be made only to film-based radiographs, but it should be noted that the
radiograph is a two-dimensional representation of three-dimensional structures and repre-
sents the sum of their radiodensities and shapes in that third dimension.
Ultrasonography is based on the pulse-echo principle A pulse of high-frequency sound
(ultrasound) is transmitted into the body. This pulse travels through the body until it reaches
a reflecting surface, at which time a portion of the ultrasound pulse (the echo) is reflected
back toward the source of the pulse. Piezoelectric crystals, which create sound in response to
electronic stimulation and create electronic signals in response to sound stimulation, are the
two-way conduit between the computer and the patient. A computer tracks the time that
elapses from the beginning of the pulse to the time the echo is received, which allows deter.
mination of the reflecting surface's position in two-dimensional space viewable on a video
screen. The proportion of the pulse that is reflected is dependent upon the initial strength of
the pulse, the ability of the reflecting surface to transmit sound (its acoustic properties), the
angle at which the pulse strikes the reflecting surface, and the size of the reflecting surface rel-
ative to the thickness of the ultrasound beam (the third dimension not seen in two-dimen-
sional ultrasonographic images). The amount of the ultrasound pulse that is reflected
determines the brightness (difference from the image background and associated with the
mechanical intensity of the reflected sound) of the point produced in the two-dimensional
image and whether or not anything can be seen beyond that point (e.g., acoustic shadow).
Should the ultrasound beam encounter tissues or objects with very different acoustic prop-
erties to general soft tissues (e.g., bone, air, metal), near-complete reflection will occur. If an
adequate number of points can be transmitted and received, a composite image of the reflect
ing surfaces can be displayed. This image is updated by sending multiple pulses and receiv.
ing multiple echoes in a relatively short period. The data are stored in a computer and, when
transferred to a video display in “real time" a moving, flicker-free image can be seen. This
real-time image can be recorded on videotape or the video display can be “frozen" on an area
of interest and recorded on photographic film or electronic media forfuture computer-based
transfer, manipulation, and even transmission to a remote site for second opinion.
The echoes reflected from a body part being examined also can be displayed along a mov-
ing,time-oriented graph. This display is referred toas M-mode and is used most often in car-
diology todisplay quantitatively the size of heart valves, heart chambers, heart walls, and great
vessels, as well as the motion of the ventricular walls, heart valves, and major vessels. The
striplike image that is created parallels the course of an electrocardiogram, which also allows
comparison of electrical and mechanical cardiac activities.
The hand-held transducer, which houses the piezoelectric crystal(s), can vary in fre-
quency (megahertz [MHz]) and crystal configuration. In general, the higher the resonant
frequency the greater the resolution but the lower the penetration of the sound beam. For
 most small animals, transducers in the 4- to 12-MHz range are used. The arrangement of
the piezoelectric crystals as well as their number, “firing" sequence and, if applicable,
shaped] or rectangular image) (Fig. 1-1). The applicability of these transducer configura-
tions depends on whether a small or large “footprint," or area of surface contact, is
applicable to the anatomy being imaged and the cost one is willing to encumber for a
machine. Current sector scanners may have transducer configurations ranging, in increas-
ing order of cost, from (1) mechanical sector, moving the piezoelectric crystal(s), through
(2) curved linear/radial array, a series of piezoelectric crystals arranged in a diverging array.
pnsdos auu e u psnd seso saozaid jo saas ieu e dee pasd (e) o
sequence to whip the sound beam back and forth (Fig. 1-2). Current linear-array scanners
(linear series of piezoelectric crystals designed to image flat or nearly flat surfaces and yield
a rectangular image that corresponds to the transducer length) may vary in their overall
size depending on their intended use (e.g,broad surface abdominal imaging for organs not
obscured by ribs, pelvis, gas-containing viscera, or intracavitary imaging such as transrec-
tal). The most versatile transducer configuration for small animal imaging is the sector
scan because the narrow part of the image is at the skin surface and the viewed area gets
wider with increasing depth in the patient. This allows views to be made between bony
structures (e.g., ribs) or gas-filled viscera or both. There are special transducer configura-
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
3
FIG. 1-1 Example of a two-dimen-
sional, sector real-time scan (A) and
a two-dimensional, real-time linear-
array scan (B). Each scan was made
of the same spleen (S). The ventral
pue (do on isaso moxu) ansdes
dorsal capsule (arrow lowest on scan
and pointing to the entrance of a
splenic vein) are identified. Note the
difference in the volume imaged in
the near field (just under the skin
surface) in A compared with B.
A
B
tions available including transvaginal, transesophageal, and even intravascular These are,
however, quite expensive and are designed only for specific use in humans. Although there
may be some applicability of these to select small animal situations, their limited versatil-
ity usually does not justify their cost.
 Ultrasonography is subject to many artifacts. These have been described in detail, and
will discuss the effects of these artifacts on the image that is produced, these references
 should be consulted if a more complete understanding of the physical principles that pro-
duce these artifacts is desired.
4
FIG. 1-z Diagrammatic representa-
CURVED/RAD AL
oscillating MECHANICAL
tion of sector scanners (mechanical,
sequenced linear
E
SECTOR[crystal moves]
curved linear, phased array) and lin-
 ear-array transducers. (From Feeney
DA, Fletcher TF, Hardy RM: Atlas of
correlative imaging anatomy of the
TIME
normal dog: ultrasound and com-
 puted tomography. WB Saunders.
Philadelphia, 199l; and Western
Veterinary Conference, 1988.)
TJME2
TIME3
RADIOGRAPHIC AND ULTRASONOGRAPHIC DIAGNOSIS
Several steps are required to obtain a radiographic diagnosis, beginning with the patient's
initial evaluation and the recognition of the valuable information that radiography of a
specific area may yield. Following this is the task of creating a diagnostic quality radi-
sds ixu an ann qdon an no uodn pu uoe au udo
of a list of differential diagnoses based on the radiographic findings. Next, the clinician
should compare the list of differential diagnoses with the possible diagnoses based on the
patient's history and physical findings. The probability of a specific diagnosis should be
factored into this evaluation. Finally, given all the data, a radiographic diagnosis or list of
probable diagnoses should be developed. From this list, a plan for additional tests or fur-
ther radiographic studies should be developed either to confirm or refute the possible diag-
noses or to establish a treatment plan.
Obtaining an ultrasonographic diagnosis is also a multistep process In most cases a
radiographic examination precedes the ultrasonographic examination. The size, shape,
location, echo intensity, and homogeneity of the ultrasonographic images are evaluated
 and compared to the radiographic interpretation and other available information. As in
 radiography, a list of differential diagnoses is developed and from this list a diagnostic or 
therapeutic plan is developed. Specific diagnoses may, however, be facilitated using tissue
core biopsy or fine-needle aspirates obtained with ultrasonographic guidance. To date,
attempts to correlate sonographic architecture and echo intensity with histological diag-
noses have been generally unsuccessul. Instead, a list of differential diagnoses will be
developed based on the ultrasonographic findings and other available information.
INDICATIONSFOR RADIOGRAPHY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
The many indications for radiography range from recognition of specifically identifiable
pathology (e.g., a palpable abdominal mass), to the evaluation for spread of disease (e.g..
evaluating the lungs for metastasis from a tumor),to following the progression of either a
disease or healing proces, to the general evaluation of an area for any visible pathology.
 Radiographs provide excellent anatomical information but are of limited use in the evalu-
ation of some tissues or organs. For example, the internal structure of the liver cannot be
examined using noncontrast radiographic techniques. Noncontrast, noncomputed radi-
ographic techniques can differentiate only five relative patient or object densities. These
are, in increasing order of radiographic absorption: air, fat, water or soft tissue, bone, and
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
5
metal. Soft tissues or organs surrounded by fluid cannot be defined, because their tissue
density is the same as that of the fluid surrounding them. The internal architecture of
organ. Patient manipulation, as well as the addition of appropriately administered positive
(more opaque than sof tissue) or negative contrast (less opaque than soft tissue) media
may facilitate the radiographic assessment. Be sure appropriate indications and con-
traindications for these media are understood. 16-19
tion of the internal structure of an abdominal mass) but may be performed independent
of the radiograph (e.g., for confirmation of a pregnancy). Ultrasonography is superior to
radiography in some circumstances but has limitations in other areas. Ultrasonography
provides information about size, shape, and location of structures; however, it also pro-
vides information about the soft-tissue architecture of the structure or organ being exam-
ined. Ultrasonography is best for distinguishing solid from cavitating (fluid-filled)
structures and provides internal detail not demonstrated radiographically. When identi-
fied,an abdominal mass should be evaluated to determine (1) its internal architecture, par-
ticularly whether the mass is solid or cavitating, (2) the organ from which the mass arises,
(3) the extent of that organ infltrated, (4) the degree of local spread (e.g, to peritoneal sur-
faces or adjacent organs), and (5) the presence of abnormalities compatible with metas-
tases in distant organs (e.g., liver metastases from a splenic mass). Ultrasonography is
ideally suited for evaluation of animals with pleural or peritoneal fluid. In those patients
with pleural fluid, mediastinal masses, or cardiac disease, ultrasonography provides infor-
 e ann sosn d den an to a q nou   
accessible for ultrasonographic examination unless the area of lung involved is against the
thoracic wall or surrounded by soft tissue-equivalent lung infiltrate that permits sound
penetration (remember, air blocks ultrasonographic transmission into tissue). Although
ultrasonography is not as useful for broad examination of the axial, appendicular skeleton
or the skull as are survey radiographs, some information may be obtained from ultrasono-
graphic evaluation of muscles, tendons, and the joints, as well as examination of the orbit
and brain (in animals with open fontanels).
Utrasonography is also extremely valuable for guiding fine-needle aspirates or biop-
sies.20-26 The needle can be observed as it passes through or into a lesion, and samples can
be obtained from specific sites within an organ or mass (Fig. 1-3). When the needle cannot
be identified, movement of the organ or lesion as the needle is moved can be used as indi-
rect evidence of the needle's position. The individual performing the biopsy must be care-
ful to ensure that the tip of the needle is identified. Short-stroke manipulation of the needle
parallel to its path can facilitate identification of the shaft and the tip. Remember that most
real-time images are two-dimensional representations of a three-dimensional slice of tis-
sue that is from 4 to 15 mm thick, depending on transducer frequency and focusing.
Therefore, if the tip is out of the scan plane (slice thickness), it cannot be seen. Some biopsy
needles have been altered to increase the intensity of the echoes reflecting from them.
Biopsy guides are helpful because they keep the needle in the scanned plane and often proj-
ect the path of the needle within the video image. Biopsies may also be performed without
these guides but these require greater operator skills. Because most current ultrasono-
graphic transducers are focused for optimal tissue visualization within a specific depth
range, surface stand-offand off-set materials may be useful in improving tissue and needle
also aid in the assessment of structures at or near the skin surface when sector scanners are
used (i.e., allow the sector sound beam to diverge within the off-set, giving a broader view
of surface and superficial structures). Aspiration of fluid from cysts, abscesses, or
hematomas can be performed to obtain samples for cytology or to reduce the size of the
fluid-flled cavity. Ultrasonographically guided biopsy is safe when performed on patients
with appropriate coagulation parameters.2.25 Major complications may include hemor-
rhage, bile peritonitis, spread of infection, and possibly even spread of previously localized
neoplasia. Sonographically guided fine-needle aspirations are relatively safe even on a
patient with compromised coagulation status, but their use requires a risk-benefit assess-
6
FIG. 1-3 Transverse sonograms of
the liver of a 10-year-old female
mixed breed dog with a history of
elevated liver enzymes and a mass
arising from the lateral thoracic wall.
A poorly defined hyperechoic lesion
was noted in the ventral portion of
the liver and a liver biopsy was per-
formed to evaluate the lesion. A to C,
The biopsy needle can be identified
as a hyperechoic linear structure
within the liver. D, The hyperechoic
A
ine remains affer the needle has
been removed because of the air that
was injected during the liver biopsy.
C
 interventional procedures also can be employed, such as percutaneous drain placement for
fluid collections (usually abscess), and injection of locally toxic substances (e.g., alcohol)
into masses.28,29
Further sophistication in ultrasonographic techniques involves the use of (1) duplex
and color-flow Doppler imaging to study the velocity and direction of blood flow, (2)
power Doppler imaging for increased sensitivity of tissue vascularity, (3) the injection
of ultrasonographic contrast agents that enhance both vessel and tissue echogenicity,
(4) tissue harmonic imaging in which multiples of the usually imaged frequencies are
used to increase image clarity, and (5) three-dimensional ultrasonographic imaging for
enhanced spatial understanding of the imaged pathology 30-3 These techniques are
beyond the discussion in this text. Cost, at least for the foreseeable future, and the need
for more user and interpreter expertise may limit their application in small animal
imaging.
RADIOGRAPHIC AND ULTRASONOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE
RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE
The overall radiographic technique must be correct or the radiograph should be
repeated. Attempting to interpret an inferior radiograph will lead to an inferior diagno-
sis and may negatively impact the patient's care. The factors that must be considered in
making diagnostic quality radiographs have been described in detail.34-36 Using tech-
nique charts that change radiographic exposure with changes in patient size, and careful
processing of the x-ray film (much more problem with manual than with automatic pro-
cessing), are strongly recommended. The factors that impact the radiographic outcome
include the radiographic technique, patient preparation, and patient positioning.
Radiographic technique must be assessed for underexposure or overexposure as well as
for appropriate penetration. In general, exposure is easily evaluated, because the exposed
 portion of the radiograph over which there was no animal (i.e., that part surrounding the
animal's surface) should be completely black. Failure to accomplish this despite normal
film processing indicates inadequate milliampere-seconds (mAs). If the film had ade-
quate exposure but the area covered by the patient is still too light or internal structures
cannot be distinguished, then the kilovolt (peak) (kVp) should be increased. The stan-
dard increase in kVp needed to be able to visually detect a difference is 15% to 20%.
CHAPTER ONEINTRODUCTION
si Aiaua uooud au pue moi ooi si day  uaum nsa m uoud aenapeu
insufficient to penetrate the subject. Increasing the kVp will produce more energetic
photons for more effective penetration. To make a film darker without changing the rel-
ative penetration of the organs or tissues involved, increase the mAs by 50% to 100%. If
the overall film is too dark, either the mAs or kVp should be reduced. Because it is diffi-
cult to discern which parameter should be adjusted, we recommend a decrease in mAs by
reducing the exposure time. If this causes the radiograph to be light by virtue of inade-
quate radiation (i.e., too light in the areas not covered by the animal), the mAs should be
restored and the kVp decreased. To adjust the number of shades of gray in the film,
simultaneous adjustment of kVp and mAs can be performed. As a general rule, a change
in kVp of 15% to 20% is the equivalent of a twofold change in mAs. Therefore, to
increase radiographic contrast (fewer shades of gray with a dominance of blacks and
whites), increasing the mAs while decreasing the kVp in the proportions described above
usually will yield favorable results. To decrease the contrast of an otherwise satisfactory
radiograph (more shades of gray between black and white, also referred to as wide lati-
tude), an increase in kVp with a simultaneous decrease in mAs in the proportions
described above often will meet the need. Adequate penetrating capability (kVp) is also
a factor in decreasing patient and operator exposure.37 This may influence the decision
on whether to increase kVp or mAs if the image of the patient (not the background sur-
rounding the patient) seems too light.
Proper patient preparation may be critical in discovering radiographic evidence of
 d  d u  s p  o  d
abdominal radiography, as a general rule the animal should not be fed and should be
allowed to empty its bladder and colon if abdominal radiographs are anticipated. A stom-
ach full of ingesta or a colon distended with feces may obscure an abdominal mass or inter-
fere with density evaluation of other organs. A longhaired animal that is wet may have the
density of the hair superimposed over bone, and this may mimic or obscure a fracture line.
Another critical factor to evaluate is the patient's positioning, which should be as per-
fect as possible. The oblique radiograph lends itself to misinterpretation, which ultimately
may lead to decisions that harm the patient. Whenever an abnormality is detected,the pos-
sibility that it results from malpositioning must always be considered. Tracheal elevation,
which may indicate cardiomegaly or a cranial mediastinal mass, may be caused by failure
to elevate the sternum or failure to extend the head and neck when positioning the animal
for a lateral thoracic radiograph. Therefore it is critical to insist on properly positioned
patients and to require repeat radiographs and sedation or anesthesia, if necessary, to
achieve proper positioning. Tranquilization or anesthesia may actually reduce the stress of
radiography and may prove to be less dangerous than struggling with the animal to obtain
a properly positioned patient. In addition, sedation may avoid the need for multiple
attempts before obtaining a satisfactory radiograph.
At least two views taken at 90-degree angles to each other are required almost always.
Without these it is impossible to create a mental image of the three dimensions of the
structures of interest. Furthermore, some pathologies are more readily apparent on one
  s   s a  si      s  
misinterpretations may result. In some circumstances, two views taken 180 degrees from
each other may be adequate and complementary. Comparison of right and left lateral
recumbent radiographs of the abdomen may provide specific information about the gas-
trointestinal (GI) tract (including moving fluid alimentary contents away from a soft-tis-
sue dense foreign body), because the air and fluid within the GI tract move with gravity.
This may be adequate to identify gastric outflow obstruction or gastric dilation volvulus in
patients that are too sick for positioning in dorsal recumbency. Right and left lateral tho-
racic radiographs can provide information nearly equal to that obtained from a lateral and
a ventrodorsal view.
 A useful technique in specific situations in small animal radiography is “horizontal-
beam" views. For this technique, the x-ray beam is directed horizontally (i.e., toward a wall)
instead of toward the floor as in standard vertical-beam radiography. At the outset, deter
mine which direction the beam can be directed and not aimed at a potentially occupied
area (i.e., not toward the waiting room). There are several purposes for horizontal-beam
SMALLANIMALRADIOLOGY
radiography. One is to determine if a soft-tissue density is just pooled "free" fluid or a mass.
If it is free fluid,its position and shape will change with variations in patient positioning.
Positioning used depends on the intent of the study and the location of the suspicious den-
sity. The patient should be held in the appropriately determined position for at least 2 to 3
minutes to assure that fluid that will move has moved. Another use for this technique is to
quasiquantitate volumes of free fluid or free air. The analogy in effect here is that it is eas-
ier to tell how full a glass of water is by looking at it from the side than from the top. Using
this approach, it can be determined more readily if there is more or less air or fluid in a
given body cavity (or even an alimentary organ) over some specified time interval (e.g., a
worsening pneumothorax or decreasing pleural fluid in response to diuretic therapy). The
yield might be information that would influence the therapeutic approach. A third use for
this technique is todetect small quantities of freeair in the pleural, peritoneal, or retroper
toneal cavities. Under circumstances in which a small amount of free air may be worrisome
(e.g., an early traumatically induced pleural leak that may be progressive or a small amount
of free peritoneal air that could indicate alimentary organ rupture), this technique fosters
confidence about the presence or absence of free air well beyond that possible with routine
that normal structures are identified correctly (e.g, the gas cap in the cardiofundic region
of the stomach is not erroneously interpreted to be free in the peritoneum). No special
equipment is needed. Any object, with the aid of almost any kind of tape, can be used to
support the cassette. Avoid primary beam exposure even with an appropriately gloved
hand. The radiographic technique should use about one-half the mAs of a regular in-table
grid technique. An attempt should be made to use about the same focal film distance as is
specified in the regular technique chart. The kVp should be based on the body-part thick-
ness as usual.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE
Ultrasonography is both operator dependent and time consuming. The operator must be
knowledgeable about normal anatomy, especially the positional relationships between
anatomical structures such as abdominal organs and cardiac chambers. Familiarity with
the artifacts commonly seen during an ultrasonographic examination is necessary. Because
only a small area of the body is examined at one time and ultrasonography does not pro-
duce the global image of anatomy provided by radiography, it is extremely important that
the ultrasonographer have a great deal of imaging experience. The images must be inter-
preted as they are acquired, and hard copies usually are made to document an observation
rather than to produce something to be interpreted at a later date (the exceptions being
 postprocessing and quantitative analyses of echocardiographic studies).
The quality of the ultrasonographic image is determined by the transducer selected, the
gain settings on the machine, and the preparation of the patient. Patient preparation
should include clipping the hair over the region of interest. Hair will trap air and this inter-
feres with sound transmission. In areas with thin or fine hair, the air may be eliminated by
wetting the hair with water or alcohol. After the hair has been clipped or dampened, ultra-
sonographic gel is used to ensure good contact and sound transmission from the trans-
ducer to the animal's tissues. If the ultrasonographic examination precedes the
radiographic examination, the hair must be thoroughly cleaned after the ultrasonographic
examination to avoid radiographic artifacts produced by wet or gel-contaminated hair.
The gain settings on the machine are used to vary the strength of the echo that returns
from the structure of interest. Because the strength of the ultrasound beam decreases with
increasing depth within the tissues, the machine can be adjusted to compensate for the loss
of signal. In most machines this compensation is variable, with a slope that adjusts for the
increasing loss of signal caused by sound reflection and refraction from tissues interposed
between the transducer and the deepest structure to be imaged. The transducer should be
selected based upon the thickness of the area that is being examined and, if possible, the
transducer focal zone should match the depth of the general area of interest. Decreasing
transducer frequency correlates with increased depth of ultrasonographic penetration with
an accompanying loss of resolution. The transducer that is selected should be of a fre-
quency that adequately penetrates the subject without having to set the gain too high. If the
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
y
signal is not strong enough (e.g., the image is too black), the gain setting should be
increased or a lower frequency transducer selected. If the signal is too bright, the gain
should be decreased or a higher-frequency transducer selected. The use of a high-frequency
transducer at high gain settings to compensate for lack of ultrasonographic penetration
produces artifacts that may result in incorrect interpretation. Because air and bone reflect
a large percentage of the ultrasound beam, the direction from which the organ is being
imaged may be altered to avoid imaging through them. This is important when imaging
the heart. The cardiac window is selected because of the absence of lung at the cardiac
notch regions. The patient may be imaged from below to take advantage of lung atelecta-
 sis on the recumbent side It is also important when imaging the abdomen. The liver may
be imaged through the intercostal spaces if the stomach is full of air and located between
the usual position of the transducer caudal to the costochondral junctions. The liver and
the air-filled bowel may be displaced away from the examination area by gentle pressure on
the abdominal wall using the transducer.
 Patient positioning for ultrasonography varies with the examination being performed
and, to some degree, operator preference and dexterity. Many ultrasonographers prefer to
examine the abdomen with the patient in dorsal recumbency. Most of the examination is
performed from the ventral abdominal wall with some areas, such as the liver and gall blad-
der, examined through an intercostal space. Some individuals prefer to examine the
abdomen with the patient in lateral recumbency. A satisfactory examination can be
performed from either position. If an animal cannot be restrained in either position, the
examination may be accomplished with the patient standing. For cardiac examination,
most individuals prefer to position the animal in lateral recumbency with the
examination performed from the dependent side. This produces a larger air-free cardiac
window. The examination may be performed from the upper side; however, inflation of the
lung can reduce the size of the cardiac window. For examining most other body areas, the
SYSTEMATIC EVALUATION FOR RADIOGRAPHIC AND
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC PATHOLOGY
The importance of systematically evaluating a radiograph needs to be emphasized repeat-
edly. The tendency to rely on inspiration, first impressions, and “having seen one like this
before? in evaluating radiographs is poor practice that will result in diagnostic errors. It is
diffcult to ignore the clinical signs and concentrate solely on the radiographic information,
especially when the clinician and radiographer are one and the same person; however, this
should be attempted. Ideally, the radiographs should first be evaluated without knowledge
or consideration of the animal's history or linical signs. Then, the radiographs should be
mse jo asond a rn sis i e s snd an jo it u pn
those questions raised by the initial findings. There are several systems for radiographic eval-
uation, including (1) the inside-out method, beginning at the center of the radiograph and
observing structures in ever-enlarging concentric circles, (2) the outside-in method, which
is the opposite of the inside-out method, and (3) the inventory method, evaluating each
organ according to a predetermined list of those structures that should be present in any
given area. The method used is a matter of personal preference and training experience;
however, once adopted the method should be used consistently.
Utrasonographic examinations should proceed in an orderly fashion, with each organ
or area of the animal being evaluated completely. Most organs should be evaluated in at
least two planes. In some areas, such as cardiac ultrasonography, these planes have been
very well defined and should be adhered to strictly so that artifacts that mask or mimic dis-
ease are not created. In other areas, the planes are less well defined and oblique, or off-axis
views may be as valuable as the standard examination planes. Ultrasonography usually is
performed with some specific area of interest, such as evaluation of a mass in the region of
the spleen. This area should be evaluated carefully, but other structures may be important
in determining a final diagnosis and these also should be examined (e.g, presence of focal
abnormalities within the liver in a patient with a splenic mass). The ultrasonographic
examination of specific organs or anatomical regions must be approached from more than
10
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
one angle or direction. For example, when examining the kidney the transducer should be
moved from the cranial to the caudal pole in the transverse plane, and from both medial
to lateral and dorsal to ventral in the longitudinal plane. Each organ or region is examined
carefully, with attention paid to the pattern of echoes produced as well as to the brightness
of the echoes when compared to adjacent structures. The size of many structures can be
measured precisely, using calipers that are coupled to the computer and video image. The
examination must be complete, and we strongly recommend full abdominal scans even if
there is a specific organ of interest based on available biochemical, hematologic, or survey
radiographic information.
RADIOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
 The identity of any structure can be deduced from its radiographic appearance. Normal
radiographic anatomy is learned from evaluating a large number of normal studies. This is
particularly true for recognizing the normal anatomical variants that occur in different
breeds. The comparison between the observed image and the expected normal appearance
provides data upon which deductive reasoning is applied to form the basis for a radi-
 ographic diagnosis.
 Certain radiographic features are used to determine the nature of an object seen on the
x-ray film. These features are used to determine both normal anatomy as well as pathologic
alterations and should be evaluated for every structure examined on the radiograph. These
characteristics include size, shape, density, position, and architecture. In addition to
these characteristics, some functional information (e.g., continuity versus leakage; propul-
sion versus paralysis or ileus) can be derived from studying the radiographic architecture
and contrast.
S1ZE
The size of an object can be determined directly by measuring the object as it appears on
the radiograph, by comparing the object of interest with some adjacent normal structure,
  no    i n       
Measurement of objects directly from the x-ray film image ignores the distortion that
results from magnification of the image due to the distance from the object to the flm. It
   a-x  aq     o si o
object may not be parallel to the film plane and may therefore be magnified unevenly. Thus
the size of a bone pin required to repair a fracture may be overestimated, because the femur
is separated from the film by the thigh muscles, and therefore the medullary diameter is
actually less than that measured on the radiograph. One femur may appear shorter than
 ue ud uuadxa si ree  jn ydeou sid qesopnu e u ro a
g soo oi n ru a se sa s aui on ppxa aq oo du p
geometric distortion and to permit comparison between animals of greatly different sizes,
comparison to some adjacent normal structure often is used. Thus the length of the kidney
 often is compared with that of the second lumbar vertebra. Normal ranges for such com-
parisons have been established. Subjective impressions of organ size may also be made, and
these usually are based on previous experience. Enlargement of the spleen, heart, and
prostate, for example, often is diagnosed based on a subjective opinion of how big that
structure has appeared on other radiographs of similar-size animals.
SHAPE
Objects may be distinguished on the radiograph according to their shape. Distinction can
be made between solid and hollow objects, spheres, cylinders and cubes, and flat or curved
surfaces. Each produces a specific image. The image that is produced on the x-ray film dif-
fers from the patient's anatomy, because the radiograph is a two-dimensional representa-
tion of a three-dimensional structure. Overlapping of different structures as well as
photographic and visual illusions may produce images that do not truly represent normal
anatomy. When the shape of a density does not conform to that of any normal anatomical
structure or to any described pathology, the probability of radiographic artifact is high.
These may be readily apparent, because they occur infrequently and are so different from
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
previously observed anatomy. However, some may mimic pathologic proceses and must
be recognized. A subjective contour artifact in which a geometric contour can be con-
structed from partial lines has been described (Fig. 1-4). This artifact often appears
 brighter or more prominent and appears to be closer to the viewer than normal structures.
 The artifact will disappear on closer examination.
DENSITY
 Density is the mass of a structure per unit volume. It is a major factor in determining the
amount of radiation that various objects absorb. Objects that absorb most or all of the
radiation impinging upon them are termed radiopaque The photons do not pass through
these objects and therefore neither reach nor expose the x-ray film. These structures pro-
 duce a clear area on the film, which appears white or light gray when viewed. Objects that
permit most of the radiation to pass through them are termed radiolucent and produce a
black or dark gray image on the x-ray film.
Relative Density Versus Absolute Density. The density of objects relative to one another
determines their apparent shade of black, white, or gray on the x-ray film. Therefore an
understanding of relative subject densities is essential to the interpretation of a radi-
 ographic image. In terms of radiographic density, the animal may be considered as being
composed of five components: (1) air, in the respiratory or GI tracts, (2) fat or cartilage,
both of the same radiographic density, (3) tissue, including blood, body fluids, muscle, and
 various parenchymal organs, (4) bone, and (5) metal, usually because of ingestion or
introduction through accident or surgery. Note the similarity to the five discernible object
and patient densities described earlier. These elements can be ranked easily in order of
decreasing subject density when their composition is considered. Metallic objects, the most
dense, have a high atomic number and absorb nearly all of the x-ray photons; this prevents
the photons from reaching the film (or digital detector) and causes a white image on the
radiograph. Various metallic foreign objects produce this radiographic density. They
include surgical devices such as intramedullary pins, metallic sutures or hemostatic clips,
minerals such as uroliths, and barium-containing compounds. Bone, which is composed of
elements having a somewhat lower atomic number and an organic matrix that absorbs less
FIG. l-4 Lateral abdominal radi-
ograph of a mature cat. The caudal
pole of the right kidney and the cra-
nial pole of the left kidney overlap.
producing a subjective contour arti-
fact. This artifact appears brighter
 than the real shadows of the kidneys.
12
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
radiation, produces a nearly white or light gray image. Muscles, blood, and various organs,
which are composed predominately of water and absorb approximately equal amounts of
radiation, produce comparable shades of gray on the film. Therefore these objects are
described as fluid or soft-tissue dense. This shade of gray is darker than that of bone. Fat
and cartilage absorb even less radiation than the fluid or soft tissue-dense elements and
produce a darker gray image on the film. Air or gas absorbs the least amount of radiation
and produces a black image. Therefore the usual components of an animal being radi-
ographed in order of decreasing subject densities are metal, bone, tissue, fat or cartilage,
and air.
The density of an object may appear to change when it is surrounded by an object of
different density. This is an optical illusion and can be observed when high effective atomic
number (Ze) cystic calculus, which appears white on a noncontrast radiograph, is sur-
rounded by dense iodine-containing contrast material (which has an even higher Zef) dur-
ing a contrast cystogram. The white cystic calculus appears gray when surrounded by the
more opaque (denser) contrast (Fig. 1-5). Similarly, when tissue-dense structures, such as
the prepuce or a nipple, which are surrounded by air, are seen on a ventrodorsal radiograph
superimposed on the remaining abdominal structures, they often appear to be of bone
density.
Another visual illusion that results from density differences is the Mach band effect.37
 In this phenomenon, either a bright or a dark line may occur at borders of structures. The
FIG. 1-5 Close-up views of lateral
abdominal radiographs of a mature
dog before (A) and after (B) the
intravenous  administration 
of
water-soluble iodinated contrast
material. The radiopaque cystic cal-
culi appear white (dense) on the
noncontrast radiograph (A) and
appear gray (less dense) when sur-
rounded by the more opaque con-
trast material (B). This is an optical
illusion and, if measured by means
 of a densitometer, the opacity of the
calculi would be identical in both
images.
B
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
13
Mach band effect is caused by a specific physiologic process in the normal eye. This may be
 observed readily in the hind limb where the fibula crosses the tibia, producing an apparent
dark line that might be mistaken for a fracture (Fig. 1-6). This effect may be seen in any
area in which two objects of different density are adjacent to one another.
The thickness of a structure also is important in determining the relative subject den-
sity evident on an x-ray film. Thicker or larger volumes of the same material will absorb
more radiation and produce an image that is whiter; however, the effect is less than that
resulting from an inherent subject density (in gm/cc) difference. Therefore the size of the
structure must also be considered when its composition is being deduced from its radi-
ographic appearance.
 The size and shape of objects are perceived by visual definition of their external bor-
ders. The ability to perceive these borders requires that objects be adjacent to something of
a different density. For example, some species of jellfish are nearly invisible in water
because they contain so much water themselves. Yet a fish, such as a tuna, is readily appar-
ent in water and easily described by size and shape. To discriminate between objects on a
radiograph, they must be of different subject densities. Whenever an object of one density
lies against an object of a different density, a margin will be evident. The greater the differ-
ence between the densities of the two objects, the sharper the margin will appear on the
radiographic film. Conversely, whenever two objects of the same density lie in contact with
each other, their margins will not be visible. In the abdomen, for example, the presence of
abdominal fat outlines the soft tissue-dense abdominal organs, and the inner surface of the
stomach and intestines often can be identified because they contain air. Evaluation of
the bowel wall will demonstrate that the inner wall, which is in contact with the luminal
gas, is better defined than the outer wall, which is in contact with the surrounding abdom-
inal fat. This is because of the greater difference in subject density between the air and soft
tissue-dense structures when compared to the fat and soft tissue-dense structures.
POSITI0N
The position of objects on a radiograph is used also to establish their identity or, if
applicable, their organ of origin in the case of an unidentified mass. The object must be
FIG. 1-6 Close-up view of a cranial-
caudal radiograph of the tibia and
fibula of a mature dog. A radiolucent
(dark) line is visible in the midtibia
at the point where the fibula crosses
the tibia (arrows). This is a Mach line
and should not be confused with a
fracture.
14
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY
identified on two views to establish its location. For example, certain abdominal organs nor-
mally will be found in specific areas within the abdominal cavity. An ovoid soft tissue-dense
mass in the caudal ventral abdomen would most likely be the urinary bladder or associated
with the male or female reproductive tract (i.e., prostate, retained testicle, uterine body, or
cervical mass). Abdominal organs also may displace other structures from their normal
positions. Thus enlargement of the spleen will displace the intestines caudally, dorsally, and
to the right. The displacement of the intestines indicates that the enlarged organ or mass is
originating from the cranial, ventral, left abdomen and therefore is probably associated with
the spleen. Some diseases produce lesions that may be sen radiographically in specific loca-
tions. For example, primary tumors of long bones are usually metaphyseal in location while
metastatic tumors are more frequently diaphyseal. The lesion's location may therefore help
discriminate between these two conditions, which might otherwise have similar radi-
Ographic features. In some circumstances, failure to identify a suspected abnormality on a
second view will help to establish its location (or possibly its reality). For example, identifi-
cation of a mass in the hilar region of the lung on a lateral radiograph and inability to iden-
 tify the mass on a ventrodorsal radiograph help to localize the mass to the mediastinum or
hilus and therefore indicate that the mass is not in the lung.
ARCHITECTURE
The term architecture is used to describe the internal structure (when visible) of an object
and is stated in terms of homogeneity, granularity, or irregularity. Architecture may refer
also to the definition of the object or extent to which its margins are definable. Thus the
trabeculation of a bone may be evaluated, and alterations from stress remodeling, tumor
destruction, or osteopenia may be recognized. Food or fecal material may be recognized as
a granular mixture of air, sof tissue, and bone.
FUNCTION
 Contrast radiography usuall is required in order to obtain functional information. Even
with contrast studies, evaluation of physiologic levels of function usually is not possible.
 However, it is possible to recognize some anatomical changes on noncontrast radiographs
that indicate abnormal function. An example would be colonic distention with granular
material, suggesting difficulty or interference with defecation. Another example is the dila-
tion of the small intestine to a greater-than-normal diameter, which may indicate interfer-
ence with peristalsis or obstruction to normal flow of ingesta. Identification of an enlarged
caudal vena cava and hepatomegaly in a dog with right heart disease may indicate that right
heart failure rather than merely right heart disease is present.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
Certain features should also be evaluated during an ultrasonographic examination. These
include size, shape, echo intensity, position, and architecture.
SIZE
 Most structures can be measured directly using the calipers, which are integrated with the
software used in the ultrasonography machine. These calipers are very accurate, and spe-
cific measurements can be made. Very large organs, such as the liver, are difficult to meas-
ure, because the extent of the organ is rarely imaged in a real-time single frame. In these
cases, a subjective impression of the organ size is obtained by estimating the amount of the
external body surface that is covered while the entire organ is examined. The operator
should be careful when making the measurements to ensure that the angle at which the
 measurement is being made corresponds to some established standard. For example, spe-
cific values have been established for measurement of the cardiac chambers from specific
 positions. Oblique or off-axis measurements may obscure or mimic disease.
SHAPE
As in evaluation of size, the shape of an object can be distorted if an off-axis view is obtained.
 Ultrasonography is sensitive to alterations in shape of penetrable structures. These abnor-
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
15
malities are demonstrated easily and accurately provided the organ is imaged from some
standard position. In order to obtain good transducer skin contact, pressure often is applied
to the abdomen when performing an abdominal ultrasonographic examination. This can
distort the shape of structures, and is usually most apparent in examination of the urinary
bladder. The bladder shape can be distorted because of transducer pressure.
ECHO INTENSITY
The echo intensity of an organ is usually specific to that organ; however, it may be altered
by machine settings, the transducer selected, patient preparation, the angle with which the
ultrasound beam strikes the organ, and the nature of the tissue that surrounds the organ
of interest. Poor contact between the transducer and the skin may cause structures to
deeper structures appear more echogenic. The echo intensity of abdominal organs usually
is compared to that of other abdominal organs. Thus the kidney cortex is described
as being hypoechoic (blacker) or isoechoic (nearly the same) and the spleen is described as
being hyperechoic (whiter) relative to the liver. Ultrasonographic artifacts also affect an
organ's echointensity. In the presence of peritoneal fluid, the abdominal organs beyond an
area of fluid may appear to be more echogenic. The portion of the liver that is imaged
through the gall bladder may appear more echogenic (brighter) than the portion away
from the galbladder. Angling the transducer away from the perpendicular during exami-
nation of a tendon will decrease the echointensity of the tendon.
POSITION
An organ's position can be detected readily with ultrasonography. Both abdominal masses
and normal structures may be displaced from their natural positions by transducer manipu-
 from normal position can be recognized when the architecture of the organ is normal. For
example, displacement of the kidney from its usual position may create some confusion,
 especially if the architecture is altered and recognition of the structure as a kidney is difficult.
ARCHITECTURE
The echo pattern of normal organs usually is specific. The structure may be anechoic (lack-
 ing internal echoes), uniformly echogenic, or of mixed echogenicity. Some organs can be
recognized because of their specific echo patterns. The liver can be identified because of the
bright parallel echoes produced by the portal veins, and the spleen can be recognized
because of the pattern of vessels entering the hilus and the lack of bright walls of internal
vessels.
RADIOGRAPHIC AND ULTRASONOGRAPHIC ABNORMALITIES
When a suspected abnormality is detected on a radiograph, the possibilities that must be
 considered are that (1) the radiographic change was caused by a specific disease, (2) the
 a a ( a   e si  
is the result of a technical or physical artifact, or (4) the finding is normal and has been
overinterpreted. In most instances, when the radiographic abnormality is identified on
only one view or is the only change identified even if the expected disease almost always
sents a normal anatomical variant or radiographic artifact.
Although a radiograph should be evaluated initially without consideration of the
patient's history or clinical signs, it should then be reevaluated after these facts have been
determined. This “second look" should detect any abnormalities that are expected based
upon the presumptive diagnosis. For example, if a radiograph is performed on a dog for
evaluation of urinary tract disease, the original viewing should evaluate the entire
abdomen. The second look should concentrate upon the urinary tract. This may be help-
ful in deciding that densities originally ascribed to ingested matter in the intestinal tract are
actually mineralization in the kidneys or ureters, or perhaps that renal shadows were diffi-
cult to define. If this radiograph were being performed for a dystocia, this condition might
16
be overlooked or considered insignificant because of normal decrease in abdominal fat in
a heavily lactating bitch; however, this new information may be extremely important in a
dog with polyuria, polydipsia, and vomiting. Additional radiographs obtained after admin-
istration of enemas or laxatives, extra views (including alternate recumbency or horizon-
 tal-beam techniques), selective abdominal compression, or radiographic contrast studies 
may be necessary to evaluate the patient completely.
This second look often helps put the radiographic findings in their proper perspective.
For example, a narrowed intervertebral disc space may indicate acute or previous disc pro-
lapse, and only the patient's clinical signs can establish if the disc prolapse is acute.
Shoulder osteochondrosis and panosteitis may be identified on radiographs of the shoul-
der of a young, large-breed dog. Only a careful physical examination will determine which
of the two lesions is responsible for the dog's acute lameness. If the radiographic changes
 do not fit the animal's clinical signs, either the radiographic changes, the clinical signs, or
both should be reevaluated.
 Generally, a single disease type (e.g. pneumonia) produces several recognizable radi-
ographic changes. The more of these radiographic changes present on a single study, the
more reliable the radiographic diagnosis becomes. Thus the interpreter should be aware of
 the possible variations that may occur with a given disease type and not rely on the pres-
 ence or absence of a single, falsely labeled pathognomonic radiographic change.
Similar considerations accompany ultrasonographic abnormalities. Artifacts are a
operator dependent. Artifacts frequently seen during ultrasonographic exams include shad-
owing, distant enhancement, reverberation, beam width, and section thickness. Shadowing
is a frequently observed acoustic artifact that results in a decrease or absence of signal in
areas that should contain echoes (Figs. 1-7 and 1-8). It results from attenuation or reflection
of the ultrasound beam from a highly reflecting surface. Because of this, the ultrasound
pulse is reflected almost completely and is unable to reach deeper structures, producing a
black area deep to the reflecting surface. Shadowing is most often observed beneath bone or
air but also may be seen deep to catheters, drains, bullets or pellets, or vascular clips. The
shadow will hide the underlying anatomy. This is frequently seen when the air-filled stom-
ach or the ribs hide portions of the liver. A shadow also provides useful information. It
FIG. 1-7 Transverse sonogram of
the left kidney of a mature dog.
There is a hypoechoic (black) band
(arrows) extending deep to the renal
pelvis. This decrease in signal is a
shadowing artifact that results from
reflection or attenuation of the ultra-
sound beam by renal pelvic mineral-
ization. Although the renal pelvis is
slightly hyperechoic, the shadowing
helps to confrm that renal pelvic
mineralization is present.
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
17
 indicates the presence of a highly reflective surface and helps the operator recognize the
 presence of gas or mineral. Not all mineral materials shadow completely; therefore the
absence of shadowing does not rule out the presence of mineralization.
Refraction, or bending, of the ultrasound beam can produce an artifact similar to a
shadowing artifact (Fig. 1-9). This occurs along the edge(s) of an object when the ultra-
sound beam passes through a highly echogenic interface. A decrease in the intensity of the
ultrasound beam results, and there may be no sound left to produce echoes from the struc-
tures deep to the interface. This can mimic shadowing and be interpreted mistakenly as the
object having mineralization of its wall (e.g., edge refraction of the edge of a nonmineral-
ized fetal head). The area beneath the structure causing the acoustic shadow may have
some echoes because of reverberation, beam-width, or slice-thickness artifacts.
Acoustic enhancement results in stronger signals deep to fluid-filled structures (Fig. 1- 10).
These structures have no internal echoes to reduce the amount of sound transmitted across
them, resulting in increased echoes from the underlying structures. This distant enhancement
is the result of the machine being set up to compensate for soft-tissue sound attenuation
(time-depth gain compensation) but actually passing through simple fluid, which has less
sound attenuation. This enhancement artifact is used as one of the criteria that help to iden-
tify the presence of fluid within a structure.
 Reverberation occurs when the sound beam is bounced back and forth between the trans-
ducer and a highly reflective interface within the patient (Figs. 1-11 and 1-12). The computer
interprets each reverberation as a separate signal, placing the source of the signal at a distance
FIG. 1-8 Abdominal sonograms of a
mature dog in the region of the liver
(A) and urinary bladder (B). The
ribs produce hypoechoic (black)
bands that extend deep to their posi-
tion (A). The colon also produces a
hypoechoic band deep to its position 
(B). Shadowing may be due to the
presence of bone (A) or gas (B). Also
note the distortion of the bladder
due to transducer pressure.
A
B
FIG. 1-9 Longitudinal sonogram of
the caudal abdomen of a mature
male dog. The anechoic urinary
bladder and prostate are visible. A
hypoechoic (black) band can be seen
cranial to the margin of the prostate
(arrows). This is a refraction artifact.
ROSTATE
18
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 1-10 Longitudinal sonograms
of the cranial abdomen of a dog The
liver and gall bladder are visible. The
portion of the liver deep to the gall
bladder appears more echogenic
(brighter) than the area cranial and
αudal to the gall bladder. This is
because of acoustic enhancement.
The fluid within the gall bladder
does not attenuate the ultrasound to
the same extent as the liver, thereby
increasing the strength of the echoes 
from that portion of the liver deep to
the gall bladder.
FIG. 1-1l Longitudinal sonogram of
the urinary bladder of a dog. A series
 of echogenic (bright) parallel lines
can be seen within the superficial
 portion of the urinary bladder.
These are reverberation artifacts.
They may be originating at the skin
surface or from the dorsal bladder
wall. They are accentuated by the
high gain setting that was used to
obtain this image.
corresponding to the time elapsed from the signal pulse to echo reception. Comet-tail and
ring-down artifacts are forms of reverberation artifacts (Fig. 1-13). The comet-tail artifact may
originate at a highly reflective suface, such as a fuidgas interface, and is helpful in indicating
the presence of air The ring-down artifact commonly occurs within metals and often is
observed in association with biopsy needles or metallc foreign objects. Reverberations are
more likely to occur when the interface is close to the transducer, at highly reflecting surfaces,
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
19
FIG. 1-1z Longitudinal sonogram of
IBAR
the caudal lumbar region of a dog.
The ventral surface of the lumbar
vertebra is visible as a highly
echogenic curved line (arrows). The
echoes that are visible deep to the
vertebral bodies are reverberation
artifacts. The heteroechoic mass ven-
tral to the vertebral bodies represents
enlarged sublumbar lymph nodes.
FIG. 1-13 Transverse sonogram of
the stomach of a dog. The echogenic
bands (arrows) extending deep to the
 gastric wall represent comet-tail and
ring-down reverberation artifacts.
These result from the highly reflec-
tive interface between the gastric
wall and intraluminal air. All the
 echoes within the gastric lumen are
artifacts.
and when high gain settings are used. Reverberations also can occur within a structure such as
a cyst, in which the echoes may be reflected off the far wall of the cyst back toward the near
wall and then toward the far wall again. Thus the signal resulting from reverberations may be
impossible to distinguish from real echoes. Air and bone are the most common sources of
reverberation artifacts. Increasing the gain only increases the intensity of the reverberations;
therefore echoes that are observed beyond bone and gas interfaces are artifacts.
20
SMALl ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 1-14 Longitudinal sonogram of
the cranial abdomen of a cat. The
diaphragm  is evident  as
an
echogenic (bright) curved line
(arrows). The normal liver can be
seen adjacent and caudal to the
diaphragm and a mirror image of
the liver can also be identified deep
and cranial to the diaphragm. There
is a small amount of anechoic peri-
toneal fluid (curved arrows) in the
 dorsal abdomen between the liver
and stomach.
A mirror image artifact is also a form of reverberation artifact (Fig. 1-14). This is
 observed most often when examining the liver and produces an image of the liver on the
thoracic side of the diaphragm. The image is a mirror of that seen on the abdominal side
of the diaphragm and is due to the sound traversing a reflected rather than a direct path.
The resulting increased path length is displayed by the machine as if it traveled in a straight
line, placing it farther away from the transducer.
The ultrasound beam has a finite thickness in the third dimension, and the echogeni-
cities of structures encountered across that thickness are averaged when displayed.
Consequently, echoes that originate from structures within the center as well as from the
edges of the beam are included in the image. These produce beam-width or slice-thickness
artifacts and can be responsible for adding echoes to an anechoic structure or subtracting
echoes from a hyperechoic structure (Figs. 1-15 and 1-16). This can result in the false pres-
ence of echogenic material within the urinary or gall bladder or the illusion of a mass in
the liver because of catching the edge of the stomach. Electronic noise also may add echoes
to an anechoic structure.
 Because of the number of artifacts that occur during an ultrasonographic examina-
tion, when an abnormality is observed it must be evaluated carefully to determine that it
is not an artifact. The ultrasonographic findings must fit the patient's clinical signs and
should be visible in multiple planes. Lesions detected that are not consistent with those
signs should be suspect. The ultrasonographer must be aware of the lesions that may
accompany the presumptive diagnosis. If an area in which a lesion would be anticipated
(based on the presumptive diagnosis) cannot be evaluated thoroughly because of poor
patient cooperation or interference from overlying gas or bone, the ultrasonographer
should be prepared to repeat the ultrasonographic examination or to suggest alternative
diagnostic techniques or additional patient preparation, anesthesia, or sedation. As with
radiographs, rarely is the ultrasonographic diagnosis specific, and additional studies,
such as aspiration or biopsy, frequently are required for a specific anatomical diagnosis.
 Difficulty in examining certain patients adds to the problem in determining a specific
ultrasonographic diagnosis.
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
21
FIG. 1-15 Longitudinal sonogram of
the urinary bladder of a dog. There
are many echoes within the bladder
lumen. These are the result of rever-
beration or electronic noise artifacts.
These artifacts add echoes to the
normally anechoic urine and could
be misinterpreted as echogenic cellu-
lar material within the urinary
bladder.
FIG. 1-16 Longitudinal (A and B)
and transverse (C and D) sonograms
of the urinary bladder of a 4-year-
old female mixed breed dog with a
 2-week history of vomiting and diar-
rhea. In the longitudinal sonograms
there is a hyperechoic area that
appears to be within the dorsal
aspect of the urinary bladder. In the
transverse sonograms this hyper-
echoic area is identified as the colon,
A
B
which is indenting the dorsolateral
aspect of the bladder. This creates a
beam-width or slice-thickness arti-
fact because, due to the width of the
BLDR
ultrasound beam, a portion of the
colon is included along with the uri-
nary bladder when the longitudinal
sonogram was obtained.
D
DEVELOPING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
After an abnormality has been identified radiographically or ultrasonographically using
the features described in this chapter, a list of differential diagnoses should be established.
This list should include all possible causes of the described radiographic or
22
ultrasonographic abnormalities. Diagnoses should include all possible etiologies: toxic,
infectious, metabolic, nutritional, degenerative, neoplastic, iatrogenic, immune, idiopathic,
and developmental. The probable diagnosis usually is based on determining which of the
differential diagnoses can produce all of the radiographic or ultrasonographic abnormali-
ties observed. This probable diagnosis may be specific or general. An example of a specific
diagnosis might be a bone tumor (most likely osteosarcoma) in the case of an aggressive
but mixed (destructive and proliferative) lesion with a sunburst pattern in the distal radius
of a 9-year-old male Saint Bernard, or a renal cyst in the case of a focal anechoic area within
the kidney. A general diagnosis would be an enlarged kidney in a 5-year-old mixed breed
RECOMMENDATION FOR FURTHER DIAGNOSTIC MODALITIES
OR THERAPY
Once a radiographic or ultrasonographic diagnosis is reached, a program for confirmation of
the diagnosis or for treatment of the problem should be developed. This step is the result to
which the radiographic or ultrasonographic examination is properly oriented. One caveat of
the radiographic or the ultrasonographic diagnosis is that lesion appearance is neither cyto-
logically nor histological specific. Further techniques that commonly are indicated include
additional diagnostic imaging procedures, hematologic or biochemical blood evaluations,
endoscopy, fine-needle aspiration, ultrasonographicaly guided fine-needle aspiration or core
tissue biopsy, or surgical exploration. Treatment plans might include pharmacologic therapies
(e.g, antibiotics for pneumonia) or surgical treatments (e.g, partial ligation of portosystemic
shunts). Another caveat of imaging diagnoses is that unless a wide array of possible differen-
tial diagnoses are considered and an organized sequential plan to confirm or refute these is
developed, the appropriate test may not be run or the necessary further diagnostic modalities
might not be pursued. Therefore the formulation of a broad, but ranked, list of differential
diagnoses based on the combination of signalment (age, breed, gender), history, physical
examination findings, morphologic alterations observed via imaging, and any other available
information is a critical step in patient evaluation. In addition, it may be these differential pos-
sibilities that justify the imaging modalities used and their sequence.
REFERENCES
1. Schnelle GB: Radiology in canine practice. The North American
13. Lamb CR, Boswood A: Ultrasound corner—an artifact resulting
Veterinarian, Evanston, 1l, 1945.
from propagation speed error. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1995; 36:549.
 2. McGahan JP, Goldberg BB: Diagnostic ultrasound: a logical
14. Widmer WR, Kneller SK: Artifacts and technical errors presented as
approach. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, 1998.
 part of the 1996 ACVR oral certification exarmination. Vet Radiol
 3. Miles KG: Basic principles and clinical applications of diagnostic
1997; 38:156.
ultrasound. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1989; 11:609.
15. Miles KG: Basic principles and clinical applications of diagnostic
4. Nyland GT, Mattoon J: Veterinary diagnostic ultrasonography. WB
ultrasonography. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1989; 11:609.
 Saunders, Philadelphia, 2001.
16. Carrig CB, Mostosky Uv: The use of compression in abdominal radi-
5. Kaplan PM, Murtaugh RJ, Ross JN: Utrasound in ermergency veteri-
ography of the dog and cat. Vet Radiol1976; 17:57.
nary medicine. Semin Vet Med Surg 1988; 3:245.
17. Zescov B, Petrociv B, Dragnovic B: Retropneurmoperitoneal visuali-
6. Curry TS, Dowdey JE, Murry RC: Christensen's physics of diagnostic
zation of abdorminal organs in dormestic anirmals. Vet Radiol 1976;
radiology, ed 4. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1990.
17:23.
7. Feeney DA, Fletcher TF, Hardy RM: Atlas of correlative irmaging
18. Gormez JA, Lawson TL, Korobkin M, et al: Selective abdorminal
anatormy of the norrmal dog: ultrasound and computed tomography.
angiography in the dog. Vet Radiol 1973; 14:72.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1991.
19. Farrow CS: Stress radiography. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 181:777.
8. Herring DS, Bjornton G: Physics, facts, and artifacts of diagnostic
 20. Barr F: Percutaneous biopsy of abdominal organs under ultrasound
ultrasound. Vet Clin North Am 1985; 15:1107.
guidance. I Small Anim Pract 1995; 36:105.
 9. Kremkau FW: Diagnostic ultrasound: principles, instruments and
 21. Crystal MA, Penninck DG, Matz ME, et al: Use of an ultrasound-
exercises, ed 5. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1998.
guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy and autormated core biopsy for
10. Barthez PY, Leveille R, Scrivani PV: Side lobes and grating lobes
the diagnosis of gastrointestinal diseases in srmall anirmals. Vet Radiol
artifacts in ultrasound irmaging. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997;
Ultrasound 1993; 34:438.
38:387.
 22. Hager DA, Nyland TG, Fisher P: Ultrasound-guided biopsy of the 
11. Douglass JP, Kerrmkau FW: The urinary bladder wall hypoechoic
canine liver, kidney and prostate. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:82.
 pseudolesion. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1993; 34:45.
 23. Lamb CR, Trower ND, Gregory SP: Utrasound-guided catheter
12. Kirberger RM: Imaging artifacts in diagnostic ultrasound: a review.
biopsy of the lower urinary tract: technique and results in 12 dogs. J
Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:297.
Small Anim Pract 1996; 37:413.
CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION
23
 24. Leveille R, Partington BP, Biller DS, et al: Complications after ultra.
 31. Shapiro RS, Wagreich J, Parsons RB, et al: Tissue harmonic irmaging
sound-guided biopsy of abdorminal structures in dogs and cats: 246
sonography: an evaluation of irmage quality compared with conven-
cases (1984-1991). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:413.
tional sonography. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1998; 171:1203.
25. Srmith S: Ultrasound-guided biopsy. Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anin
 32. Campani R, Bottinello O, Callida F, et al: The latest in ultrasound:
Pract 1985; 15:1249.
three-dimensional imaging. Eur J Radiol 1998; 27:173.
26. Allen JK,Kramer RW:Enhanced sonographic visualization ofbipsy
 33. Martinoli C, Derchi LE, Rizzatto G, et al: Power Doppler sonogra-
needles. Vet Radiol 1993; 34:359.
 phy: general principles, clinical applications and future prospects.
27. Biller DS, Myer W: Utrasound scanming of superficial structures 
Eur Radiol 1998; 8:1224.
using an ultrasound standoff pad. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:138.
 34. Morgan IP, Silverman S: Techniques of veterinary radiography, ed 4.
28. Luerssen D: Presentation of percutaneous drainage of prostatic
lowa State Press, Ames, lowa, 1987.
abscesses under sonographic control by means of two case reports.
 35. Ticer IW: Radiographic technique in veterinary practice, ed 2. WB
Kleinterpraxis 1993; 38:15.
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1984.
29. Penninck DG, Finn-Bodner ST: Updates in interventional ultra-
 36. Kirberger RM: Radiograph quality evaluation for exposure vari-
sonography. Vet Clin North A1m Simall Anirn Pract 1998; 28:1017.
 ablesa review. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1999; 40:320.
30. Melany M, Grant EG: Clinical experience with sonographic con-
 37. Papageorges M, Sande RD: The Mach phenormenon. Vet Radiol 1990;
trast agents. Semin Utrasound CT MR 1997; 18:3.
31:274.
CHAPTER TWO
The Thorax
iagnostic images of the thorax are very important when evaluating
patients with known or suspected thoracic disease. These images can con-
 it ae j sis ai  pidsns si ri sis e aiu ro 
physical examination. Astute interpretation of diagnostic images also can yield
information not otherwise detectable, suggest a diagnosis not previously consid-
ered, and provide baseline information on the patient's condition for evaluation of
disease progression or regression. The image interpretation also can provide spe-
cific information about a previously formulated tentative clinical diagnosis or list
of differential diagnoses. However, evaluating the images to consider only the clin-
ical differential diagnoses is a serious error. The appropriate choice of imaging
modality, such as radiography, ultrasonography, or computed tomography, will
    i     sn r sd si   
than one modality will be indicated and frequently will be necessary. The entire
imaging study should be evaluated systematically without consideration of the ten-
tative diagnoses so that unsuspected conditions are not overlooked. The images
ing special attention to those areas in which, because of the patient's history or
physical examination, abnormalities would be expected.
TECHNICAL QUALITY: RADIOGRAPHIC
The technical quality of a thoracic radiograph is extremely important, because radiographic
changes of disease can be masked or mimicked by inappropriate radiographic technique. The
patient's position and respiratory phase, as well as exposure factors, beam-restricting devices,
darkroom procedures, and viewing conditions are alimportant aspects of the thoracic radi-
ographic evaluation.Al of these factors alter the radiograph's technical quality, and their effects
must be recognized so that technical errors neither obscure nor are mistaken for disease.
PATIENT'S POSITI0N
A minimum of a lateral recumbent radiograph, either right or left lateral, and either a
dorsoventral (sternal recumbent) or ventrodorsal (dorsal recumbent) radiograph should
be obtained. In certain situations, especially when evaluating for the presence of metasta-
trodorsal view has been recommended.l-4 It appears that the use of two views is statistically
adequate in most situations. However,it may be prudent to recommend taking the oppo-
site lateral view when evaluating a patient for pulmonary metastasis, due to the devastat-
ing effect on the prognosis of the patient with the finding of metastatic disease.
The appearance of the thorax varies depending on the position of the patient when
radiographed, because the dependent lung lobes partially collapse, even in an unanes-
the position in which the patient is placed. Comparison with previous radiographs and
recognition of radiographic abnormalities will be facilitated if the same position is used
each time that the animal is examined.
 In lateral recumbency, the dependent diaphragmatic crus is usually cranial to the oppo-
site crus, and the cranial lung lobe bronchus on the dependent side is usually dorsal to the
opposite cranial lobe bronchus.l0 The cardiac silhouete appears longer from apex to base
25
26
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
FIG. 2-1 A 12-year-old male Labrador Retriever was brought in for evaluation of a large mass in the cau-
dal abdomen. The cardiac silhouette appears shorter and more round when the dorsoventral radiograph
(A) is compared with the ventrodorsal radiograph (B) Diagnosis: Normal thorax.
in the right lateral recumbent than in the lef lateral recumbent radiograph.,l,12 In left lat-
eral recumbency, the cardiac silhouette may fall away from the sternum as the right middle
lung lobe inflates. This produces a radiolucency that separates the heart from the sternum.
 In right lateral recumbency, contact between the heart and sternum usually is maintained.
 In the ventrodorsal radiograph, the cardiac silhouette appears longer and narrower, the
aul u ueul iasuol siedde eaen euaa epneo aul pue iaaiel sieadde aqoi sunl Aiossae
dorsoventral radiograph (Fig. 2-1).13,14
The x-ray beam should be centered over the thorax, because geometric distortion of the
thoracic structures will occur, especially when larger films are used (Fig. 2-2). The x-ray beam
should be centered just behind and between the caudal scapular borders in the dorsoventral
or ventrodorsal radiograph and at the fourth to fifth intercostal space in the lateral radi-
 ograph. The forelimbs should be pulled cranially and fully extended on both views.
with narrow and deep thoracic conformation, the sternum must be elevated slightly from
the x-ray table by a foam sponge or other radiolucent device. Proper lateral positioning can
be recognized on a radiograph when the dorsal rib arches are superimposed and the cos-
tochondral junctions are at the same horizontal level (Fig. 2-3). In a ventrodorsal or
dorsoventral thoracic radiograph, the sternum and vertebral column should be superim-
posed and the distance from the center of the vertebral bodies to the lateral thoracic wall
should be equal on both the right and left sides (Fig. 2-4).
 In the lateral radiograph, malpositioning may produce artifactual tracheal elevation
and splitting of the main stem bronchi (see Fig. 2-3). Malpositioning also alters the shape
of the cardiac silhouette and can create or obscure the impression of cardiomegaly or car-
diac chamber enlargement. The cardiac apex always shifts in the same direction as the ster-
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
27
A
B
 FIG. 2-2 A 5-year-old spayed German Shepherd dog was presented for evaluation of the thorax prior
-s sepien aui ydeiopen oeou espuaa i u u 'y asasp umiu iy jua o
 aa au  sade anas sie a as u si qu ed sd a
cardiac silhouette length is due to geometric distortion resulting from malpositioning of the dog rela-
tive to the x-ray beam. In A the x-ray beam is incorrectly centered over the diaphragm, while in B the
x-ray beam is centered behind the scapulae. There are incidental findings of old fractured ribs on both
'sp uomiu ci np uaass Aatre Arnd parug sso sis yal pue u au
A
B
FIG. z-3 A 2-year-old female Persian cat with anterior uveitis. Thoracic radiographs were obtained to
evaluate the cat for systemic involvement. A, In the initial lateral thoracic radiograph the thorax is
rotated markedly. The dorsal arches of the ribs are separated (closed arrows). The costochondral junc-
tions are at widely different levels (open arrows). B, An additional lateral thoracic radiograph was
obtained. The ribs are superimposed, and the costochondral junctions are at the same level. The tho-
racic rotation moves the trachea closer to the thoracic spine and creates an apparent cardiomegaly.
Diagnosis:Normal thorax.
28
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-4 A 2-year-old female Persian
cat with anterior uveitis. A, In the ini-
 tial ventrodorsal thoracic radiograph
the cardiac silhouette is shifted into
the left hemithorax. This is due to
malpositioning with rotation of the
sternum to the leff. Note that the dor-
sal spinous processes are angled to
the right (arrows). B, The ventrodor-
sal thoracic radiograph was repeated.
The cardiac silhouette is in its normal
snouds iesiop ul uosd
 processes are centered on the tho-
racic vertebrae (arrows). Diagnosis:
Normal thorax.
A
B
num. An apex shift to the right will accentuate or mimic an apparent right heart enlarge-
ment a shift to the lft will minimize the apparent size of the right ventricle. s
The forelimbs should be pulled cranially to avoid superimposition of their density over
the cranial lung lobes, which will increase cranial lung lobe and mediastinal densities. This
can create or obscure pulmonary or mediastinal lesions (Fig. 2-5).
The best radiographs for thoracic evaluation are those in which the animal is most
comfortable and therefore can be positioned symmetrically. Once right or left lateral, ven-
trodorsal, or dorsoventral radiographs are obtained, those positions should be repeated on
all subsequent examinations.
RESPIRATORY PHASE
Obtaining a radiograph at peak inspiration provides optimal contrast, detail, and visibility
of thoracic structures. Although many animals spontaneously will inspire maximally, some
will not. It may be necessary to interfere with respiration momentarily by obstructing the
animal's nares and closing its mouth. This stimulates a deep inspiration when the obstruc-
tion is removed.
 The increased pulmonary density seen at expiration can mimic the appearance of pul-
monary disease. The pulmonary vessels are shorter, wider, and less sharply defined at expi-
ration than at inspiration. The cardiac silhouette appears relatively larger at expiration
because it is surrounded by less aerated lung. The caudal vena cava may appear wider and
may be defined less clearly at expiration (Fig. 2-6).
The difference between inspiration and expiration must be recognized due to the arti-
facts created by an expiratory radiograph.16 Compared with the lateral radiograph exposed
at full expiration, the lateral radiograph exposed at full inspiration has:
1. Increased size of the lung lobes cranial to the cardiac silhouette
2. Slight elevation of the cardiac silhouette from the sternum
 3. Extension of the pulmonary cupula cranial to the first rib
 4. Increased ventral angulation of the trachea
 5. A flatter diaphragm
 6. Greater separation of the diaphragm from the caudal cardiac margin
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
29
A
B
FIG. 2-5 A 5-year-old male mixed breed dog with a 5-month history of cervical pain. Thoracic radi-
ographs were obtained prior to anesthesia. The density of the cranial mediastinum appears to be
increased in the initial lateral radiograph (A). This is due to positioning of the right forelimb over the
ranial thorax. The cranial thorax is normal in density in a repeat lateral thoracic radiograph (B). The
forelimb has been extended. Diagnosis: Normal thorax.
 7. A more ventral position of the point at which the diaphragm contacts the cardiac
silhouette
 8. A lumbodiaphragmatic angle caudal to T12 (compared with T11 at expiration)
 9. A wider lumbodiaphragmatic angle
10. Increased size and lucency of the accessory lung lobe
11. A caudal vena cava that is more parallel to the vertebral column and appears more
 elongated, distinct, and thinner.
When compared with the ventrodorsal expiratory radiograph, the inspiratory radiograph has:
1. A smaller cardiac silhouette (this is more apparent than real due to a decreased car-
diothoracic ratio)
2. An increased thoracic width (most obvious caudal to the sixth rib)
 3. An increased thoracic cavity length
 4. The diaphragmatic dome positioned caudal to mid-T8
 5. A wider cardiodiaphragmatic angle
 6. Decreased cardiodiaphragmatic contact
7. A more distinct, less blunted cardiac apex
8. A costodiaphragmatic angle caudal to T10.
 Most radiographs are exposed between full expiration and full inspiration; therefore it is
unlikely that all of these changes will be seen in any one radiograph. The changes should
be used as guides for recognizing the expiratory radiograph and are most obvious when
inspiratory and expiratory radiographs are placed side by side.
ExPOSURE FACTORS
A properly exposed radiograph is essential for evaluating pulmonary disease correctly. For
 this reason, a technique chart based upon the patient's greatest thoracic dimension (usu-
ally measured at the level of the xiphoid cartilage for the ventrodorsal view and at the
"spring of the ribs" for the lateral view), along with measuring all patients at the same
anatomical site, ensures the reproducible radiographic exposure of different patients or of
the same individual on repeated examination. Exposure factors used should be recorded so
that follow-up examinations may be made using the identical technique. Unfortunately,
technique charts are designed for the average individual, and the patient's physical status
and conformation must be considered when selecting a technique. An emaciated Afghan
Hound will require less exposure than an average conditioned German Shepherd or an
obese Cocker Spaniel, even though their lateral thoracic measurements may be identical. A
radiographic technique that is ideal for the German Shepherd will overexpose the Afghan
Hound and underexpose the Cocker Spaniel. This occurs because the Afghan Hound's
30
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-6 A 12-year-old male
Pekingese with a single acute episode
of collapse. A, In the initial lateral
thoracic radiograph there is an
density. The right diaphragmatic
crus overlaps the cardiac silhouette.
The diaphragm is located at the level
of Tll. These findings indicate that
this radiograph was obtained at
expiration. B, A second lateral tho-
racic radiograph was obtained. The
right diaphragmatic crus is posi-
tioned more caudally. The size of the
right cranial lung lobe is increased.
The diaphragm is positioned cau-
dally to the level of T13. The overall
pulmonary density appears normal.
The pulmonary vascular structures
are more clearly defined. Diagnosis:
Normal thorax. The apparent
increase in pulmonary density on A
was due to expiration. This can
mimic pulmonary disease and
obscure pulmonary vascular struc-
tures and can create the appearance
 of mild cardiomegaly.
A
B
thorax is mostly air-dense lung, whereas the Cocker Spaniel's thorax is mostly fat and tis-
 sue density. Overexposure of the radiograph may hide intrapulmonary disease, while
 Selection of specific kilovolt (peak) (kVp) and milliampere-second (mAs) setings is a
matter of personal preference within the requirements dictated to achieve a diagnostic
radiograph. As a general rule, the highest mA setting, shortest exposure time, and a high
 sp s n  n  r pd ae s d
machine capability and the x-ray film and screens used. Exposure time is extremely
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
31
FIG. 2-7 A 2-year-old male Labrador
Retriever with an acute onset of
vomiting, nystagmus, and ataxia. A,
In the initial lateral thoracic radi-
ograph the increased density of the
thorax is the result of underexposure.
B, A second lateral thoracic radi-
ograph was obtained usingthe proper
radiographic technique. The pul-
monary structures and airways are
defined much more clearly in the sec-
ond radiograph. Underexposure of
the radiograph can mimic a pul-
 monary infiltrate. Diagnosis: Normal
thorax.
A
B
 important, because exposures of 1/30 second or less are essential in order to minimize res-
piratory motion. Longer exposure times may result in apparent motion, causing blurring
of pulmonary vessels, bronchi, interstitial structures, and overlying bony structures. This
 an create the appearance of a pulmonary infiltrate or obscure pulmonary lesions. If
motion is suspected, the bony structures should be evaluated closely, because loss of defi-
nition of ribs or bony structures is readily detectable.
32
GRIDS
A fixed or moveable grid should be used for thoracic radiographs of those patients whose
be considered when selecting a grid. Scatter radiation will cause film fog, which produces
a resultant overall increase in pulmonary density and loss of structural detail. In general, a
grid is recommended for patients whose chest measurement is greater than 10 cm; how-
ever, the patient's conformation must be considered when grids are employed. Because less
scatter radiation occurs in a 10-cm wide, thin dog than in a 10-cm wide, obese dog, a grid
 is recommended in obese dogs that are 8 cm or wider.
BEAM-RESTRICTING DEVICES
Beam-restricting devices, or collimators, are designed to limit precisely the x-ray exposure
to the area being radiographed. This reduces patient and technologist exposure and
improves the quality of the radiographic image by reducing the amount of scatter radia-
tion. Close collimation with beam restriction to the thoracic area is ideal.
DARKROOM PROCEDURES
Many excellent radiographs are ruined in the darkroom during processing. Careful han-
dling of the x-ray film before, during, and after processing is essential. A standard time and
temperature film-developing protocol is extremely important, because thoracic radi-
ographic density always is compared with a mental standard established from previous
cases and radiographs of the same patient at an earlier date. Underdeveloping will increase
and overdeveloping will decrease the apparent thoracic density. Altering the processing
time will not rescue an improperly exposed radiograph. Automatic processing capabilities
will enhance the uniformity and predictability of darkroom procedures and results.
VIEWING CONDITI0NS
The conditions in which the final product is evaluated are important. The radiograph
 should be fixed completely, washed, and dried before viewing. Because there is a natural
impatience to determine the cause of a disease as soon as possible, many radiographs are
examined while still wet, especially when manual processing techniques are used. Some
abnormalities will be a great deal more apparent affer a film is dry. Therefore it is impera-
tive that the radiograph be reexamined after it is dry.
A quiet, darkened area with illumination provided by a light source designed for radi-
ographic viewing is best. A high-intensity beam or "hot light" should be available and used
to examine overexposed areas on the radiograph. Masks that block out the light from the
unexposed edges of the radiograph are helpful.
 Positioning the radiograph on the view box in a consistent manner will facilitate radi-
ographic interpretation. By convention, lateral radiographs are placed with the animal's
head to the viewer's left and its spine toward the top, and ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radi-
ographs are placed with the animal's head up and its right side on the viewer's left. When
this is done consistently, anatomical structures are seen at specific places on the radiograph,
and both normal and abnormal densities and shapes may be recognized quickly.
Proper thoracic radiographic interpretation results from the production of excellent,
not merely acceptable, thoracic radiographs, from experience gained by careful systematic
interpretation, and from the knowledge of various artifacts, normal anatomical variations,
 and thoracic diseases and how they affect the appearance of a radiograph.17,18 In addition,
the survey radiographic findings may lead to other radiographic or radiographically
assisted procedures.
TECHNICAL QUALITY: SONOGRAPHIC
TECHNICAL PERSPECTIVE
Ultrasonography, when used in the common pulse-echo mode, is an imaging procedure
designed specifically for use in soft tissues. Both air and bone block penetration of the
sound beam to the depth of interest. Therefore ultrasonographic techniques are of little
CHapTeR TWO THE THORaX
33
value for lung assessment unless the lung lesion is immediately adjacent to the chest wall.
Air in the lung willblock sonographic interrogation of the heart unless penetration to the
by fluid or a mass. Similarly, mediastinal ultrasonography depends upon patient confor-
  s   a n sre s d    
the lungs at both the thoracic inlet and parasternal windows. However, as mediastinal, par-
ticularly cranial mediastinal, masses enlarge or as mediastinal and pleural fluid accumu-
lates, sonographic access to mediastinal structures is enhanced.
PATIENT PREPARATION
aq oi as au 's sdais may e Aiuo sanbai Audeiaouos io uoedaid ued iadoi
examined must be prepared so that good contact can be made between the transducer and
the patient. Air cannot be tolerated at the transducer-skin interface because it blocks the
transmission of the sound waves. The best way to prepare the site is to clip all hair from the
area of interest. Then, liberally apply ultrasonographic contact gel to establish good surface
contact between the probe and the patient. In dogs or cats with short or thin hair coats or
if hair clipping cannot be done, a thorough soaking of the patient's hair to remove allair
from between the shafts of the hair may be adequate. Isopropyl alcohol works well for this
 purpose. Then ultrasonographic gel should be applied liberally.
 The proper patient positioning and probe orientation depend upon which anatomical
structure is being imaged. Examination of the heart and mediastinum is facilitated by
 ns u ps iodns n ain e  qan e u nd a l
manner that the probe can be applied to the area of interest from the dependent side (i.e.,
from beneath the patient). This is best accomplished with a table that has a cutout in its
surface so that the probe is readily moveable underneath the patient. This serves to maxi-
mize the size of the ultrasonographic window (cardiac notch), because the dependent lung
will collapse and the heart will move toward the dependent thoracic wall.
Ketamine hydrochloride has been shown to have minimal effects on the feline heart.19 On
the other hand, medetomidine and xylazine have been shown to alter significantly echocar-
diographic values in the dog.20
 Sonography is best performed in a quiet room with subdued lighting. Excess ambient
light will reflect from the screen and make image evaluation more difficult.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT
 Evaluation of thoracic anatomy is facilitated by using the highest frequency transducer that
addo Aq panaa sq are sou po zakaenbape anns au snuad m
studies using lower frequencies. Equipment used for echocardiography should minimally
be able to produce both M-mode and B-mode studies, simultaneously record an electro-
cardiogram (ECG), and should be able to measure and record the actual size of imaged
structures in both modes. Preferred equipment should perform the minimums described
above as well as produce Doppler studies, using pulsed wave, continuous wave, and color-
flow techniques, and be able to measure and record the images and data. Ideally, the trans-
ducer head should be small enough to allow for positioning between ribs. For cardiac
au o s snusu a ade o aqeid si ei a uu e suoua
moving structures. Electronic sector scanners (e.g., curved linear and radial array or phase
array) have an advantage over mechanical sector scanners in this regard. They also display
simultaneous real-time two-dimensional images, whereas mechanical sector scanners can
display only one or the other in real time. Evaluations of other thoracic structures (e.g-,
mediastinal masses) may be performed better using a low frame rate. Various combinations
 of contrast and postprocessing functions are determined by the individual sonographer's
preference.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE
A complete echocardiogram requires the use of B- and M-mode imaging as well as Doppler
studies. B-mode (real-time, two-dimensional mode) reveals an image of cardiac anatomy
34
in a manner that is clearly representative of the actual anatomy. The size, location,
echogenicity, and motion of various structures can be evaluated. M-mode, also known as
TM-mode, time-motion mode, or motion mode, reveals a graphic representation of an iso-
lated portion of the cardiac anatomy. This is the so-called ice-pick view. This graphic rep-
resentation continuously displays an isolated narrow line of structures over time, so that
the motion of the structures within the beam is seen clearly and recorded. M-mode is used
for measuring cardiac chamber diameters and wall thickness as well as for observing the
motion and physical relationships of structures to each other, such as the motion of the
septal leaflet of the mitral valve in diastole and systole as well as the relationship of its tip
to the interventricular septum.
 Ideally, echocardiograms should be performed with a simultaneous recording of the
ECG so that the mechanical and electrical activity of the heart can be correlated.
Measurements of wall thicknesses and chamber diameters are made at either end systole or
end diastole, as determined by electrical activity landmarks (e.g., end diastole at the onset
of the QRS complex). Simultaneous ECG also is used to ensure that the specific image cho-
sen for measurement represents a part of a normally conducted cardiac cycle.
is pe p i an umq si smi rsd ii au ry o rsn
intercostal spaces between the sternum and costochondral junctions (Fig. 2-8). From this
location, the long-axis four-chamber view and the long-axis left ventricular outflow view
are obtained. Also obtained from this location are the short-axis views. Other images that
can provide useful information include the left caudal parasternal long-axis two-chamber
view, the long-axis left ventricular outflow view, the four-chamber view, and the five-
chamber view. The transducer location for the left caudal parasternal views is between the
fifth and seventh intercostal spaces, as close to the sternum as possible. Left cranial
parasternal views (both long-axis and short-axis views) also may be helpful on occasion.
The transducer location for these views is the left third and fourth intercostal spaces
between the sternum and the costochondral junctions.24
FIG. 2-8 Diagrams of the thorax showing the proper transducer
Right Parasternal Window
locations for the right and left parasternal echocardiographic views.
(From Thomas WP, Gaber CE, Jacobs GJ, et al: Recommendation for 
standards in transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography in the
dog and cat. I Vet Intern Med 1993; 7:248.)
Left Parasternal Windows
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
35
Specific positioning and images should be used for Doppler studies."5 The proper posi-
tioning aligns the ultrasound beam as parallel as possible to the direction of blood flow.
 This will minimize artifacts and optimize the Doppler signal.
THORACIC SONOGRAPHY TECHNIQUE
Thoracic structures other than the heart also may be studied. The use of a stand-off pad or
fuid offset probe may be helpful in evaluating superficial structures that may be obscured
by near-field artifact. The intercostal soft tissues may be visualized directly, and the subcu-
taneous fat and underlying muscles may be delineated clearly. The normal parietal pleura
is thin and is not identified as a separate structure. Sonography may be a useful tool for
evaluatinof leralseaseparticlalihytrax ispresent63Tcranial
astinum may be studied also.27 This may be attempted by using the heart as an acoustic
window. However, the normal left and right cranial lung lobes usually prevent visualization
of normal mediastinal structures using this approach. If hydrothorax or a very large mass
is present, the cranial mediastinum may be scanned from other portals, such as the thoracic
inlet or directly over the mass. In normal studies, no structures will be identified clearly,
because the lungs will envelop the mediastinal structures almost completely. If pleural fluid
is present, various normal cranial mediastinal structures may be identified.
CERVICAL SONOGRAPHY TECHNIQUE
Multiple structures in the cervical soft tissues have been examined sonographically.
yunn seduso pue spuea pioaered spea piu ie au go suonds
have been published.3-39 Structures usually are imaged in multiple planes.
SYSTEMATIC IMAGE INTERPRETATION
Evaluation of the radiograph's technical quality is the first phase of radiographic interpreta-
tion. Although an imperfectly exposed and positioned radiograph may have to be examined
because of the patient's clinical status, the effect of these factors on the radiograph must be
considered during radiographic evaluation. Any observed “lesion? that could be caused by
 d   os y  p aq is an r
decrease the likelihood of overlooking an abnormality The particular system used is less
important than is its consistent application every time a radiograph is examined.
 One system that may be used is the following:
1. Examine the soft-tissue structures outside the thorax, including the cervical soft
tissues, soft tissues of the forelimbs, and that portion of the abdomen shown on the
radiograph.
 2. Examine the bony structures, including the vertebral column, ribs, sternebrae, and
long bones.
3. Examine the diaphragm, including both crura and the cupula (dome).
4. Examine the pleural space (ie., the potential space between the lungs and the tho-
racic wall and between the separate lung lobes).
 5. Examine the mediastinum and all its reflections (i.e., cranially and ventrally
between the right cranial and left cranial lung lobes, caudally between the accessory
and left caudal lung lobe, and ventrally around the cardiac silhouette and
diaphragm).
 6. Examine the trachea and trace it to and beyond the bifurcation and as far down
each of the bronchi as possible.
 7. Examine the esophagus or the area through which it normally passes.
 8. Examine the cardiac silhouette, evaluating its size, shape, and position, especially
relative to the animal's thoracic conformation.
 9. Examine the aorta, tracing it as far caudally as possible.
10. Examine the caudal vena cava from heart to diaphragm.
11. Examine the lung. Look at its overall density, as well as the size, shape, and pattern
of pulmonary arteries, veins, and bronchial and interstitial structures.
12. Go back and reexamine anything that appeared abnormal on the first examination
and interpret that abnormality in light of any other abnormality noted.
36
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY
13. Combine all radiographic abnormalities into a list of possible diagnoses in order of
probability or, when possible, make a specific diagnosis.
14. Reevaluate the abnormalities noted in light of the clinical, historical, or physical
findings, and determine a radiographic diagnosis.
 Evaluation of the sonogram should begin with an assessment of technical factors. Depth
gain (time-gain compensation),frequency,focal zone, and overall power should be appro-
priate for the structures being examined. Alignment to a structure and symmetry of the
cardiac chambers are critical in many cases.
 The echocardiogram should follow a set course of study. First perform the right
parasternal long-axis ventricular outflow study, followed by the right parasternal long-
axis four-chamber view, and then the right parasternal short-axis views. Doppler stud-
ies (color-flow or spectral or both) should be made across each valve. The combination of
 B-mode, M-mode, and Doppler studies constitutes a routine, thorough examination. The
majority of the wall thickness and chamber diameter measurements should be made in
the M-mode. Measurements may be made in the B-mode study if correlated with the
 ECG. Left-sided views should be used if clinically indicated. Doppler studies should like-
wise follow a set protocol, including velocity measurements across each valve, preferably
pulsed wave across the mitral and tricuspid valves and continuous wave across the pul-
monic and aortic valves, and color-flow evaluation across each valve and in the ventricu-
lar outflow tracts.
NORMAL RADIOGRAPHIC AND SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY
SOFT TISSUES
The soft tissues surrounding the thorax should be evaluated. Fascial planes should be
outlined by fat; soft tissues should have a uniform homogenous density. The position of
the forelimbs should be noted, because their superimposition over the cranial thorax
adds to that region's density. Skin folds are created when patients are positioned for tho-
racic radiography and these can be identified as tissue-dense lines that have a distinct,
dense margin. These lines usually can be traced beyond the thoracic margins (Fig. 2-9).
The nipples and other cutaneous structures may be superimposed on the lung and
mimic intrapulmonary nodules. In certain situations, if needed, the nipples may be
 coated with barium to identify them positively. However, in most cases, examining the
patient and confirming the location of the nipples is enough. Pleural masses may extend
into the external soft tissues. Therefore intercostal swellings should be evaluated criti-
cally. The hepatic and gastric shadows should be examined, noting their position, size,
shape, and density If hepatic or gastric abnormalities are observed or suspected, an
abdominal radiograph should be obtained.
The soft tissues surrounding the thorax do not have specific sonographic characteris-
tics—they appear as any other soft tissue. The muscles are heteroechoic, and the fat tissue
between fascia as well as the fibrous connective tissues are hyperechoic. The soft tissues of
the thorax are not evaluated routinely by sonography.
BONY STRUCTURES
The vertebral column, ribs, sternebrae, and bones of the proximal forelimb usually are
included on a thoracic radiograph. An exposure that is correct for thoracic viscera usually
underexposes these bony structures. Positioning for thoracic radiographs is not ideal for
evaluation of the regional bony structures; however, the vertebral column, ribs, sternebrae,
scapulae, and long bones still should be examined. Another radiograph, properly exposed
for evaluation of bony structures, must be obtained if abnormalities are suspected on the
survey radiograph.
 The vertebral column should have a smooth, continuous contour. Disc spaces should
be uniform, and rib articulations and joint spaces should be symmetric. An apparent
decrease in bone density will be observed along the ventral aspect of the vertebral bodies
when there is superimposition of the lung. The pattern within the lung may create the
 appearance of irregular vertebral body density; careful examination will identify the pat-
tern as pulmonary in origin.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
37
FIG. 2-9 Ventrodorsal radiograph of a 6-year-old male Irish Setter
brought in for evaluation of seizures. The thorax is normal. There is
a skin fold superimposed on the left side of the thorax (arrows). Note
the sharply defined margin of this skin fold. The skin fold can be
 traced beyond the margins ofthe thoracic cavity. Diagnosis: Normal
thorax.
 On the lateral radiograph, each pair of ribs should be superimposed where they artic-
ulate with the vertebrae. Additionally, the costochondral junctions should appear at the
same level. Because of the curvature and density of the ribs, abnormalities may be subtle.
Tracing the ribs from right to left across the thorax on the ventrodorsal view facilitates
lesion detection. The rib density should be uniform and a faint cortical shadow should be
visible. A rib head, neck, and tubercle can be identified proximally, although the size and
shape of these structures are variable. The costochondral junctions are widened slightly,
and the costal cartilages may calcify in a solid, irregular, granular, or stippled pattern.
Calcification may begin before l year of age, usually increases with age, and may appear
without clinical significance.
 In addition to the ribs and costal cartilages, the rib spacing should be evaluated and
should show uniformity from side to side. Uneven spacing suggests uneven inflation of the
lung and may reflect soft-tissue, rib, pleural, pulmonary, or diaphragmatic pathology.
The ribs of certain breeds, such as the Dachshund and Basset Hound, first curve out
ward then inward at or near the costochondral junction. This is followed by an outward
then inward curve to their sternal attachment. In the ventrodorsal radiograph of these
 dogs, the thoracic wall conformation produces an extra density over the lung that should
not be mistaken for pleural or pulmonary disease (Fig. 2-10).
38
FIG. z-10 A and B, An ll-year-old male Basset Hound with multiple
cutaneous mast cell tumors. The thorax was evaluated for intratho-
racic metastases. The thorax is normal. The cardiac silhouette size and
shape are normal for a dog of wide thoracic conformation. Note the
soft-tissue density that overlies the right and left sides of the lateral
thoracic margin (arrows). This density is created by the configuration
of the thoracic wall and does not represent pleural disease. The metal-
lic density in the right cranial thorax represents a vascular clip, which 
was present in the soft tissues dorsal to the thoracic vertebral bodies.
Diagnosis: Normal thorax.
A
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
39
The sternebrae and their intersternebral cartilages should be evaluated. The amount of
 mineralization of the chondral and intersternebral cartilages usually increases with age and
is greater in larger dogs. Malalignment of sternebrae is observed frequently and is insignif-
icant unless accompanied by intrathoracic or extrathoracic soft-tissue swelling, pleural
effusion, or clinical signs. Sternebral malformations usually are insignificant. Variations in
the size and number of sternebrae and in the shape of the manubrium and xiphoid are
common.
 Thoracic conformation varies with breed and each variation influences the appearance
of the thoracic viscera. It is important to note the animal's thoracic shape and evaluate the
thoracic viscera accordingly. Three major categories may be observed:
1. Deep and narrow—such as Doberman Pinschers, Afghan Hounds, Collies, and
Whippets (Fig. 2-11).
2. Intermediate—such as German Shepherd dogs, Labrador Retrievers, and
Dalmatians (Fig. 2-12).
ea p s ss so  s m  s s
(Fig. 2-13).
Some variation occurs even within the same breed; therefore categorization should be
 based on each individual's conformation.
DIAPHRAGM
The diaphragm defines the caudal margin of the thoracic cavity. It is visible radiographically.
because the air-flled lung contacts its smooth cranial surface With deep inspiratoryeffors, the
diaphragmatic attachments to the thoracic wall may appear on the ventrodorsal or dorsoven-
tral views as peaks or scalloped margins along the diaphragm margin. This has been referred
to as tenting of the diaphragm. The caudal margin of the diaphragm blends with the shadows
adse esop sii u sn yei e n e po psooo si dep ai s pe ra u g
and a central cupula, or dome, in the ventral portion. There are three separate openings
through the diaphragm for the aorta, esophagus, and caudal vena cava. Because of its curved
shape, the diaphragmatic profile changes with the animal's position and the x-ray beam
angle.10 The diaphragms shape is infuenced alsoby respiratory phase, pressure from intratho-
racic structures (e.g, normal, hypoinflated, or hyperinflated lungs, pulmonary masses) or
abdominal contents, breed, obesity, and age. Because of the diaphragm's complex shape, aer-
ated lung will be superimposed over the liver and pulmonary pathology may be more readily
identified in those areas, depending upon the radiographic technique that was used.
 In the ventrodorsal and dorsoventral radiographs, the cranial peak of the cupula fre-
quently lies to the right of the midline. The caudal vena cava interrupts the diaphragmatic
outline at about this point. The crura may be identified as separate structures overlapping
the cupula laterally, curving caudaly toward the midline, and blending with the vertebral
column at about T10. The crura are more often evident on a ventrodorsal view, because the
angle of the x-ray beam divergence will allow some portions of the beam to be tangential
to the individual portions of the diaphragm. However, there is considerable variation
among individuals, so the appearance is variable and one, both, or neither crura may be
seen. On the lateral radiograph, all three portions of the diaphragm are usually evident,
with the dependent crus usually cranial to the opposite crus.f0 The margins of the caudal
vena cava interrupt the outline of the right crus. When the animal is in right lateral recum-
bency, the air-filled gastric fundus may be identified caudal to the left crus. Fat within the
falciform ligament ventral to the liver may outline the diaphragmatic cupula on the
abdominal side. This may be a helpful finding in patients with pleural fluid in which
diaphragmatic hernia is being considered as a possible diagnosis.
Sonographically, the diaphragm is not identifiable specifically. The interface of the
diaphragm and the air-filled lung creates a hyperechoic line that has the shape of the nor-
mal diaphragm. This interface frequently is misidentified as the diaphragm. The actual
 diaphragmatic muscle is obscured by the reverberation that occurs at the level of the
diaphragm-lung interface. Diaphragmatic muscle is clearly visible only when there is
simultaneous pleural and peritoneal effusion. The caudal vena cava usually can be identi-
fied traversing the diaphragm. Identification of the esophagus at the esophageal hiatus is
 more difficult due to air in the stomach and lung.
40
Small Animal RadiOlogy And UltrasonoGraphy
FIG. 2-11 A 2-year-old female
Doberman Pinscher brought in for
routine ovariohysterectomy Thoracic
radiographs were obtained at the
owner's request. The thorax is nor-
mal. A, On the lateral radiograph the
ardiac size and shape are normal for
a dog of narrow thoracic conforma-
tion. B, On the ventrodorsal radi-
 ograph a soft tissue-dense triangular
structure is present in the cranial leff
thorax. This represents soft tissue and
fat within the cranial mediastinum
(arrows). In young dogs, the thymus 
may be identified in this location.
Diagnosis: Normal thorax.
Chapter TWO THe ThoraX
41
FIG. 2-1z An 1l-year-old female German Shepherd dog with a 2-
month history of unilateral epistaxis. The thorax is normal. A, On
the ventrodorsal radiograph fat density can be seen in the cranial
mediastinum (arrows) and also outlines the caudal mediastinum
(arrows). B, The density ventral to the cardiac silhouette on the lat-
eral radiograph represents fat in the ventral mediastinum. There is
an indentation in the cranial ventral margin of the cardiac silhouette
at the site of the interventricular groove (open arrow). Pulmonary
structures are identified easily with calcification present within some
 bronchial walls. This is most obvious on the lateral radiograph over
the cardiac silhouette. The size and shape ofthe cardiac silhouette are
normal for a dog with intermediate thoracic conformation.
 Diagnosis: Normal thorax.
A
B
PLEURAL SPACE
The pleural space is a potential space between the visceral and parietal pleura and between
the visceral pleura of adjacent lung lobes. In normal animals, a small amount of serous
fluid is present within this space. However, because of the size of this space and the small
amount of fluid that it contains, it is not visible radiographically. Fluid or air accumulation
42
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-13 A 7-month-old male
English Bulldog with a l-month his-
tory of anorexia. The thorax is nor-
mal for a dog of this breed. The
cardiac silhouette appears enlarged;
however, it is normal for a dog of
wide thoracic conformation. A and
B, The cranial mediastinum also
appears widened, but this dog is
 obese and the mediastinal widening
 represents an accumulation of fat. B,
On the ventrodorsal radiograph fat
also is seen within the caudal medi-
astinum (closed arrows). The accu-
mulation of fat also is responsible for
the separation of the lungs from the
thoracic wall in the caudal portion of
the thorax (open arrows). Diagnosis:
Normal thorax.
CHapter TWO THe THoraX
43
within this potential space, or fibrosis, or calcification of the pleura will make the pleural
space visible. When the direction of the x-ray beam is parallel to an interlobar fissure, it
may be radiographically evident as a thin linear tissue density. The locations of the inter-
lobar fissures within the thorax are fairly consistent and these should be examined specif-
ically. Fat may accumulate beneath the parietal pleura in obese animals and be visible (see
Fig. 2-13). The pleural space width may be accentuated on an expiratory radiograph in a
normal animal.
The normal pleural space is not identifiable sonographically because it is so small. Mild
pleural thickening or calcification usually is not identified. A small volume of air that is free
in the pleural space may be extremely difficult to differentiate from air that is within the
lung. Horizontal-beam radiographs can facilitate the identification of small amounts of
either pleural air or fluid. Pleural fluid is readily identifiable sonographically as a relatively
upon the cellular and protein content of the fluid) between the thoracic wall and the lung.
MEDIASTINUM
 The mediastinum separates the right and left hemithoraces into unequal portions and is
formed by parietal pleural reflections (mediastinal pleura) over the midline mediastinal
structures. The cranial mediastinum contains a number of vascular, lymphatic, and other
structures, including the cranial vena cava; brachiocephalic, subclavian, and internal tho-
-  n  d   a   
diosympathetic, and cardiovagal nerves; esophagus; trachea; and sternal and cranial
mediastinal lymph nodes. The right cranial lung lobe displaces the cranial ventral medi-
astinum to the left. The accessory lung lobe displaces the caudal ventral mediastinum
into the left hemithorax. The mediastinum is fenestrated in the dog and does not prevent
   s    n   r   sd
astinum frequently is complete (i.e., not fenestrated) in the cat. The mediastinum in both
species communicates cranially with the cervical fascia and caudally with the retroperi-
toneal space.
The dorsal mediastinum extends from the thoracic inlet to the diaphragm, but it is not
identifiable radiographically. The ventral mediastinum is divided into precardiac and post-
cardiac portions by the heart. The precardiac mediastinum contains a number of soft tis-
sue-dense structures and is readily identified radiographically. On the ventrodorsal
radiograph, it lies mostly on the midline; however, its ventral portion is displaced to the left
by the right cranial lung lobe. On the lateral radiograph, the ventral precardiac medi-
astinum may be identified from the trachea to the ventral margin of the cranial vena cava.
Except for the tracheal lumen or calcified tracheal rings, the individual tissue-dense struc-
tures within the cranial mediastinum usually cannot be identified on survey radiography.
lsiuaa su uo mous e sis ud spresod unu enusa ne a
the left by the accessory lung lobe.40
The caudal mediastinal structures (i.e., caudal vena cava, aorta, esophagus) are discussed
separately. Note that the caudal vena cava is in a fold, or plica, of the right mediastinal pleura
and therefore is isolated from the potential space within the posterior mediastinum.
 In puppies and kittens, the thymus may produce a widened cranial ventral medi-
astinum. This appears in the left precardiac mediastinum as a “sail sign" extending from the
mediastinum toward the left thoracic wall, just cranial to the heart. In older dogs and cats,
especially obese individuals, the precardiac and, much less frequently, the postcardiac
mediastinum may be quite wide. Fat may separate the cardiac silhouette and lung from the
sternum on the lateral view, mimicking pleural fluid or even, rarely, air (see Figs. 2-12 and
2-13). The presence of mediastinal fat should be recognized, because where the fat is con-
tiguous with the heart the cardiac margins will remain apparent. This occurs because the
fat is less dense than the heart. However, a mediastinum that is widened as a result of
fat accumulation will not displace the trachea. This characteristic helps distinguish fat
within the mediastinum from widening due to a mediastinal mass. Also, the lateral medi-
astinal margins usually are smooth and linear when widened due to fat accumulation,
whereas masses usually cause the medial margin of the cranial lobes to be curvilinear (ie.,
44
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY
bulge laterally). In obese animals, small volumes of pleural fluid and small mediastinal
masses can be hidden within the mediastinal fat.
The mediastinum sometimes can be viewed using the heart as a sonographic window.
 Normal individual structures other than the aortic root and caudal vena cava normally are
not identified, because the lung almost completely envelops the heart and blocks transmis-
 sion of the sound waves. Transesophageal ultrasonographic techniques have been used to
evaluate mediastinal structures.41
 Computed tomography has been used to evaluate the mediastinum, and the normal
structures have been described.42,43
TRACHEA
The air-filled radiolucent trachea is identified easily in every thoracic radiograph. It is an
important landmark for evaluating the mediastinum and the cardiac silhouette. The
 position of the trachea in the cranial thorax may vary depending on the position of the
head and neck. When the head and neck are extended, the normal trachea is straight;
head or neck flexion may produce a dorsal or rightward curve in the trachea (Fig. 2-14).
The trachea and the thoracic spine usually have a slowly progressive divergence from the
 thoracic inlet to the tracheal bifurcation. The degree of tracheal-spine divergence (i.e.,
ventral deviation from the spine) varies with thoracic conformation and is greater in
animals with deep, narrow thoracic dimensions than in those with shallow, wide
conformation.
The tracheal diameter varies only slightly with respiration in most animals. This vari-
ation may be increased in older small-breed dogs, especially those with tracheal chon-
dromalacia, but usually is not identified except on paired inspiration and expiration
films due to the minimal change involved. The cervical trachea narrows slightly at inspi-
i   s si an m s i a si  
trachea. Tracheal size should equal the internal laryngeal diameter measured at the
cricoid cartilage or should be at least 3 times the diameter of the proximal one third of
the third rib. If the diameter is smaller, a diagnosis of tracheal hypoplasia may be
 made.4,45 Similarly, the tracheal diameter should be constant between the larynx and
just cranial to the tracheal bifurcation.
The inner (mucosal) surface of the trachea should be smooth and well defined. On the
lateral radiograph, the esophagus may overlap the trachea at the thoracic inlet and partially
obscure its lumen. The significance of this overlap shadow is controversial, and some radi-
ologists consider it a sign of partial collapse or invagination of the cervical portion of the
dorsal trachealis muscle due to direct pressure from the adjacent esophagus. Tracheal ring
calcification varies among individuals but usually increases with advancing age and has no
clinical relevance.
The trachea branches into the bronchial tree caudal to the aortic arch at the fifth or
sixth intercostal space, almost invariably the sixth in the cat. A ventrodorsal radiograph
may need to be overexposed to demonstrate the trachea and bronchial branches because
of the superimposed density of the sternum and spine. The angle at which the bronchi
branch will vary, but it is usually 60 to 90 degrees depending upon the patient's confor-
mation. On the right lateral radiograph, a slight ventral deviation of the trachea occurs
at the bifurcation, followed by a dorsal deflection of the caudal main stem bronchi. The
right cranial lobe bronchus is usually the most cranial bronchial branch, with the left
cranial lobe bronchus branching next from the ventral trachea. 46 The right middle lobe
bronchus rarely is identified. The main stem bronchi to the caudal lung lobes continue
caudally and dorsally.
 In younger dogs, the larger bronchi can be traced only a short distance beyond the
bifurcation. In older dogs, the bronchial wall may be traced more peripherall due to
either bronchial or peribronchial fibrosis or calcification.
ESOPHAGUS
The normal esophagus is usually not visible because of the blending of its fluid density
with that of other mediastinal structures. However, if the esophagus contains a swal-
lowed bolus of air, it may be identified anywhere along its path. In some individuals, the
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
45
A
FIG. 2-14 A 4-year-old spayed Doberman Pinscher with a mass in the oral cavity. The thorax was
radiographed to evaluate the dog for the possibility of pulmonary metastasis. A, In the initial lateral
radiograph the trachea appeared to be deviated dorsally, cranial tothe cardiac silhouette. B, A second
lateral thoracic radiograph was obtained with the head and neck extended. The tracheal deviation is
no longer identified. There was no evidence of pulmonary metastasis. Diagnosis: Normal thorax.
normal esophagus can be seen on the lateral radiograph as a fluid-dense stripe dorsal to
the caudal vena cava and extending caudally from the level the heart to the esophageal
 hiatus of the diaphragm. In other individuals, visualization of this structure may repre-
sent an abnormal finding.
The esophagus is located to the left of the trachea at the thoracic inlet, becomes dorsal
 to the trachea in the cranial mediastinum, and continues at that level to the diaphragm.
The esophagus can become dilated when an animal is anesthetized or exhibit marked
aerophagia associated with struggling during restraint. This dilation should not be misin-
terpreted as esophageal disease.
CARDIAC SILHOUETTE
Radiographic evaluation of the cardiac silhouette is complicated by the size and shape vari-
ations in different species, breeds, and individuals, and by the effect of malpositioning on
its appearance. The cardiac silhouette is not a profile of the heart itself but is composed of
the heart, pericardium, pericardial and mediastinal fat, and other structures at the hilus of
thelung.
Cardiac size varies slightly with respiration. A minimal increase in size at expiration is
enhanced by a decreased lung volume and increased sternal contact.
The cardiac size and shape vary during the cardiac cycle.47 This change is most notice-
able in larger dogs and when short exposure times are used. Ventrodorsal radiographs of
the heart during ventricular systole are characterized by a widened cranial portion, nar-
 rowed apex, and bulging or accentuation of the main pulmonary artery.
on the animal's thoracic conformation, the cardiac shape also varies. Dogs with deep and
narrow thoracic conformation have an elongated, thin, oval, or egg-shaped heart, which
often seems relatively small when compared with the thoracic volume. On the lateral
views of these dogs the apex-base axis of the heart is almost perpendicular to the spine
with minimal sternal contact (see Figs. 2-11 and 2-14). The normal variation in cardiac
shape, observed when comparing ventrodorsal and dorsoventral radiographs, is most
46
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTR.
apparent in dogs with this thoracic conformation. In these dogs, the cardiac apex is fre-
quently positioned on the midline during inspiration and to the left of the midline on
expiration.
 Dogs with intermediate thoracic conformation have a wider cardiac silhouette that, on
the lateral radiograph, is inclined cranially within the thorax and has more sternal contact
than dogs with deep, narrow conformation (see Figs. 2-7 and 2-12). The cardiac silhouette
has a reverse-D shape in the dorsoventral radiograph, and the cardiac apex is usually posi-
tioned slightly to the left of the midline.
 Dogs with shallow, wide thoracic conformation have a short, round cardiac silhouette
that, on the lateral radiograph, has a marked cranial inclination and a long area of sternal
contact (see Figs. 2-10 and 2-13). On the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, the car-
diac apex usually is located to the left of the midline and is often difficult to identify
because of its broad shape. This type of dog has a heart that always appears to be enlarged
relative to the thoracic volume.
The size and shape of the feline heart are fairly uniform among different breeds and are
similar to that of the dog, except that the apex is narrower when compared with the base or
cranial cardiac margin.48 In older cats, an increased sternal contact often occurs along with
an elongated aortic arch.49 This“drooping" or"uncoiled” aortic arch may appear as a distinct
circular structure, or masslike effect, in thelft cranial aspect of the cardiac ihouette on h
ventrodorsal or dorsoventral views. This finding does not appear to have clinical relevance.
A study has noted a tendency for pericardial fat pads in cats to be interpreted as a part of the
cardiac silhouette, leading to the misdiagnosis of cardiomegaly.50 However, the use of higher
kVp techniques and careful evaluation of density differences often permit discrimination of
the border between the pericardial fat and cardiac silhouette.
Sternal and thoracic wall deformities also affect the position and, consequently, the
shape and relative size of the cardiac silhouette. Some consideration must be given when
these deformities are present.
Variation in thoracic conformation and cardiac size among normal dogs and cats is a
problem in recognizing cardiac disease; previous radiographs for comparison are always
helpful. When these are not available, mild or sometimes moderate degrees of apparent
generalized cardiomegaly should be considered to be of questionable significance unless
supported by clinical, electrocardiographic, or ultrasonographic evidence of cardiomegaly.
This is particularly true in older toy and small-breed dogs.
Several methods have been proposed for measuring cardiac silhouette size. One system
for the dog uses a vertebral scale methodology to measure heart size.5l The overall heart
size is measured and compared with the thoracic vertebrae (beginning at T4 and proceed-
ing caudally). The vertebral heart size (VHS) is then expressed as total units of vertebral
length to the nearest O.1 vertebra. Using this system, the sum of the long and short axes of
the heart, expressed as VHS, was 9.7 ± 0.5 vertebra. Exceptions were noted in dogs with a
short thorax (e.g., Miniature Schnauzer) or a long thorax (e.g., Dachshund). Modifications
A similar method of mensuration has been described for the cat, which uses the measure-
ment of the length and breadth of the cardiac silhouette and normalizes it to the length of
certain vertebrae or sternebrae.54
The outline of the cardiac silhouette is a composite of different structures. Several
schemes have been proposed for remembering which cardiac chamber or vessel forms each
segment or portion of the cardiac outline. The simplest method divides the cardiac silhou-
ette into four segments on the lateral radiograph. The cranial dorsal segment is formed pre-
dominately by the right ventricle and atrium, more specifically the right auricular
ing aorta. The cranial ventral segment is formed almost exclusively by the right ventricle.
The caudal dorsal segment is formed by the left atrium and the caudal ventral by the leff
ventricle. Areas referred to as waists are defined cranially and caudally on the lateral view.
The cranial waist is at the confluence of the cardiac silhouette and the cranial vena cava,
which forms the ventral border of the visible cranial mediastinum. Enlargement of the
structures in the craniodorsal segment result in a “loss" of the cranial waist. Similarly, the
caudal waist is the transition between the left ventricle and the left atrium along the caudal
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
47
border of the cardiac silhouette. Enlargement of the left atrium results in a loss of the cau-
dal waist.
 On the ventrodorsal radiograph, the cardiac silhouette can be divided into left and right
sides by creating an oblique line coursing caudally from the cranial aspect of the right side
of the cardiac silhouette (just to the right of the visible portion of the cranial mediastinum)
through the caudal apex of the silhouette. The cranial right segment is formed by the right
ventricle and atrium and the caudal right segment by the right ventricle. The cranial left seg-
ment is formed by the confluent shadows of the descending aorta, main pulmonary artery,
and left auricular appendage. The caudal left segment is formed by the left ventricle.
 Another scheme for describing the cardiac margins uses clock references. In the lateral
radiograph, the left atrium occupies the twelve to two o'clock position, the left ventricle is
found from two to five or six o'clock, the right ventricle from five or six to nine or ten
o'clock, and the composite of the right auricular appendage, main pulmonary artery, aor-
tic arch, and some mediastinal structures, including the cranial vena cava as it approaches
the right atrium, occupies the area from ten to twelve o'clock. In the ventrodorsal radi-
e  a o om o suo u p s e ed u a udeio
appendage from two to three o'clock, the left ventricle from three to five or six o'clock, the
right ventricle from five or six to ten o'clock, and the right atrium and caudal extent of the
cranial vena cava from ten to twelve o'clock. The clock face model serves as a rough guide,
but thoracic conformation and position of the cardiac apex will alter slightly these cardiac
chamber positions.
On the lateral radiograph, the cardiac silhouette extends from the third or fourth to the
seventh or eighth rib and occupies roughly two thirds of the thoracic height. It has a dor-
sal base, a rounded cranial border, and a slightly less rounded caudal border. The cardiac
apex contacts or is slightly separated from the seventh sternebra. The ventral margin of the
cranial vena cava blends with the cranial cardiac margin, and a fairly sharp angle or even
an indentation may be present at this point, the cranial cardiac waist. This is the point of
 division between the right atrium and right ventricle. In obese dogs, another indentation,
 the interventricular groove, may be identified on the ventral cardiac margin (se Fig. 2-12).
Ventral to the point where the caudal vena cava crosses the caudal cardiac margin, a third
indentation may be identified This is roughly the point of division between the left atrium
and left ventricle. Identification of the cranial and caudal waists is often difficult, but they
can serve as useful landmarks.
 The heart's appearance may vary between dorsoventral and ventrodorsal views and also
may vary in consecutive dorsoventral or ventrodorsal views due to shifting of the cardiac
apex If the position of the apex is noted carefully, the changes that result should not be too
confusing. On the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, the cardiac silhouette in the
average dog extends from the third to the eighth or ninth rib. At its widest point, it occu-
 n  no   a  n  no sn  on   ss
with the mediastinal density. Contained within this area are the right auricle and aortic
arch. The right lateral cardiac border is rounded. The apex usually is located to the left of
the midline and has a somewhat blunted tip. The left lateral border, almost straight and free
of bulges, produces a shape that has been described as a lopsided egg.
 Normal echocardiographic anatomy has been well described.* The structures that are seen 
depend upon the view that is used. The most commonly used images are the right parasternal
views. These usually are displayed with the cardiac apex to the left and the base to the right. All
of the cardiac chambers are displayed on the right parasternal long-axis left ventricular out-
fow view (Figs. 2-15 and 2-16). The size and relationship of the chambers and walls in this
view have been measured.s-59 The measurements usually are performed using the M-mode
study (Figs. 2-17 and 2-18). The normal values for both dogs and cats have been described
(Figs. 2-19 to 2-22) (Table 2-1). These values must be applied carefully, because there is varia-
tion in the mean values among different breeds of dogs as well as among individuals.60 There
are even differences between Greyhounds that are in training and those that are not.61,62 The
normal values for cats show much less variation except for those seen in kittens.57,63 Also
*References 19,21,23,24,55-59.
48
obtained from this site is the right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view, which is used to
can also be obtained from this window. These usually are displayed with the pulmonary artery
to the right side of the screen. These images can be used to evaluate the left ventricular (LV),
-  tg'( on t-7 ) s m pe s ( snoe pe () ree 
ing measurements at a site at end systole and end diastole just below the tips of the mitral valve
leaflets between (i.e., totaly excluding) the papillary muscles, both fractional shortening and
ejection fractions can be calculated. The percentage of fractional shortening is a commonly
used index of cardiac contractility and is calculated from the formula:
(LV end-diastolic dimension)
FIG. 2-15 Diagrammatic representations of the normal appearance
Long-Axis 4-Chamber View
of the right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view and long-axis
left ventricular outflow view. RA, Right atrium; TV, tricuspid valves;
RV, right ventricle; LA, left atrium; MV, mitral valves; LV, left ventri-
de; CH, chordae tendineae; PM, papillary muscle; VS, interventricu-
ar septum; LVW, leff ventricular free wall; AO, aorta; IC, leff
 s ) ae Ad  a rdsn Aen
Gaber CE, Jacobs GJ, et al: Recommendation for standards in
transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography in the dog and cat.
JVet Intern Med 1993; 7:248.)
Long-Axis LV OutflowView
FIG. 2-16 A right parasternal long-axis left ventricular outflow view
of the heart showing the right atrium (ra), right ventricle (rv), aorta
(ao), left cusp of the aortic valve (lc), left ventricle (tv), and leff
atrium (la). This view is taken at a slightly different angle than that
shown in Fig. 2-15. Diagnosis: Normal heart.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
49
FIG. 2-17 A and B, Composite dia-
 gram showing the standard M-mode
sites for cardiac mensuration using
the right parasternal long-axis left
ventricular outflow tract view. T,
Transducer; TW, thoracic wall; RVW,
right ventricular wall; RV, right ven-
tricle; IVS, interventricular septum;
MAS
LV, left ventricle; LVW, left ventricu-
lar wall; AV, aortic valve; AO, aorta;
AMV, anterior leaflet of the mitral
valve; PMV, posterior leaflet of the
mitral valve; LA, left atrium; PER,
pericardium; TV, tricuspid valve;
EN, endocardium. (From Bonagura
JD, O'Grady MR, Herring DS:
Echocardiography: principles of
interpretation. Vet Clin North Am
1985; 15:1177.)
3
THORACIC
 WALL
888382
888883
RVW
RS
RV
TY
15
AV
LV
AO
PUV
LA
EN
PER
2
3
4
B
Ejection fractions can be calculated from the fractional shortening, but because of their
critical dependence on assumptions of ventricular shape, which are not always accurate in
the multiple breeds and sizes of animals examined, they are used infrequently in clinical
veterinary medicine. The structures at the heart base (e.g., pulmonic valve and pulmonary
artery) are best observed with the right parasternal short-axis views of the heart
base. Other views that may be helpful in specific cases include the left caudal (apical)
parasternal four-chamber and five-chamber (Figs. 2-30 to 2-32), the left caudal
(apical) parasternal two-chamber, and the left cranial parasternal long-axis views.
The motion of the various cardiac components should be evaluated. Although motion 
of the left atrial wall is difficult to assess, the structure and motion of the mitral valve
leaflets have been studied closely. The valve leaflets, anterior (septal) and posterior, should
 appear as slender, smoothly marginated, clearly delineated echogenic structures. The ante-
rior leaflet is hinged to the atrium at the same level as the left coronary cusp of the aortic
valve. The posterior is affixed at the junction of the atrial and ventricular myocardium.
 s aa r   ra   s sd   aa 
its widest extent. The septal leaflet touches (in cats and small-breed dogs) or nearly touches
d a e o e ur s e a ( aq-)
of maximal excursion of the septal leaflet is referred to as the E point (see Fig. 2-18). The
distance between the E point and septum is referred to as the E-point septal separation
50
FIG. 2-18 M-mode echocardiograms with simultaneous electrocardiogram tracing demonstrating
structures that routinely are measured in a complete echocardiographic examination. A, RVWED,
Right ventricular wall at end diastole; RVEDD, right ventricular end-diastolic diameter; TV, tricuspid
valve; IVSED, interventricular septum at end diastole; IVSES, interventricular septum at end systole;
LVEDD, left ventricular end-diastolic diameter; LVESD, left ventricular end-systolic diameter;
LVWED, left ventricular wall at end diastole; LVWES, left ventricular wall at end systole; LVWA, left
early diastolic opening of the mitral valve; F, closure of leaflets after early diastolic filling (the slope
from E to Fis the velocity of diastolic closure); C, closure of mitral leaflets just before systole; EPSS,
E-point septal separation; AMV, anterior leaflet of the mitral valve; PMV, posterior leaflet of the
mitral valve. C, RV, Right ventricle; Ao, aortic root; AS, aortic valve during systole; AD, aortic valve
during diastole; AA, aortic amplitude; LA, left atrium. (From Moise NS: Echocardiography. In Fox
PR, ed: Canine and feline cardiology. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1988; p 124.)
(EPSS). The posterior leaflet closely approaches the left ventricular free wall. As this stage
q  re t a ns ri  rn  o  s an 
(the active stage of left ventricular filling) and the leaflets are again distracted. Their excur-
sion is not as great as that seen with passive filling. The point of maximal excursion of the
septal leaflet in this phase is referred to as the A point. This may not be apparent in views
that are “off angle? or in patients with rapid heart rates. As ventricular systole begins,
the valve leaflets close completely, meeting in a straight line across the mitral valve orifice.
The valve leaflets should not bulge nor displace into the left atrium.
The motion of the left ventricular free wall and interventricular septum should be
observed also (see Fig. 2-18). During systole,these structures should approach each other
tum depolarizes a few milliseconds before the free wall, causing it to contract that much
 Sooner. If there is a longer lag, this may represent an oblique angle through the ventricle.
During diastole,the ventricular walls should move apart.
The aortic valve should be closed during diastole and open during systole. On the
M-mode echocardiogram, the cusps of the aortic valve will appear as an open rectangle
at the time the aortic valves are open. When closed, the cusps will appear as a single line
(see Figs. 2-17 and 2-18).
 Contrast echocardiographic studies commonly use saline that has been well shaken
with air, so that it contains large numbers of microscopic bubbles. The saline is injected
intravenously and the microbubbles are imaged as multiple, small, discrete hyperechoic
foci flowing through the right heart and into the pulmonary arteries. The bubbles are
cleared by the alveolar capillaries and should not appear in the left heart.
Several brands of ultrasonographic contrast media have become or will soon be avail-
able. Some of these have bubbles that are small enough in size and of sufficient uniformity
to traverse the pulmonary capillaries, allowing visualization of flow through the left heart
as well as the right.
CHapter TWO The ThoraX
51
3一
FIG. 2-19 Graphs showing the nor-
mal values (predicted value ±95%
confidence interval) of the left
atrium (A) and aortic root (B).
(From Bonagura ID, O'Grady MR,
27
Herring DS: Echocardiography:
 principles of interpretation. Vet Clin
North Am 1985; 15:1191.)
(99] 1H913N 1008
FEE
30-
21
BODY WEIGHT (KG]
B
resolution images of heart base structures. However, these transducers are expensive and
have not yet become common in clinical practice.65,6
 Doppler echocardiography allows determination of the direction and velocity of
blood flow by using information from the Doppler shift effect. This physical principle
results from a shift in frequency of an echo that is induced by a change in position of the
structure that is generating the echo. The shift will be to a higher frequency if the struc-
ture is moving toward the transducer and to a lower frequency if it is moving away from
the transducer. The magnitude of the shift is related to the object's speed of movement.
This Doppler shift induced by the moving red blood cells can be used to assess hemody-
namic information. Conventionally, flow or movement away from the transducer is dis-
played below, and flow toward the transducer is displayed above, the baseline. The
pressure differential or gradient across a valve (△P [mm Hg]) is estimated by applying
the modified Bernoulli equation to the known velocity of flow (V [m/s]) across a valve
(△P = 4 V2).21
52
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-20 Graphs showing the nor-
2
S6 aa Pid) sa 
confidence interval) of the normal
ventricular septal thickness in dias-
tole (A) and systole (B). (From
 Bonagura ID, O'Grady MR, Herring
DS: Echocardiography: principles of
interpretation. Vet Clin North Am
1985; 15:1190.)
A
P<0.06
4
12
T11-
3234
ODY WFTGHT (K6]
B
Duplex Doppler units capable of simultaneously displaying both a two-dimensional
s ro a   as a sa di ar s doa sd e p
originates is visible. In areas with high flow rates or in areas that are relatively distant from
the transducer, a continuous wave Doppler (nonimaging) system is more accurate. As a
frequency transducers produce better images (at the cost of less depth penetration). A com-
 promise often must be made in transducer selection.
Doppler studies may be performed to investigate blood flow characteristics at
any site in the heart. The method for evaluating the common sites has been described (Fig.
2-33).2s,67-69 An example of the detailed information available using Doppler echocardio-
 graphy can be seen in studies of the left atrium. Sampling usually is performed using a left
 caudal parasternal view, a four-chamber inflow view. To evaluate mitral valve competence,
the sample volume position should be in the left atrium one fourth of the distance
between the mitral annulus and the dorsal wall. To evaluate the flow across the mitral
CHapter TWO The ThoraX
53
12-
FIG. 2-21 Graphs showing the nor-
S6 aa pidj saa i
1
confidence interval) of the normal
 left ventricular wall thickness during
10-
diastole (A) and systole (B). (From
 Bonagura ID, O'Grady MR, Herring
DS: Echocardiography. Principles of
interpretation. Vet Clin North Am
1985; 15:1189.)
nY￥FtHTK
A
17.5
12.5
10.0
3234
BODY KEIGHT[KG]
valve, the sample volume is positioned in the left ventricle, just distal to the mitral valve
annulus at the point of maximal opening of the mitral valve.25,67 Normal studies at heart
rates less than approximately 125 beats per minute will clearly reveal separate flows dur-
 ing passive (E wave) and active (A wave) filling of the ventricle (Fig. 2-34). With very slow
rates, a separate L wave associated with pulmonary vein inflow may be seen between the
E wave and A wave. During systole, a fourth wave (S wave) is seen, which is a low-veloc-
ity, positive turbulent flow signal and occurs after the A wave In heart rates greater than
approximately 125 beats per minute,these flow phases begin to coalesce and at rates
 greater than 200 beats per minute the E and A waves are no longer distinguishable.25
Similar information may be obtained at the tricuspid valve (Fig. 2-35).
AORTA
The aortic arch and branches of the ascending aorta are obscured by the fluid density of
the cranial mediastinum. On the lateral radiograph, the descending aorta can be identified
crossing the trachea cranial to the tracheal bifurcation and continuing caudally and dor-
sally from that point. If a good inspiratory radiograph is obtained, the aorta may be traced
to the diaphragm. However, in most normal animals, its smooth margin (especially the
54
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-22 Graphs showing the nor-
 a Pd)  
confidence interval) of the left ven-
tricular internal dimension during
diastole (A) and systole (B). (From
 Bonagura ID, O'Grady MR, Herring
DS: Echocardiography: principles of
interpretation. Vet Clin North Am
1985; 15:1188.)
22
A
B
 FIG. 2-23 A right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view of the
heart showing the right atrium (ra), tricuspid valve (tv), right ven-
tricle (rv), left atrium (la), mitral valve (mv), left ventricle (tv), chor-
dae tendineae (ch), interventricular septum (vs), and left ventricular
 a   e ie   ma s ()  
that shown in Fig. 2-15. Diagnosis: Normal heart.
CHAPTER TWO
THE THORAX
55
TABLE 2-1 Normal Echocardiographic Values in Cats
MENSURAL
(N =1)
(N = 25)
(N = 30)
NG
(N = 30)#
(N = 16)#
IVEDD (cm)
1.51 ± 0.21*
1.48 ± 0.26*
1.59 ± 0.19*
1.10 - 1.60t
1.40 ± 0.13*
1.28 ± 0.17*
LVESD (cm)
0.69 ± 0.22
0.88 ± 0.24
0.80 ± 0.14
0.60- 1.00
0.81 ± 0.16
0.83 ± 0.15
Ao (cm)
0.95 ± 0.15
0.75 ± 0.18
0.95 ± 0.11
0.65 
1.10
0.94 ± 0.11
0.94 ± 0.14
LA (cm)
1.21 ± 0.18
0.74 ± 0.17
1.23 ± 0.14
0.85-
1.25
1.03 ± 0.14
0.98 ± 0.17
LA/Ao (cm)
1.29 ± 0.23
1.30 ± 0.17
0.80
1.30
12.10 ± 0.18
IVSED (cm)
20'0  05'0
0.45 ± 0.09
0.31 ± 0.04
0.25-
0.50
0.36 ± 0.08
IVSES (cm)
0.76 ± 0.12
0.58 ± 0.06
0.50
1- 0.90
LVWED (cm)
0.46 ± 0.05
0.37 ± 0.08
0.33 ± 0.06
0.25 -
- 0.50
50'0  5'0
0.31 ± 0.11
LVWES (cm)
0.78 ± 0.10
0.68 ± 0.07
0.40 - 0.90
88'0 + 55'0
RVED (cm)
0.54 ± 0.10
0.60 ± 0.15
0.50 ± 0.21
LVWA (cm)
20'0  05'0
一
0.32 ± 0.11
EPSS (cm)
0.04 ± 0.07
0.02 ± 0.09
AA (cm)
0.36 ± 0.10
MVEFS
54.4 ± 13.4
87.2 ± 25.9
83.78 ±
23.81
(mm/sec)
DD% (%)
55.0 ± 10.2
41.0 ± 7.3
49.3 ± 5.3
29-35
42.7 ± 8.1
34.5 ± 12.6
LVWT (%)
39.5 ± 7.6
一一
IVST (%)
33.5 ± 8.2
HR
182 ± 22
167 ± 29
194 ± 23
255 ± 36
(beats/min)
WT (kg)
4.3 ± 0.5
4.7 ± 1.2
4.1 ± 1.1
3.91 ± 1.2
Mean ± SD.
tUsual range.
tCats anesthetized with ketamine.
NNumber of cats in study; NG,information not given; LVEDD,eft ventricular end-diastolic diameter; VESD,
left ventricular end-systolic diameter; Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; LA/Ao, left atrium-to-aortic root ratio; IVSED,
wallat end diastole; LVWES, left ventricular wall at end systole; RVED, right ventricular diameter at end diastole;
LVWA, lef ventricular wall amplitude; EPSS, E-point septal separation; AA, aortic amplitude; MVEFS, mitral
valve E-F slope; DD%,fractional shortening; LVWT,lIft ventricular wallthickening; IVST, interventricular septal
thickening; HR, heart rate; W'T, weight.
From Moise NS: Echocardiography. In Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline cardiology. Churchil Livingstone, New York,
1988; p 27.
Short-Axis Views
FIG. 2-24 Diagrammatic representations of the normal appearance of
the right parasternal short-axis views. RA, Right atrium; TV, tricuspid
C
D
valves; RV, right ventricle; LA, left atrium; MV, mitral valves;, LV, left
ventricle; CH, chordae tendineae; APM, anterior papillary muscle;
 PPM, posterior papillary muscle; VS, interventricular septum; LVW, left
ventricular free wall; AO, aorta; LC, left coronary cusp; RC, right coro-
nary cusp; NC, noncoronary cusp; LPA, left pulmonary artery, RPA,
right pulmonary artery, CaVC, caudal vena cava. (From Thomas WP,
Gaber CE, Jacobs GJ, et al: Recommendation for standards in transtho-
racic two-dimensional echocardiography in the dog and cat. I Vet 
Intern Med 1993; 7:250.)
56
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-25 A right parasternal short-axis view of the heart at the level
 of the papillary muscles reveals the anterior papillary muscle (apm),
posterior papillary muscle (ppm), left ventricle (tv), and right ventri-
dle (rv). Diagnosis: Normal heart.
V
wde
ppm
FIG. 2-26. A right parasternal short-axis view of the heart at the
level of the chordae tendineae reveals the chordae tendineae (ch), left
ventricle (v), and right ventricle (rv). Diagnosis: Normal heart.
dorsal aspect) is obscured before reaching the diaphragm. The aorta tapers only slightly as
it transits the caudal thorax.
p padeus-ye uonsanb 1o padeus-s ue seq eoe aun shop pue sie rapno aos u
mity across and dorsal to the trachea (Fig. 2-36). This deformity is without any known clin-
ical significance.
In the ventrodorsal radiograph, the aortic arch can be detected as it crosses the left cra-
nial aspect of the cardiac silhouette at about the one o'clock position. Proximal to this, the
aorta is obscured by the cranial mediastinal density. The aorta usually can be followed cau-
dally, but only its left margin is visible. This margin gradually approaches the midline and
 is lost at about the level of the cardiac apex or slightly caudal to the diaphragmatic cupula.
A prominent cranial bulge may be observed on the lateral radiograph in older dogs and
cats. This is related to the progressive shifting of the cardiac axis into a plane more parallel
to the sternum than routinely is observed. Otherwise, the aortic margin should be smooth,
tapering gradually as it progresses caudally.
 Radiographic guidelines have not been established for evaluation of aortic size; how-
ever the aorta should be roughly equal to the caudal vena cava in width. The size of the caul-
dal vena cava varies considerably with respiration and cardiac cycle.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
57
FIG. 2-27 A right parasternal short-axis view of the heart at the level
of the mitral valve reveals papillary muscles in the right ventricle
(pm), right ventricular outflow tract (rvo), left ventricular outflow
tract (tvo), anterior (septal) leaflet of the mitral valve (amv), and
om
 posterior leaflet of mitral valve (pmv). Diagnosis: Normal heart.
Vo
 FIG. 2-28 A right parasternal short-
axis view of the heart at the level of
 the aortic valve reveals the right cusp
of the aortic valve (rc), the left cusp
of the aortic valve (tc), the noncoro-
nary cusp ofthe aortic valve (nc),left
atrium (la), and right ventricle (rv).
 Diagnosis: Normal heart.
 Echocardiography provides an excellent means to evaluate the aortic root and portions
of the ascending and descending aorta. The right parasternal, long-axis, left ventricular
outflow view demonstrates the outflow tract, the valvular cusps, the aortic bulb (sinus of
Valsalva), and a portion of the ascending aorta (see Figs. 2-15 and 2-16). With cranial posi-
tioning of the transducer, the majority of the aortic arch can be imaged in some individu-
 als. The short-axis view of the heart base also demonstrates the aorta and all three cusps of
the aortic valve (see Figs. 2-24 and 2-28). The appearance of the aortic valves has been
described as resembling the symbol for the Mercedes Benz automobile.
Doppler studies of the aorta can be performed using the left apical, long-axis, left
ventricular outflow tract view. However, the five-chamber, or left ventricular outflow,
58
FIG. 2-29 A right parasternal short-
axis view of the heart at the level of
the pulmonic valve reveals the right
ventricle (rv), pulmonic valve (pv),
main pulmonary artery (pa), left
pulmonary artery (lpa), right pul-
 monary artery (rpa), and aorta (ao).
Diagnosis: Normal heart.
4-Chamber (lnflow) View
5-Chamber (LV Outflow) View
FIG. 2-30 Diagrammatic representations of the normal appearance of the left caudal parasternal
four-chamber (inflow) and five-chamber (left ventricular outflow) views. RA, right atrium; RV, right
ventricle; LA, lef atrium; LV, left ventricle; AS, atrial septum; AO, aorta. (From Thomas WP, Gaber
CE, Jacobs GJ, et al: Recommendation for standards in transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiog-
raphy in the dog and cat. I Vet Intern Med 1993; 7:251.)
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
59
FIG. 2-31 A left parasternal long-
axis four-chamber (inflow) view
reveals left ventricle (tv), lef atrium
(la), atrial septum (as), right atrium
(ra), and right ventricle (rv).
Diagnosis: Normal heart.
a
S
ra
FIG. 2-32 A left parasternal long-axis five-cham-
ber (left ventricular outflow) view reveals the left
ventricle (tv), left atrium (la), aorta (ao), right
atrium (ra), and right ventricle (rv). Diagnosis:
Normal heart.
ao
a
ra
view is preferable.25,67 The sample volume is placed in the middle of the aorta at the dis-
tal end of the aortic bulb. Normal studies reveal a rapid laminar acceleration phase
(downstroke) followed by the deceleration phase (upstroke) (Fig. 2-37). A second, much
smaller wave may be seen immediately after the dominant signal, which represents early
diastolic flow.25,67
CAUDAL VENA CAVA
The caudal vena cava may be traced from the diaphragm to the point where it enters the
right atrium cranial to the caudal margin of the cardiac silhouette. On the lateral radi-
ograph, the caudal vena cava, located at about the midpoint of the thoracic height, tapers
and slopes slightly downward from the diaphragm to the cardiac silhouette. The size of the
caudal vena cava changes with respiration and phase of the cardiac cycle. It is wider and
60
FIG. 2-33 Diagrammatic demonstrations of the views and
placement of sample volumes for Doppler echocardio-
graphic studies of the mitral valve (A), left atrial flow (B),
tricuspid valve flow (C), right atrial flow (D), aortic valve
fow (E), left ventricular outflow tract flow (F),pulmonary
valve flow (G),and right ventricular outflow tract flow (H).
LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right
ventricle; RVO, right ventricular outflow tract; TV, tricuspid
valve; PA, pulmonary artery, AS, atrial septum. (From
Krberger RM, Bland-van den Berg P, Darazs B: Doppler
 echocardiography in the normal dog: part I, velocity find-
 ings and flow patterns. Vet Radiol 1992; 33:372.)
FIG. 2-34 A pulsed wave Doppler study of the mitral valve made from the left parasternal long-axis
view reveals normal E and A defections. The maximal velocity is 0.85 meter per second. Diagnosis:
Normal study.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
61
FIG. 2-35 A pulsed wave Doppler study of the
tricuspid valve made from the right parasternal
short-axis view reveals normal E and A deflec-
-0.8
tions. The maximal velocity is 0.5 meter per
second. Diagnosis: Normal study.
B
FIG. 2-36 A 14-year-old male Yorkshire Terrier with nasal obstruction and dyspnea. The thorax is nor-
mal. The aorta is redundant and extends cranial to the cardiac silhouette (arrows) on the lateral radi-
 ograph (A) and also extends into the left hemithorax (arrows) on the ventrodorsal radiograph (B). This
elongation and redundancy of the aorta is seen often in normal, old dogs. There is no evidence of pul-
 monary metastasis. The cardiac silhouette is of normal size and shape. Diagnosis: Normal thorax.
shorter at expiration and collapses slightly during diastole. The caudal vena cava has been
reported to be equal to or shorter than the length of T5 or T6 in dogs.51
The caudal vena cava is identified more easily in the ventrodorsal than the dorsoven-
a yo apis iuu a suoe eiudep a oi je aui o pen aq eo i ydeoei en
vertebral column. The width of the caudal vena cava in the ventrodorsal view is usually
 uniform and, although a mild, even curvature is not abnormal, its margins should be
smooth, straight, and parallel
The visibility of the caudal vena cava depends on aeration of the accessory lung lobe.
Poor margin definition may be observed on expiratory radiographs, on dorsoventral radi-
 ographs, and in animals with accessory lung lobe infltrates.
62
SMAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-37 A pulsed wave Doppler study
of the aortic valve made from the left
parasternal five-chamber view revealed a
maximal velocity of 1.1 meters per sec-
ond. Diagnosis: Normal study.
5.5MHZ
HPRF
18CM
11CM
In general, the diameter of the caudal vena cava should be approximately equal to that
of the aorta. The comparison can be unreliable because of the effects of the cardiac cycle.
If the observed alteration in the size of the vena cava is confirmed by other thoracic pathol-
ogy (i.e., small vena cava with smallheart and pulmonary vessels; large vena cava with large
right heart) or is consistent on sequential radiographs, it should be considered significant.
A consistent increased diameter of the caudal vena cava that is noted on serial radiographs
  asd so  n  i s 
The vena cava usually is not identified on an echocardiogram. It is viewed easily in the
cranial abdomen as it passes through the diaphragm and liver. The intrathoracic vena cava
may be identified when hydrothorax is present. The normal size of the caudal vena cava has
the analysis is highly subjective, and a diagnosis of right heart failure usually is suspected
from distention of hepatic veins rather than caudal vena cava diameter. A consistent
increased diameter to the caudal vena cava may be a subtle indication of increased central
venous pressure.
PULMONARY ARTERY
The main pulmonary artery usually is not identifiable on survey radiography. The main pul-
monary arteries are visible as they leave the cardiac silhouette and progress through the lung.
On the lateral view the main caudal arteries can be seen heading dorsally as they progress
 caudally from a site immediately cranial to the left atrium. The cranial lobar arteries appear
at the same site and head ventrally as they progress cranially. On the ventrodorsal view the
arteries separate from the left cranial aspect of the cardiac silhouette and are seen lateral to
the bronchi and veins.
Echocardiography will readily image the pulmonary outflow tract, pulmonic valve,
main pulmonary artery, and the left and right pulmonary arteries. Doppler echocardiog-
raphy can be used to determine the velocity and direction of blood flow across the pul-
monic valve (Fig. 2-38). Continuous wave studies are preferred at this site, because
 abnormal velocities may be too fast for pulsed wave imaging.
LUNG
The air within the lung provides a natural contrast, permiting identification of the fluid-
dense pulmonary vessels, bronchial walls, and pulmonary interstitium; therefore radi-
ographs are ideal for evaluating the lung's gross morphology. Evaluation of normal
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
63
FIG. 2-38 A pulsed wave Doppler study of the
pulmonic valve made from the left parasternal
four-chamber view revealed a maximal velocity
of 1.0 meter per second. Diagnosis: Normal
study.
5.5MHZ
structures relies on the lung being well aerated so that structures stand out in contrast, and
 this must be considered anytime a thoracic radiograph is evaluated. The lung appearance
dramatically changes during different phases of the respiratory cycle.
Limited functional information may be obtained by evaluating vascular size and distri-
bution and by comparing inspiratory and expiratory radiographs. Fluoroscopy, serial radi-
ography, and cineradiography or videoradiography are required to enable a better
radiographic evaluation of functional pulmonary abnormalities. Preferred methods for
such studies include scintigraphy or pulmonary function tests.70,71 These techniques are
 generally difficult to perform and are beyond the scope of this text.
 The individual lung lobes are not identified on thoracic radiographs of normal ani-
mals; however, knowledge of the area that each lung lobe occupies and familiarity with the
understanding the radiographic appearance of most pulmonary abnormalities. The
branching patern of the major bronchi and lobar arteries can be traced distally from the
The canine right lung is divided into cranial, middle, caudal, and accessory lobes. The
left lung is divided into cranial and caudal lung lobes, with the left cranial lobe subdivided
into cranial and caudal portions.
 In the lateral radiograph, the right cranial lung lobe occupies most of the cranial tho-
rax from the tracheal bifurcation to the thoracic inlet. It extends cranial to the first or sec-
 ond rib and wraps around the cranial aspect of the cardiac silhouette. The right middle
lung lobe has a somewhat triangular shape. Its apex extends just dorsally to the tracheal
bifurcation and its base extends along the sternum, covering the area of the cardiac silhou-
ette. The right caudal lung lobe contacts the right cranial lobe dorsal to the tracheal bifur-
cation and contacts the middle lung lobe ventral to this point. It extends caudally to the
diaphragm and ventrally to the sternum. The accessory lung lobe is between the cardiac sil-
houette and the diaphragm and overlaps the cardiac border. It extends dorsally above the
caudal vena cava to about the level of the esophagus and extends ventrally to the sternum.
The left cranial lung lobe occupies an area similar to that of the right cranial and mid-
dle lobes. The left cranial lobe is divided into two segments that have separate main
  a  ds  n  a  s nq 
although the left cranial lobe is technically one lobe divided into two segments, the seg-
 ments may act like separate lobes with varying degrees of disease involvement. The left
cranial lobe usually extends beyond the cranial edge of the right cranial lobe, often extend-
64
ing beyond the first rib. Its tip may be identified as an oblong or oval lucency in the cranial
thorax, because it extends from left to right across the midline at this point. The left cau-
dal lung lobe occupies an area similar to that of the right.
The dependent lung collapses slightly in normal, conscious animals, and therefore, the
"up" lung is best evaluated in a lateral thoracic radiograph.9 Therefore, in right lateral
recumbency, the normal structures and abnormalities in the left lung are seen most easily,
and in left lateral recumbency those in the right lung lobes are most apparent.
 In the dorsoventral and ventrodorsal radiographs, the right cranial lung lobe occupies
the right cranial thorax and extends across the midline cranial to the cardiac silhouette. The
right middle lung lobe occupies the area lateral to the cardiac silhouette and overlaps a por-
tion of the heart. The right caudal lung lobe occupies the right caudal thorax, extends to
the midline dorsally, but is separated from it ventrally by the right middle and accessory
lung lobes. The accessorylung lobe occupies the area between the heart and the diaphragm,
wraps around the caudal vena cava, and extends across the midline, displacing a fold of the
caudal mediastinum to the left.
The left cranial lung lobe occupies the left cranial thorax, extending acros the midline
at the level of, or slightly cranial to, the first rib. It extends to the midline dorsally and con-
tacts the heart ventrally. The left caudal lung lobe occupies the left caudal thorax extend-
ing to the midline dorsally, but it is displaced to the left away from the midline by the
accessory lung lobe ventrally.
Dorsoventral and ventrodorsal radiographs present different profiles because of
decreased inflation of the dependent portions of each lobe. The lung lobes overlap each
other, the heart, and diaphragm. This factor must be remembered when evaluating and
localizing lesions within the lung. Pulmonary arteries, pulmonary veins, and the walls of
the larger airways can be identified within the lung Pulmonary vessels are fluid dense,
taper gradually, and branch as they are traced peripherall When they branch perpendicu-
lar to the x-ray beam, the vessels produce a round density, which is denser but of the same
i aq a   e d a s ii   nssa  se 
On the lateral radiograph, the artery is dorsal and the vein is ventral to the bronchus. On
the ventrodorsal radiograph, the artery is lateral and the vein medial to the bronchus.
 Pulmonary arteries will tend to converge toward their origin from the main pulmonary
artery (ie., cranial to the tracheal bifurcation), while pulmonary veins will converge
around the left atrium (ie., caudal to the tracheal bifurcation). Arteries are reportedly
denser, more curved, and better delineated than veins. However, detection of this difference
is difficult. Bronchial arteries cannot be identified. Vascular structures in the lung periph-
ery usually cannot be classified as arterial or venous.
Evaluation of arterial and venous size is important in disease recognition.72 Arteries
may be superimposed on the lateral radiograph; therefore identification and comparison
can be difficult. Vascular size is evaluated subjectively and, although several standards have
been proposed, none is completely reliable. Increased pulmonary perfusion frequently is
accompanied or manifested by an increase in number of vascular structures.
The shape of the pulmonary vessels and manner in which they branch should also be
evaluated. Smooth, gradual tapering is expected and alterations from this appearance are
abnormal.
The bronchial walls are not visible normally beyond the main lobar bronchi.
Calcification and fibrosis ocur with advancing age and as a result of prior pulmonary dis-
bronchial walls appear as thin, parallel, fluid-dense lines or, on cross-section, as soft-tissue,
ringlike (doughnut) densities (the wall), with a central black hole representing the airway.
 Often, the bronchial wallis obscured by the adjacent pulmonary vessel; however,the end-
on pulmonary vessels may be identified as fluid-dense dots on either side of the ringlike
bronchial density.
Additional fluid-dense lines may become apparent, especially in older animals.73,74
Usually thinner than vascular shadows, these additional fluid-dense lines do not have the
round shape or straight parallel line pattern of bronchial walls. They produce patterns that
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
65
are often described as reticulated or netlike. They are generally referred to or classified as
interstitial densities originating from the supporting connective tissue of the lung and from
ated in various pulmonary diseases.
 Many artifactual shadows may be superimposed on and appear to be within the lung.
However, these can often be identified on both views and their extrapulmonary origin
established.
 Ultrasonography has limited use within the lung because of the total inhibition of
-nd aun uium un suoens asou ul pasn aq ues in ie qanonu punosen jo uoisssun
-oos e hid sn 'm sin no ed au m nuo u si Aod Are
graphic window.
 Computed tomography has many uses within the lung.7 However, its utility is limited
 by the cost of the equipment and the need for general anesthesia during the study.
After all thoracic structures have been evaluated, the patient's history and clinical fea-
 tures should be reviewed and the radiograph reevaluated. Unfortunately, the radiograph
may not detect mild pathology, and many diseases produce no radiographic change.
Therefore, a normal thoracic radiograph does not exclude a diagnosis of thoracic disease,
and a repeat study after some time has elapsed may be beneficial.
CERVICAL SOFT TISSUES
 Abnormalities in the cervical soft tissues may be related to intrathoracic lesions or may
produce clinical signs similar to those of thoracic disease. Cervical lesions can extend into
the thoracic cavity and some thoracic lesions can spread to the neck. A properly positioned
thoracic radiograph should not include the cervical area. A separate radiograph of this area
should be obtained. The oral and nasal pharynx, larynx, cervical trachea, and cervical
 esophagus should be evaluated.
LARYNX AND PHARYNX
The larynx and cervical trachea should not be included routinely on thoracic radiographs.
A symmetrically positioned lateral radiograph that is centered on the larynx is required to
evaluate this area. Anesthesia or sedation usually is necessary, but an endotracheal tube
may interfere with the examination. The ventrodorsal radiograph is rarely helpful, because
superimposition of the larynx over the skull and cervical spine interferes with evaluation
of most laryngeal structures. The radiograph should include the oral and nasal pharynx as
well as the larynx.
 The air within the pharynx and larynx outlines the soft-tisue structures.76 Swallowing.
 breathing, and changes in head and neck position not only will result in variation in the 
appearance of these structures but may partially obscure them (Fig. 2-39).
The soft palate divides the oral and nasal pharynx. The margin of the soft palate should
n aui (dn gepneo sii ie iau s in 'at) auas iaden pinous pim shn pue yoos aq
dal margin of the soft palate usually contacts the cranial tip of the epiglottis; this varies
with head and neck position.
The laryngeal cartilages are visible in most dogs and may be calcified in older (espe-
cially in larger breed) dogs (Fig. 2-40). The epiglottis is curvilinear, extending dorsally from
the base of the larynx to the soft palate. The laryngeal saccules may be identified as some-
what thin, ovoid lucencies located caudal to and extending dorsally from the base of the
epiglottis. Their location varies with oblique patient positioning, although in many normal
dogs they are not visible. The thyroid cartilage is a somewhat rectangle-shaped density
located caudal to the laryngeal saccule. The arytenoid cartilage extends rostrally from the
apex of the thyroid cartilage. Its cuneiform process usually is seen as a blunt projection,
with its craniodorsally directed tip protruding into the pharynx. The cricoid cartilage is tri-
angular with its base dorsal and apex ventral.
 Identification of the hyoid bones depends upon proper radiographic exposure and
correct symmetric positioning. They are best evaluated on a lateral radiograph. The thy-
rohyoid bones extend ventrally from the cuneiform process of the arytenoid cartilage,
cross the epiglottis at about its midpoint, and extend to the ventral floor of the oral
pharynx where they articulate with the basihyoid bone. The basihyoid bone usually
66
yuou-l e ym sp paaq paxiu pakeds pio-ea-zl y 6-z 5i
history of coughing and gagging. A lateral radiograph of the larynx
reveals mineralization of the epiglottis and arytenoid and cricoid
S
martilages. This is normal for a dog of this age. The stylohyoid bone
ep
($), epihyoid bone (e), ceratohyoid bone (c), basihyoid bone (b), and
thyrohyoid bone (t) can be identified. The epiglottis (ep), arytenoid
cr
mrtilage (a), thyroid cartilage (th), and cricoid cartilage (cr) also are
identified in this study. Diagnosis: Normal larynx.
FIG. 2-40 A 9-year-old male
German Shepherd dog with a 6-week
history of difficulty breathing. A
nasal cavity obstruction was sus-
pected. In this lateral radiograph of
the larynx, the larynx appears nor-
mal. There is marked calcification of
the laryngeal cartilages and tracheal
rings. Diagnosis: Normal larynx.
 appears more dense than the other hyoid bones, because it is viewed end-on and there-
fore appears as a dense, somewhat triangle-shaped structure. The ceratohyoid bones are
the shortest of the paired hyoid bones. They extend rostrally from the basihyoid and are
usually parallel to the soft palate. The epihyoid bones extend dorsally and rostrally from
the ceratohyoid to the level of the soft palate. The stylohyoid bones extend dorsally and
caudally from the epihyoid bones to the area caudal to the osseous bulla. The tympa-
nohyoid cartilages attach to the stylohyoid bones and usually are not visible. All hyoid
bones except the basihyoid are paired and should be symmetric. Their radiographic sym-
metry depends on the accuracy with which the head and neck are positioned. In a well-
positioned lateral radiograph, these bones should be superimposed and their normal
 alignment should result in continuity from one bone to the next. There should be little
or no change in laryngeal positioning or pharyngeal size and shape between passive res-
piratory cycles.
CERVICAL TRACHEA
The cervical trachea should be uniform in width throughout its length (Fig. 2-41). The
individual tracheal rings may be identified if enough calcification is present. The inner
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
67
FIG. 2-41 A 12-year-old spayed
mixed breed dog with a l-month
history of coughing and gagging. A
lateral radiograph of the cervical tra-
chea was normal. The tracheal carti-
lages are faintly visible. The diameter
ofthe cervical trachea is normal with
a slight narrowing of the lumen cau-
dal to the cricoid cartilage.
Diagnosis: Normal cervical trachea.
immediately caudal to the cricoid cartilage but, in general, the dorsoventral tracheal diam-
eter should not be less than that of the larynx.44 Flexion and extension of the head and neck
will alter the position of the trachea.
Identification of the cervical trachea is difficult on the ventrodorsal radiograph due to
superimposition of the vertebral column. Additionall, poor patient positioning will alter
the trachea's location on this view.
CERVICAL ESOPHAGUS
The cervical esophagus should not be visible unless the animal swallows a bolus of air at
 the time of the radiographic exposure. The area through which the esophagus passes
should be evaluated. The esophagus begins dorsal to the cricoid cartilage, remains dorsal
to the trachea, and gradually moves laterally and to the left at the midcervical area. It con-
tinues to lie on the left side until it passes the thoracic inlet. The esophagus may be visible
as a soft-tissue density overlying the trachea through the midcervical area and beyond the
thoracic inlet. The appearance of superimposition is probably the result of the esophagus
indenting the trachea or actually resting in the groove for the trachealis muscle. This
appearance on lateral survey radiographs may indicate tracheal collapse, chondromalacia
of the tracheal cartilages, or a flaccid trachealis muscle.
RADIOGRAPHIC AND SONOGRAPHIC ABNORMALITIES
SOFT-TISSUE ABNORMALITIES
The soft-tissue structures of the neck, although not visible as individual structures, give the
appearance of longitudinal streaking parallel to the spine because of the fat in the fascial
planes between these predominately muscular structures. Soft-tisue abnormalities include
soft-tissue swelling and changes in density. The extent and location of the swelling are
important. Localized or defined soft-tissue swellings may be caused by tumors or localized
infections (i.e., abscess, granuloma). Diffuse soft-tissue swelling may result from subcuta-
neous fluid administration, edema, hemorrhage, or cellulitis (i.e., diffuse infection). This
may appear as a loss of the normal linear streaking, normally due to the soft tissue and fat.
Extension of the soft-tissue swelling into the thoracic cavity or involvement of adjacent
 bone provides important clues to the radiographic diagnosis. Oblique radiographs may be
necessary to detect pleural extension of an external mass.
68
Soft-tissue masses that protrude from the thoracic wall and are surrounded by air often
appear quite dense and may be mistaken for mineralized masses. Nipples are the most 
common of these masses and their location is an important distinguishing feature.
Typically, three sides of these masses can be identified clearly, with the fourth side, where
the mass is attached to the skin, blending with the underlying skin.
Alteration in soft-tissue density may be the result of gas accumulation (subcutaneous
emphysema), calcification, or foreign material. Subcutaneous emphysema usually results
from puncture wounds to the skin, trachea, pharynx, or esophagus; skin ulceration; or
extension cranially from the thorax due to pneumomediastinum. A small amount of sub-
 cutaneous air may be present from subcutaneous injection of medication. Subcutaneous
air usually produces a sharply marginated, linear radiolucency that outlines and dissects
along fascial planes. The relative radiolucency of the lesion, despite its small volume, allows
for differentiation between subcutaneous air and subcutaneous fat (Fig. 2-42). In animals
with paracostal hernias, intestinal loops may be herniated subcutaneously along the tho-
racic wall. These gas-filled loops usually can be identified by their typical round or tubular
shape.
Soft-tissue calcification may occur within some mammary gland tumors or in tumors
associated with the ribs or costal cartilages (Fig. 2-43). Linear cutaneous calcification may
   ai  no s   e n s s  s 
mimic soft-tissue calcification. In many cases, careful physical examination is necessary to
identify the foreign material. Although linear or plaquelike calcified densities are more typ-
ical of Cushing's syndrome, the pattern of calcification is nonspecific. Amorphous calcified
masses may be malignant or benign neoplasms, abscesses, or hematomas.
Subcutaneous foreign bodies may be identified if they are radiopaque; however, tis-
sue-dense foreign bodies will not be detected. Although fistulography has been recom-
mended, it rarely is used because the loose subcutaneous tissue of the dog and cat allow
tula. They have been useful for surgical planning in cases in which exploratory surgery has
been required.
Utrasonography can be used to determine the nature and extent of abnormalities in
- a s  a  q a sn e p a  as a ns o
FIG. 2-42 A 4-year-old female cat
with an acute onset of expiratory
dyspnea. A foul odor was present in
the oral cavity. Gas is noted in the
retropharyngeal area, around the
trachea, and ventral to the larynx
(arrows). The larynx is indistinct and
increased in density. The radi-
ographic findings are indicative of
laryngeal swelling with subcuta-
neous emphysema. The possibility of
a radiolucent foreign body should be
considered. Diagnosis: Laryngitis
with necrosis of the laryngeal
mucosa. The animal was examined
endoscopically. The cause of the
laryngitis and mucosal ulceration
could not be determined.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
69
FIG. 2-43 A 10-year-old spayed German Shepherd dog with mam-
mary tumors. There is a large soft tissue- and mineral-density lesion
located in the area of the caudal ventral right thorax. A, This mass over-
lies the right caudal lung lobe (arrows) on the ventrodorsal radiograph
hi udeioe eae au uo'g uosa Auondeu ue su pue
position externaltothethorax isidentified clearly. Note that the cranial.,
dorsal, and ventral margins of this mass are outlined distinctly, while
the caudal margin is less distinct. This is due to air outlining the mar-
gins of the mass, with its attachment blending caudally with the tho-
racic wall density. External thoracic masses may overlie the lung and
mimic intrapulmonary disease. Usualy their position can be identifed
accurately on one of the two radiographic projections. Diagnosis:
Mammary gland mass on the right ventral caudal thoracic wall. There
 is no evidence of pulmonary metastasis.
A
B
The question of whether a mass is solid or cystic (fluid flled) will be answered by the ultra-
sonographic examination. True cysts have few or no internal echoes, have a distinct wall,
and show evidence of through transmission (far enhancement). Solid structures have inter-
nal echoes, less sharply defined walls, and no through transmission. Hematomas and
70
abscesses have similar internal structure with hypoechoic or anechoic cavities, while most
tumors have a more uniform, mixed echogenic appearance. Soft-tissue mineralization, or
hyperechoic foci with shadowing, may be identified. The echogenicity of the mass always
should be compared with the adjacent normal tissue. This can be useful in identifying a
lipoma that is uniformly hyperechoic compared with the surrounding tissue.
Ultrasonography is rarely tissue- or cell-specific. It is very useful in guiding a needle into a
mass or fluid-containing structure or cavity for aspiration or biopsy.
BONY ABNORMALITIES
Abnormalities of the bony thorax are discussed in conjunction with evaluation of the spe
cific portion of the axial skeleton (i.e., ribs, spine, sternum). However, those bony abnor-
malities that may be associated with intrathoracic pathology are discussed briefly.
VERTEBRAl LESIONS
Vertebral body fractures or dislocation may accompany thoracic trauma (Fig. 2-44).
Malalignment of vertebral segments and collapse or shortening of a vertebral body may be
observed. In order to detect pathologic fractures, the density of the vertebral bodies should
be evaluated carefully.
Primary or metastatic neoplasms may affect the ribs or vertebral bodies. These areas
should be examined for productive, destructive, or mixed lesions, especially in patients
radiographed for pulmonary metastasis (see Fig. 2-42). Mediastinal masses may invade
adjacent vertebral bodies, and the bony lesion can indicate the etiology of these masses.
Osteomyelitis or discospondylitis may be identified incidentally in a patient radiographed
for other reasons.
RIB FRACTURES
Rib lesions may accompany thoracic abnormalities and orthopedic injuries.31,32,77 Rib
fractures often result from chest wall trauma but may be from underlying diseases result-
ing in pathologic fractures. The interruption of the cortical margins, a radiolucent frac-
ture line, malalignment of fragments, or increased density from overlapping fracture
ends may be observed when rib fractures occur. Pathologic fractures also may be associ-
ated with lytic lesions as well as periosteal reaction of the rib. Chest wall asymmetry and
uneven spacing of the ribs suggests the possibility of rib fractures or mediastinal tears.
Medially displaced rib fragments can penetrate the lung. Thoracic wall instability, or flail
chest, can result from adjacent segmental rib fractures. Fracture of several adjacent ribs
at two or more sites, or a large tear completely through an intercostal muscle, can pro-
 duce a thoracic wall that moves inward on inspiration and outward at expiration, called
 paradoxical chest wall motion. This may interfere markedly with pulmonary function.78
Thoracic radiographs exposed at both inspiration and expiration may document the
extent of the instability.
Pathologic fractures should be suspected whenever a solitary rib fracture or fractures
in nonadjacent ribs are detected. Bony proliferation or lysis of the rib will be seen if the
rib is examined closely. A subcutaneous or pleural soft-tissue mass may be detected if
the rib area is examined carefully.
Tearing of the intercostal muscles will result in the space between two ribs being sig-
nificantly larger on one side than on the other side (Fig. 2-45). This commonly is seen in a
 small animal that has been bitten by a large dog. If the tear is extensive, the lack of chest 
wall continuity can result in paradoxical chest wall motion and severely compromised res-
piratory function. Asymmetric rib spacing may also occur in association with soft-tissue
trauma such as bruising, previous thoracotomy, hemivertebra, and pulmonary or pleural
disease.
iis a rg  nou p pon q Ps s  p
q a jo tonsuda no s o on s e se ns sod
margin will persist for years after the original injury. The bony trabecular pattern will be
smooth and evenly mineralized, and soft-tissue swelling will be absent or minimal. These
features are useful in discriminating between healed fractures and rib metastasis.
CHAPTERTWO THE THORAX
71
FIG. 2-44 A l-year-old female Toy Poodle was brought for treat-
ment following thoracic trauma. A, On the ventrodorsal radiograph
there is a sof-tissue density in the left caudal lung lobe (open
-nd jo asda s A ieu per s (s
monary contusion. There are no rib fractures identifed. B, On the
lateral radiograph there is ventral displacement of Tll relative to
T10 (closed arrows). No evidence of displacement is seen on A. The
fracture of Tl0 is identified easily on B. Lesions such as this should
not be overlooked in animals radiographed for evaluation of tho-
racic trauma. This dog exhibited pain without neurologic deficits.
Diagnosis: Pulmonary contusion. Fracture of T10.
B
72
  r       
attacked by a larger dog was in shock and had dyspnea. The ven-
trodorsal radiograph reveals an abnormal separation between the lefft
ffth and sixth ribs (large, straight arrow). There is gas in the soft tis
sues around this area (small arrows). Pleural fluid density, presum-
ably a blood clot, is present at the site (large, curved arrow). No
evidence of pneumothorax is noted. Diagnosis: Intercostal tear of
 the left fth intercostal space, pleural hematoma, and subcutaneous
emphysema.
R1B TUMOR AND INFECTI0N
Tumor and infection may involve the ribs, and both productive and destructive bony
lesions may be identified Infection may be hematogenous, may extend from the chest wall,
 or may extend from the pleural space. Osteomyelitis is usually proliferative with minimal
amounts of bony destruction. Rib tumors may be primary or metastatic. Fibrosarcoma,
chondrosarcoma, and osteosarcoma may arise from the rib or costal cartilage. These
-nsap qa (9t- d) sasse pemdenxa sae anid pue premi ma Ae snon
tion or soft-tissue calcification or both may be evident radiographically. Displacement or
invasion of adjacent ribs may occur. Metastatic lesions are often small when detected and
may be proliferative, destructive, or both. Cortical expansion, a soft-tissue mass, or both
may be identified. The cortical malalignment usually associated with rib fracture will not
be present unless a pathologic fracture has occurred. Pleural fluid, often bloody, is a com-
mon secondary finding with invasive rib tumors.
THORACIC WALL ANOMALIES
Several types of chest wall deformity have been described. Pectus excavatum, also called
funnel chest or chondrosternal depression, is a reduction in the dorsoventral thoracic
diameter due to displacement of the sternum dorsally into the thorax (Fig. 2-47).74,79 This
usually displaces the cardiac silhouette to one side or the other and creates soft-tissue shad-
ows that overlie the lung and create difficulty in cardiac and pulmonary evaluations. In the
lateral radiograph, the sternum may be superimposed on the cardiac silhouette and curva-
ture of the ribs may be observed.
Pigeon breast, another chest wall deformity, may be acquired in dogs with car-
diomegaly secondary to congenital heart disease (Fig. 2-48). It has no clinical significance.
The sternum is angled excessively in a caudoventral direction, producing a dorsoventral
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
73
FIG. 2-46 A 9-year-old male Old English Sheepdog with a 2-month
history of coughing. The ventrodorsal radiograph reveals a large tis-
sue-density mass in the area of the cranial portion of the left cranial
lung lobe. Close examination reveals lysis of the left third rib (arrow)
suggesting the mass is arising from the rib and extending into the
thoracic cavity. Diagnosis: Chondrosarcoma of the left third rib.
thoracic diameter, which is increased markedly at the xiphoid when compared with the
manubrium.
 Sternal abnormalities are frequent and usually without clinical significance. Soft-tissue
infection, tumors, and trauma may affect the sternebrae. Few sternal anomalies are signif-
icant. Absence, splitting, or malformation of the xiphoid cartilage has been associated with
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia, and this can be a useful radiographic feature in
distinguishing that condition from other pericardial diseases80
 An acute bony lesion rarely occurs without an associated soft-tissue injury; consequently
the evaluation of the bony structures cannot be divorced from the evaluation of the adjacent
soft tissues. In the absence of a soft-tissue lesion most bony deformities can be ignored.
DIAPHRAGMATIC ABNORMALITIES
The variation in appearance of the normal diaphragm due to variations in breed, species,
position, x-ray beam geometry, phase of respiration, and abdominal content make recog-
nition of diaphragmatic abnormalities difficult. Although the basic shape of the diaphragm
is fairly constant, contour alterations occur frequently.
 Diaphragmatic abnormalities that may be recognized radiographically include changes
 in shape, width, outline, and position. The diaphragmatic outline may be deformed from
masses arising from the diaphragm, from the pleural space, or from abdominal masses that
protrude through the diaphragm. The diaphragm's outline and position may change with
diaphragmatic hernia or diaphragmatic paralysis.
MASSES
Masses may arise from or involve the diaphragm; pleural or mediastinal tumors may metasta-
size to or involve the diaphragm. Solitary or multiple masses may protrude from the
diaphragm, altering its normal shape. Diaphragmatic granulomas or adhesions may occur in
74
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGY AND UlTRaSOnOGRapHY
FIG. 2-47 A 9-month-old male Pekingese with a 3-month history of
coughing. A, On the lateral radiograph the thorax is compressed in a
dorsoventral direction. The caudal sternebrae are elevated dorsally.
There is a depression in the external thoracic wallat this point. The 
ardiac silhouette and trachea are displaced dorsally. B, On the ven-
trodorsal radiograph, the cardiac silhouette is shifted into the leff
hemithorax. There is no evidence of pulmonary disease. Diagnosis:
Pectus excavatum.
association with chronic pleural disease; focal or multifocal diaphragmatic irregularities may
be produced. The patient's history or analysis of fluid obtained from thoracocentesis is neces-
sary for differentiation of these lesions, because the radiographic appearance will be similar.
 Sonographic evaluation from the abdominal side of the diaphragm may reveal an
abnormal shape to the diaphragm. This can be difficult to appreciate unless there is fluid
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
75
B
A
FIG. z-48 A 5-year-old female mixed breed dog with a 4-month history of chronic cough that had
not responded to antibiotics and bronchial dilators. The thoracic cavity is markedly widened at its
αaudal aspect in both the lateral (A) and the ventrodorsal (B) radiographs. The sternum diverges at
an acute angle from the thoracic spine. This thoracic conformation is referred to as pigeon chest.
Diagnosis: Normal thorax.
between the diaphragm and liver. Discriminating between diaphragmatic, pleural, or medi-
astinal masses, diaphragmatic hernias with herniation of a liver lobe, and caudal or acces-
sory lung lobe masses can be challenging. The manner in which the mass moves, whether
with the lung or the diaphragm, may be a useful feature in determining the origin of a mass
 in the region of the diaphragm.
HERNIAS
Diaphragmatic Hernia. Diaphragmatic hernias allow protrusion of abdominal viscera
 i srp a n s an e sd a p an r
ent kinds of acquired and congenital diaphragmatic hernias may occur.7,80-88 These
include traumatic or congenital diaphragmatic hernia, hiatal hernia, and pericardial
diaphragmatic hernia. Although congenital diaphragmatic hernias occur, most diaphrag-
matic hernias are the result of trauma. Many congenital diaphragmatic hernias are associ-
ated with sternal anomalies.89 Occasionally there may be other medical considerations due
to the organs involved and their positions in the hernia.90,9l In most cases, the diagnosis of
traumatic diaphragmatic hernia can be easily confirmed radiographically. When large
amounts of pleural fluid are present and only a portion of the liver is herniated, the diag-
nosis may be difficult. The presence of gas-, food-, or fluid-filled portions of the gastroin-
testinal tract within the pleural space is the most reliable radiographic evidence of
size, shape, and density. Obstruction of the bowel may occur and result in bowel distention,
which could turn a chronic diaphragmatic hernia into an acute condition. Loss of the
diaphragmatic outline is a sign of diaphragmatic hernia. However, this may occur with any
type of pleural fluid and with pulmonary, pleural, or caudal mediastinal masses that arise
from or contact the diaphragm. Horizontal-beam techniques can be used to displace the
 pleural fluid away from the segment of the diaphragm suspected to be affected, by making
76
FIG. 2-49 A, and B, A 2-year-old male mixed breed dog following
multiple gas-filled loops of intestine noted within the right ventral
hemithorax. There are many bone fragments noted within the stom-
ach, which has been displaced into the ventral thorax. The cardiac sil-
houette is displaced into the left hemithorax. Diagnosis:
Diaphragmatic hernia.
B
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
77
FIG. 2-50 A 7-year-old mixed breed
dog had been hit by a car and had a
mild degree of respiratory distress A
dorsally recumbent, horizontal-
beam lateral view of the thorax
reveals a liver lobe protruding
through the diaphragmatic cupola
(arrow). Note the pleural fluid,
which had previously obscured the
herniated liver lobe,has been shifted
into the paraspinal region by the
effects of gravity due to the position-
ing.
. Diagnosis: Diaphragmatic
hernia.
the suspected area higher than any other segment (Fig. 2-50). Diaphragmatic hernias usu-
ally result in displacement of the thoracic viscera (Fig. 2-51). The degree and direction of
the displacement will vary with the hernia site and amount of abdominal viscera within the
pleural space. On occasion, only the stomach will herniate into the pleural space and
o s r as si soasou e se sede m s 'se wm sp ao
pulmonary vessels and that displaces the cardiac silhouette and pulmonary parenchyma. It
is critical that gastric involvement in diaphragmatic hernias be recognized, because these
can become acute, life-threatening emergencies if the stomach dilates and significantly
 interferes with respiration.85
 In addition to the thoracic radiographic changes, the abdominal radiograph also will be
useful. The stomach may be positioned closer to the diaphragmatic outline when the liver
herniates into the thorax In many obese cats and in many dogs, the falciform ligament con-
tains enough fat to outline the ventral abdominal margin of the diaphragm. Loss of this
shadow in an obese animal with pleural fluid, but without peritoneal fluid, often indicates a
diagnosis of diaphragmatic hernia. In some animals with diaphragmatic hernia,the absence
of normal viscera from the abdomen will permit the diagnosis of diaphragmatic hernia. Rib
fractures, especially those involving the caudal ribs, may be detected also. Diaphragmatic
tears may ocur without herniation and may not be detectable radiographically.
 Barium contrast examinations of the stomach and small intestine may be helpful when
 the diagnosis is not obvious on the survey film. Positioning of the stomach close to the
diaphragm or identification of bowel within the thorax confirms the diagnosis of
diaphragmatic hernia.
 Positive and negative contrast peritoneography have been used to evaluate the
diaphragm.993Injection of 1 to 2ml/kg of body weight of water-soluble positive-contrast
medium into the peritoneal cavity, followed by right and left lateral, sternal, and dorsal
recumbent radiographs, allows complete evaluation of the diaphragm. Identification
 of contrast within the pleural space confirms the diagnosis of diaphragmatic rupture (Fig.
 2-52). Air, carbon dioxide, or nitrous oxide also may be used. The gas is injected into
the peritoneal cavity, and its identification in the pleural cavity confirms the diagnosis (Fig.
2-53). Positional maneuvers, including horizontal-beam radiography, can be used to move
ing the abdominal surface of the diaphragm. In chronic diaphragmatic hernias, adhesions
of the viscera to the diaphragm can interfere with contrast flow into the pleural space and
cause a false-negative study.
78
FIG. 2-51 A and B,A 10-year-old male cat with a 12-day history of hema-
turia and stranguria. Abdominal radiographs were obtained and, because
of the appearance of the thorax on the abdominal radiographs, thoracic
radiographs were obtained. There is a loss of the normal diaphragmatic
shadow on the left side. There is a soff-tissue and fat density located within 
the caudal ventral left hemithorax. The cardiac silhouette is displaced to 
the right and dorsally (arrows). Diagnosis: Diaphragmatic hernia.
A
B
 Positional radiographs also may be used to evaluate the diaphragm when pleural fluid
is present. Right, left, sternal, and dorsal recumbent radiographs using both horizontally
and vertically directed x-ray beams will shift the pleural fluid and outline different portions
of the diaphragm. They also may allow identification of abdominal viscera within the tho-
ach when it contains both gas and fluid. Positioning of the pylorus or body close to the
diaphragm will indicate that the liver is small or herniated.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
79
 Congenital diaphragmatic hernias are seen infrequently. It is difficult to distinguish
them clinically from traumatic hernias, because the radiographic signs are the same.
Congenital defects are most often on the ventral midline and the xiphoid frequently is
involved. Malformation of the sternum, including absence or splitting of the xiphoid or
 alteration in the shape and number of the sternebrae, may be identified.
Sonographic changes associated with diaphragmatic hernias usually are restricted to
the identification of hydrothorax or abdominal structures or both in abnormal locations
 carefully a structure as liver because atelectatic lung, lung lobe torsion, and pulmonary or 
 pleural neoplasms can mimic closely the sonographic appearance of liver.
 It is usually very difficult to identify specifically a diaphragmatic rent, because the
diaphragm itself is rarely seen sonographically. The hyperechoic line that normally is seen
between the liver and lung is realy the interface between the diaphragm (tissue) and lung
(air). If there is a diaphragmatic defect, the interface between liver and lung will also appear
as a thin, hyperechoic line.
Esophageal Hiatal Hernia. Although hernias potentially may occur around the caval or
osd u u  sa  o pns uq a su ie
hernia, and combined hernia. An oval or semicircular soft-tissue density may be visible
protruding from the diaphragm in the lateral radiograph at the level of the esophageal hia-
tus. The soft-tissue density will extend on the ventrodorsal view into the caudal medi-
astinum on or slightly to the left of the midline. Secondary esophageal dilation with food,
fluid, or gas may be identified. Gas within the stomach will outline the rugal fold pattern
and allow recognition of the stomach's position cranial to the diaphragm. In some
instances, the rugal folds may be traced caudally through the diaphragmatic opening into
the abdominal portion of the stomach (Fig. 2-55). Many hiatal hernias are termed sliding
(ie., the stomach may move into and out of the caudal mediastinum on sequential radi-
ographs). An esophageal contrast study is necessary in most instances to distinguish
between axial hiatal hernia, in which the stomach protrudes through the esophageal hia
tus, and paraesophageal hernia, in which the stomach protrudes through a diaphragmatic
opening lateral to the hiatus. Sonographically, the stomach may be seen protruding cra-
nially beyond the rest of the abdominal viscera with a hiatal hernia.
FIG. 2-52 A 2-year-old male Cairn
Terrier with mild exercise intoler-
Yaam e Aeme u peu sop aui 'aue
prior to being found and brought for
treatment. Examination of survey
radiographs revealed an increased
density in the caudal and ventral
portion of the thorax. A positive
contrast celiogram reveals extravasa-
tion of the contrast media across the
diaphragm and into the thoracic
cavity
(arrow).
Diagnosis:
 Diaphragmatic hernia.
80
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-53 A 6-month-old male
mixed breed dog after thoracic
trauma. The animal was mildly dys-
pneic. A, On the lateral thoracic
radiograph the diaphragm appeared
to be irregular (arrows). No other
abnormalities are noted. B, Carbon 
dioxide was introduced into the
peritoneal cavity through a plastic
atheter, and a second lateral tho-
racic radiograph was obtained. Gas
is present within the pleural space
separating the heart from the ster-
 num. This is indicative of communi-
cation between the peritoneal and
pleural cavities due to a diaphrag-
 matic hernia. The diaphragmatic
tear was at the level of the diaphrag-
matic  irregularity.
Diagnosis:
 Diaphragmatic hernia with hernia-
tion of a small portion of the liver.
A
B
Pericardial Diaphragmatic Hernia. Pericardial diaphragmatic hernia (PDH) usually causes
a pumpkin-shaped cardiac silhouette and is therefore one of the differential diagnostic
 considerations in pets with generalized cardiac enlargement.8,14-109 If gas-flled gastroin-
testinal structures are within the pericardial sac, the diagnosis may be radiographically evident
(Fig. 2-56). The diaphragmatic defect in these animals is often small and not radiographically
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
81
FIG. 2-54 A 5-year-old male Yorkshire
LIVER
Terrier was evaluated for an acute onset of
dyspnea. Right parasternal short-axis
views reveal the presence of liver (l) adja-
cent to the heart (h). The diaphragm is
not visible. Diagnosis: Diaphragmatic
hernia.
detectable. In cats with congenital PDH, the presence of a dorsal peritoneopericardial
mesothelial remnant (a distinct curvilinear soft-tissue opacity between the cardiac silhouette
 Had Xdeoo tn'(e-z ) sisoup al jo a aiu si (erp e
recognized by the presence of abdominal viscera within the pericardial sac (Fig. 2-58). This
condition is discussed more completely in the section on cardiac abnormalities.
GASTROESOPHAGEAL INTUSSUSCEPTION
Gastroesophageal intussusception is the invagination of the stomach into the caudal tho-
racic esophagus. Radiographically, the caudal esophagus will appear to be fluid filled and
enlarged, and the stomach may not be identifiable within the abdomen. If the esophagus
cranial to the intussusception is dilated with gas, the rugal folds of the stomach may be
13 Sonographically, atransesophageal study may reveal the tissue density extending cra-
 nially and the rugal folds may be apparent.
HYperTrOPHIC MuSCulAR DYSTrOPHY
Thickening and iregularity of the diaphragmatic contour, megaesophagus, and cardiomegaly
 have been described in dogs and cats with hypertrophic muscular dystrophy.ll4 Decreased
liver echogenicity; peritoneal fuid; hepatic, splenic, and renal enlargement; increased renal
cortical echogenicity; and adrenal mineralization may be demonstrated on ultrasonographic
82
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
C
B
D
FIG. 2-55 A 3-month-old male Shar-Pei with a history of labored breathing over a period of several
weeks. Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) thoracic radiographs revealed a soft tissue-dense mass
located in the caudal mediastinum. This density obliterates a portion of the caudal dorsal cardiac sil-
houette (closed arrows) and is visible on the midline in B. There is a gas bubble within this soft-tis-
sue density (open arrows). An esophagram was performed with ventrodorsal (C) and lateral (D)
radiographs. The caudal thoracic esophagus is dilated. There is a constriction in the esophagus at the
level of T8 (large arrows). Caudal to this constriction,the contrast column widens into a large hollow
viscus. There are irregularities in the margins of this structure, which represent rugal folds (small
arrows). An additional constriction is noted caudal to this area of dilation. Contrast can be traced
from that point into the intrabdominal portion of the stomach. The radiographic findings are
indicative of hiatal hernia. The size of the barium-containing bowel and the presence of rugal folds
identify the intrathoracic portion of the stomach. Diagnosis: Esophageal hiatal hernia.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
83
FIG. 2-56 A 1-year-old male Old
English Sheepdog with exercise
intolerance. On physical examina-
tion the heart sounds were muffled.
The lateral radiograph reveals a
severely enlarged cardiac silhouette
with multiple air-filled tubular
structures within it. Diagnosis:
Pericardial diaphragmatic hernia
with loops of bowel trapped within
the pericardial sac.
FIG. 2-57 An 8-year-old female
domestic long-haired cat was exam-
ined for abdominal distention. The
lateral view of the thorax revealed an
enlarged cardiac silhouette. The liver
appears to be slightly smaller than
normal. The dorsal peritoneoperi-
cardial mesothelial remnant (arrow)
can be seen. Diagnosis: Congenital
 pericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
examination. Concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, increased left ventricular systolic and
 diastolic dimensions, and increased endocardial echogenicity also have been reported.
ABNORMAL FUNCTI0N
The position of the diaphragm varies with respiratory phase, recumbency, and pressure
from abdominal contents. In lateral recumbency, the dependent crus is usually cranial to
84
SMALLANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTF
the opposite crus. Asymmetry between diaphragmatic crura may be a normal variation;
changes, the possibility of a functional diaphragmatic abnormality should be considered.
 Displacement of one or both diaphragmatic crura may result from adhesions or diaphrag-
diseases. Optimal functional evaluation of the diaphragm requires fluoroscopy.
Comparison of inspiratory and expiratory lateral radiographic views can suggest a lack of
parallel motion of the diaphragmatic crura. Although usually traumatic in origin,
diaphragmatic motion abnormalities may arise from other causes. A posttraumatic
condition called synchronous diaphragmatic futter also may be seen as a diaphragmatic
dysfunction.
PLEURAL ABNORMALITIES
Pleural abnormalities that can be detected include intrapleural and extrapleural masses
and air or fluid accumulation in the pleural space. Pleurography has been described for the
purpose of evaluating the pleural space l1,120 Because the technique is difficult to perform
and interpret, it has been used infrequently. Sonography has proven to be marginally eas-
ier and a great deal more specific since its introduction.
PLEURALAND EXTRAPLEURAL MASSES
Masses that involve the thoracic wall may extend into the thorax, although they may not
penetrate the pleura. These chest wall masses often are referred to as extrapleural masses.
The intact pleural covering produces a smooth, distinct margin over the inner surface of
these masses. A convex interface with the adjacent lung and concave edges at the point of
 a ss s s aq a  e s on n  ss a on 
ally widest at their point of attachment. Rib destruction, bony proliferation, soft-tissue
mineralization, and distortion of intercostal spaces may be seen (Fig. 2-60). Although the
presence of a bony lesion suggests that a mass is extrapleural, the absence of bone lesions
does not exclude that possibility. The often smaller, external portion of the mass also may
be identified. Pleural fluid, more often observed with pleural than extrapleural or pul-
monary masses, may be minimal unless the mass becomes rather large and causes inter
costal vascular erosion. Most extrapleural masses are neoplastic, often arising from the rib
FIG. 2-58 A 9-year-old neutered
female Beagle had a history of pant-
ing and an enlarged cardiac silhou-
ette on thoracic radiographs. A right
lateral view reveals the presence of a
lobe of liver (LIVER) and gall
bladder (GB) in the right side of
the pericardial sac. Diagnosis:
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic
hernia.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
85
FIG. 2-59 A and B, A 5-year-old
mixed breed dog had been hit by a
car and was both tachypneic and
dyspneic at rest but did not have suf-
ficient lung abnormalities to justify
the degree of respiratory dysfunc-
tion. Lef lateral and ventrodorsal
radiographs of the dog revealed that
the right diaphragmatic crus was
positioned well cranial of the left
crus on both views. At fluoroscopy,
the crura moved in opposite direc-
tions, indicating the right one was
 paralyzed. Diagnosis: Right hemidi-
aphragmatic paralysis.
86
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULT
FIG. 2-60 A and B,A 2-year-old male mixed breed dog with a
-os isoad syam z asou e Aq pyy uaq sua o Aroi
tissue swelling was present on the right thoracic wall. The dog had
evidence of mild respiratory distress. There is a soft-tissue density
in the right hemithorax. The cardiac silhouette and trachea are
displaced to the leff. The diaphragmatic outline is obliterated.
There is bony proliferation on the cortical margins of the eighth
and ninth ribs. There is destruction involving the ventral aspect
of the eighth rib at the costochondral junction (arrows). There is
 irregular soft-tissue mineralization noted in this area. The radi-
ographic changes are indicative of a pleural mass that has dis-
placed the cardiac silhouette. Although other causes of pleural
fuid and mass should also be considered in a differential diagno-
sis, the bony lesion indicates that the mass is extrapleural and
 arising from the ribs. Diagnosis: Fibrosarcoma.
B
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
87
FIG. 2-61 A 5-year-old male cat with dyspnea and pale mucous
membranes. A diaphragmatic hernia had been repaired 4 months
earlier. In the ventrodorsal radiograph there is a soft-tissue density
that obliterates the entire left thoracic cavity. The cardiac silhouette
and trachea are displaced to the right. There is a small amount of
fuid present in the pleural space on the right side. This fluid outlines
the lung lobes and separates them from the lateral thoracic wall. The
radiographic changes are indicative of a soft-tissue density within the
left hemithorax. This could be a mass or trapped pleural fluid. A tho-
racocentesis was performed and purulent material was removed.
Diagnosis: Loculated pyothorax.
or costal cartilage, although some inflammatory lesions may be encountered. When an
it can appear similar to a pleural or extrapleural mass. The shape of the soft-tissue density
and evaluation of the point of junction between chest wall and lung lesion may distinguish
por aenn re s red z'su emenx pue reod umq
and lack the shoulder observed with extrapleural masses. Obtaining opposite lateral views
will be helpful in distinguishing among pulmonary and pleural or extrapleural masses.
Horizontal-beam radiography may be helpful in demonstrating a mass by using gravity to
displace the pleural fluid away from the mass. In some instances biopsy, via needle aspirate
or surgery, is the only way to make a definitive diagnosis. Fluoroscopic examination, com-
puted tomography, ultrasonography,and pleurography have been recommended; however,
they rarely are required.
Herniation of abdominal viscera through a diaphragmatic tear may mimic the appear-
ance of a pleural or extrapleural mass. Positional radiographs, evaluation of the abdomen,
and careful evaluation of the diaphragm usually will identify the hernia.
 Encapsulated or loculated pleural fluid, granulomatous masses, or pleural neoplasms may
- pe Ard ( l-z ) sss d po ass aa sdeo aod
tic pleural neoplasms are rare. They often are hidden by pleural fluid and are not identified
until the fluid is removed. 123,124 A fluid collection that does not conform to the normal linear
or triangular shape of the pleural space as defined by the lung lobes, or a fluid density that
maintains its position and shape despite alteration in the animal's position during radiogra-
o issadoo ni an nsnn s sn q ss nnad e jo ap si kud
 displacement of the heart or other mediastinal structures also can be observed.
As a screening technique for pleural lesions, ultrasonography is usually impractical
because of the large area that must be evaluated. The transducer must be placed immedi-
ately over the lesion to be identified. However, once an area of interest is identified radi-
ographically, the area may be evaluated readily to determine the tissues involved and the
88
character of the lesion (ie., cystic or solid). Observing movement of the mass with respi-
ration, which identifies the mass as intrapulmonary, and identifying the position of the
lung lobes when the mass is pleural are useful in discriminating among diaphragmatic her-
nias and pleural and pulmonary masses. Once a lesion is imaged, the sonogram can be used
to guide a needle for biopsy or aspiration.26
PLEURAL FLUID
The radiographic appearance of pleural fluid, or hydrothorax, depends upon the nature
and amount of the fluid and the presence or absence of coexisting thoracic disease. Pleural
fluid will obliterate normal fluid-dense structures and will highlight air-containing struc-
tures (Fig. 2-62). In the lateral radiograph, the cardiac apex and diaphragmatic outline may
be obliterated. Because of their elastic nature, the lung lobes will retain their normal shapes
and fluid will accumulate in the interlobar fissures dorsal and ventral to the lung lobes. This
outlines the lung lobes, accentuating their margins, and produces a “scalloping" or "leaf-
ing" of the lobes. Fluid collcting between lung lobes produces linear or triangle-shaped
densities at the anatomical sites of theinterlobar fissures. If fluid hasbeen present for a sig
nificant length of time (weeks to months), fibrin deposition or inflammation of the visceral
pleura may result in rounding of thelung lobe margins, which may be referred to as restric-
tive pleuritis. The volume of fluid will determine the extent to which the heart and
diaphragm are obliterated, the width of the interlobar fissures, and the amount of
separation between the lung and the dorsal and ventral thoracic wall. In animals with freely
moveable pleural fluid, right and left lateral recumbent radiographs differ, because the
mediastinum will not prevent fluid movement from one side to the other, and the depend-
ent lung lobes will collapse to a greater extent than the nondependent lobes. Failure of the
fluid to shift position in opposite lateral recumbent radiographs indicates that the fluid is
trapped, the mediastinum is abnormally thickened, the fluid is fibrinous, or a pleural mass
is present. 124-126
 The dorsoventral and ventrodorsal radiographs appear different when free pleural
[esioponuaa au ul zai'pny pue sun eau au uo joaa sAiaa o anp quasaid s piny
view, the pleural fluid accumulates dorsally on either side of the vertebral column. The
cardiac silhouette usually will be visible, surrounded by and to some degree floating on
aerated lung. The costodiaphragmatic recesses or costophrenic angles wil become
rounded or blunted. If only a small amount of fluid is present it may be localized to the
"paraspinal gutters" and may be only minimally apparent on the ventrodorsal view. More
often, fluid willbe evident (ie., separating the lungs from the lateral thoracic wall, sepa-
rating individual lung lobes) on both views. This is dependent on the amount of fluid and
is usually more obvious in the ventrodorsal than the dorsoventral view. Pleural fissure
lines will be evident, outlining the lung lobes in both views. The pattern and distribution
of these lines will change with the view. Part of the diaphragmatic outline will be obliter-
ated in either view; however, the cupula or dome will be less obvious in the dorsoventral
view and the crura will be obscured in the ventrodorsal view. In the dorsoventral radi
ograph, the pleural fluid will gravitate to the sternum, the cardiac silhouette will be oblit-
erated, and the mediastinum will appear widened. The differences between ventrodorsal
and dorsoventral views may be used to determine the nature of the pleural fluid and to
detect masses or other lesions that might be masked by the fluid. A change in the fluid dis-
tribution with changes in the animal's position indicates that adhesions and large
amoun ts of fibrin are not present. Areas of the thorax masked by fluid in one view may be
evaluated in an other view.
Horizontal-beam radiographs are also useful in detecting and evaluating pleural fluid.
Because the fluid should move with gravity, the region of interest should be up and the
fluid should move to the dependent side, unlessit is fibrinous in nature, rapped by adhe-
 sions, or a fluid-dense mass is present.
 Inflation of the lung lobes should displace the pleural fluid evenly. If fluid accumulates
in the area of a lung lobe and does not move away with normal respiration, an abnormal-
ity or disease within that lobe should be suspected. Positional maneuvers can be performed
to evaluate the lung lobe, although the lesion often will not be apparent until the pleural
fluid is removed (Figs. 2-63 and 2-64).
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
89
B
C
FIG. 2-62 A 2-year-old female cat was brought in with a history of dyspnea and mufled heart
sounds. Lateral (A), ventrodorsal (B), (C) thoracic radiographs were obtained. In the ventrodorsal
radiograph, the margins of the lung lobes are visible (open arrows), outlined by a fluid density that sep-
arates them from the lateral thoracic wall and outlines the interlobar fissures. The cardiac silhouette is
obscured. In the lateral radiograph, the diaphragmatic margins are obscured on the thoracic side—the
fat in the abdomen identifies the abdominal side of the diaphragm (closed arrows). The radiographic
changes are indicative of pleural fluid. Because the cranial mediastinum could not be evaluated on the
ventrodorsal radiograph, an erect ventrodorsal radiograph was obtained using a horizontally directed
in iu ad a o u m x iun aun o  s  a 'q ai-x
This radiographic finding indicates that an anterior mediastinal mass was not present. Diagnosis:
 Pleural fluid. A thoracocentesis was performed and pyothorax was diagnosed.
厂
B
C
FIG. 2-63 A 10-year-old male castrated cat with a l-day history of acute onset of dyspnea. There was
no history of thoracic trauma. Lateral (A), ventrodorsal (B), and erect ventrodorsal (C) radiographs
were obtained. There is pleural fluid noted, especialy in the right cranial thorax. The cardiac silhou-
ette is obscured. There are bronchial structures present in the area of the right cranial lung lobe ante-
rior to the cardiac silhouette in A (arrows). In C, the erect ventrodorsal radiograph, the soft-tissue
density remains in the right cranial thorax, indicating that it is a solid mass or trapped fluid. Most of
the pleural fluid drains into the caudal thorax. The radiographic findings are indicative of pleural
fluid with disease in the right cranial lung lobe. This could be the result of bacterial pneumonia or
other infltrate in the lung lobe. Diagnosis: Lung lobe torsion. An exploratory thoracotomy was per-
formed and a right cranial lung lobe torsion was identified. The pleural fluid was chylous.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
91
 FIG. 2-64 A middle-aged dog with a history of dyspnea and
discomfort. A and B, Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs
revealed pleural fluid especially in the right cranial thorax.
The cardiac silhouette is obscured. There are bronchial
structures present in the area of the right cranial lung lobe
 anterior to the cardiac silhouette in A The entire right lung
 is obscured in B. However, in A a bronchus was noted tra-
versing caudal and dorsal to the heart. Following a bron-
 chogram (C), a suspected torsion of the right middle lobe
was confirmed. The occluded stump of the twisted right
 middle lobar bronchus is indicated by an arrow. Diagnosis:
Lung lobe torsion. An exploratory thoracotomy was per-
formed and a right middle lung lobe torsion was identified.
A
B
C
 The role that pleural fluid accumulation plays in the misdiagnosis of pulmonary dis-
 ease should not be minimized. A fibrinous pleural fluid that “traps" over a lung lobe may
give the appearance of pulmonary lobar disease. The presence of an internal pulmonary
structure within the density (e.g., air bronchogram signs, bronchial thickening) indicates
but does not exclude pulmonary involvement. Confirmation may require ultrasonography
or computed tomography.
 Fat accumulates in the mediastinum, dorsal to the sternum, adjacent to the pericardium,
and beneath the parietal pleura in obese dogs and cats. This may be mistaken for pleural fluid.
This fat density does not obliterate completely the diaphragm or cardiac silhouette and, there-
fore, it can be recognized as a fat density. Despite a large amount of density in the ventral tho-
rax, the pleural fissure lines will not be observed when fat rather than fluid accumulates in the
pleural space. Changes in the animal's position will not change the position of this fat density.
92
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-65 A 6-year-old neutered
female domestic short-haired cat
had diffculty breathing and tachyp-
nea. An ultrasonographic examina-
tion revealed a large volume of
pleural effusion (PE). There was
PE
severe collapse of some lung lobes
(L) that appears as a thin, triangular
structure. Diagnosis: Chylothorax.
Pleural thickening and outlining of pleural interlobar fissures due to pleural fibrosis or cal-
cification may be observed in older animals. This wil be similar to the changes that occur with
small amounts of pleural fluid. Thickened pleural fissures, however, are linear while pleural
fluid accumulations are triangular, with the peripheral portion of the density usually wider
 a ae ue m sd se a u  y d s a 
the appearance of these lines willidentify the fibrotic or calcific nature of these densities.
Free pleural fluid will displace thoracic viscera only because of gravitational effects. In
the presence of large amounts of fluid, the heart will move toward the most dependent por-
tion of the thoracic cavity This displacement causes the trachea to appear elevated on the
lateral view, which may create the false impression of cardiomegaly, 128 Displacement of the
cardiac silhouette in a direction against the effect of gravity, compression of the tracheal
lumen, displacement of the carina caudally, or a localized elevation of the trachea indicate
that a mass is present within the fluid. Loculated or encapsulated fluid may mimic this effect.
 Sonography will demonstrate reliably even smallamounts of pleural fluid if the trans-
ducer is placed on the most dependent portion of the chest or over an area of trapped
fluid.26,28,29 Atelectasis of the lungs may be noted because the lungs will collapse into tri-
angle-shaped, thin structures (Fig. 2-65). The presence of fibrin tags on pleural surfaces
indicates chronicity of the fluid accumulation. If the fluid contains a lot of floating debris,
pyothorax may be present. A pleural mass that was not identified radiographically due to
the lack of density difference between the fluid and the mass may be identified (Fig. 2-66).
Lung masses, atelectasis, or pneumonia also may be identified.
The causes of hydrothorax are numerous and include right heart failure, neoplasia,
hypoproteinemia, infection, traumatic rupture of vascular or lymphatic structures, and
 inflammation.* The nature of the fluid cannot be determined using ultrasonography,
although highly echogenic fluid suggests the presence of a highly cellular fluid or one with
a high protein level. Identification of intrathoracic abnormalities such as an enlarged right
heart, pericardial fuid or mass, pleural mass, diaphragmatic hernia, or lung lobe torsion
will provide important clues to the diagnosis. Sonography is very helpful in identifying
 opportune sites for thoracocentesis.
PLEURAL AIR
be observed when comparing right with left lateral recumbent radiographs and
*References 26, 77, 86-88, 121, 129-151.
CHapTer TWO THe THOraX
93
FIG. 2-66 A 5-year-old female
S51
 Keeshond with dyspnea and anemia.
LT
ICTRANS
DEP
 Radiographs revealed a hydrothorax.
ACU
A right parasternal long-axis view
revealed the presence of pleural fluid
(f) and a heteroechoic mass (m), with
PWR
a small cystic area (arrow) arising
POS
from the visceral pleura and lying
GAI
adjacent to the heart. Diagnosis:
MASS
Hemangiosarcoma.
HEART
dorsoventral with ventrodorsal radiographs of animals with pneumothorax; however,
'udeisope jeiael juaqumai al u si'rsi'(29-z bie) aes au are sameay roe a
these features include separation of the lung lobes from the ventral and dorsal thoracic
wall, separation of the heart from the sternum, separation of the lung lobes from the
diaphragm, and an overall increase in pulmonary density due to lung lobe atelectasis.
Air may become trapped within the mediastinum as the animal is rotated (Fig. 2-68).
This will produce soft tissue-dense well-defined lines (mediastinal folds), usually in the
caudal, postcardiac mediastinum, extending from the cardiac apex to the sternum or
diaphragm.154
 In the recumbent ventrodorsal and dorsoventral radiograph, the lungs will be sepa-
rated from the lateral thoracic wall by air density. This is identified by the lack of pul-
o roq n q  i a  s  a 
lung. The density of the lung lobes willincrease due to atelectasis. Air may be identified
between the lungs and the diaphragm. If only small amounts of air are present, it may
not be visible on the ventrodorsal view because the air is centralized below the sternum.
It may be recognized more readily on the dorsoventral view, because it may result in
minimal displacement of the lungs away from the visceral pleura. On occasion, air may
accumulate between the heart and lung lobes and may become trapped within the
mediastinum, outlining the mediastinal folds but not the individual mediastinal
structures.
 A lateral radiograph obtained using a horizontal x-ray beam is helpful for detecting
small amounts of pleural air. Furthermore, small amounts of pleural air may be accentu-
ated by obtaining radiographs at expiration rather than at inspiration.
As with pleural fluid, air should move freely within the pleural space and distribute
-n adio pios shi au xo an u sod isuu a on ss 
formly. If this does not occur and one lung lobe or a portion of a lung lobe is denser than
the others, lung lobe disease should be suspected. Additional radiographs or repeated
evaluation after removal of the pleural air may be helpful in these instances. Unilateral
pneumothorax is rare in dogs and cats. However, if previous or coexisting pleural or
 mediastinal disease has produced adhesions or pleural thickening, a unilateral pneu-
mothorax can occur.
94
FIG. 2-67 A l-year-old female cat showed evidence of respiratory distress
after surgery for the repair of a diaphragmatic hernia. There is air within the
pleural space separating the lungs from the lateral thoracic wall. In the ven-
trodorsal (A) and lateral (B) radiographs there is atelectasis of the right cau-
dallung lobe (closed arrows). There is irregularity of the diaphragm at the site
of diaphragmatic hernia repair (open arrows). In the lateral radiograph there
is air within the peritoneal cavity due to surgery (large arrows). The radi-
-udep on juanbqns xeououmaud jo aaui ane sauuy odeao
maudal lung lobe indicates that there is pathology within this lung lobe. This
is most likely residual atelectasis or pulmonary contusion. Diagnosis:
Pneumothorax and atelectasis of the right caudal lung lobe, which resolved
after chest tube placement and continued aspiration of the pleural space.
A
B
Pneumothorax is most often secondary to trauma and can occur with or without rib
fractures. Spontaneous pneumothorax refers to those that occur in the absence of
trauma, resulting from rupture of a lung tumor, abscess, or bulla, or from pleural
tears.155-163
 Tension pneumothorax occurs when a tear in the visceral pleura functions as a one-way
(or "flap") valve and air continues to accumulate within the pleural space. Under these cir-
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
95
FIG. 2-68 A 1-year-old male mixed
 breed dog was examined after tho-
racic trauma. The dog had evidence
of mild respiratory distress. In this
lateral radiograph,the collapsed cau-
dal lung lobes are outlined by air
within the pleural space (open
arrows). The cardiac silhouette is
separated from the sternum. The
esophagus can be seen in the caudal
thorax (solid straight arrow). There is
a thin, soft tissue-dense linear struc-
ture present in the caudal ventral
thorax (curved arrows). This repre-
sents a portion of the caudal medi-
astinum, which is outlined by the
pleural air. Diagnosis: Pneumo-
thorax.
cumstances, intrapleural pressure may exceed atmospheric pressure (Fig. 2-69). Severe lung
lobe collapse,flattening, or caudal displacement of the diaphragm into the abdomen and
tenting of the diaphragm at its costal attachments may be evident. The thorax may be
widened, or barrel chested, and the mediastinum may shift away from the side in which the
air has accumulated if the mediastinum is intact. This emergency condition should be rec-
ognized and treated immediately.
 Pneumothorax may be mimicked by overexposure of the radiograph, overlying skin
should be used to determine if the pulmonary vessels and airways extend to the thoracic
  a  m ion ai on ed se i s a l 
due to pneumothorax Any apparent margins that are not parallel are probably artifacts.
Skin folds often can be traced beyond the thoracic wall. Separation of the heart from the
sternum on a recumbent lateral view is a sign of mediastinal shift and is not pathogno-
monic for pneumothorax Full inflation of the right middle lung lobe in a normally deep-
chested breed or overinflation of the lung can produce this same heart-sternum separation.
Anytime radiographic changes suggest the presence of pleural air on one radiograph but
the diagnosis cannot be supported by another view, the diagnosis is suspect. A horizontal
beam view may be diagnostic in these situations.
MEDIASTINAL ABNORMALITIES
 Abnormalities of the mediastinum that may be detected radiographically include changes
in size, shape, and position, and alterations in density. The mediastinum is divided into cra-
nial (precardiac), middle (cardiac), and caudal (postcardiac) portions. The trachea is the
only structure in the cranial mediastinum that can be identified consistently on thoracic
radiographs. It therefore serves as a landmark or reference point for evaluation of cranial
mediastinal lesions, especially masses.
 The size of the mediastinum varies among individuals due to the accumulation of fat
and the presence of the thymus in young animals. This normal variation must be
considered before an abnormality is diagnosed. In a fat animal, a widened mediastinum
that has a smooth margin and does not displace or compress the trachea is probably nor-
 mal. However, a widened mediastinum in a thin dog probably has clinical significance.
96
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-69 A and B, An 8-year-old male mixed breed dog with acute
onset of respiratory distress associated with thoracic trauma. There is
air present in the pleural space separating the lungs from the thoracic
wall and diaphragm. The caudal lung lobes are collapsed, and the
cardiac silhouette is separated from the sternum. The diaphragm is
displaced caudally. The diaphragmatic attachments to the sternebra
and dorsal diaphragmatic attachments to the lumbar vertebral bod-
ies are evident (arrows). The marked caudal diaphragmatic displace-
ment and lung lobe collapse are indicative of a tension
pneumothorax. There are incidental findings of old, healing fractures
involving the ribs on both the right and left caudal thoracic wall.
Diagnosis: Tension pneumothorax. This resulted from a tear in the
left caudal lung lobe.
B
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
97
MASSES
Cranial mediastinal masses produce an increased thoracic density, because they displace the
air-flled lung (Figs. 2-70 and 2-71). Usually located in the ventral thorax, they also may
obscure the cardiac silhouette. Although esophageal or periesophageal masses usually will
displace the trachea ventrally, most mediastinal masses, if large enough, will displace the tra-
chea dorsally and away from the midline, usually to the right. The tracheal lumen may be
compressed and the cardiac silhouette and tracheal bifurcation, normally located at the fifth
or sixth intercostal space in the dog and almost always in the sixth intercostal space in the
cat, often will be displaced caudally and dorsally (Fig. 2-72). The mass if large enough or if
locally invasive, may interfere with esophageal peristalsis and a gas-, fluid-, or food-filled
esophagus will be evident at the thoracic inlet. Sternal lymphadenopathy or masses in the
area of the sternal lymph nodes will produce a soft-tissue density in the ventral cranial
mediastinum. These masses typically have a convex dorsal margin and are located over the
second to fourth sternebrae. This aids in distinguishing them from fat accumulation, which
often occurs in the same area. Mediastinal margin irregularity and a change in contour are
much more specific signs of a mediastinal mass than is widening alone. In the ventrodorsal
radiograph, the widened mediastinum may extend on both sides of the vertebral column,
blending with the margins of the cardiac silhouette. The trachea may be displaced to the
right or left depending on the origin of the mass. The cranial margins of the cranial lung
lobes will be displaced laterally, and the entire lobes may be displaced caudally. Masses in the
tip of either cranial lung lobe may contact the mediastinum and mimic a cranial mediasti-
nal mass. Distinction between these may be impossible without the use of computed tomog-
raphy. Irregularity of the mediastinal margin is most often the result of a mediastinal mass
rather than fat or fluid accumulation. There are several causes of mediastinal masses includ-
ing neoplasia, cyst, trapped fluid, abscess, or granuloma (Fig. 2-73),5l,16-83
 Sonography will reveal most cranial mediastinal masses. Very large masses are imaged
readily from anywhere on the cranial thoracic wall. Smaller masses may require using the
heart as a sonographic window, but some will not be positioned to be imaged transtho-
a a e  n nou  m a apu i nes 
the use of a parasternal window. Regardless of the imaging portal, evaluation will reveal the
presence of a mass and allow for the determination of whether it is cystic, solid, or
predominately solid with some fluid elements. The relationship of the mass to various vas-
cular structures may be apparent (Figs. 2-74 and 2-75). Exact identification of the tissue of
origin of the mass usually cannot be made with ultrasonography. However, sonography can 
be used to guide a needle for aspiration or biopsy.
Other than esophageal masses (cardiac, aortic, or pericardial masses will be discussed
separately), those in the midportion of the mediastinum usually involve the mediastinal or
tracheobronchial lymph nodes or both (Figs. 2-76 and 2-77). Tracheal or bronchial com-
pression or deviation may be the only visible radiographic change, because the lymph node
borders often are obscured by concurrent increased pulmonary density or by contact with
the heart. The trachea may be elevated cranially to its bifurcation and the main caudal lobe
bronchi depressed ventrally caudal to this point. Narrowing of the tracheal and bronchial
lumina also may be evident. These changes help distinguish tracheobronchial masses from
hilar pulmonary infiltrates, which do not displace or compress the airways; left atrial
enlargement, which may elevate the left main caudal lobe bronchus; and esophageal
masses, which may depress the entire trachea, both the bronchi, and the cardiac silhouette.
Sonography occasionally can be used to evaluate masses in the midportion of the medi-
astinum. Tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy sometimes can be imaged as masses adjacent
to the cardiac base, using the heart as a sonographic window. Fine-needle aspiration of
such masses only rarely can be performed safely using sonographic guidance.
Caudal mediastinal masses most often arise from or involve the esophagus and will be
discussed in that section. A contrast esophagram is helpful in distinguishing caudal medi-
 so ia n ss sosa  s  siss rn
masses and hernias may occupy the caudal mediastinum and should be considered when-
ever a soft-tissue density is present in this area.
98
FIG. 2-70 A 10-year-old spayed Dachshund with
mammary gland masses. There is a large, soft
tissue-dense mass in the cranial thorax. There are areas
of calcification associated with this mass, especially
ventrally and cranially. On the ventrodorsal (A) and lat-
eral (B) radiographs the cranial mediastinum is
widened, the trachea is displaced to the right and dor-
sally, and the cardiac silhouette is displaced caudally.
There is no evidence of pleural fluid. The radiographic
fndings are indicative of a cranial mediastinal mass.
Diagnosis: Thymoma. This mass was unrelated to the
 mammary gland neoplasms.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
99
FIG. 2-71 A and B, An 8-month-old male cat with a 2-week history
ansss esi aau ua pue sasda iudsp 
density in the cranial mediastinum. The trachea is elevated and com-
pressed. The cranial lung lobes tips are displaced laterally and the
lobes are displaced caudally. There is a small amount of pleural fluid
present in the fissure between the right middle and caudal lung lobes
(arrows). The radiographic findings are indicative of a cranial medi-
astinal mass. Diagnosis: Lymphoma.
100
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 2-72 A, A 9-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired cat
had dyspnea. The ventrodorsal view revealed a large tissue density in
the cranial thorax that obscures the cardiac silhouette. The cranial
lung lobes have been displaced caudally and laterally (black arrows).
A small volume of fluid is present in the pleural space (white arrows).
B, The lateral view reveals that the tracheal bifurcation has been dis-
placed caudally from the normal site in the sixth intercostal space to
the caudal aspect of the seventh intercostal space. Diagnosis: Cranial
mediastinal mass (lymphoma).
CHAPTER TWO
THE THORAX
101
 FIG. 2-73 A 6-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired cat
had a grade 2/6 systolic murmur. The ventrodorsal (A) and lateral
(B) views of the thorax revealed a well-circumscribed mas in the
cranial mediastinum. An ultrasonographic examination revealed a
thin-walled, fluid-filled structure that was successfally drained per-
cutaneously Diagnosis: Branchial cyst.
B
102
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
FIG. 2-74 A transverse anterior tho-
11
racic ultrasonogram was performed
1
CHEST
V7
on a 14-year-old neutered male
 domestic long-haired cat suffering
6.0MH
from dyspnea. A solid mass (M) is
ABD
noted displacing the great vessels (v)
in the anterior mediastinum dor-
sally, as well as a moderate volume of
PWR
pleural effusion (PE). Diagnosis:
Lymphoma.
55d
GAI
TE
FIG. 2-75 A 7-year-old German
Shepherd dog with anorexia, weight
loss, and hypercalcemia. Radio-
graphs revealed a moderate to severe
hydrothorax. A right parasternal
long-axis view revealed a mass (m)
immediately cranial to the heart base
(aorta [ao]). Hydrothorax (h) is also
present. Diagnosis: Lymphoma.
MEDIASTINAL FLUID
Fluid, such as blood, edema, or exudate, may accumulate in the cranial, middle, and caudal
obese animals. This diagnosis should Obe considered in a thin animal with a widened cranial,
 middle, or caudal mediastinum. Sonography can provide confirmation of this diagnosis.
Mediastinal density does not increase markedly as the mediastinum becomes filled
with fluid or replaced by a mass. The increased density can be detected only when the
 mediastinum displaces the air-filled lung.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
103
FIG. 2-76 An 1l-year-old male
German Shepherd dog had moder-
ate dyspnea. An ultrasonographic
examination of the cranial thorax
revealed pleural effusion (PE), the
heart (H), and a mass (M) in the
M
cranial mediastinum. Diagnosis:
Hydrothorax and thyroid carci-
noma.
PE
FIG. 2-77 A 4-year-old female
German Shorthaired Pointer with
generalized
 peripheral
lym -
 phadenopathy There is a soft-tissue
density in the cranial ventral thorax,
which represents sternal lym-
 phadenopathy (closed arrows). There 
is an additional soft-tissue density
that surrounds the tracheal bifurca-
tion (open arrows). The caudal
main stem bronchi are displaced
 ventrally The radiographic findings
 are indicative of sternal and tracheo-
bronchial
lymphadenopathy.
Diagnosis: Lymphoma.
MEDIASTINAL AIR
Air may accumulate within the mediastinum itself, known as pneumomediastinum, or
within the esophagus. This may occur as a result of tracheal, bronchial, or esophageal
 perforation, perforating wounds at the thoracic inlet, or dissection of subcutaneous
emphysema (Fig. 2-78). Pneumomediastinum with accompanying pulmonary intersti-
104
FIG. 2-78 A 4-year-old spayed
Collie was brought in 2 weeks affer
having been poisoned. The oral and
ingual mucosa were necrotic. The
dog was having diffculty breathing.
The dog had responded to initial
treatment but developed an acute
depression and vomited blood 24
hours prior to admission. A,A lateral
thoracic radiograph revealed a
marked accumulation of air within
the cranial mediastinum. The cranial
 mediastinal structures are outlined.
The aorta can be traced beyond the
diaphragm into the abdomen
(arrows). The radiographic fndings
are indicative of pneumomedi-
 astinum. B, An esophagram was per-
formed. Contrast material can be
seen outside the esophageal lumen in
the cranial thorax (arrows). This is
 indicative of esophageal perforation.
Diagnosis: Pneumomediastinum
secondary to esophageal perforation.
This dog was euthanized due to the
severity of the esophageal injury.
A
B
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
105
tial infiltrate has been reported secondary to paraquat toxicity. Pneumomediastinum
air may dissect retroperitoneally or beyond the thoracic inlet into the cervical fascia and
subcutaneously.
Air within the mediastinum will delineate the normally unidentifiable mediastinal
results from a mixture of air and fluid densities. The external tracheal margin will be
sharply defined. The cranial vena cava, azygous vein, esophagus, and sometimes the aor-
tic arch and left subclavian and brachycephalic arteries may be visible. The air may dis-
sect caudally and outline the descending aorta and main pulmonary artery. Continued
caudal migration may produce a pneumoretroperitoneum, which outlines the abdomi-
nal aorta, its main branches, and both kidneys. Pneumomediastinum may extend into
the pericardial sac, creating a pneumopericardium. The thin, tissue-dense pericardium
will be distinctly separate from the cardiac silhouette and the surface irregularities of the
heart will be visible.
The cause of pneumomediastinum rarely is evident on the survey radiograph.
However, lung tisue may tear, and the leaking air may dissect along the pulmonary ves-
sels and lymphatics and thereby reach the mediastinum. If the visceral pleura is not dam-
aged, there may be no accompanying pneumothorax. Contrast studies of the trachea or
esophagus may be helpful, on rare occasions, in unusual cases of pneumomediastinum in
delineating perforation with mediastinal extension and pneumomediastinum (see Fig. 2-
78). Because pneumomediastinum usually is self-limiting, contrast injections into exter-
nal wounds to demonstrate communication with the mediastinum are usually
unnecessary.
A mild degree of pneumomediastinum can be overlooked easily. In animals with over-
 inflated lungs or pneumothorax, an erroneous impression of pneumomediastinum may be
created, especially if delineation or definition of the descending aorta is used as the sole cri-
terion for the diagnosis. Additional radiographic changes should be present before a diag-
 nosis of pneumomediastinum is made. Ultrasonography is of minimal value in detecting
or determining the cause of pneumomediastinum.
TRACHEAL ABNORMALITIES
Tracheal abnormalities include those affecting the tracheal size, shape, density, and posi-
tion, as well as those affecting tracheal function. Most tracheal abnormalities can be eval-
uated adequately on noncontrast radiographs.188 Evaluation and comparison of
radiographs obtained at inspiration and expiration are required for detection of functional
abnormalities. The ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph is less valuable than the lateral
radiograph, because superimposition of the vertebral column occurs. However, this view
should not be ignored.
TRACHEALHYPOPLASIA
tracheal diameter will be evident in both lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs. The en tire
 trachea from the larynx to the main stem bronchi usually is involved, although congeni-
tal hypoplasia of shorter segments of the trachea has been described.44 The tracheal
 diameter is often 50% or less than the laryngeal diameter. The hypoplastic trachea retains
its normal ovoid shape in contrast to the more elliptical shape observed in tracheal col-
lapse. The normal trachea should be wider than the cranial-caudal dimension of the
proximal one third of the third rib.44 Tracheal hypoplasia occurs most frequently in
 a s ro  n soa g a) so 
affected (Fig. 2-80).
Narrowing of the entire trachea also may result from mucosal inflammation or exu-
date accumulation. The inflammation must be severe for radiographic detection
and, although cases have been described, the radiographic diagnosis is difficult and rare
(Fig. 2-81). 191
106
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-79 A 2-year-old female cat with a unknown history of multiple external wounds and subcu-
taneous emphysema. On the lateral radiograph, gas is noted in the sof tissues at the thoracic inlet.
The air dissects into the cranial mediastinum. The outer tracheal wall is distinctly outlined (open
arrows). The cranial vena cava and the aortic arch also are outlined distinctly (closed arrows). The azy-
gous vein is delineated clearly. There are multiple shotgun pellets in the soft tissues over the thorax.
Diagnosis: Pneumomediastinum. This resulted from extension of the subcutaneous emphysema
from the external wounds in the cervical soft tissues. There was no evidence of tracheal or esophageal
 perforation. The mediastinal air resolved without treatment.
Localized or segmental tracheal stenosis may be congenital, secondary to local
inflammation and fibrosis, or secondary to trauma (Figs. 2-82 and 2-83). The stenosis is
usually smooth, although the tracheal rings may be deformed. Distinction between
acquired and congenital localized tracheal stenosis is not radiographically possible.
However, congenital localized stenosis is extremely uncommon. The major distinction
must be made between localized stenosis and intramural or intraluminal masses.
TRACHEAL AVULSION OR PERFORATION
Tracheal avulsion or rupture is usually traumatic.192,193 An interruption in the tracheal wall
may be visible (Fig. 2-84). The avulsed ends may be separated widely, or a thin, soft tis-
sue-dense band or line may separate the avulsed portions. Pneumomediastinum is fre-
quently, but not always, present.
 Tracheal perforation is rarely a specific radiographic diagnosis. Pneumomediastinum is
often present, but the site of the perforation rarely can be identified even when contrast
studies are performed.194
TRACHEAL MASSES
 Extraluminal masses may displace or deform the trachea. These usually arise from mediasti-
nal structures and are described in that section (see Mediastinal Structures). Because the tra-
chea is somewhat rigid, extraluminal masses produce a gradually curving displacement of the
trachea. Although displacement is the most common finding with an extraluminal mass, the
tracheal lumen can become narrowed if the mass surrounds the trachea or compresses it
 Intramural lesions cause thickening of the tracheal wall with luminal deformities.
The curvature of the mass will be more abrupt than the gradual curve of the trachea,
which accompanies extraluminal masses. The degree of tracheal displacement depends
upon the amount of the mass that extends outside the tracheal wall and the compress-
ibility of the adjacent tissues. The mucosal surface of the trachea is usually smooth
(Figs. 2-85 and 2-86).
 Intraluminal lesions are more common than intramural lesions. Granulomas, neo-
plasms, polyps, and foreign objects may be encountered. Masses may be solitary or multiple
and are often eccentric. They produce rounded or cauliflower-shaped densities within the
tracheal lumen. The attachment site of the mass blends with the normal tracheal mucosa.
CHapter TWO THe ThoraX
107
FIG. 2-80 A 4-month-old male
 English Bulldog with a 3-week his-
tory of diffculty breathing. A lateral
radiograph of the cervical soft tissues
(A) and a lateral thoracic radiograph
(B) revealed that the entire trachea
was small in diameter. The laryngeal
area was indistinct due to overlying
soft-tissue density.
Diagnosis:
Hypoplastic trachea.
A
B
 This blending can make a small mass very diffcult to identify particularly if it has the den-
sity of a rib or scapula superimposed upon it. Most benign and malignant neoplasms pro-
 duce solitary masses that may occur anywhere within the tracheal lumen.19s,i98 Tracheal
 granulomas due to Oslerus osieri are often multiple and occur in the distal one third of the
d aq a oe hn  a  n'q is  a  p 
Although other soft-tissue densities may overlap the tracheal lumen and mimic intra-
luminal masses, careful inspection of the lesions will reveal their true nature.
Intratracheal masses usually have distinct margins that are surrounded by air and at least
108
FIG.2-81 A 6-year-oldmale
Doberman Pinscher with a 2-week
history of epistaxis. A, Thoracic
radiographs were obtained before
the dog was anesthetized for aspira-
tion and flushing of the nasal pas-
 sages. B, The second radiograph was
obtained after anesthesia. Marked
 thickening of the tracheal wall is evi-
dent (arrows) when B is compared
with A This is due to accumulation
of exudate in the trachea. This
resulted from the nasal cavity and
frontal sinus irrigation. Diagnosis:
A
Tracheitis.
one indistinct or poorly defined margin at the point of tracheal attachment.
Superimposed soft-tissue masses have less distinct margins if surrounded by fat and have
all sides visible if surrounded by air (i.e., on the outside of the animal). If an intralumi-
nal lesion is not identified on both lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs, the radiograph
that showed the lesion should be repeated and should be centered on the region of inter-
est to confirm the location of the mass. Ultrasonography has little value in evaluation of
tracheal abnormalities.
TRACHEAL FOREIGN BODIES
 Dense tracheal foreign objects are detected easily; small tissue-dense objects are more eas-
Smaller foreign bodies usually pass into and obstruct an individual bronchus, the right
 caudal being the most commonly involved.20l This may lead to local inflammation and
bronchial thickening. Ideally, the foreign object should be identified on at least two radi-
ographs, preferably at right angles to each other. When this is not possible, two similarly
positioned radiographs, with one centered on the lesion, are preferred. The sharp, distinct
margins resulting from the air surrounding the tracheal foreign body may not always be
observed.
Radiographic studies using barium or water-soluble iodine-containing contrast agents
patient is well positioned and properly exposed survey radiographs are obtained.
Tracheoscopy usually is preferable to contrast radiographic studies.
TRACHEAL DISPLACEMENT
The trachea is an easily identified landmark when evaluating intrathoracic masses. When dis-
placed, the tracheal position indicates the origin of the mass. Ventral displacement of the cra-
nial thoracic trachea may occur secondary to esophageal enlargement, periesophageal masses,
or other dorsal mediastinal masses. Dorsal tracheal displacement occurs in association with
masses arising within the mediastinum ventral to the trachea, from right atrial enlargement or
FIG. 2-82 A 6-month-old male
German Shepherd dog with a l-week
history of inspiratory and expiratory
stridor. On the lateral thoracic radi-
ograph the trachea is narrowed and
irregular in the area of the thoracic
inlet (arrows). The mucosal surface is
irregular, and the tracheal wall
 appears thickened. The radiographic
changes are indicative of tracheal
stenosis. This was thought to be
caused by trauma. The affected area
of the trachea was resected.
 Pathologic examination revealed con-
genital tracheal deformity. Diagnosis:
Congenital tracheal stenosis.
FIG. 2-83 A 4-year-old male cat with acute respiratory distress,
which occurred l.5 weeks after a fractured mandible had been
repaired. On the lateral thoracic radiograph, there is marked
narrowing of the tracheal lumen at the level of the fourth intercostal
space (arrows). This is indicative of a localized tracheal stenosis.
Diagnosis: Tracheal stenosis. This portion of the trachea was
resected. The etiology of the tracheal stenosis was not determined.
FIG. 2-84 Lateral view of a domestic
cat following two episodes
of
trauma. Acute dyspnea was noted
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
following the second occurrence.
Please refer to the printed publication.
The cranial mediastinal trachea is
disrupted, cranial tracheal portion
or Tl (craniat arrows) and caudal
tracheal portion or T2 (caudal
arrows). There is a balloon-like air-
filled area in the cranial medi-
astinum (middle arrows). Diagnosis:
Traumatic tracheal avulsion with
pneumomediastinum. (From Caylor
KB, Moore RW: What is your diag-
nosis? Severed cervical trachea and
substantial subcutaneous emphy-
sema in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc
1994; 205:561.)
110
Small Animal Radiology And Uitrasonography
FIG. 2-85 A and B,A 9-year-old female cat with an acute
onset of respiratory distress. On the two lateral thoracic
radiographs that were obtained, there is a sof-tissue
(smou) quu sy auyo aaal aui ie eauoeilauu Asuap
The tracheal lumen is narrowed. The margins of the
mass are distinct. The radiographic fndings indicate an
intraluminal tracheal mass. Diagnosis: Metastatic neo-
 plasm within the trachea.
B
FIG. 2-86 A 7-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat with
dyspnea of 3 days duration. The lat-
eral radiograph reveals a sharply
 marginated mass within the lumen
of the trachea (arrows). The mass
could not be seen on the ventrodor-
sl view due to the superimposed
spine and sternum. Diagnosis:
 Tracheal chondroma. The mass was
 successfully removed at surgery.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
111
tumors, or from heart base masses. Dorsal displacement of the trachea immediately cranial to
the bifurcation may be due to right atrial, heart base, or tracheobronchial lymph node masses.
Dorsal displacement of the trachea caudal to the tracheal bifurcation occurs with left atrial
enlargement. Ventral displacement in that region may be due to esophageal enlargement,
periesophageal caudal mediastinal masses, or tracheobronchial lymph node enlargement. The
degree of ventral main stem bronchial displacement is more severe with lymph node enlarge-
ment than with esophageal lesions. Many esophageal lesions displace both the heart and tra-
chea, while lymph node enlargement affects mostly the trachea and main stem bronchi. Left
ven tricular enlargement will elevate the trachea at the bifurcation.
Mediastinal shifts away from the midline may be detected easily by identifying the tra-
chea's position. Whether the shift is due to a mass pushing in the direction of the shift or
to the collapse of the lung lobe with shifting toward the collapsed side cannot be deter-
mined solely from tracheal position.
 Dorsal displacement of the cranial thoracic trachea may be observed on the recumbent
lateral view when pleural fluid is present. This may be due to the displacement that accom-
 panies a cranial mediastinal mass, but it is more often due to a shift in the position of the
lungs that occurs in the presence of pleural fluid (or even air). Compression of the tracheal
 lumen indicates that a mass is present within the pleural fluid. In the absence of tracheal
compression, a mass may or may not be present.
Tracheal displacement to theleft is prevented by the aorta,but it can occur when a right
aortic arch is present. Mediastinal shifts that include the heart will permit leftward tracheal
displacement. Right-sided displacement of the trachea between the thoracic inlet and
bifurcation is seen in many normal dogs and is more pronounced in brachycephalic breeds.
True right-sided displacement of the trachea also may occur with heart base masses and
esophageal enlargement. Most ventral mediastinal masses displace the trachea dorsally and
do not move it to either the right or the left.
The tracheal bifurcation may be displaced caudally. In the cat, the tracheal bifurcation
almost always is visualized at the sixth intercostal space, and any deviation caudal to this
strongly suggests the presence of a cranial mediastinal mass. In dogs, the tracheal bifurca-
tion occurs at the fifth or sixth intercostal space. The possibility of a cranial mediastinal
mass should be considered if there is displacement caudal to the sixth intercostal space.
Tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy, especially when associated with chronic disease,
 may cause narrowing as well as displacement of the trachea and main stem bronchi. These
are reliable signs of lymphadenopathy, which can be seen despite obliteration of the lymph
node margins by a pulmonary infiltrate.
TRACHEAL COLLAPSE
 The tracheal diameter may change very slightly with respiration and coughing in normal
animals.204 When marked luminal narrowing occurs during normal or forced respiration,
tracheal collapse is present. Although dorsoventral narrowing is most common, congenital
side-to-side, or lateral, narrowing may occur. The extent and location of the narrowing will
 uonndsu ie uo ao si un jno jepneo a jo smon Xna
 a ( p  ) s s a    
rowing may extend through the thoracic inlet, which probably accounts for some variation.
Left atrial enlargement may cause narrowing or collapse of the tracheal bifurcation or main
stem bronchi (Fig. 2-89).
Both inspiratory and expiratory recumbent lateral radiographs that include the entire
trachea should be obtained if tracheal collapse is suspected. Inducing a cough will accentuate
the collapse; however, obtaining a radiograph at the time of the cough may be difficult.
Fluoroscopic examination is useful in evaluating and documenting tracheal collapse.
Contrast studies using intratracheally administered barium or water-soluble iodinated
         s 
beyond that obtained from carefully positioned, properly exposed, survey radi-
ographs. 202,203
A lateral radiograph obtained while the animal's head and neck are dorsiflexed is rec
ommended for evaluation of tracheal collapse.204 This view accentuates the tracheal nar-
rowing and may be useful, especially relative to the tracheal diameter at the thoracic inlet.
112
SMAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-87 An 8-year-old male
Yorkshire Terrier with a 5-year his-
tory of a honking cough. On this lat-
eral radiograph there is marked
narrowing of the trachea cranial to
the thoracic inlet. This is evident in
the radiograph obtained at inspira-
tion. Diagnosis: Extrathoracic tra-
cheal collapse.
F1G. 2-88 A 12-year-old male
Poodle with harsh lung sounds and
respiratory distress, especially when
excited. Inspiratory (A) and expira-
tory (B) lateral thoracic radiographs
were obtained. The trachea appears
normal on A. On B the entire
intrathoracic  trachea  narrows
markedly. There is extensive calcifi-
ation of the tracheal rings. The left
atrium is enlarged. Diagnosis:
Intrathoracic tracheal collapse.
A
B
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
113
FIG. 2-89 A 14-year-old male
Cocker Spaniel with a history of
chronic cough for several months. A,
 On the lateral radiographs taken on
inspiration the trachea appears of
normal size. B, On the lateral radi-
ograph taken at expiration the tra-
chea narrows markedly at the
tracheal bifurcation. This is indica-
tive of collapse of the tracheal bifur-
cation and main stem bronchi.
Enlargement of the lft ventricle and
left atrium is present. The lef atrium
A
is seen extending caudal and dorsal
to the tracheal bifurcation (arrows).
Diagnosis: Collapse of the tracheal
bifurcation and main stem bronchi.
Left heart enlargement consistent
with mitral valve insufficiency.
B
A tangential cross-sectional projection of the trachea also has been described for evalua-
tion of tracheal collapse. The animal is positioned in sternal recumbency and the head and
neck are dorsiflexed. The x-ray beam is directed caudally and ventrally to strike the trachea
tangentially at the thoracic inlet. Although this view is difficult to obtain because of patient
resistance, it may provide additional information (Fig. 2-90).
 The amount of tracheal collapse that occurs during coughing in normal dogs has not
been defined. A clear-cut distinction between normal narrowing and tracheal collapse can-
not be made. If the tracheal diameter narrows more than 50% with normal respiration or
coughing, a diagnosis of tracheal collapse should be considered. If the tracheal diameter
narrows by more than 20% in normal respiration, a diagnosis of tracheal collapse should
be considered if clinical signs are present.
An overlap of the trachea by the esophagus at the thoracic inlet may be seen.
Careful examination of the radiograph will reveal the tracheal lucency with the super-
imposed esophagus. This is probably due to a flaccid dorsal trachealis muscle with
chealis muscle to become dorsolateral instead of dorsal. Indentation of the trachea by
the esophagus due to laxity of the trachealis muscle may represent a type of collapsing
trachea.
Animals with tracheal collapse also may have cardiac, pulmonary, or bronchial disease;
collapseoccurs most fequently in old, obese, small-breed dogs It rarelyoccurs in cats.25
ESOPHAGEAL ABNORMALITIES
Radiography is an important part of the clinical evaluation of animals with esophageal
abnormalities. Survey radiographs provide useful information. Additional information can
be obtained with esophageal contrast studies. A static (radiographic) contrast examination
provides some functional information. However, a complete functional evaluation requires
114
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-90 A 13-year-old male
Poodle with a 6-month history of
chronic nonproductive cough. A, On
the lateral thoracic view, there is a
soft-tissue density superimposed on
the tracheal shadow in the caudal
cervical region extending into the
thoracic inlet (arrows). This creates
an impression of tracheal collapse. B,
On a skyline projection of the tra-
chea the lumen appears normal.
There is slight indentation of the
dorsal trachea (arrows). An esopha-
gram was performed (C). The posi-
tion of the esophagus can be seen
overlying the trachea. Diagnosis:
Normal trachea with no evidence of
tracheal collapse.
B
C
a dynamic (fluoroscopic) contrast examination. Cineradiography or videotape with slow
motion and reverse capabilities is necessary to record and completely evaluate the separate,
rapidly occurring phases of swallowing.
Ultrasonography is rarely useful in the evaluation of the intrathoracic esophagus. The
cervical esophagus may be identified dorsal to, or left and lateral to, the trachea. The hyper-
echoic gas and mucus within the lumen help identify the esophagus.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
115
ESOPHAGEAL DILATION OR MEGAESOPHAGUS
Generalized Dilation. The esophagus may become distended with air, fluid, or food mate-
rial (Fig. 2-91). It will be evident in the lateral radiograph as a tubular structure dorsal, lat-
eral, and sometimes ventral to the trachea, dorsal to the heart base, and between the aorta
and caudal vena cava caudal to the heart. The fluid- or food-filled esophagus may be recog-
Ap anss pue suoq se jo ued ien io Asup pesu au jo snesq pazu
located in the region through which the esophagus passes. The air-flled esophagus will
decrease the thoracic density, and a pair of thin, linear fluid densities corresponding to the
dorsal and ventral esophageal walls may be detected The ventral wall may drape ventral to
the trachea in the cranial mediastinum, pass dorsal to the heart base, drape ventral to the
caudal vena cava, and then rise to the level of esophageal hiatus. The dorsal esophageal wall
may be obliterated by contact with the longus coli muscles and may be evident only from the
midthoracic area pasing obliquely to the diaphragm at the esophageal hiatus. In the
dorsoventral radiograph, the esophageal wall may be visible on the right side as a thin, tis-
sue-dense line, progressing caudally or caudolaterally to the tracheal bifurcation and then
angling to intersect the midline at the esophageal hiatus. The left side of the esophagus may
be evident in the cranial thorax angling toward the midline at the heart base. The wall is not
visible as it passes to the right of the aortic arch but usually becomes visible caudal to the tra-
cheal bifurcation. It curves slightly laterally before tapering toward the midline at the
esophageal hiatus. Caudal to the heart, the converging esophageal walls have been described
as cone- or funnel-shaped, with the apex at the esophageal hiatus. The dilated food-, fluid-,
or air-filled esophagus may produce indirect radiographic evidence of its presence, such as
ventral or rightward tracheal displacement and ventral displacement of the heart.
Generalized esophageal enlargement may be due to many different conditions. In
young animals, idiopathic megaesophagus is the most common cause. In adults, the list of
eu n sas su s s sp   si ss s
disorders such as myasthenia gravis, lead poisoning, polyneuritis, polymyositis, and dysau-
tonomia; endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism and hypoadrenocorticism; and other
conditions such as chronic esophagitis, tumor, foreign body, stricture,hiatal hernia, gastric
volvulus, and anesthesia. 206-229
Localized Dilation. Localized esophageal dilation in a young dog is most often due to a
vascular ring anomaly Fig. 2-923-23Themost common of these is a persistent rigt
aortic arch; however, other vascular ring anomalies, such as the double aortic arch and
aberrant left and right subclavian arteries, may occur. These abnormalities produce
esophageal dilation cranial to the heart base. This dilation may displace the trachea ven-
trally on the lateral radiograph. In the ventrodorsal view, the esophageal dilation may be
identified in the cranial mediastinum on the left side. The right aortic arch prevents tra-
cheal displacement, and therefore the rightward tracheal displacement, usually observed
with idiopathic megaesophagus, does not occur. The aortic shadow, normally observed
slightly to the left of the vertebral column, may be superimposed on the vertebral column
and not evident on the ventrodorsal radiograph. In some animals with vascular ring anom-
alies, the caudal thoracic esophagus will dilate also. In these animals, a constriction at the
 heart base, which is not present in idiopathic megaesophagus, may be identified even on
the noncontrast radiograph. If necessary, this constriction can be confirmed by a contrast
esophagram. If there is caudal esophageal dilation, it may be secondary to the ring's inter-
a vascular ring. It is clinically important to identify this situation.
The specific variation of vascular ring anomaly cannot be defined without an angio-
 pd si ag ai nou si a i   pe s se
because of this lack of specificity and because persistent right aortic arch is the most com-
mon vascular ring anomaly.
Localized esophageal dilation may be seen with acquired and congenital diverticula,
localized esophagitis, foreign bodies, localized neuromuscular disease of the esophagus, or
proximal to esophageal strictures. Motility disturbances may lead to pulsion diverticula,
while periesophageal inflammation, fibrosis, and adhesions may produce traction divertic-
ula. These may occur at any point within the esophagus (Fig. 2-93). A slight local dilation
116
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOG
FIG. 2-91 A and B, A 6-month-old
female Great Dane with 3-month his-
tory of chronic regurgitation. The
thoracic esophagus is dilated and
flled with air. The esophageal walls
are visible (arrows). The trachea is
displaced ventrally and to the right.
The cardiac silhouette is displaced
ventrally. Diagnosis: Megaesophagus
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
117
FIG. 2-92 A 3-month-old female
 Dachshund with a history of regur-
gitation after the owner started feed-
ing the dog solid food. The
regurgitation occured shortly after
ingestion.A, Ventrodorsal and lateral
thoracic radiographs were obtained.
The cranial mediastinum is widened.
There is an air-filled density in the
cranial mediastinum (solid arrows).
This is indicative of a dilated cranial
thoracic esophagus. There is a local-
ized alveolar pattern infiltrate in the
right middle lung lobe (open
arrows). This is due to aspiration
pneumonia. B, An esophagram was
 performed. The esophageal dilation
cranial to the cardiac silhouette is
identified. The esophagus caudal to
the cardiac silhouette is normal. The
A
area of stenosis is evident on the lat-
eral and ventrodorsal radiographs
(arrows). Diagnosis: Vascular ring
anomaly. Persistent right aortic arch.
B
may be observed at the thoracic inlet, especially in normal brachycephalic dogs. A small
amount of air may be seen within the esophagus at this point on a noncontrast study.
However, a contrast esophagram usually is required to demonstrate this local dilation. It 
lacks clinical significance.
 Esophageal strictures may occur at any site, with the more common sites being at or
junction. The esophagus proximal to the lesion may be dilated. Diagnosis of a stricture
requires a contrast esophagram (Fig. 2-94). It may be necessary to mix the barium with
food, because liquid barium may pass through without interference if the stricture is mild.
Treatment may be performed by balloon-catheter dilation, with positioning of the balloon
under fluoroscopic guidance,236,237
Many patients swallow air during radiography, and a localized air accumulation within
 the esophagus must be identified on at least two radiographs and must be consistent in
size, shape, and location to be considered significant. Local accumulations of food or bony
material are more significant. Unless the density can be identified as a foreign object, an
 esophageal contrast study is needed to evaluate the cause of the food accumulation. With
time, a local esophageal dilation may become generalized.
118
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
S
A
B
FIG. 2-93 A 4-year-old Pug with regurgitation of 2 weeks duration. A, A ventrodorsal radiograph
revealed two thin-walled, air-filled structures (arrows) on the midline nearly adjacent to the
diaphragm. B, An esophagram performed 2 days later revealed mild dilation of the entire esophagus
-aaip ieaeudosg isisoia uaeudep au on ieo Aia (a) sue ieo se lam se
FIG. 2-94 A l-year-old neutered
female cat with regurgitation of 1
week duration. The cat had been
neutered 2 weeks prior to the onset of
signs. An esophagram reveals dilation
of the cranial esophagus, which ter-
minates into an abruptly narrowed
area (arrows). The distal esophagus is
normal in  size.
Diagnosis:
Esophageal stricture.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
119
FIG. 2-95 A 3-year-old mixed breed
dog with dysphagia and weight loss.
Attempts at swallowing were
labored. An esophagram revealed
multiple mural masses in the proxi-
mal cervical esophagus (arrows). The
caudal cervical esophagus appeared
normal (E). Also identified are the
trachea (T) and pharymx (P).
 Endoscopic examination revealed
multiple mural masses in the area,
which were biopsied. Diagnosis:
Granulomatous esophagitis (histo-
plasmosis).
E
Esophageal Masses. The shape of the esophagus may be altered by extraluminal, intra-
mural, and intraluminal masses, as well as by generalized and localized esophageal dila-
 tion.238 Masses are usually inflammatory or neoplastic in origin and may arise from the
esophagus or the adjacent mediastinum. A soft-tissue density may be identified in the
mediastinum on noncontrast radiographs. This mass may produce a localized or general-
ized esophageal dilation with air or food accumulating proximal to the soft-tissue density.
In most instances, an esophageal contrast study is required to determine the nature of the
soft-tissue density; however, the air pattern within or around the density may provide a
clue to its nature.
Extraluminal Masses. A smooth, gradual displacement of the esophagus with an
uninterrupted mucosal surface is indicative of an extraluminal mass. The air or contrast
column may merely be displaced or thinned as it passes through or around the lesion.
Contrast or air will not accumulate within the lesion unless there is esophageal perforation
and a periesophageal mediastinal abscess. Either neoplastic or inflammatory mediastinal
masses or hernias may produce this lesion.
 Intramural Masses. Intramural masses may be circumferential (annular) or eccentric.
Esophageal displacement will be minimal depending on the lesion's size. Contrast or air
may accumulate proximal to these lesions if they are circumferential or obstructive. The
mucosal surface is usually smooth, but may be roughened depending upon the degree of
luminal and mucosal involvement. A thin column of contrast may be observed within the
center or at the edge of the lesion. Tumors and granulomas may produce this type of lesion
 Intraluminal Masses. Intraluminal masses, including pedunculated masses and for-
eign bodies, allow contrast or air passage around their edges as well as within them. This
often breaks up the bolus of contrast and causes some of it to remain within or around the
 mass or both. The mucosal surface will be rough and uneven. Pedunculated tumors, gran-
ulomas, and foreign bodies will produce this type of lesion.
 In some instances, a lack of normal esophageal peristalsis will prevent the contrast
 media from reaching the lesion. In these cases, an erect lateral or ventrodorsal radiograph
using a horizontal x-ray beam may be valuable in demonstrating the margins of the lesion
(Fig. 2-96).
ESOPHAGEAL DENSITY
The density of the esophagus will vary depending on its content. Gas, fluid, food, or a mixture
of these normally may be observed within the esophagus. A small amount of air or food pres-
ent within the esophagus on a single radiograph is not abnormal; however, if this is identified
on multiple radiographs, an esophageal contrast study is recommended. Any food material
that is retained within the esophagus for more than a couple of minutes is abnormal.
120
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-96 A 13-year-old spayed cat with a
l-month history of chronic vomiting. There is
dilation of the thoracic esophagus. The
esophageal walls are visible in both the lateral (A)
and ventrodorsal (B) radiographs (short arrows).
The trachea and cardiac silhouette are displaced
ventrally. There is a sof-tissue density identified
in the caudal mediastinum at the level of the
esophageal hiatus (long arrows). There is an
increase in pulmonary interstitial density. The
radiographic findings are indicative 
of
 esophageal dilation with a mass or foreign body
 in the caudal thoracic esophagus.
Continued
A
B
ESOPHAGEAL DISPLACEMENT
The esophagus may be displaced by mediastinal, heart base, or hilar masses. The direction
 of the displacement will indicate the origin of the mass. An esophagram usually is required
to identify the position of the esophagus. One unusual form of apparent displacement is
 the "ventra sling" tat is seen in some brachiocephalic breeds (e.g, English Bulldog).249 In
this situation, it appears that there is a deviation of the esophagus, but it is really a
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
121
FIG. 2-96, cont'd C, An esophagram revealed that
the contrast material outlined the dilated thoracic
 esophagus and did not extend beyond the level of
the soff-tissue density. D, Erect lateral and erect
ventrodorsal radiographs were obtained using a
horizontal x-ray beam. The contrast material has
moved into the caudal thoracic esophagus and out-
lines the soft tissue-dense mass There is indenta-
tion of the contrast column with a central
outpouching, indicating constriction of the
esophageal lumen (arrows). The radiographic find-
ings are indicative of a soft-tissue mass in the cau-
dal thoracic esophagus. The erect radiographs with
the horizontal x-ray beam are useful in demon-
strating the mass more completely. Diagnosis:
 Squamous cell carcinoma of the caudal thoracic
esophagus.
D
redundancy that has clinical manifestations similar to those associated with vascular ring
anomalies.
 Masses around the esophageal hiatus, caudal mediastinal abscesses or tumors,
intussusception, or diaphragmatic masses may be differentiated by an esophageal contrast
study. Caudal mediastinal or diaphragmatic masses are extraluminal and may displace the
esophagus but will not involve the esophageal mucosa.
ESOPHAGEAL FOREIGN BODIES
Esophageal foreign bodies may be radiopaque and easily identified or tissue dense and
less readily detected.25o-253 Foreign bodies usually lodge at the thoracic inlet, cranial to
122
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-97 A 7-year-old female Springer Spaniel with a history of having swallowed a fish hook 2 days
'asq leau aul ct iesip pauuap aieai si yoou usy aui ydeiaopei sioeul ieaii sui u aa
There is a soft-tissue density surrounding the fish hook, and there is gas in the soft tissues dorsal to
this density (arrows). The radiographic findings indicate perforation of the esophagus by the fish
hook, with air within the mediastinum. Th e soft-tissue density that surrounds the fish hook may
represent bait that was on the fish hook at the time it was swallowed. Diagnosis: Fish hook in the tho-
racic esophagus with penetration of the mucosa. The fish hook was removed by endoscopy.
Additional air was present in the mediastinum after removal ofthe fish hook. A contrast esophagram
was performed 3 days after foreign body removal and there was no evidence of leakage of contrast
material at the site of foreign body perforation. No complications were encountered.
the heart base, or cranial to the esophageal hiatus (Figs. 2-97 to 2-99).251,252
 Identification of these foreign objects on the ventrodorsal radiograph is often difficult
because of the overlying vertebral column. Esophageal dilation cranial to the foreign
object may provide a clue to its presence, but an esophageal contrast study may be nec-
essary to outline it. If an esophageal foreign body is identified or suspected, the thoracic
radiograph must be evaluated carefully for evidence of mediastinal or pleural fluid and
air, which indicate esophageal perforation. Aspiration pneumonia may be present if the
animal has been vomiting. The preferred method for performing an esophageal contrast
study in situations in which there is a likelihood or suspicion of esophageal perforation
should involve a water-soluble, nonionic contrast medium, because there is less potential
damage that could be inflicted on the lung should the patient aspirate the material. An
ative, a follow-up study with liquid barium should be considered to evaluate for occult
leaks. The contrast studies may not demonstrate contrast leakage despite noncontrast
radiographic evidence of esophageal perforation because of adhesions or fibrosis, which
may partially seal the perforation.2s Esophagoscopy is the preferred method to delineate
an esophageal perforation.
ESOPHAGEAL FISTULAS
Mediastinal or pleural fluid or a localized pulmonary infiltrate may be observed in asso-
ciation with these fistulas. However, there may be no survey radiographic findings sug-
gestive of a fistula despite notable clinical signs. The diagnosis requires demonstration of
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
123
FIG. 2-98 A 5-year-old spayed
Boston Terrier with a history of
regurgitating immediately afer eat-
ing. On the lateral thoracic radi-
ograph the trachea is ventrally
displaced at the level of the thoracic
inlet. There is a radiopaque object
dorsal to the trachea. This object has
a bone density and trabecular pat-
tern. It represents a portion of a ver-
tebral body that is lodged within the
 esophagus. There is gas noted in the
esophagus surrounding this foreign
object. The portion of the esophagus
distal to this foreign body also con-
tains a smallamount of fuid and gas.
Diagnosis: Esophageal foreign body.
There is no evidence of esophageal
 perforation. The esophageal foreign
body was removed by endoscopy. No
 complications were encountered.
FIG. 2-99 A 5-year-old female
Lhasa Apso with an acute onset of
vomiting and diarrhea with abdomi-
 nal distention. The dog was anorec-
tic. On the lateral thoracic
radiograph there isa radiodense for-
eign body in the esophagus anterior
to the diaphragm. The bone density
and trabecular pattern identify this
object as a bone. There is a small
amount of gas within the cranial
thoracic esophagus dorsal to the tra-
chea. Diagnosis: Esophageal foreign
body. No complications were noted.
The foreign body was displaced into
the stomach with a fiberoptic endo-
scope.
a communication between the esophagus and the trachea or bronchus during an
esophageal contrast study (Fig. 2-100). Aspirated contrast medium must not be confused
with a fistula. When a fistula is present, a larger amount of contrast will be present within
the distal than within the proximal airway. The presence of contrast in the cranial portion
of the trachea sugests that contrast visualized more caudally in the airways may have
 been aspirated.
ESOPHAGEAL FUNCTI0N
 Evaluation of esophageal function usually requires fluoroscopy; however, some indirect
Generalized or localized esophageal dilation is a nonspecific finding that indicates reduced
124
FIG. 2-100 A 5-year-old male Keeshond with chronic regurgitation
 and a recent onset of cough and inappetence. Survey radiographs
suggested the presence of a massin the area of the caudal esophagus.
A contrast study of the esophagus (E) revealed a diverticulum (D)
immediately cranial to the stomach (S), with a fistula into the
bronchus (arow). The bronchus is seen to taper distally and the
amount of contrast diminishes in the more cranial portion of the
bronchus. Diagnosis: Bronchoesophageal fistula.
E
D
 peristaltic activity and muscle tone. Megaesophagus is a general term used to describe a
generalized esophageal dilation. It has been used synonymously with congenital idiopathic
megaesophagus. There are, however, many causes of esophageal dilation and the term
megaesophagus does not indicate a specific etiology or disease entity.
The degree and extent of the esophageal dilation can best be determined radiographi-
cally by using contrast media. Those anatomical or structural alterations that could cause
secondary esophageal dilation can be identified. In some instances, the contrast material
will not reach the caudal thoracic esophagus due to esophageal hypomotility or a complete
absence of peristalsis. Supporting the patient in a semi-erect position and using a horizon-
tal x-ray beam frequently will outline the caudal thoracic esophagus when peristaltic activ.
ity is insufficient to propel the contrast to that level. The weight of the contrast-filled
esophagus may close the lower esophageal sphincter and block contrast passage when the
animal is positioned in an erect posture. This can create the illusion of lower esophageal
sphincter spasm or stenosis.
Gastroesophageal Reflux. Reflux of gastric contents into the thoracic esophagus may be
 observed during esophageal and gastric contrast studies, especially in cats. If the contrast is
returned immediately to the stomach by esophageal peristalsis, the reflux is not significant.
Persistence of the contrast in the thoracic esophagus, esophageal dilation, or mucosal irreg-
ularity indicate esophageal infammatory disease98,265 Hwever, it may be dificult o
 determine whether this is secondary to chronic reflux or to a primary esophageal or lower
esophageal sphincter disorder.
CARDIAC ABNORMALITIES
 In animals with cardiac disease, both the size and shape of the heart can be evaluated radi-
ographically. Variation of the heart's size and shape among different breeds and individu-
als makes the radiographic evaluation challenging. Several important factors that must be
remembered when evaluating the heart radiographically include:
1. The cardiac silhouette is a summation shadow of all four cardiac chambers and the
 major vessels, smoothed out by the pericardium.
 2. The cardiac size and shape vary with the stage of the cardiac cycle.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
125
3. The apparent cardiac size will vary with the respiratory phase.
4. The normal cardiac size and shape vary with thoracic conformation.
Many animals with cardiac disease have normal cardiac silhouettes. This occurs because
there is a wide range of shapes and sizes among normal animals, some cardiac diseases do
not cause cardiomegaly, and many cardiac diseases must be present for some time before
 cardiac size alterations develop.
 Echocardiography provides a great deal more information about the heart than does
survey radiography. Echocardiography allows for the determination of the thickness of var-
ious portions of the myocardium; the diameters of various chambers and great vessels; the
motion of valves, septum, and other structures; and even determination of the direction
and velocity of blood flow through various parts of the heart and great vessels. It is very
   d    q  d  
Measurements must be made at precisely the proper site and beam angle. Doppler evalua-
tions must be performed with equal attention to procedure to ensure that artifacts, such as
aliasing, are not mistaken for valid measurements.
CARDIOMEGALY
expected dimension for an animal of a specific breed, age, and physique. Moderate and
severe degrees of cardiomegaly are detected readily, but a mild degree may be overlooked
or diagnosed incorrectly. The radiograph cannot differentiate among cardiomegaly due to
muscular hypertrophy, chamber dilation, and small amounts of pericardial fluid. The radi-
ographic diagnosis in those animals with a mild degree of cardiomegaly should be ignored
if it is not supported by clinical, electrocardiographic, echocardiographic, or other noncar-
diac radiographic findings.
 Because the radiograph depicts the cardiac silhouette and not just the heart, the cardiac
silhouette may appear enlarged although the heart size is normal. This can be due to age, obe
sity, physique, thoracic conformation, phase of respiration, phase of cardiac cycle, or geome
 on aaen iase auis redde Aeu aanos spieo ai saeu ke-x aul jo An
thoracic dimensions in younger dogs. This characteristic usually disappears around 4 to 6
months of age. Older dogs, particularly in toy and small breeds, seem to have a larger cardiac
silhouette than do young mature dogs. This characteristic may be due largely to asympto-
matic compensated cardiac disease. Fat can accumulate around the heart, both inside and
outside the pericardial sac, in obese animals. This will result in an enlarged cardiac silhouette.
Animals that are in good physical shape and are bred or used for athletic activities such as rac-
ing seem to have larger hearts than nonracing animals with similar thoracic conformation.
Cardiomegaly may result from cardiac and extracardiac diseases. Fluid overload,
myocardial disease, valvular insufficiency, anemia, or cardiovascular shunts may produce
cardiac dilation.26 Hypertrophy results from increased resistance to cardiac output, ele-
vated systemic pressure, or idiopathic causes. When evaluating cardiac size, both a lateral
that standard studies be done routinely and consistently using the same lateral (i.e., right
or left lateral) and vertical (i.e., ventrodorsal or dorsoventral) views, because there are dif-
ferences in the appearance of normal structures among the studies, and consistent use of a
particular study enables the interpreter to develop standard criteria of normalcy If the car-
diac silhouette appears enlarged on only one view, the enlargement is probably artifactual.
 In the lateral radiograph, the heart may enlarge cranially, caudally, and/or dorsally.
Cranial and caudal enlargement increase the cardiac size relative to the intercostal spaces.
This must always be evaluated relative to the dog's thoracic conformation. Cranial cardiac
enlargement is mostly right ventricular, with cranial dorsal enlargement associated with the
right auricular appendage, pulmonary artery, and aortic arch. The cranial cardiac border
bulges anteriorly, accentuating its normal curvature. The cardiac-sternal contact increases.
 The cranial border may appear straight and become more vertical when the cardiac
enlargement becomes marked.
Caudal enlargement is mainly left ventricular, with caudodorsal enlargement associated
with the left atrium. The cranially directed curve of the normal caudal cardiac border, or
waist, gradually becomes straighter and more vertically directed. The slight indentation
126
SMALLANIMALRADIOLOGY
that is sometimes observed between the left atrium and ventricle becomes flattened. The
caudal vena cava becomes dorsally displaced at the point where it contacts the heart.
Overlap, if any, between the heart and the diaphragm increases, although the reliability of
this change depends on consistently obtaining an inspiratory radiograph.
Dorsal enlargement of the cardiac silhouette will increase the apicobasilar cardiac
dimension and decrease the normal caudoventral angulation of the trachea. This always
must be interpreted with consideration of the animal's thoracic conformation. Generally,
right heart enlargement elevates the trachea cranial to the tracheal bifurcation, left
ventricular enlargement causes elevation at the bifurcation, and left atrial enlargement
causes elevation caudal to the bifurcation. These changes rarely occur as isolated events and
a considerable amount of overlap is observed.
 In the dorsoventral or ventrodorsal radiograph, cardiac enlargement may be cranial,
caudal, or to either side. The cranial cardiac margin blends with the cranial medi-
astinum, and evaluation of this dimension is difficult. Cranial right enlargement, usu-
ally associated with the right atrium, accentuates the curvature of this cardiac margin.
 Cranial left enlargement, usually associated with the aortic arch and main pulmonary
artery, or very rarely the right atrial appendage, produces bulges or knobs on this part
of the cardiac margin. Caudal left enlargement usually is associated with the left ventri-
cle and results in a rounder silhouette. Caudal cardiac silhouette enlargement also
causes rounding of the cardiac apex, which results in a flattened or blunted tip. This is
documented best in a ventrodorsal rather than a dorsoventral radiograph. Enlargement
of the cardiac silhouette in a craniocaudal dimension, resulting in an increased api-
cobasilar dimension and elongation of the cardiac silhouette, is associated mainly with
left ventricular enlargement.
 Enlargement of the cardiac silhouette on the right side is mostly due to right ventricu-
lar enlargement. The location of the cardiac apex relative to the midline is critical. An apex
shift to the left will decrease the appearance of right-sided cardiomegaly, while a shift
toward the right wil increase the apparent enlargement. Enlargement of the right cardiac
margin accentuates its normal convexity. The cardiac apex shifts to the left and the distance
from the cardiac margin to the right thoracic wall decreases. Enlargement of the cardiac
margin on the left side is mostly due to left ventricular enlargement. The normal, relatively
straight, left cardiac margin becomes more convex and the distance to the left thoracic wall
decreases. Apex shift to the right is an uncommon occurrence. Left atrial appendage
enlargement produces a convex bulge at approximately the three to five o'clock position.
This occurs with moderate to marked left atrial enlargement and rarely is seen without left
ventricular enlargement.
Because the shape of the normal heart differs in the comparison of ventrodorsal and
 dorsoventral radiographs, reevaluation of a patient should include use of the same view
each time. Consistent and accurate positioning is more important than the specific posi-
tion used.
[el a uo 'sop u pao ien  sede u sia sieo u aie
radiograph, this produces a bulging cardiac contour, because enlargement is most appar-
ent in the craniodorsal and caudodorsal portion of the silhouette. The cardiac silhouette
may be elongated and tracheal elevation may be observed. On the dorsoventral radiograph,
cardiac enlargement usually produces changes in the right and left cranial margins. This
increases the dimension cranially while maintaining a relatively normal caudal dimension,
producing a somewhat triangular or valentine-shaped cardiac silhouette.
 The nature of the cardiac enlargement depends on the specific cardiac disease that
is present, as well as the duration and severity of the disease. Once a diagnosis of car-
diomegaly is made, the cardiac silhouette should be evaluated critically for evidence of
radiographs are invaluable in detecting cardiomegaly and specific chamber
enlargement.
 Usually a diagnosis of cardiomegaly is not made from an echocardiographic examina-
tion. The information obtained is more cardiac chamber-specific than simply a general
assessment of overall cardiac size. M-mode and two-dimensional measurements usually
are made from leading edge (acoustic interface closest to the transducer) to leading edge.
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
127
 Diastolic dimensions are measured at the Q or R wave of the ECG. Systolic measurements
are obtained at the point of peak downward septal movement.
Right Atrial Enlargement. Right atrial enlargement is not identified radiographically
unless the atrium becomes severely enlarged. When present, it is usually associated with
evidence of generalized right heart disease (Fig. 2-101). The exception to this is when a
right atrial thrombus or neoplasm is present.
On the lateral radiograph, a severely enlarged right auricular appendage may produce
a convex bulge on the cranial dorsal margin of the cardiac silhouette, with loss of the cra-
nial cardiac waist. That portion of the trachea cranial to the bifurcation may be mildly dis-
placed dorsally over the heart base.
On the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, the enlarged right atrium will pro.
duce a bulge on the right cranial cardiac margin at approximately the nine to ten o'clock
position. Severe enlargement may protrude across the midline to the left cranial cardiac
margin.
An echocardiogram can identify right atrial enlargement prior to when it will be radi-
ographically evident. Although normal diameters have not been well defined, the right
atrium should not appear larger than the left atrium on the right parasternal long-axis view
or the left parasternal four-chamber view.
cranial convexity of the cardiac silhouette on the lateral radiograph; it eventually causes a
vertically oriented cardiac border (Fig. 2-102). Contact between the cardiac silhouette and
the sternum increases, the cardiac apex may become elevated or separated from the ster-
num, and the trachea may become elevated cranial to or at the bifurcation as a result of
right ventricular enlargement. If a line is drawn from the tracheal bifurcation to the cardiac
apex, the amount of the cardiac silhouette cranial to this line will be greater than the nor-
mal two thirds of the total cardiac area.
In the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, right ventricular enlargement will
make the right cardiac margin become more convex and the distance to the right thoracic
wall will decrease. The cardiac apex will shift to the left. As the cardiac apex becomes ele-
vated from the sternum, the right ventricle may bulge caudally beyond the interventricular
septum, producing two bulges on the caudal cardiac margin (an apparent double apex). If
a line is drawn from the cardiac apex to the point where the cranial mediastinum merges
with the right cranial cardiac border, more than one half of the heart area will be to the
right of this line.
 Radiographic evidence of right ventricular enlargement can be due to either dilation of
 the right ventricular cavity or hypertrophy of the right ventricular myocardium. An
echocardiogram can determine if either or both of these lesions are present. The normal
diameter of the right ventricular cavity at end diastole is not well defined in the dog, but it
should not exceed 33% to 50% of the diameter of the left ventricle as measured on the right
parasternal long-axis view. The diameter in the cat at end diastole should not exceed
7 mm.2l Likewise, the normal thickness of the right ventricular free wallis poorly defined
but should be approximately 33% to 50% of the thickness of the interventricular septum
or left ventricular free wall.55
Main Pulmonary Artery Enlargement. On the lateral radiograph, a markedly enlarged
main pulmonary artery may bulge cranial to the cranial dorsal cardiac border, exhibiting
loss of the cranial cardiac waist (Fig. 2-103). In most cases the enlarged pulmonary artery
does not extend beyond the cardiac margin or is lost within the soft-tissue density of the
 cranial mediastinum.
 On the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, the enlarged main pulmonary artery
bulges beyond the left cranial cardiac margin at the one to two o'clock position. The cra-
nial border of the bulge may blend with the shadow of the cranial mediastinum. In a
slightly overexposed radiograph, the caudal border of the bulge may be traced to the left
main pulmonary artery, which will facilitate differentiating it from other regional struc-
tures.
FIG. 2-101 A 7-year-old male mixed
breed dog with a 5-day history of
 anorexia and lethargy. The abdomen 
was distended. A, On the lateral tho-
racic radiographs there is a bulge on 
the cranial aspect of the cardiac sil-
houette (arrows). The trachea is
mildly elevated cranial to the tra-
cheal bifurcation, and there is sternal
contact as well as elevation of the
ardiac apex from the sternum. B,
On the ventrodorsal radiograph a
bulge is present on the right cranial
aspect of the cardiac silhouette
(arrows), as is rounding of the right
side of the cardiac silhouette and
shifting of the cardiac apex into the
left hemithorax. The radiographic
changes are indicative of right atrial
enlargement. The right ventricle also
is enlarged. There is an incidental
fnding of a radiopaque air-rifle pel-
let within the soft tissues. Diagnosis:
Enlarged right ventricle and atrium.
This was due to tricuspid insuffi-
ciency.
CHapTeR TWO THE THoRaX
129
FIG. 2-102 A 6-year-old female
mixed breed dog with a history of
poor exercise tolerance, lethargy and
abdominal distention. The cardiac
silhouette is enlarged. A, On the lat-
eral radiograph the cranial aspect of
the cardiac silhouette is rounded and 
the cardiac apex is elevated from the
sternum. B, On the ventrodorsal
radiograph the right side of the car-
diac silhouette is rounded. There is a
bulge on the left side of the cardiac
silhouette in the area of the main
 pulmonary artery segment. The pul-
monary arteries are enlarged and
tortuous (arrows) on both radi-
 ographs. There is an increase in pul-
 monary interstitial density,especially
in the caudal dorsal lung lobes.
Diagnosis: Diroflariasis.
A
B
Slight bulging in the area of the main pulmonary artery may be observed in normal
dogs. This may be due to rotation of the heart within the thorax, exposure of the radi-
 ograph during systole, or malpositioning of the animal.
The main pulmonary artery is seen best by echocardiography on the right parasternal
short-axis view high on the base through the pulmonic valve region. The pulmonary artery
is normally the same diameter as the valvular orifice. The right and left pulmonary arter-
 ies normally have a smaller diameter than the main pulmonary artery.
130
FIG. 2-103 A 5-month-old female Airedale brought for evalua-
tion of a grade 5/6 holosystolic murmur. The cardiac silhouette is
enlarged. A, On the ventrodorsal radiograph the right margin of
the cardiac silhouette is rounded. A bulge is present in the area of
the pulmonary artery segment (arrows). B, On the lateral radi-
ograph there is increased sternal contact and cranial bulging of
the cardiac margin. The pulmonary artery enlargement is also evi-
dent cranial to the cardiac silhouette (arrows). The pulmonary
vessels appear small The radiographic findings are indicative of
right heart and main pulmonary artery segment enlargement.
Diagnosis: Pulmonic stenosis.
B
Left Atrial Enlargement. On the lateral radiograph, the silhouette of the enlarged left atrium
 produces a wing-shaped shadow caudal to the tracheal bifurcation and dorsal to the caudal
vena cava (Fig. 2-104). The caudal cardiac margin becomes straight and forms a sharp angle
with the dorsal cardiac margin, with loss of the caudal cardiac waist. Caudal to the tracheal
bifurcation, the main stem bronchi are elevated, the left more markedly than the right.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
131
On the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, the enlarged left auricular appendage
may bulge beyond the left cardiac margin, producing a convex bulge at about the three to
four o'clock position. The atrium may be evident as an increased density between the cau-
dal main stem bronchi at the tracheal bifurcation. An overexposed radiograph will demon-
strate the widened angle between the main stem bronchi, which results from the
displacement by the enlarged atrium.
Echocardiographically, the normal diameter of the left atrium has been defined for
 Mono ienua yai sixe-suon jeuaiseed uu au yoq susn ie pue sop a qoq
F1G. 2-104 A 13-year-old male Miniature
Poodle with a chronic, moist cough. The car-
diac silhouette is enlarged markedly. The left
atrium is enlarged on both the lateral (A) and 
ventrodorsal (B) radiographs. The caudal car-
diac border is straightened, and the main stem
bronchi are both elevated and compressed. On
 B a bulge is noted on the cardiac silhouette in
 the three to four o'clock position, and on A a
wing-shaped density is present on the caudal
dorsal cardiac margin (closed arrows). These
fndings indicate left atrial enlargement. The
cardiac apex is rounded and the caudal cardiac
 margin is straight. The tracheal elevation on A
indicates left ventricular enlargement. The
right side of the cardiac silhouette is also
rounded and there is a bulge on the cranial
aspect of the cardiac silhouette indicating
 right atrial enlargement (open arrows). The
radiographic changes are indicative of gener-
alized cardiomegaly. Diagnosis: Mitral and
tricuspid insuffciency with biatrial and biven-
tricular enlargement.
A
B
132
view and the right parasternal short-axis view. In general, the left atrial diameter should be
approximately the same as the aorta at the level of the aortic valve. The left arium also may
be viewed using the left parasternal four-chamber view.
Left Ventricular Enlargement. On the lateral radiograph, the normal convexity of the
caudal cardiac margin may become accentuated in mild left ventricular enlargement (Fig.
2-105). This will progress until the caudal cardiac margin becomes straightened and more
upright; it will eventually become perpendicular to the sternum. The caudal vena cava
becomes elevated, sloping upward from the diaphragm to the heart. The tracheal bifurca-
tion also is elevated, and the thoracic trachea may be parallel to the thoracic vertebral bod-
ies or slope dorsally from the thoracic inlet to its bifurcation.
 On the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, the normally straight left cardiac mar-
gin becomes more convex and the distance from its margin to the left thoracic wall
decreases. The cardiac apex becomes rounded and blunt. It moves toward the midline and
rarely shifts into the right hemithorax. The craniocaudal dimension of the cardiac silhou-
ette increases. These changes may not be apparent in deep-chested breeds. A line drawn
from the junction of the right cardiac border with the cranial mediastinum to the cardiac
apex will divide the heart unequally, with a larger area on the left side, if the left ventricle
is enlarged.
 Radiographic evidence of left ventricular enlargement can be due to either dilation of
    r a n   ao ra  a
echocardiogram can determine if either or both of these processes are present. The normal
diameter of the left ventricle and thickness of the interventricular septum and left ventric-
ular free wall have been defined.2l In cats, the left ventricular diameter ranges from 1.1 to
1.5 cm in diastole, and from 0.6 to 0.9 cm in systole. The thickness of the feline intraven-
tricular septum ranges from 0.25 to 0.5 cm in diastole and from 0.5 to 0.8 cm in systole.
The feline left ventricular free wall thickness ranges from 0.25 to 0.5 cm in diastole and
from 0.4 to 0.8 cm in systole.
 In dogs, the cardiac measurements vary in a relationship that is not linear but has been
indexed to body weight.55 In some breeds the relationship of the left ventricular size to
body weight has not had high coeffcients of determination.269 In a typical 12-kg dog the
tricular diameter in systole is 2.1 cm for a 12-kg dog, while for a 24-kg dog the systolic
diameter is 2.9 cm. The diastolic width of the intraventricular septum for a 12-kg dog is
0.72 cm, while in a 24-kg dog the width is 0.84 cm. The systolic dimension of the inter-
s a o  e r  7'i  op i e n  i si s s
ventricular free wall measurement is 0.62 cm for a 12-kg dog and 0.75 cm for a 24-kg dog.
a 24-kg dog.
An internal marker of left ventricular dilation is an increase in the EPSS
(Fig. 2-106). This is the distance between the tip of the septal leaflet at its fullest
opening during passive filling of the ventricle and the inner wall of the interventricu-
lar septum as measured on the M-mode echocardiogram. In cats and small dogs the
normal EPSs is 0 to 1 mm. For medium- to large-breed dogs the normal EPSS values
are in the 4- to 5-mm range. Giant-breed dogs will have normal EPSS values up to 7
mm, or occasionally even more.
 Aortic Arch Enlargement. On the lateral radiograph, the enlarged aortic arch may be evi-
dent as a bulge on the cranial dorsal cardiac margin, by loss of the cranial cardiac waist
(Fig. 2-107). This enlargement is not seen often, because the aortic arch is within the cra-
nial mediastinum and is in contact with the rest of the heart. In normal older cats and some
normal chondrodystrophic dogs, a small aortic bulge that has no clinical significance may
be identified.
On the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, the cranial bulging of the aorta may
be hidden within the mediastinum or produce a widened mediastinum. If the enlargement
involves the descending aorta, as in patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), the bulge will be
observed along the left margin of the descending aorta. If the enlargement involves the
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
133
FIG. 2-105 A and B, A 10-year-old
female Miniature Poodle with a
4-day history of coughing. On the
lateral and ventrodorsal thoracic
radiographs the cardiac silhouette is
enlarged and elongated. The left car-
diac margin is rounded, and there is
elevation of the tracheal bifurcation.
The caudal cardiac margin is straight
and upright. The radiographic
changes are indicative of left ventric-
uar enlargement. Diagnosis: Left
ventricular and atrial enlargement.
 This was due to mitral insufficiency.
A
B
134
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
ascending aortic arch, as in aortic stenosis, the bulge, if noticeable at all, will be observed
cranial to the cardiac silhouette.
The proximal ascending aorta is visualized easily by echocardiography. As seen on
the right parasternal long-axis left ventricular outflow tract view, the aorta begins with
the aortic valves, then is followed by a slight dilation (sinus of Valsalva) and then con-
tinues cranial and then dorsal. In some patients, part of the aortic arch can be visual-
ized. Dilation of this segment is recognized readily, and the diameter can be
   gg     hh  1) s   
distal to this region usually is not exhibited on the echocardiogram, because the air-
filled lung blocks transmission of sound to these regions (e.g., at the level of ductus
arteriosus).
MICROCARDIA
Microcardia is a nonspecific term that is used to denote a smaller-than-normal cardiac sil-
houette (Fig. 2-108). It generally reflects a decrease in circulating blood volume. This may
occur from hypovolemic shock, dehydration, or emaciation and has been reported with
Addison's disease.270 The hypovolemia and hypoperfusion also cause the caudal vena cava
and pulmonary arteries to appear small Microcardia may be diagnosed incorrectly when
 the heart appears smallin comparison to the lungs as a result of overinflation of the lungs
or tension pneumothorax.
 On the lateral radiograph, an abnormally small heart may not contact the sternum. It
will measure 2l/2 intercostal spaces or less in width, and its height will be less than 50% of
 the lateral thoracic dimension. The apex often appears more sharply pointed than normal.
The heart will be almost perpendicular to the sternum.
 On the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph, the cardiac silhouette will occupy
less than 50% of the thoracic diameter and will be separated from the diaphragm by
lucent lung. The heart may be oval in shape due to its upright position within the
thorax.
Echocardiographically, hypovolemia is recognized by a decrease in the diameter of all
chambers and great vessels. Cardiac wall thicknesses will remain normal or be slightly
increased, and fractional shortening may be normal or increased.
FIG. 2-106 A4-year-old male Great
 Dane had a cough and an enlarged
cardiac silhouette on radiographs.
The M-mode echocardiogram
revealed marked dilation of the left
ventricle. The septal (SL) and pari-
etal (PL) leaflets of the mitral valve
are observed. The E-point septal sep-
aration (EPSS—i.e., that distance
between the maximal open position
of the septal leaflet and the interven-
tricular septum) is enlarged
markedly (16 mm). Diagnosis:
Dilated cardiomyopathy.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
135
FIG. 2-107 A 3-month-old female
 Collie was brought in for evaluation
 of a grade 5/6 holosystolic murmur.
The cardiac silhouette is of normal
size. A, On the lateral radiograph the
caudal margin of the cardiac silhou-
ette appears straight and there is a
bulge on the cranial dorsal margin
(arrows). B, On the ventrodorsal
radiograph a bulge is present in the 
cranial mediastinum cranial to the
cardiac silhouette (arrows). The
radiographic findings are indicative
of
aortic arch enlargement.
 Diagnosis: Aortic stenosis.
A
B
HEART DISEASE AND CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
Heart disease in the form of a structural or functional heart abnormality may be present
Q pearay leu ass sdoaap iee re aq a s e nog
inadequacy resulting in congestive changes in other organs. The presence of an enlarged
cardiac silhouette is not an indicator of heart failure. Rather, changes in extracardiac
structures are used to define congestive heart failure. These changes may be divided into
those associated with left heart failure and those associated with right heart failure.
136
SmAll ANImAl RADIOLOGY AND U1
FIG. 2-108 A and B, A 10-year-old female Doberman Pinscher
with a history of collapse. The cardiac silhouette is small. The pul-
ographic fndings are indicative of microcardia and hypovolemia.
Diagnosis: Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease).
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
137
Congestive left heart failure develops in stages. Pulmonary venous congestion may be
recognized radiographically when the size of the pulmonary vein reproducibly exceeds the
size of the adjacent pulmonary artery. This is followed by interstitial pulmonary edema,
which produces a blurring of vascular margins beginning in the perihilar area and radiat-
ing peripherally in a nearly symmetric fashion. This, then, progresses to a more diffuse,
  h d aq  d r e  n    s
follow the pulmonary edema. Although decreased cardiac output may reduce the size of
the aorta, this generally is not recognized radiographically. Congestive left heart failure
usually occurs after left heart enlargement; however, the left heart size may be normal with
acute left heart failure secondary to conditions such as ruptured chordae tendineae or
myocarditis.
 Although echocardiography generally is superior to conventional radiography for eval-
uating cardiac morphology, motion, myocardial function, and blood flow patterns, it can-
not evaluate the pulmonary parenchyma or pulmonic vessels. Therefore echocardiography
alone cannot confirm a diagnosis of congestive left heart failure. Radiographic evidence is
required.
Congestive right heart failure results in systemic venous hypertension and conges-
tion. Enlargement of the caudal vena cava usually occurs. This cannot always be identi-
effusions may be observed radiographically in patients with congestive right heart
failure.
The sonographic diagnosis of congestive right heart failure requires evaluation of the
heart as well as the size of the caudal vena cava and hepatic veins. The size of the caudal
 vena cava and hepatic veins is evaluated subjectively. The enlargement that occurs with
right heart failure is marked and recognized easily after a few normal livers have been
examined. There is also a loss of the normal respiration-related diameter changes in the
caudal vena cava. The presence of ascites or pleural effusion is helpful in confirming the
diagnosis of right heart failure. Right heart enlargement or pericardial fluid along with
 dilation of the hepatic veins and caudal vena cava is indicative of congestive right heart
failure.
SPECIFIC CARDIAC DISEASES
When evaluating either the thoracic radiograph or echocardiogram, it is useful to catego-
rize cardiac disease as either acquired or congenital. The radiograph, only one part of the
cardiac evaluation, should not be used as the sole basis for a definite diagnosis. The
echocardiogram often allows a definite diagnosis. If there is a disparity between clinical,
electrocardiographic, echocardiographic, and radiographic findings, an angiocardiogram
is recommended to establish a definitive diagnosis.272
CONGENITAL CARDIAC DISEASES
 There are specific radiographic and echocardiographic features described for most con-
graphy has been published.284 Because some variation exists, one or more of the expected
features in any specific case may be absent. Unless specified, the features described apply to
both dogs and cats.
PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
PDA is the failure of the fetal ductus arteriosus to close at birth. This situation usually
results in a left-to-right shunting of blood, which causes increased blood flow through
the lungs and the left side of the heart (Fig. 2-109). As a result, the left ventricle, left
atrium, pulmonary arteries, and pulmonary veins are all enlarged or increased in num-
ber or both.28s-287 An aneurysmal dilation usually occurs in the descending aorta and in
the main pulmonary artery. The aortic aneurysm produces a bulge usually seen on the
138
FIG. 2-109 A 9-month-old female
Cocker Spaniel was brought in for
evaluation of a continuous murmur.
The cardiac silhouette is markedly
enlarged. A, On the lateral radi-
ograph the cranial and caudal car-
diac margins appear rounded, and a
soft-tissue density is present in the
area of the left atrium (arrows). B,
 On the ventrodorsal radiograph
there are bulges on the leff cardiac
margin at the site of aorta (a) and
left atrium (). The cardiac apex is
rounded. The pulmonary vessels
 appear increased in size. The radi-
 ographic findings indicate left-sided
cardiomegaly with pulmonary arte-
rial and aortic aneurysmal dilations.
The increased size of pulmonary ves-
sels indicate the presence of a left-to-
right shunt. Diagnosis: Patent
ductus arteriosus.
A
B
ventrodorsal radiograph along the left side of the aorta at the level of the fourth or fifth
 intercostal space. Additionally, a pulmonary arterial aneurysmal dilation or knob often is
visible at the same level or slightly caudal to the aortic aneurysm, and a third bulge rep-
resenting an enlarged left atrial appendage may be visible caudal to the pulmonary
aneurysm.
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
139
A
B
FIG. 2-11o A 2-year-old male Neapolitan Mastiff with failure to gain weight and labored breathing
affer exercise. Auscultation revealed a continuous (machinery) murmur. Radiographs revealed gen-
a si-s pd  t  se Ard d  Ai p
reveals marked dilation of the right ventricular outflow tract (rvo), as well as the main (pa) and right
(rpa) pulmonary arteries. B, The right parasternal long-axis aortic outflow view reveals dilation of
the left atrium (la) and left ventricle (lv). Also identified are the right ventricle (rv) and aorta (ao).
Diagnosis: Patent ductus arteriosus
FIG. 2-111 A 6-month-old male, 30-
Ib mixed breed dog had a continuous
murmur. The M-mode echocardio-
 gram revealed marked dilation of the
left ventricle (IVDd = 50 mm).
 Diagnosis: Left ventricular dilation
LV
due to volume overflow from a
RUDd
 patent ductus arteriosus.
usd
LUDd
UD
UN
The echocardiogram in dogs with PDA will reveal left atrial and left ventricular dila-
tion, and eccentric hypertrophy may be present (Figs. 2-110 and 2-111). The EPSS, the
point of maximal mitral valve opening to left ventricular septal echo, may be greater than
normal. Fractional shortening will be either normal or diminished subsequent to the ven-
tricular dilation. In some cases, the aneurysmal dilation of the aorta will be identified.
Dilation of the pulmonary artery is seen more frequently In some cases with long-stand-
ing disease, there may be right ventricular dilation. Direct visualization of the ductus is
uncommon but may be accomplished in some cases by using a parasternal short-axis view
at the heart base.288 Doppler studies may reveal a continuous flow disturbance and a high-
velocity retrograde flow toward the pulmonic valve in the proximal pulmonary artery (Fig.
2-112).289 Mitral and aortic regurgitation is identified often as well.
140
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-112 A pulsed wave Doppler
echocardiogram with the sample
PV
volume (DG/PA) in the pulmonary
artery in the same dog as in Fig. 2-
DG/PA
lll demonstrates continuous dis-
turbed flow at this site. Diagnosis:
Patent ductus arteriosus.
Most dogs with PDA have typical radiographic and echocardiographic findings;: how-
ever, all changes are not present in every case. The severity and duration of the shunt will
influence the appearance. Cats with PDA have similar changes; however, as with dogs, it is
unusual for all radiographic changes to be present.
After ligation of the ductus, the pulmonary vessels return quickly to normal size. The
left heart usually decreases (returns to normal) in size, although this may take longer. Left
heart enlargement may persist if mitral regurgitation was present preoperatively or if
myocardial function has been diminished permanently.
A PDA with right-to-left shunting produces a different spectrum of echocardiographic
and radiographic changes289-292Therigt ventricleis enlarged du toelevated right ven-
tricular pressure. The aortic aneurysm may not be observed; however, a pulmonary knob
will be present and the main pulmonary arteries are often enlarged, tortuous, and blunted.
The size of the pulmonary veins will be normal. A contrast echocardiogram may reveal the
presence of bubbles in the aorta distal to the junction of the PDA, most easily imaged in
 the abdominal aorta, after intravenous injection.120
AORTICOPULMONARY SEPTAL DEFECT
Aorticopulmonary septal defect, a window of communication between the aorta and pul-
monary artery near their origin at the base of the heart, produces hemodynamic effects similar
tothose seenwith aA229 The radiographic andechcardiographic changes aresmir
except that the aorta and pulmonary artery lack the degree of aneurysmal dilation seen in PDA.
AORTIC STENOSIS
Aortic stenosis is one of the most commonly reported congenital cardiac defects in the
U gogo  u uoun s 1 sop pq-re u uo rou s I co-96 o
some dogs, the stenosis may increase in severity over time and serial Doppler studies are
indicated.304,305
Aortic stenosis, whether valvular, subvalvular, or supravalvular, when present to a
clinically significant degree, usually has consistent radiographic features (see Fig.
 sd op u
extending cranially into the cranial mediastinum with loss of cranial cardiac waist on the
lateral view, although in many affected animals this is masked by the cranial mediastinum
 on the ventrodorsal and dorsoventral views. The cardiac silhouette may appear elongated
CHapTer TWO THe THOraX
141
F1G. 2-113 A 6-month-old male
Rottweiler with a grade 4/6 systolic
ejection-type murmur that was best
heard atthe left heart base. A,A right
 parasternal long-axis aortic outflow
view revealed the left ventricle (tv)
and aorta (ao). B, A close-up view of
the aortic outflow tract revealed a
Ivo
focal hyperechoic band (arrows) nar-
rowing the left ventricular outflow
tract {lvo) immediately beneath the
aortic valve leaflets. Diagnosis:
Aortic stenosis.
A
A
B
FIG. 2-114 A, An M-mode view at the level of the left ventricle reveals the normal structures: inter-
ventricular septum (vs), lft ventricular cavity in diastole (lvd), left ventricular cavity in systole (tvs),
and left ventricular free wall (tvw). The fractional shortening (LVED - LVES / LVED) is increased
(approximately Ss%). B, An M-mode view at the level of the mitral valve reveals abnormal valve
ue (a) uod-g au aie payap os (us) iaeal idas auo uou noaue ssis u uo
A-point (a). Diagnosis: Systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve and increased fractional short-
 ening consistent with aortic stenosis.
with a broad apex due to the left ventricular enlargement. The remainder of the heart and
thoracic structures usually are normal.
 Echocardiographic findings may be specific for the site of anomaly. Subvalvular
aortic stenosis may be seen either as a discrete membrane or focal ridge just below the
aortic valve, or as a more elongated, tunnel-type narrowing of the left ventricular out-
flow tract (Fig. 2-113). Usually, this is most noticeable on the septal side. Other findings
associated with subvalvular aortic stenosis may include hypertrophy of the left ventri-
 cle, a hyperechoic subendocardium, normal to increased fractional shortening, coarse
systolic fluttering of the aortic valve, partial premature closure of the aortic valve, and
thickening of the septal leaflet of the mitral valve with or without systolic anterior
early systole (Fig. 2-114). Systolic anterior motion can be so severe (prolonged) that the
septal leaflet of the mitral valve opens wide in midsystole into the aortic outflow tract
and acts as a partial aortic outflow obstruction. Although the poststenotic aneurysmal
dilation of the aorta can be seen, the degree of aneurysmal dilation is variable and may
not be readily noted on echocardiography. Valvular stenosis is difficult to identify. In
this condition, the valve leaflets may appear thickened, with a decreased range of
motion. Supravalvular lesions are very rare but would show an obvious constriction dis-
tal to the aortic valve.
142
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-115 A 2-year-old male
Golden Retriever had a heart mur-
mur but no clinical signs.
VEL
=3.22M/S
Continuous wave Doppler ultra-
PG
=41.5mmHg
 sonography through the aortic valve
revealed a maximal velocity of 3.22
meters per second (pressure gradient
of 41.5 mm Hg). Diagnosis: Aortic
5.5MHZ
stenosis.
FOCUS:
=1.0
INTERVAL
Doppler studies are necessary for the complete evaluation of aortic stenosis. Color-flow
studies may demonstrate turbulent flow patterns proximal to the aortic valve and usually
will be present distal to the valve. There may also be evidence of turbulent flow proximal
 to the aortic valve in diastole due to concomitant aortic insuffciency. Regurgitation across
the mitral valve may be seen also.
Spectral Doppler studies will reveal an increased velocity of blood flow across
the aortic valve area. Because these velocities may be very high, continuous wave
studies often are required (Fig. 2-115). Subcostal imaging windows are preferred,
because they provide the best measurement geometry for accuracy of velocity meas-
urement.308
Normal velocities across the aortic valve are in the range of 1 meter per second (m/s).
 Observed velocities may be higher, depending in part on beam geometry. A maximal peak
velocity (Vmax) of 1.7 m/s or more is suspicious for aortic stenosis. A velocity of greater
than 2 m/s that is seen on average over five cardiac cycles, especially if recorded from a sub-
costal window, is considered diagnostic for aortic stenosis.
By using the modified Bernoulli equation, the velocity can be used to calculate the
approximate pressure gradient. Gradients of 10 to 20 mm Hg (1.7 to 2.2 m/s) are con-
sidered mild. Gradients of 100 mm Hg or greater (5 m/s) are considered severe. Another
measurement that appears to correlate with severity is the indexed effective orifice
area.309
AORTIC INSUFFICIENCY
 Primary aortic insufficiency with regurgitation is rare in dogs and cats.310 It has been asso-
ciated with aortic stenosis and ventricular septal defects (VSDs). It may develop as a com-
plication in tetralogy of Fallot and bacterial endocarditis.
PULMONIC STENOSIS
 Pulmonic stenosis is a common congenital heart lesion in dogs It is les common in cats.31l
 There also may be asociated anomalies of the coronary arteries, especially in Boxers and
English Bulldogs312 valvular stenosis with fibrous thickening at the base of the valves is the
most common form seen in the dog. Similar radiographic findings will be present regard-
less of whether a pulmonic stenosis is subvalvular, valvular, or supravalvular (Figs. 2-103
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
143
FIG. 2-116 A and B,A 5-month-old
female West Highland White Terrier
was evaluated for a grade 5/6
holosystolic murmur. There were no
clinical signs associated with this
murmur. The cardiac silhouette
shows increased sternal contact and
rounding of the cranial border on
the lateral view. The ventrodorsal
view reveals an enlargement of the
main pulmonary artery segment.
 The pulmonary vessels appear small.
 Diagnosis: Pulmonic stenosis.
and 2-1l16). The degree of severity of the lesion may affect the degree of radiographic
change noted. Enlargement of the right ventricle and a poststenotic dilation of the main 
vessels is usually normal but they may be small.
Echocardiographic findings in pulmonic stenosis are consistent with the
radiographic changes. Aneurysmal dilation of the main pulmonary artery is usually
144
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-117 A 3-year-old spayed
DEPT
female English Bulldog with ascites
CARD
and a grade 5/6 systolic heart mur-
mur that was best heard over the left
PWR
heart base.A right parasternal short-
axis view reveals narrowing of the
APOE
valvular orifice (*). There is a dila-
GAIN
tion (D) of the main pulmonary
artery (pa) distal to the narrowing.
Other structures noted are the aorta
(ao), right ventricular outflow tract
(rvo), pulmonary artery (pa), right
pulmonary artery (rpa), and left pul-
monary artery (lpa). Diagnosis:
Pulmonic stenosis.
FIG. 2-118 A 1-year-old neutered
female mixed breed dog had an
 asymptomatic grade 4/6 heart mur-
mur heard best at the left cranial car-
diac base and radiating to the right
thorax. A continuous wave Doppler
study across the pulmonic valve
reveals an increased pulmonic valve
velocity (velocity of 3.7 meters per
second and a 55 mm Hg gradient)
that “wraps around" due to inade-
quate settings for total velocity and
level of the baseline. Also present is a
significant pulmonic insufficiency
(velocity of 1.6 meters per second).
Diagnosis: Moderate
pulmonic
 stenosis and insufficiency.
apparent (Fig. 2-117). Thickened, domed pulmonic valves also may be seen. In one study,
valve morphology was grouped into two forms: type A—normal annulus diameter and
aortic-to-pulmonary ratio <1.2, and type B—-pulmonary annulus hypoplasia and aortic-
to-pulmonary ratio >1.2. The dogs in the B group were mostly brachycephalic breeds.
 Dogs with type B valve morphology had fewer favorable outcomes with balloon valvulo-
plasty.318 As a result of the stenosis, right ventricular hypertension may lead to thicken-
ing of the right ventricular free wall and interventricular septum, which can be identified
by echocardiography. The right ventricular diameter may be increased. The normal
motion of the interventricular septum may be dampened. If severe, the increased right
ventricular pressures may cause paradoxical septal motion, a condition in which the
interventricular septal motion parallels that of the left ventricular free wall due to pres-
sure overload in the right ventricle, nearly obliterating any fractional shortening and
severely reducing stroke volume.
 Doppler studies are used to estimate the pressure gradient across the valve, which aids
in choosing between medical and surgical treatments (Figs. 2-118 to 2-120). Color-flow
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
145
FIG. 2-119 A 3-month-old male
English Springer Spaniel with an
asymptomatic grade 5/6 murmur
that was loudest at the left cranial
cardiac base with palpable thrills on
both the left and right thoracic walls.
A continuous wave Doppler study
 reveals a severe increase in velocity
(7.7 meters per second and a pres-
sure gradient of 235 mm Hg).
Diagnosis: Severe pulmonic steno-
sis.
7.7M/S
1
FIG. 2-120 A 10-month-old male
 Miniature Schnauzer had a murmur.
A
continuous
wave Doppler
 echocardiogram revealed a marked
increase in velocity across the pul-
monic valve (4.24 meters per second
and approximately a 72 mm Hg gra-
dient). Other findings included dila-
tion and hypertrophy of the right
ventricle. Diagnosis: Moderate pul-
UNAX
monic stenosis.
studies will identify turbulent flow distal to the pulmonic valve. Turbulence may be seen
 proximal to the valve in diastole if pulmonic insuffciency is also present. Tricuspid insuf-
ficiency may be observed also in some cases.
Spectral Doppler studies, preferably using continuous wave or high pulse repetition
frequency techniques, are requisite to assess the severity of the disease. Patients with gradi-
ents exceeding 80 to 100 mm Hg, as calculated using the modified Bernoulli equation from
the peak velocity across the pulmonic valve, are considered to be severely affected and are
 andidates for immediate treatment, while those with gradients from 40 to 80 mm Hg usu-
ally are not treated but are reevaluated periodically. Treatment planning for balloon valvu-
loplasty uses echocardiography to determine the size of the outflow tract and
             
 balloon valvuloplasty.
SEPTAL DEFECTS
Atrial and mixed atrioventricular defects may be viewed as defects in the development of
the endocardial cushion.32l Although this interpretation may be called into question, it is
clear that these lesions do exist in a mixed format in many affected individuals.
Furthermore, it appears that VsDs commonly are seen in combination with some of the
 other lesions listed above.
146
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGy AND UiTRaSoNOGRapHY
FIG. 2-121 A 6-year-old male
Persian cat had had a heart murmur
since birth with no clinical signs. The
murmur was currently graded 3/6
and was loudest on the left sternal
border. A two-dimensional echocar-
diogram revealed a defect (arrow) in
the septum between the left atrium
(LA) and the dilated right atrium
(RA). A Doppler study confrmed a
left-to-right shunt through the
defect. Diagnosis: Atrial septal
defect.
ASD
blood flow from the left to the right may cause right heart enlargement and dilation of the
pulmonary arteries and veins.
Echocardiography usually will demonstrate the defect in the septum (Fig. 2-121).
Care must be used in interpreting an apparent defect due to “dropout" of portions of the
septum as an artifact due to the thinness of the septum and the geometry of image
formation.
Doppler studies should be helpful. Color-flow studies should document the site of the
defect and the direction of flow, including bidirectional flow. Spectral studies should be
used to assess the velocity of the shunt flow.
Ventricular Septal Defect. VSD is seen in both dogs and cats. This, along with mixed sep-
tal lesions, is the most common congenital anomaly of cats.322 The most frequent site in
the septum is in the membranous portion (i.e., high, nearer the aortic root).
The size and location of the septal defect and the amount of blood and direction
of blood flow through the shunt determine the radiographic changes that are observed
(Fig. 2-122). In many septal defects, the cardiac silhouette and pulmonary vessels are
radiographically normal. When radiographic changes are present, enlargement of the
left ventricle is usually somewhat more obvious than right ventricular enlargement,
although both occur. Pulmonary arterial and venous enlargement may be
evident; however, the size and number of vessels depend on the volume of blood
shunting from left to right. The vessels appear normal or only slightly overperfused in
most cases.
 The echocardiographic changes are likewise dependent upon the size of the defect
and the amount of blood that is shunted. Two-dimensional studies are best performed
with the right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view or the right parasternal short-
axis view. Typically, septal defects are located close to the aortic root (high) (Fig. 2-123).
They vary in size from pinpoints to those involving the majority of the interventricular
septum. The majority of VsDs occur in the thin, membranous part of the septum. An
apparent defect may be seen in normal individuals in this area due to dropout of echoes
because the tissue is so thin. It is important to be able to define the septal defect in mul-
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
147
FIG. 2-12z A 5-month-old male Golden Retriever was brought for
evaluation of a grade 5/6 systolic murmur. The dog was asympto-
matic. A, On the ventrodorsal radiograph the cardiac silhouette is
mildly enlarged and appears elongated., On the lateral radiograph
there is slight elevation of the trachea. The right and left cardiac mar-
 gins appear rounded in A. The radiographic findings indicate mild
cardiomegaly. Diagnosis: Ventricular septal defect.
凸
B
tiple, repeatable imaging planes to ensure that it is not an artifact. In most instances, an
increase in image intensity, a bright echo at the junction of the defect or T sign, is noted
include dilation of the left atrium and left and right ventricle, and increased fractional
shortening. Rarely, a leaflet of the aortic valve may prolapse into a septal defect. Contrast
148
FIG. 2-123 A 6-month-old male Rottweiler with a grade 4/6 sys-
tolic ejection-type murmur that was best heard at the heart base.
The right parasternal long-axis aortic (ao) outflow view reveals a
focal defect (arrow) high upon the interventricular septum (vs).
Doppler studies confirmed the defect. Diagnosis: Ventricular
septal defect.
sonography (bubble studies) can be used to help identify some VSDs. In those that have
appear in the left atrium. In those that shunt from left to right, there may be an area of
apparent diminished bubble numbers in the right ventricle due the shunting of
non-contrast laden blood across the septum into the area.
 Doppler studies are very important in clearly identifying and grossly quantitating
blood flows through a VsD. Color-flow studies should be used to identify specifically the
 site of the lesion and indicate the direction of blood flow. Aortic regurgitation also may be
noted in some cases.
Spectral Doppler studies should be directed across the lesion in a manner as parallel as
 possible to the flow through the defect. Because high velocities may be encountered, con-
tinuous wave (or high pulse repetition frequency) studies are preferable.
The echocardiography findings may be helpful in making a prognosis. Factors that
 'ae a po t ui sit po das au u np e apu ai suad no
maximal shunt velocity of greater than 4.5 m/s, and no evidence of significant aortic
regurgitation.323
Atrioventricular Septal Defects. Atrioventricular septal defects, or endocardial cushion
defects, are cases in which all or part of the atrioventricular septum is missing. This malfor-
  s    s   n s 
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT
displaced) aorta, and right ventricular hypertrophy (Fig. 2-124). Tetralogy has been
reported in both cats and dogs. It is a heritable disease in the Keeshond.326-328 The cardiac
silhouette size is usually normal or only slightly enlarged. The right ventricular margin may
be slightly more round and the left ventricular margin straighter than normal. Both
changes result in a somewhat rectangle-shaped heart. The poststenotic pulmonary artery
dilation is usually small and not radiographically visible. A striking radiographic feature is
the decreased pulmonary vascular size and hyperlucent lung. The aorta may be small, but
radiographic recognition is diffcult.
ventricular septal defect is usually high in the membranous portion of the septum, result-
ing in a “malalignment VsD." The aortic root is seen straddling the septal defect (Fig.
2-125). The main pulmonary artery usually shows a mild aneurysmal dilation. The right
ventricular free wall is thickened. The left atrium may be small. The shunting of blood may
be documented with contrast (bubble) or Doppler studies.
EISENMENGER'S PHYSIOLOGY
Eisenmenger's physiology is the shunting of blood from the right side of the circulatory
system to the left due to increased pulmonary vascular resistance. This is a very uncommon
finding and usually results in a right-to-left shunt. These reversals usually occur early in
life. Lesions associated with Eisenmenger's physiology include atrial septal defect, VSD,
aorticopulmonary defect, PDA, and combinations of the above.329-331
CHapter TWO The ThoraX
149
FIG. 2-124 A and B,A 6-month-old
male Scottish Terrier with a grade
5/6 systolic murmur. The dog had
exercise intolerance and was cyan-
otic. The cardiac silhouette shows
slight right-sided enlargement. The
pulmonary vessels appear smaller
than normal. No other abnormalities
are noted. The radiographic findings
are indicative of congenital heart dis-
ease, most likely tetralogy of Fallot.
 Diagnosis: Tetralogy of Fallot.
A
B
 Radiographic abnormalities are uncommon. The cardiac silhouette is usually within
normal limits. The main pulmonary artery may appear normal or may be mildly dilated.
Echocardiography is usually diagnostic in these cases due to the right ventricular
hypertrophy in response to the pulmonary arterial hypertension. The lesions associated
150
SMALl ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-125 A 1-year-old male mixed breed dog was
DEF
evaluated for exercise intolerance. A grade 5/6 sys-
CAR
tolic heart murmur was present. A right parasternal
long-axis aortic outflow view reveals the presence of
PWR
a defect (*) in the interventricular septum (vs). The
origin (arrows) of the aorta (ao) is positioned astride
ao
40d
the interventricular septum. Also seen are the right
GAI
ventricle (rv), left ventricle (tv), and lef atrium (la).
Diagnosis: Tetralogy of Fallot. The pulmonic steno-
other views.
with this physiologic change usually have large anatomical defects. Color-flow Doppler or
contrast (bubble) studies usually demonstrate the shunt flow. The right ventricular outflow
tract and main pulmonary arteries usually are dilated. If pulmonic valve insufficiency, sec-
ondary to pulmonary hypertension, is noted, a regurgitant jet of less than 2.5 m/s fails to
support diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension.332
COR TRIATRIATUM
Cor triatriatum is a rare anomaly in which there is a persistent remnant of a fetal mem-
brane in an atrium. This results in division of the atrium into two compartments,
e ls aiaa aq Au suudo aui suao ao no auo Aq pon are uum
may provide resistance to normal blood flow and result in congestion proximal to the
lesion.
 Cor triatriatum sinister, involving the left atrium, has been reported in a cat with result-
The radiographic changes are limited to either pulmonary congestion or enlargement
of the caudal vena cava, hepatomegaly, and ascites. Two-dimensional echocardiography
 reveals division of the atrial chamber and may document the presence of the obstructing
membrane.
ATRIOVENTRICULAR VALVE MALFORMATIONS
Atrioventricular valve malformation may affect the mitral valve, the tricuspid valve, or
both. Both dogs and cats may be affected.345 The pathology may include an enlarged valve
annulus, short and thick valve leaflets, short and stout chordae tendineae, and upward mal-
position of papillary muscles.346 These changes result in valvular insufficiency.
MITRAL AND TRICUSPID INSUFFICIENCY
Mitral valve dysplasia causes mitral regurgitation and may result in subsequent left heart
failure. Radiographic findings of congenital mitral valve insufficiency, similar to those
dilation and moderate to severe left ventricular enlargement.347-349 Cardiogenic pul-
monary edema may be present if the dog is in left heart failure. Tricuspid dysplasia
results in tricuspid regurgitation and subsequently may lead to right heart failure.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
151
Radiographic findings include right atrial dilation, which is radiographically apparent
 a  rn  s) n r  p s ji a
pleural or abdominal effusion and persistent caudal vena caval dilation may be present if
right heart failure occurs. Combinations of the above findings may be noted if both con-
ditions coexist (Fig. 2-126).
 Echocardiographic findings of mitral insufficiency include marked left atrial dilation,
left ventricular dilation, and mild left ventricular hypertrophy Malformations may include
displaced papillary muscles, abnormal chordae tendineae, and shortened and thickened
valve leaflets. Prolapse of the valve leaflets (i.e., displacement of one or more valve leaflets
into the atrium) may be seen. Fractional shortening is typically normal or increased but
will confirm a diagnosis of mitral regurgitation. Because the regurgitant flow may be nar-
row or directed angularly into the left atrium, the study may require Doppler mapping (i.e.,
sampling at multiple locations throughout the atrium) unless color-flow studies are used
to define the site of maximal regurgitation. The use of color Doppler readily confirms the
ma  dosp ss
tation may be estimated with the color-flow study.
 Echocardiographic findings of tricuspid insufficiency include severe right atrial dila-
tion and right ventricular enlargement. Abnormal papillary muscles, chordae tendineae,
and valvular prolapse may be seen (Figs. 2-127 and 2-128). Positioning of the valves low in 
the ventricle away from the annulus may be seen in Ebstein's anomaly. Doppler findings
will be similar to those seen with mitral regurgitation.
MITRAL STENOSIS AND TRICUSPID STENOSIS
Stenosis of atrioventricular valves has been reported in the dog and cat but involve-
noted may include left atrial enlargement and possibly pulmonary venous congestion
and pulmonary edema. Two-dimensional echocardiography may reveal incomplete
diastolic leaflet separation, lack of leaflet closure in middiastole, and doming of
the mitral valve.356 Doppler studies will reveal an increased velocity of flow
across the mitral valve with associated turbulence. Mitral insufficiency may be demon-
strated also.
PRIMARY ENDOCARDIAL FIBROELASTOSIS
   aq ose su s l pn q su si rrs
cats, and has been documented as a congenital anomaly in Burmese cats.357-359
Radiographically, left heart enlargement or generalized cardiomegaly may be seen.
Expected echocardiographic findings would include hyperechoic endocardium, dilation of
 the left atrium and ventricle, and decreased fractional shortening and possibly thickening
of the mitral valve leaflets.
COMBINED AND MISCELLANEOUS CONGENITAL DEFECTS
There have been several reports of animals with multiple congenital cardiac
the anatomical defects as well as their alterations in hemodynamics.
ACQUIRED CARDIAC DISEASE
ACQUIRED ATRIOVENTRICULAR VALVULAR INSUFFICIENCY
Insufficiency of the mitral or the tricuspid valve or both is seen frequently in older, mostly
small-breed dogs and is usually the result of endocardiosis. An inherited predisposition to
Endocardiosis, also sometimes termed mucoid valvular degeneration and myxomatous
transformation of the AV valves, is a degenerative process that results in thickened, short-
ened, nodular, and distorted valve leaflets.373 Although it may afect any heart valve, the
mitral and tricuspid valves are involved most commonly. A less common cause of valvular
insuficiency is traumattheheart reultingdsrutionof parorallof thealve75
152
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 2-126 A 3-month-old female
mixed breed dog with an acute onset
of respiratory distress. A grade 4/6
systolic murmur was detected on
physical examination. The cardiac
silhouette is markedly enlarged. A,
 On the lateral radiograph the caudal
ardiac margin is straightened. The 
trachea is elevated. There is
increased  sternal contact and
bulging of the cranial margin of the 
ardiac silhouette. B, On the ven-
trodorsal radiograph the cardiac sil-
houette is enlarged and the apex is
rounded. The cardiac silhouette
 appears elongated. There is an alveo-
ar pulmonary infiltrate in the right 
caudal lung lobe. The radiographic
findings are indicative of congenital
heart disease with lef heart failure.
Diagnosis: Congenital mitral and
tricuspid insufficiency.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
153
FIG. 2-127 A 2-year-old male German Shepherd dog with exer-
P psd s  ss g a  aa 
the jugular veins were distended. A right parasternal short-axis
view of the heart base revealed dilation of the right atrium (ra)
and right ventricle (rv) as well as prolapse of the tricuspid valve
leaflets (arrows). Also identified are the aorta (ao) and pul-
monary artery (pa). Diagnosis: Tricuspid valve dysplasia with
prolapse.
ra
FIG. 2-128 A 2-year-old female
hp
 Labrador Retriever with anorexia,
hydrothorax, and hydroperitoneum.
A right lateral four-chamber view
 reveals severe dilation of the right
RV
atrium (RA). The tricuspid valve is
severely deformed, with tethering
and thickening of the septal leaflet
(single arrow) and a severely elon-
gated parietal leaflet (double arrow).
RA
 Diagnosis: Tricuspid valve dysplasia.
LV
A
The radiographic signs depend upon the site and severity of the lesion and are a result of
valvular insufficiency. Left ventricular and left atrial enlargement are observed with mitral
valve insufficiency (see Fig. 2-89). The degree of chamber enlargement and the change with
time useful in determining the severity and in monitoring progression of the mitral insuf-
ficiency. Chronic, severe mitral regurgitation may result in endocardial damage, atrial wall
cardiac size and shape to left-sided cardiomegaly. Cardiomegaly may be accompanied by
 pulmonary venous congestion or pulmonary edema. Animals with mitral endocardiosis
also may have tricuspid valve endocardiosis. They may have tricuspid insufficiency and
radiographic evidence of right ventricular and right atrial enlargement.
154
HOPE
35d
GAIN
A
B
FIG. 2-129 A 14-year-old neutered male Cairn Terrier with coughing. A grade
5/6 systolic murmur was present. A, A left parasternal four-chamber view reveals
dilation of the lef atrium (la) and left ventricle (tv). The right ventricle (rv) and
right atrium (ra) are normal. The leaflets of the tricuspid valve (small arrow) are
GAIN
normal. The leaflets of the mitral valve (large arrows) are shortened and grossly
-e o anp s uds iu u jo ap uede au pau
fact. B, A right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view reveals left atrial (la)
and left ventricular (v) dlation. There is mild prolapse of the thickened,irreg-
ular septal leaflet of the mitral valve (arrow) into the left atrium. C, A right
parasternal short-axisview at the levelof the mitral valve reveals the thickening
and irregularity of the mitral valve leaflets (arrows). The left ventricular outflow
tract (tvo) and right ventricle (rv) are also identified. Diagnosis: Mitral valve
insufficiency secondary to endocardiosis.
C
hood that the dog wil develop right- or left-sided heart failure or both, dogs with mild
degrees of cardiomegaly may develop congestive heart failure.
The echocardiographic findings are similar to those seen with congenital valvular
2-129). The M-mode study of the left ventricle usually will reveal increased fractional
shortening as the ventricle rapidly unloads into the low-pressure left atrium. Careful study
of the mitral valve leafets frequently will reveal that they are shortened, thickened, and
irregular (Fig. 2-130). Nodular changes may be observed. If severe, prolapse of the mitral
valve leaflet into the left atrium also may be seen.
 In unusual situations, a chordae tendineae may rupture and result in a flailleaflet effect
that is typified by the tip of the flail cusp extending into the left atrium in systole and then
displacing into the left ventricle in diastole.377 Color-flow studies will reveal turbulent flow
across the valve and the regurgitant flow into the atrium. A subjective evaluation of sever-
ity of regurgitation is possible by judging the degree, shape, and size of the regurgitant jet
relative to overall atrial size using multiple views.378 Spectral Doppler studies can docu-
ment the peak velocity of flow (Fig. 2-131).
CARDIOMYOPATHY
Dilated Cardiomyopathy. Canine dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) most commonly
occurs in 2- to 7-year-old male large- and giant-breed dogs.39-38 Specific causes have been
noted in some breeds. In some Great Danes an X-linked recessive genetic trait has been
identified.386 In both English and American Cocker Spaniels, DCM may be associated with
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
155
FIG. 2-130 An 1l-year-old neutered female mixed
breed dog had a cough, moist rales, and a grade 3/6
 systolic murmur on auscultation. The two-dimen-
sional echocardiogram reveals severe thickening of
the septal leaflet of the mitral valve (SL/MV). Other
structures include the parietal leaflet of the mitral
valve (PL/MV), left atrium (LA), left ventricle (LV),
aorta (Ao), and the aortic valve (AoV). Diagnosis:
Mitral valve endocardiosis. Doppler echocardiog-
raphy confirmed mitral insuffciency.
PL/MV
FIG. 2-131 A 10-year-old neutered female
Miniature Poodle had a heart murmur and a
cough. The continuous wave Doppler echocardio-
MV
 gram was recorded with the beam (C-cursor) pass-
ing through the left ventricle, mitral valve (MV),
and left atrium. The normal flows including the
 passive (E) and active (A) flows as well as the clos-
ing click are noted. The regurgitant flow (R) has a
'(uss iad sia s aaeixdde) Aioaa y
Diagnosis: Mitral insufficiency.
taurine deficiency and the disease may respond to supplementation.387-390 Taurine
deficiency has been identified also in individuals of other breeds.391 Varying degrees of
right- and left-sided cardiomegaly will be observed (Fig. 2-132). In many instances, an
 alteration in the cardiac shape will be much more noticeable than the total cardiomegaly.
 Bulging in the atrial areas may be observed. Pulmonary edema or efusions into the pleu-
ral or peritoneal cavities or both may be seen also.
The echocardiographic findings of canine DCM include dilation of the left ventricle
and atrium, thinning of the myocardium, and decreased fractional shortening, frequently
156
FIG. 2-132 A 9-year-old male
Doberman Pinscher with a 2-week
history of tachycardia and coughing.
The cardiac silhouette is enlarged
markedly. A, On the lateral radi-
 ograph, the caudal cardiac margin
 appears straight. There is elevation
of the trachea. B, On the ventrodor-
 mal radiograph, the left cardiac mar-
 gin is rounded and the cardiac apex
is round. There is an alveolar pattern
infltrate in the left caudal lobe and 
interstitial
 pattern
infiltrates
throughout all lobes. Several pleural
fissure lines are identifed (arrows).
The  radiographic  findings 
are
indicative of
generalized
car-
diomegaly with evidence of pul-
 monary edema. Diagnosis: Dilated
cardiomyopathy with left heart
failure.
A
 in the 10% to 15% range (Fig. 2-133),392,393 Doppler studies may be helpful in assessing
valvular integrity.
An area of great interest is the use of echocardiography to identify individuals with sub-
clinical disease. In one study of Doberman Pinscher dogs, a left ventricular internal diam-
eter (in end diastole) of greater than 46 mm was present in 13 of 15 dogs that died of DCM
CHapter TWO THe THoraX
157
A
B
DEPTHO
DERTIA
C
D
FIG. 2-133 A 5-year-old male Doberman Pinscher with exercise intolerance. Auscultation revealed a
mature beats. A, An M-mode view of the left ventricle (tv) distal to the mitral valves reveals dimin-
ished fractional shortening. The end-diastolic diameter (ed) was 66 mm, and the end-systolic
diameter (es) was 56 mm, giving a 15% fractional shortening value. Also identifed are the interven-
tricular septum (vs) and left ventricular wall (tvw). B, An M-mode view at the level of the mitral valve
reveals a marked E-point septal separation (arrow) of 10 mm. Identifed are the E and A points as
well as the interventricular septum (vs). C, A right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view demon-
strated dilation of the left ventricle (tv) and left atrium (la). D, A right parasternal short-axis view of
the left ventricle (tv) demonstrated ventricular dilation and mild thinning of the myocardium.
Diagnosis: Dilated cardiomyopathy.
within the next 2.4 years.394 Furthermore, 14 of 14 dogs who had a left ventricular internal
diameter (in end systole) greater than 38 mm died during the same period. A second study
developed slightly different criteria for recognizing subclinical DCM. The criteria included
fractional shortening of less than 25% and a left ventricular internal diameter (in end dias-
tole) of greater than 45 mm in dogs weighing less than 38 kg and greater than 49 mm in
dogs weighing more than 37 kg.395,396
osle Aau oot-reclesswreo (pioqa) pezerauas mous Aensn Na um se
may have prominence of the atria resulting in a valentine shape, more often associated with
feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Fig. 2-134). Pleural or peritoneal effusion,
pulmonary edema, and arterial thromboembolism also may be present. Feline DCM
is uncommon now that commercial diets have been supplemented adequately with
taurine.392,393
The echocardiographic findings of both canine and feline DCM include dilation of the
left ventricle and atrium,thinning of the myocardium, and decreased fractional shortening
 Involvement of the right heart is uncommon but has been reported. DCM involving
primarily the right heart also has been reported.
Hypertrophic Heart Disease. Hypertrophic heart disease is idiopathic hypertrophy of the
left ventricle that ocurs more frequently in cats than in dogs. There are many posible
causes of left ventricular hypertrophy in the cat. Although idiopathic hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy is the most common cause, others include hyperthyroidism, acromegaly, sys-
 temic hypertension, and infiltrative diseases (Fig. 2-136).401-408
158
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND UlTRaSONOGRaPHY
FIG. 2-134 A and B, A 2-year-old
female cat with a 3-day history of
progressive lethargy anorexia, and
weakness. There is marked car-
diomegaly, especially in the area of
the atria, and the trachea is elevated
markedly. The radiographic findings
are indicative of generalized car-
diomegaly and free pleural fluid.
Diagnosis: Dilated cardiomyopathy.
B
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
159
rv
SAIN"
A
B
FIG. 2-135 An ll-year-old neutered male domestic short-haired cat with anorexia and lethargy. A
grade 3/6 murmur was auscultated. A, A right parasternal short-axis view of the left ventricle reveals
both left (tv) and right ventricular (rv) dilation. B, An M-mode view through the left ventricle reveals
marked right (rv) and left (lv) ventricular dilation. Minimal change in the ventricular diameter is
 present between systole and diastole. Diagnosis: Dilated cardiomyopathy.
FIG. 2-136 An ll-year-old Golden
Retriever had exercise intolerance
 and peripheral lymphadenopathy.
The two-dimensional echocardio-
gram reveals a moderate to large vol-
ume of pericardial effusion (PE).
The myocardium (right ventricular
free wall {RVFW], interventricular
septum {IvS], and left ventricular
free wall {LVFW]) is markedly thick-
 ened and heteroechoic. Diagnosis:
 Infiltrative cardiomyopathy (lym-
 phoma).
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. There are no survey radiographic findings that can be
used to differentiate unequivocally dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Fig. 2-
137). The cardiac silhouette alterations are similar in all types of feline cardiomyopathy.
The valentine shape on the ventrodorsal view is more common in hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy. The cardiac silhouette may even appear to be normal. More commonly, the
cardiac silhouette will enlarge, particularly the atrial areas in moderate or severe
cases.401,402,409
 Echocardiographic changes include hypertrophy of the left ventricular myocardium
(including free wall, septum, or both), dilation of the left atrium, decreased ventricular
luminal diameter, and normal to increased fractional shortening (Fig. 2-138). Particular
attention should be paid to the motion of the septal leaflet of the mitral valve. In some cases
it may open during ventricular systole, causing a dynamic partial obstruction to the aortic
outflow tract. This is referred to as systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve.
Occasionally the ventricle will be dilated and have ventricular hypertrophy. On rare occa-
 sions, a thrombus may be identified in the left atrium or ventricle (Fig. 2-139).410
160
Small Animal Radiology And UltrasonOgraphy
FIG. 2-137 A and B, A l-year-old
male cat with a 2-week history of
lethargy and anorexia. The cat had a
 grade 4/6 holosystolic murmur. The
cardiac silhouette is enlarged
markedly. The ventrodorsal view
reveals marked biatrial prominence.
There is a small amount of pleural
fuid in the caudal mediastinum. A
pleural fissure line is present dorsal
to the cardiac silhouette (arrows).
The caudal vena cava appears
 enlarged. The radiographic findings
are indicative of generalized car-
diomegaly with pleural fluid.
 Diagnosis: Hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy.
A
B
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a relatively rare disease in the dog.41l Breeding trials
have shown that a form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is heritable in Pointer dogs.412
Many other breeds have had individuals that were affected. Radiographs rarely reveal sig-
nificant findings. In some individuals, left atrial enlargement may be noted.
 Echocardiography usually reveals a global hypertrophy of the left ventricle. A muscular
ridge of tissue may be identified in the left ventricular outflow tract. Left atrial enlargement
and systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve also may be present.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
161
GAI
A
B
FIG. 2-138 A 9-year-old neutered male domestic short-haired cat with dyspnea. A gallop rhythm was auscul-
tated. Radiographs revealed mild cardiomegaly pulmonary edema, and a minimal pleural effusion. A, A right
parasternal long-axis aortic outflow view reveals dilation of the left atrium (la). The left ventricular free wall
 a au s ( inn a  au  ae ( s ra e (m)
(ao) is normal. These findings were confirmed on an M-mode study, which was used for mensuration. B, A
right parasternal short-axis view of the left ventricle shows the thickened left ventricular free wall (tvw) and
cardiomyopathy.
S519
FIG. 2-139 A 12-year-old neutered male domestic
DEPTH
short-haired cat with dyspnea, tachycardia, and a
ACUSO
 grade 4/6 heart murmur. A right parasternal short-
 axis view at the level of the aorta (ao) reveals a large
thrombus (arrows) in the left atrium (a). Diagnosis:
PWR
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and left atrial throm-
50dB
bus.
GAIN=
THROMBUS
Unclassified Cardiomyopathy. Unclassified, also termed intermediate or restrictive,
opathy is diastolic dysfunction. The lesions usually are related to endocardial, suben-
docardial, or myocardial fibrosis. Radiographic changes are indistinguishable from
those seen with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Echocardiographic findings are variable.
The most common feature is severe left atrial dilation (Fig. 2-140). The endomyocar-
dial form of restrictive cardiomyopathy has a cardinal feature of a pronounced endo-
cardial scar, a solid fibrous connective tissue band oriented along the long axis of the
ventricle but bridging the free wall to the septum at some level. Other features may
include mild left ventricular hypertrophy, possibly eccentric, and right atrial and right
ventricular enlargement. Rounded or "ball" thrombi may be found in the left atrium
and ventricle. The myocardial form of restrictive cardiomyopathy is characterized by
162
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-140 A 9-year-old neutered
female Siamese cat had difficulty
breathing. An M-mode echocardio-
gam through the aorta (AO) and
left atrium (LA) revealed a severe
dilation of the left atrium.
Diagnosis: Left atrial dilation sec-
 ondary to unclassified cardiomyopa-
thy.
FIG. 2-141 An M-mode echocardio-
gram through the leftventricle of the
ame cat as above revealed normal
parameters. Diagnosis: Unclassifed
cardiomyopathy.
marked left atrial or biatrial dilation, with a normal left ventricular diameter and wall
 thickness.416 Other changes may include normal to thickened myocardium and normal
to slightly decreased fractional shortening and ventricular diameter (Fig. 2-141).
Distortion of the left ventricular chamber and an irregular and highly echogenic endo-
cardium may be seen. Mitral valve regurgitation may be demonstrated with Doppler
studies in these cases.
HYPERTHYROID HEART DISEASE
Many cats with hyperthyroidism will have cardiomyopathy also. The classic echocardio-
 graphic changes include left ventricular hypertrophy, left atrial and ventricular dilation,
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
163
CERTIA
PHRB
a
4
B
FIG. 2-142 A 4-year-old male Great Dane with a history of hematuria of 4 months duration.
Urinalysis revealed pyuria (with pus casts), and Escherichia coli was cultured. A grade 3/6 systolic
ejection-type murmur had developed a week prior to examination. A, A right parasternal long-axis
aortic outlow view revealed echogenic masss (arows) on the aortic valve cusps. Identified are the
left atrium (la), left ventricle (lv), and aorta (ao). B, A right parasternal short-axis view at the aortic
level reveled the echogenic masses (arrows) on the left and right cusps of the aortic valve. Identified
are the aorta (ao) and left atrium (la). Diagnosis: Bacterial endocarditis of the aortic valve second-
ary to pyelonephritis.
and increased fractional shortening.402 Successful treatment of the underlying hyperthy-
roidism will result in partial resolution of the echocardiographic changes.
HYPERTENSIVE HEART DISEASE
Cats with systemic hypertension will develop cardiomyopathic changes including left ven-
 tricular hypertrophy and left atrial dilation.408 Successful treatment does not result reliably
 in resolution of the left ventricular hypertrophy.
ENDOCARDITIS AND MYOCARDITIS
The size and shape of the cardiac silhouette usually are normal with either acute endo-
carditis ormyocarditis inboth dogs andcats41423 Radiographic evidence of heart failre
may be present despite the heart's normal size and shape. In severe cases, vegetative lesions
may be identifiable on angiography.424
 Echocardiography may reveal hyperechoic vegetative masses on either the aortic or
mitral valves with endocarditis (Fig. 2-142). These may even calcify. Diastolic flutter of the
anterior mitral valve leaflet may occur due to aortic insufficiency.
Doppler studies usually demonstrate turbulent flow and increased velocities across
the aortic valve due to restriction by the mass obstructing the outflow. Furthermore,
 masses may prevent normal closure of valve leaflets, resulting in aortic insufficiency
(Fig. 2-143). Various uncommon sequelae have been described, including development
of vegetation extending into the proximal right coronary artery and atrial septum,
resulting in a right coronary artery to right atrial fistula, development of a flail aortic
leaflet, and development of a fistula between the left ventricular outflow tract and left
atrium.425-427
MYOCARDIAl INFARCTI0N
Myocardial infarction is a very infrequent finding in dogs and cats. No specific radi-
ographic abnormalities have been described. Echocardiographic changes in dogs have
included focal hypokinesis of the left ventricular free wall and dilated, poorly contractile
hearts.428 Ventricular hypertrophy has been noted in cats.428
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION AND COR PULMONALE
Cor pulmonale indicates right ventricular hypertrophy secondary to pulmonary disease.
 Pulmonary hypertension, increased pulmonary artery pressure, due to any disease that
inhibits normal pulmonary blood flow and causes pulmonary hypertension may produce
164
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-143 A 2-year-old neutered
male Boxer had a murmur and
marked weight loss. A continuous
wave  Doppler echocardiogram
through the aortic valve (Ao)
revealed an increased aortic velocity
(3.19 meters per second and approx-
imately 40 mm Hg gradient). There
is also regurgitant flow (R) in dias-
tole. Two-dimensional imaging also
revealed a vegetation on the aortic
valve. Diagnosis: Endocarditis.
cor pulmonale. Dirofilariasis is the most common cause of cor pulmonale in the dog (Fig.
 2-144).429-431 Other causes include pulmonary fibrosis, chronic pulmonary disease, pul-
monary mineralization, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis, pulmonary embolism, emphy-
sema, and asthma.432,433 If a thrombus is located close to the heart, it occasionally may be
identified with echocardiography429,430434 Right ventricular hyerrophy, enlargement f
 the main pulmonary artery, and enlargement or tortuosity, or both, of the pulmonary arte-
rial branches are the major radiographic features.
 The echocardiographic findings reflect the pulmonary hypertension. Dilation of the 
main pulmonary artery and right ventricle as well as hypertrophy of the right ventricle can
be seen. In severe cases, there may be dilation of the right atrium due to right atrial regur-
 gitation and signs of right heart failure. The degree of pulmonary hypertension may be
estimated by applying the modified Bernoulli equation to the peak velocity of any regurgi-
tant flow across either the pulmonary or tricuspid valve. Pulmonary hypertension is con-
sidered to be present if there is a velocity of greater than 2.7 m/s across the tricuspid valve
0r 2.1 m/s for the pulmonary valve.433
DIROFILARIASIS
 Canine. Thoracic radiographs may be normal in mild or early diroflariasis.435 In many geo-
graphic areas this is the most common finding in diroflariasis. In more severe or later stages
of dirofilariasis there may be moderate to severe enlargement of the right heart, the main pul-
monaryarery anthlbararrie3hismayevedaarlyas6mnth f
infection.43 Pulmonary artery enlargement (i.e., arger than the adjacent vein), irregular to
-d oqe e  po ss () s in d rn
ing), and sudden termination of a large artery (blunting) may be observed (see Figs. 2-2 and
2-144).442 A classification scheme based on subjective and objective assessments, including
radiographic changes, has been published as an aid in guiding therapy for diroflariasis.43
Other pulmonary parenchymal abnormalities that may be observed range from a mild
increase in pulmonary density to severe, focal alveolar pattern infiltrates associated with pul-
(absence of demonstrable microfilaria), a diffuse, patchy interstitial pattern infiltrate demon-
strated by a fine linear pattern may be present throughout the lung. This infiltrate may
obscure partially the margins of the peripheral pulmonary vessels (Fig. 2-145).
Thromboembolism, infarction, or secondary bacterial pneumonia may produce large
areas of interstitial and alveolar pattern infiltrates. This may be observed in animals with
CHAPTERTWO THE THORAX
165
FIG. 2-144 A 6-year-old female Boxer with a l-month history of
coughing and syncopal attacks. There is marked right-sided car-
diomegaly with rounding of the right side of the cardiac silhouette 
on the ventrodorsal radiograph (A), and cranial bulging of the car-
diac silhouette on the lateral radiograph (B). The cardiac apex is ele-
vated from the sternum. The pulmonary arteries are enlarged and
tortuous (arrows). There is an interstitial pattern infltrate, which
most severely involves the caudal dorsal lung lobes. The radiographic
findings are indicative of heartworm disease. Diagnosis:
Dirofilariasis.
A
B
166
FIG. 2-145 A and B, A 6-year-old
female Bullmastiff with a 1-day his-
tory of respiratory distress and harsh
lung sounds. There is a generalized
interstitial pattern infltrate, and the
 pulmonary arteries are enlarged and
tortuous (arrows). There is mild
right heart enlargement with bulging
on the cranial aspect of the cardiac
 silhouette on the lateral radiograph
e siu eii au ()
indicative of pulmonary infltrate
with eosinophilia secondary to
heartworm disease. Diagnosis:
Eosinophilic pneumonitis secondary
to heartworm disease. Microfilaria
were not detected in this dog's blood;
however, the heartworm antigen test
was positive.
A
B
CHAPTeR TWO THE THORAX
167
active infection but is more frequent after treatment for adult heartworms. Granulomas
 have been reported infrequently in both microfilaremic and occult heartworm cases. These
pulmonary masses have no specific characteristics—only the presence of the typical arte-
rial changes suggests their origin.
It is difficult radiographically to detect reinfection or inadequate treatment in dogs that
have been treated for heartworms. Some regression of the cardiac and pulmonary abnor-
 a so pe aass aos u raamo t iae sino si
diomegaly and pulmonary arterial changes persist despite the absence of parasites, but the
pulmonary parenchymal changes usually resolve.
 The most common echocardiographic findings reflect pulmonary hypertension.
Hypertrophy and dilation of the right ventricle and dilation of the main pulmonary artery
may be present. In severe cases, there may be dilation of the right atrium and signs of right
heart failure. Identification of individual worms may be difficult because of their small
diameter. Large numbers of worms may be identified as linear echogenic structures in the
right heart and in the proximal main pulmonary arteries (Fig. 2-146).445 In some cases
valvular insufficiency may be caused by masses of worms crossing the affected valve and
possibly wrapping around leaflets, resulting in incomplete valvular closure (Fig. 2-147).
Worms have even been identified in the liver.446
Feline. Diroflaria immitis infestation in cats has become a well-recognized entitiy44-49 It
appears to be more common in certain endemic areas. Infestation in cats usually is limited
to one or two adult worms. Radiographic changes vary depending upon the degree and
stage of infestation.450 Typical findings include mild cardiomegaly and enlarged main stem
pulmonary arteries with ill-defined margins. Blunting and tortuosity of the pulmonary
over time. There may an increase in bronchial pattern that mimics the appearance of feline
bronchitis-asthma syndrome. Pulmonary hyperinflation may occur and become more
apparent as the disease progresses.
 Echocardiography may identify right ventricular hypertrophy or dilation or both.
 Dilation of the main pulmonary arteries may be present. One or more heartworms may be
identified, but due to the low number of worms typically present specific identification
may be difficult.429,451-453
CARDIAC MASSES
Various primary cardiac-related tumors and granulomas have been described.454-465 The
radiographic appearance of these depends upon the location of the mass, whether it causes
a pericardial fluid accumulation, and its hemodynamic effects upon various cardiac struc-
tures. The majority of the masses described have been noted on echocardiography. These
may appear as focal thickenings of cardiac muscle or masses that project into the lumen of
various cardiac chambers or pericardial sac (Fig. 2-149).
PERICARDIAL DISEASE
PERICARDIAL EFFUSION
Generalized enlargement of the cardiac silhouette may be observed with concurrent left and
right heart disease or with pericardial disease (Figs. 2-150 and 2-151). With concurrent left
and right heart disease, the cardiac silhouette usually retains some of its normal contour, with
greater curvature of the right and cranial cardiac margins and prominence of the left atrium.
If a significant amount of pericardial effusion surrounds the heart, it will smooth the outline
of the cardiac silhouette. The heart base retains its normal shape. This results in a pumpkin-
Or soccer ball-shaped cardiac silhouette. The nature of an effusion cannot be determined
radiographically, nor can small amounts of pericardial fluid be recognized radiographically.
 Pericardial effusion may result in a marked decrease in cardiac output due to the pres-
sure in the pericardial sac equalling at least ventricular filling pressure, known as cardiac
tamponade. In this situation, the pulmonary vessels are often small and the caudal vena
cava may be enlarged. This finding is sometimes helpful when distinguishing between gen-
eralized cardiomegaly and pericardial disease.
168
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-146 A 5-year-old male mixed breed dog was
evaluated for exercise intolerance. A right paraster-
nal long-axis aortic outflow view revealed multiple,
highly echogenic, small foci (arrows) in the right
atrium. The foci were composed of short, parallel
line pairs. The right atrium and right ventricle (rv)
were dilated. The aorta (ao) and left ventricle (tv) are
identifed. Diagnosis: Diroflariasis.
V
FIG. 2-147 A 3-year-old male English Pointer had exercise
 intolerance.The two-dimensional echocardiogram revealed
a large number of linear hyperechoic, two-walled structures
(arrows) that were “wrapped around" the parietal leaflet of
the tricuspid valve (TV) as well as free in the right ventricle
(RV). The right atrium (RA) is dilated. The left atrium (LA),
RV
mitral valve (MV), and left ventricle (LV) were normal.
Doppler echocardiography through the tricuspid valve con-
frmed that there was severe valvular insufficiency.
 Diagnosis: Diroflariasis with tricuspid insuffciency.
LV
TV
RA
 Introduction of a significant volume of air into the pericardial sac after an equal amount
of fluid has been removed by pericardiocentesis allows for further evaluation of the possible
ventrodorsal and dorsoventral views when performing this study, because there usually is
 a o n ss a is rrd a  t  nir ass
portion of the pericardial sac and heart. The heart and pericardium should then be evaluated
 for the presence of masses. Although echocardiography essentially has replaced pneumoperi-
cardiography, there are a few cases in which the echocardiogram fails to demonstrate a mass
that may be diagnosed by the pneumopericardiogram.
 Echocardiography is very sensitive at detecting even small amounts of pericardial fluid.
It may be difficult to distinguish pericardial from pleural fluid. However, careful examina-
tion of the heart will demonstrate that the pericardial fluid outlines or conforms to the
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
169
FIG. 2-148 A and B, A 4-year-old
female cat with a history of chronic
cystitis. A grade 3/6 systolic murmur
and gallop rhythm were picked up
on routine physical examination.
There is mild cardiomegaly. The
caudal lobar pulmonary arteries
are enlarged and tortuous (arrows).
The remainder of the lung is normal.
The radiographic findings are
indicative of heartworm infestation.
Diagnosis: Diroflariasis.
A
B
170
SMALl ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-149 A 9-year-old spayed female Labrador Retriever with abdominal disten-
tion and lethargy of 2 weeks duration. A left parasternal long-axis four-chamber
view revealed a large heteroechoic mass (m) within the right atrium (ra). Also iden-
tified are the right ventricle (rv), left atrium (la), and left ventricle (tv). Diagnosis:
Right atrial fbrosarcoma.
CAIR
contour of the heart and does not cause retraction or outlining of the lung lobes. The peri-
cardium may be seen as a thin echogenic border, or it may be thickened due to disease. The
nature of the fluid is indicated in part by its echogenicity. Fluid containing numerous
echogenic foci suggests it either contains particulate matter (e.g., pus) or is high in protein
 yo ad a sis  soa yo s  yo asad aui 
 tags and that the condition is chronic.
Cardiac tamponade occurs when the internal pericardial pressure rises to a level at
which it equals the filling pressure of the ventricle. Because the right ventricle filling pres-
sure is the lowest, it is the first to be affected and right heart output decreases. The
increased pericardial pressure is transmitted through the right atrial and ventricular free
walls, interfering with right atrial filling and resulting in diastolic collapse of the right
atrium (Fig. 2-152). The transmitted pericardial pressure on the right ventricular free wall
results in elevated right ventricular pressure and limited diastolic flling As pericardial
 pressure continues to increase, the transmitted pressure leads to bowing of the interven-
tricular septum into the left ventricular lumen and, finally, a situation in which the move-
ment of the left ventricular free wall and the interventricular septum parallel (ie., are
identical to) each other. Both walls of the left ventricle remain parallel and roughly equi-
distant from each other throughout the entire cardiac cycle, resulting in minimal ventric-
ular contraction (Fig 2-153).468 This is referred to as paradoxical septal motion and it
results in severely reduced stroke volume. These changes can result in congestive right heart
failure and severely decreased left heart output.
 The cause of pericardial fluid accumulation is not apparent in many cases. Diseases that
must be considered when pericardial fluid is present include bacterial, protozoal, or
mycotic infection, heart base or right atrial neoplasms, pericardial diaphragmatic hernia,
hypoalbuminemia, uremia, right heart failure, immune pericarditis, atrial rupture, peri-
cardial cysts, visceral leishmaniasis, feline infectious peritonitis, and idiopathic causes.
Masses involving the right atrium or heart base frequently can be detected (Fig. 2-154).
One study evaluated the utility of determining the pH of pericardial fluid to discriminate
 between malignant and benign effusions. Almost ll neoplastic effusions had a pH of 7.5,
whereas nearly all benign effusions had a pH of 6.5.481 In a few cases, the mass may not be
visualized and a positive or negative contrast pericardiogram may confirm the diagnosis.
established.
PERICARDIAL MASSES
 Pericardial masses usually produce pericardial fluid and rarely alter the smooth curvature
of the cardiac silhouette. Echocardiography frequently allows identification of the
 masses.454 Masses may be solid or cystic and may represent tumors, granulomas, or cysts
(Figs. 2-155 and 2-156).
*References 96, 351, 376, 459,460, 469-480.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
171
FIG. 2-150 A and B, A 6-year-old
male Terrier with an acute onset of
mild respiratory distress and depres-
sion. The cardiac silhouette is
enlarged and rounded. The pul-
monary vessels appear small. A, On
the lateral radiograph the trachea is
elevated cranial to the bifurcation;
however,the main stem bronchi have
the normal ventral deviation. The
radiographic fndings are indicative
of pericardial fluid. Diagnosis:
Idiopathic pericardial effusion.
A
B
172
FIG. 2-151 A and B, A 4-year-old
male German Shepherd dog with a
2-week history of lethargy and
weight loss. The owners noted
labored respiration and abdominal
distention 24 hours prior to admis-
sion. The cardiac silhouette
markedly enlarged and rounded. A,
On the lateral radiograph the trachea
is mildly elevated cranial to the tra-
cheal bifurcation. The main stem
bronchi deflect ventrally beyond the
tracheal bifurcation. The radi-
 ographic findings are indicative of
pericardial
fluid.
Diagnosis:
Hemopericardium secondary to
right atrial hemangiosarcoma. The
diagnosis was determined by peri-
cardiocentesis and necropsy exami-
nation.
A
B
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
173
A
B
FIG. 2-152 An 8-year-old male Labrador Retriever with exercise intolerance and ascites of 3 months
duration. A, A right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view in early diastole reveals a moderate
pericardial effusion (small arrow). Identifed are the left atrium (LA), left ventricle (LV), and right
atrium (RA). The right atrial free wall is apparent (large arrow). B, Aright parasternal long-axis four-
chamber view in late diastole reveals collapse of the right atrium (large arrow). The pericardial effu-
sion is still evident (small arrow). The cause of the effusion was not determined. Diagnosis:
 Idiopathic pericardial ffusion and cardiac tamponade.
FIG. 2-153 A 9-year-old female
Keeshond with ascites and exercise
intolerance of several weeks dura-
tion. An M-mode echocardiogram of
the ventricles reveals paradoxical
septal motion—left ventricular free
wall (tvw) and interventricular sep-
tum (vs) move in parallel (tong, thin
arrows). Pericardial effusion and
pericardial thickening (possible fb-
rin deposition) are apparent (large
arrow). Diagnosis: Pericardial effu-
sion and tamponade with paradoxi-
cal septal motion.
RESTRICTIVE PERICARDIAL DISEASE
Chronic infection or inflammation may result in pericardial fibrosis and restrictive peri-
cardial disease.482,483 Recognition of this condition is very diffcult; however, the presence
of an irregularly shaped cardiac silhouette in a patient with right heart failure without
right-sided cardiomegaly suggests the diagnosis of restrictive pericardial disease. No spe-
cific echocardiographic findings have been reported, but a thickened or irregular peri-
cardium may be identified (Fig. 2-157).
PERICARDIAL DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA
Pericardial diaphragmatic hernia will result in a pumpkin- or soccer ball-shaped cardiac
silhouette. The condition is easily recognized when intestines or fat are present within the
174
FIG. 2-154 A 9-year-old spayed female Golden Retriever was evalu-
 ated for ascites. Auscultation revealed mufled heart sounds. An elec-
trocardiogram revealed dampened complexes with electrical
 alternans. A right parasternal long-axis four-chamber view revealed
severe pericardial effusion (pe). A large, complex mass (arrow) with
cystic areas is present on the right atrium (ra). Also identified is the
be
right ventricular free wall (rvw). Diagnosis: Right atrial heman-
giosarcoma.
ra
FIG. 2-155 A l-year-old male German Shepherd
dog with ascites. Auscultation revealed mufled
heart sounds. A right parasternal short-axis view
through the ventricles revealed severe pericardial
pe
effusion (pe) and a complex mass (m), with cystic
areas caudal to the heart. The mass did not move
with the heart beat. No diaphragmatic discontinuity
could be visualized. Also identified are the liver (L),
left ventricle (lv), and right ventricle (rv). A peri-
ardiectomy was performed. Diagnosis: Pericardial
cyst.
pericardial sac. It is more difficult to distinguish this condition from other pericardial dis-
eases when the liver or spleen, or both, are herniated or when there is fluid as well as the liver 
  s     s rd a   
xiphoid; or absence of sternebrae also may be seen with this condition. A dorsal mesothelial
 remnant has been described in cats.104 This is evident as a curvilinear soft-tissue structure
in the caudal ventral mediastinum ventral to the caudal vena cava. Affected animals usually
 are asymptomatic. However, liver abnormalities such as cirrhosis or tumor may result from
the presence of the liver within the pericardial sac for a long period. The condition is con-
genital and is the result of incomplete separation of the pleural and peritoneal cavities.
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
175
FIG. 2-156 A 5-year-old male
Greyhound had exercise intolerance,
cardiomegaly, and pulmonary nod-
ules. The two-dimensional echocar-
PE
diogram revealed a moderate volume
of pericardial effusion (PE) and a
mass (M) attached to the pericardial
sac. Diagnosis: Hemangiosarcoma.
 Ultrasonography will distinguish readily between pericardial fluid and abdominal vis-
cera within the pericardial sac.
ABNORMALITIES OF THE AORTA
ANEURYSM
 PDA, aortic stenosis) or vascular ring anomalies, are uncommon. Aneurysmal dilation in
the descending aorta, as in patent ductus, or aortic arch, as in aortic stenosis, may be
observed in those cases. Aneurysmal dilations of the descending aorta may occur second-
ary to Spirocerca lupi infestation in dogs and have been observed as an incidental finding
cially on the lateral radiograph. Because of the migration of these parasites in the aortic
regional vessels, nonbridging, nonspondylitic, almost palisading bony reaction may be seen 
on the ventral aspect of the regional vertebrae (Fig. 2-158).
COARCTATION OF THE AORTA
Coarctation of the aorta is narrowing, usually severe, of the aortic lumen. It has been
reported rarely in dogs.486-488 The lesion wil be evident radiographically as a poststenotic
aneurysmal dilation. An angiographic study may be required to establish the diagnosis.
Echocardiography rarely will be helpful, because the lesion is likely to be located away from
   sa n p   o     
tic arch has been reported also.489
TUMOR
Aortic body tumors originate from the baroreceptor tissue within the aortic arch.490-495 A
localized dorsal deviation of the trachea cranial to the bifurcation may be evident when the
mass becomes large (Fig. 2-159). This usually is an abrupt deviation, initially dorsally and
then ventrally, near the ascending aorta. On the dorsoventral or ventrodorsal view, the tra-
chea may be displaced abruptly to the right as it passes the aortic arch. Aortic body tumors
may extend dorsal to the trachea. The mass also may be apparent cranial to the cardiac sil-
houette ventral to the trachea (Fig. 2-160). Invasion of the cranial thoracic vertebral bod-
ies may occur. Pericardial effusion may accompany aortic body tumors. Flexion of the head
and neck will produce dorsal deviation of the trachea in the cranial mediastinum cranial
176
Small Animal RaDiOlOgy And UltraSonOGraphy
FIG. 2-157 A 3-year-old neutered male domestic short-haired cat with respiratory dis-
tress of 2 months duration. A, A right parasternal short-axis view of the heart revealed
mild pleural effusion and thickening of the pericardium. B, A longitudinal view of the
pleural space revealed the parietal pleura (large black arrow) and visceral pleura (sall
black arrow) were displaced by a fluid that contained numerous echogenic, filamentous
fbrin tags (small white arrow). Diagnosis: Pleuritis and pericarditis. A causative agent 
was not identified.
A
IBRIN
B
FIG. 2-158 Lateral view (close-up)
of an adult dog brought in for dys-
phagia. A mass (M) containing con-
trast medium is seen in the
esophagus at the bottom leff of the
figure. Periosteal reaction (arrows)
with a palisade appearance is noted
along the ventral aspect of several
vertebral bodies in the same trans-
verse plane as the esophageal mass.
Diagnosis:  Vertebral bony and
 esophageal mass reaction related to
spirocercosis.
to the heart base, and this has been mistaken for evidence of an aortic body or heart base
is observed also in both normal and obese brachycephalic dogs. The abrupt nature of the
tracheal displacement observed with heart base tumors is an important feature in differ-
entiating a tumor from this normal variation.
CHapter TWO The ThoraX
177
FIG. 2-159 A 7-year-old male mixed
breed dog with respiratory distress,
There is a soft-tissue density in the
cranial mediastinum extending to
the heart base. The trachea is dis-
placed dorsally in the lateral radi-
ograph (A) and markedly to the
right in the ventrodorsal view (B)
(arrows). The abrupt nature of the
tracheal deviation indicates the pres-
ence of a heart base mass. Diagnosis:
Aortic body tumor.
B
178
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-16o A and B, A 9-year-old
neutered male Boxer dog with respi-
ratory distress and known pericar-
 dial effusion. On these radiographs
made after pericardiocentesis, there
is a soft-tissue density (arrow) in the
 cranial mediastinum extending ante-
rior to the heart base on the lateral
view. However, there is little abnor-
mality seen on the ventrodorsal view,
limiting the likelihood of right atrial
or main pulmonary trunk enlarge-
ment. Diagnosis: Cranial paracar-
diac mass consistent with aortic
body tumor.
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
179
Echocardiography frequently will reveal the presence of an aortic body tumor. They are
most common between the aorta and pulmonary artery. The right parasternal short-axis
view of the cardiac base is the most common view used to identify these masses (Fig. 2-161).
CALCIFICATI0N
Calcification of the aorta is rare. It has been observed in association with lymphosarcoma,
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, atherosclerosis, and Cushing's disease496,497 Thin,
linear calcification will be seen extending along the margins of the aorta (Fig. 2-162). The
aortic valves may be involved.
ABNORMALITIES OF THE CAUDAL VENA CAVA
diseases eventually will cause the caudal vena cava to dilate, its size varies normally with
cardiac cycle and phase of respiration. Invasion of the caudal vena cava by masses
extending from the right atrium, liver, kidney, or adrenal glands, or masses of Dirofilaria
may alter the shape of the vena cava. Diaphragmatic abnormalities also may alter the shape
of the caudal vena cava. The size of the caval foramen may be altered after repair of a
diaphragmatic hernia.
PERIPHERAL ARTERIOVENOUS CONNECTIONS
On occasion, connections between the arterial and venous systems develop,s50,so0 These
create prominent disturbances in circulatory dynamics and can lead to congestive heart
failure as well as to problems such as mass lesions. They can be the result of a congenital
anomaly, focal trauma, neoplasia, and previous surgery Because these are effctively high
pressure-to-low pressure shunts outside the heart, vascular noise (bruit) often can be
 detected. These can occur anywhere including the lung, parenchymal abdominal organs,
and musculoskeletal system. Masses of unknown origin when identified in the presence of
systemic circulatory disturbances should foster consideration of a peripheral arteriovenous
fistula.
PULMONARY ABNORMALITIES
The first step in evaluating the lung on a thoracic radiograph is to be certain that the
technical quality of the radiograph is adequate. Next, evaluate the overall pulmonary
FIG. 2-161 A 7-year-old male Samoyed with exercise intolerance. A
right parasternal short-axis view at the level of the aorta revealed a
mass (m-arrows) between the aorta (ao) and pulmonary artery.
Diagnosis: Aortic body tumor.
180
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-162 A 4-year-old male cat
with a history of anemia and a heart
murmur. On the lateral thoracic
radiograph the cardiac silhouette is
mildly enlarged and irregularly
shaped. There is calcification of the
margins of the aorta (arrows). The
calcification extends into the ascend-
ing
and
descending
aorta.
Diagnosis: Aortic calcification. The
etiology was not determined. The
 cat's clinical signs were due to lym-
phocytic leukemia.
density by comparing the right lung to the left. Similar densities and patterns should be
present in comparable areas. If available, previous radiographs should be compared
directly. If areas of abnormally increased or decreased density are observed, they should
be evaluated according to the portion (i.e., ventral, dorsal, peripheral, middle, hilar) or
number of lung lobes involved. The symmetry or asymmetry of the suspect lesion and
distribution of the abnormality should be noted. It should be determined if a lesion cen-
ters on the pulmonary hilus and extends outward, seems more severe in the middle or
peripheral lung, or is uniformly dispersed throughout the lung.502 Next, the pattern of
pulmonary density should be determined. The defined patterns include the alveolar,
interstitial, bronchial, or vascular pattern.503 Many infiltrates will have features of more
than one type of pattern. The predominant pattern is used to develop the list of differ-
ential diagnoses.
PULMONARY PATTERNS
ALVEOLAR PATTERN
 Alveolar patterns result from flooding of pulmonary acini with fluid. An acinus consists of
that portion of lung that is distal to a terminal bronchiole (i.e., the respiratory bronchioles,
alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli). Each acinus has multiple communications with
the adjacent acini via multiple interalveolar pores, the pores of Cohn. An acinus, which rep-
resents the basic unit of the end-air spaces, is the smallest pulmonary unit that is individ-
ually visible on a radiograph.
An alveolar pattern is due to flooding of the acini with some type of fluid such as pus,
blood, edema or, rarely, cellular material. As individual acini become filled, the fluid then
ographic pattern of a poorly marginated (*"fluffy") density. The areas of density may spread
and their poorly defined borders will coalesce. This process may spread until all acini within
a lung lobe are filled. If this happens, there may be a sharply marginated border seen at the
edge of a lung lobe due to the dense connective tissue or pleura blocking further spread of
the fluid into the adjacent lung lobe. As the number of fluid-filled adjacent acini increases,
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
181
the air-filled, large and medium-sized bronchial structures may become evident as linear
radiolucent branching structures (Fig. 2-163). This is referred to as the air bronchogram sign.
The air-flled bronchi are surrounded by a tissue-fluid density, and the bronchial wall and
adjacent vessel are not seen as individual structures. When a bronchus branches perpendi-
cular to the x-ray beam it will be seen as a round, radiolucent dot.
 Recognition of an alveolar pattern is important, because it identifies the abnormal den-
sity as being within the end-air spaces rather than within the interstitial space (lung
stroma), pleural space, or mediastinum, or outside the thoracic cavity. It also strongly sug-
 material via the airways (e.g., transtracheal wash or bronchoscopic lavage) will likely yield
diagnostic material.
INTERSTITIAL PATTERN
Interstitial pattern infiltrates have been described as a fine linear, reticular, or nodular pat-
tern of densty.503,s07,s58This pattern produce either a fluid-dense haze, which obscures or
obliterates vascular outlines, or distinct linear densities or distinct nodules. Interstitial pat-
tern infiltrates do not produce air bronchogram signs.
The fine linear pattern of infiltrate may be due to the presence of fluid or cells,
including neoplastic cells, or fibrosis within the supporting tissues of the lung. Many lin-
ear and branching densities may be evident. Viewed in summation, these can produce a
netlike or reticular pattern (Fig. 2-164). At the points where these linear densities con-
verge, smalltissue-dense dots may become evident, producing a fine nodular interstitial
pattern.
 The nodular pattern is caused by aggregations of cells (e.g., seen with metastatic neo-
plasia) within the supporting tissues of the lung. A separate subcategory is the nodule that
is caused by focal infiltration of viscous or predominately cellular material into a single
acinus or a few acini, but that does not have the typical spread of fluid through the inter-
granulomatous pneumonia.
FIG. 2-163 A6-month-old female Great Dane with a 2-week
history of a cough. A soft-tissue density was present in the
right cranial lung lobe. A close-up view of the lung lobe infl-
trate is ilustrated, and the radiolucent branching structure
indicative of an air bronchogram sign is visible. Several air-
filled end-on bronchi are visible as radiolucent dots
(arrows). These fndings indicate the presence of air-flled
bronchi and fluid-flled acini. Discrete margins are absent
except at the lobar border. This is an alveolar pattern. The
infiltrate may consist of pus, edema, or hemorrhage.
Diagnosis: Bacterial pneumonia.
182
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
 i n e ae n  s ss q  sd ni
ographic appearance. An active interstitial infiltrate is characterized by poorly
defined, wide linear interstitial densities with extensive blurring of vascular margins.
As the condition becomes chronic, or resolves with fibrosis, the interstitial densities
become thinner and better defined and the vascular borders become more clearly
visible.
 Recognition of an interstitial pattern is important, because it identifies the abnormal
density as being within the supporting tissues of the lung rather than within the end-air
 spaces, pleural space, or mediastinum, or outside the thoracic cavity. It also strongly sug-
gests a cellular nature of the infltrate. Finally, it sugests that an attempt to aspirate mate-
rial via the airways will not likely yield diagnostic material. Rather, direct sampling (e.g.
fine-needle aspirate, biopsy) is more likely to be successful.
BRONCHIAL PATTERN
The bronchial pattern results from fluid or cellular infiltrate within the bronchial wall and
 ssr  s-eoss  o ns n resd pe 
bronchial walthickening and outlining of many bronchial structures not normally identi-
fied (Fig. 2-165). These bronchial structures may be seen as paired, somewhat parallel lines
 that converge slightly and branch in pairs. These paired lines are thinner and do not taper,
as do pulmonary vessels, maintaining a fairly uniform width throughout their course. They
have been described as “railroad tracks" or “tram tracks" because they converge slightly as
 they extend toward the lung periphery in a fashion similar to the way railroad tracks appear
ad ynq sas as u raaasqo ue  ae naep nai Aai se sao 0
pendicular to the x-ray beam they produce a tissue-dense circle or"doughnut" with a radi-
olucent center. This pattern suggests that an attempt to aspirate material via the airways
should be rewarding.
Another form of the bronchial patern is seen with bronchiectasis 510-512 Two forms of
of bronchial dilation and loss of the normal taper of the bronchial lumen as it progresses
distally into the lung 513 Saccular bronchiectasis consists of focal bronchial dilations. Both
forms are associated frequently with bronchial thickening due to chronic inflammation.
FIG. 2-164 A 7-year-old male
German Shepherd dog with a mass
in the caudal abdomen. Thoracic
radiographs were obtained to evalu-
 ate the dog for pulmonary metasta-
sis. A photographic enlargement of 
the caudal lung lobes is illustrated.
The pulmonary vessels are obscured
by a pattern of linear soft-tissue den-
sities. This represents pulmonary
interstitial fbrosis and is a common
fnding among the normal features
 of the lungs of an aged dog that has
no clinical signs.
Diagnosis:
Pulmonary fibrosis.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
183
VASCULAR PATTERNS
Vascular patterns are produced by an increase or decrease in the size, shape, and number
of pulmonary arteries and veins. Evaluation of pulmonary vascular size is subjective, based
 on a recollection of other similar-sized patients. Semiquantitative methods of assessing
lobar vessel size have been described.72 Vessels radiographically appear as linear, tapering.
branching, soft tissue-dense structures that parallel the course of the main lobar airways.
When vessels branch perpendicular to the x-ray beam,they are seen as distinct round, solid
- a  nd   s rs s n a an a n s
gins of the pulmonary vessels should be smooth and well defined. Vascular patterns with-
out other pulmonary patterns rarely are observed in pulmonary diseases but may be
observed in animals with cardiovascular disease.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES USING PULMONARY PATTERNS
 In addition to the symmetry, distribution, and pattern of a pulmonary lesion, changes in
 other thoracic structures should be noted and used to narrow the differential diagnosis.
The presence or absence of cardiac, lymph node, tracheal, esophageal, diaphragm, rib, or
chest wall lesions will influence the probability of a specific diagnosis. However, in many
cases only a ranking of differential diagnoses is possible. Pattern recognition provides use-
ful clues in differentiating pulmonary diseases. In many cases, a mixture of patterns is
observed. In those cases, the predominant pattern should be used to classify the density
observed.so2 A classic example of this is the pathogenesis of left heart failure. In the early
stages of congestive heart failure, an increased vascular pattern is present. This is followed
by an interstitial pattern with loss of vascular outlines. Finally, this may progress to an alve-
olar pattern of infiltrates, with loss of both vascular and bronchial wall shadows, coalesc-
ing fluffy densities, and possibly air bronchograms. Although many different pulmonary
diseases can demonstrate various patterns during the course of disease, most diseases have
typical infiltrate patterns at the time they are evaluated radiographically. For example, bac-
 oe s i  d r i e s a id 
 patterns will be visible very early in the disease and when the infiltrate has nearly resolved.
Recognition of the pattern and its distribution may suggest certain diagnoses, eliminate
others, and generally narrow the list of probable diagnoses (Table 2-2).
FIG. 2-165 A 2-year-old male mixed
breed dog was brought for evalua-
tion of a 3-week history of a cough.
On the lateral thoracic radiograph,
the pulmonary vessels are obscured
by a diffuse increase in pulmonary
densities. Several end-on bronchi
and thickened bronchial walls are
evident (arrows). The radiographic
fndings indicate a diffuse bronchial
 pattern and a mild interstitial pat-
tern. Diagnosis: Eosinophilic bron-
chitis and pneumonitis.
A
 transtracheal wash  was performed
and eosinophils were identified in
the specimen. The dog was treated
with glucocorticoids and the pul-
 monary disease resolved.
184
TABLE 2-2 Radiographic Patterns of Pulmonary Abnormalities
A. Alveolar Pattern
1. Focal or Multifocal
a. Bacterial pneumonia
b. Aspiration pneumonia
c. Pulmonary edema
d. Pulmonary hemorrhage (trauma, coagulopathy)
e. Embolus
f. Lung lobe torsion
g. Atelectasis
h. Parasitic pneumonia (Capillaria, Aelurostrongylus, larva migrans, Toxoplasma)
i. Immune (pulmonary infltrates with eosinophilia, allergic)
j. Neoplasia
 2. Disseminated or Diffuse 
 a. Cardiogenic (left heart failure) pulmonary edema
 b. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
1) Allergic
 2) Central nervous system
3) Postictal
4) Electric shock
5) Toxic (ANTU)
 6) Postexpansion (shock lung, adult respiratory distress syndrome)
7) Uremic
 8) Upper airway obstruction
B. Interstitial Pattern
1. Nodular Patterns
a. Parasitic pneumonia
b. Mycotic pneumonia
 c. Feline infectious peritonitis
d. Eosinophilic granulomatosis
e. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
f. Congestive left heart failure
g. Neoplasia
h. Abscess
 2. Linear or Reticular Patterns
a. Age
b. Inhalation (smoke, dust)
c. Immune (PIE, allergic)
d. Left heart failure
e. Mycotic pneumonia
f. Hemorrhage (coagulopathy)
 g. Metastatic or primary neoplasia
h. Lymphoma
i. Diroflariasis
 j. Viral pneumonia
k. Mineralization
C. Bronchial Patterns
1. Bronchitis: Allergic, Viral, Bacterial
 2. Chronic Bronchitis
3. Bronchiectasis
D. Vascular Pattern
1. Increased
a. Left-to-right cardiac or vascular shunts (PDA, VSD,ASD)
 b. Pulmonary venous congestion (left heart failure)
C. Arteriovenous fistula (peripheral)
d. Pulmonary hypertension
e. Diroflariasis
2. Decreased
a. Right-to-left cardiac shunts (tetralogy of Fallot, reverse PDA)
b. Pulmonic stenosis
c. Hypovolemia (shock, dehydration, Addison's disease)
CHapter TWO THe THoraX
185
TABLE 2-2 Radiographic Patterns of Pulmonary Abnormalities—Cont'd
d. Emphysema
e. Thromboembolism
f. Right heart failure
 g. Pericardial disease (tamponade, effusion, restrictive pericarditis)
3. Abnormal Branching
a. Dirofilariasis
b. Hypertension
PIE, Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect; ASD,
atrial septal defect.
The infiltrate pattern provides a strong clue to the next logical diagnostic test.
Diseases with infiltrates in the bronchi or end-air spaces may be amenable to diagnosis
by transtracheal aspiration or bronchoscopy. Diseases with infiltrates confined to
the pulmonary interstitium usually will require either open biopsy or fine-needle aspi-
ration.
DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH ALVEOLAR PATTERNS
BACTERIAL PNEUMONIA
 Bacterial pneumonia may involve any lung lobe, or portion thereof, and may be focal or 
multifocal (Figs. 2-166 to 2-168). Bronchial pneumonia, that which has pathogen
spread through the airways, tends to be lobar in distribution. Hematogenous pneumo-
nia,that which has pathogen spread via the vascular system, tends to have a patchy, mul-
 tifocal distribution.so3 Tracheobronchial or sternal lymphadenopathy and pleural fluid
rarely are present with either type of bacterial pneumonia. Spontaneous pneumothorax
 or pyothorax may result from chronic bacterial pneumonia secondary to lung abscessa-
tion.161
ASPIRATION PNEUMONIA
Aspiration pneumonia produces similar focal or multifocal alveolar patterns (Fig.
2-169). The pattern depends upon the amount and nature of the material aspirated and
A si i a e no j jo  s y i si  jo As a
irritating is more likely to cause a severe alveolar pattern. The distribution of the infil-
 trates may depend on the animal's position when the material is aspirated. Passively aspi-
rated (e.g, during sedation or anesthesia) material is most likely to go to the most
dependent or first accessible lung lobe, frequently the right cranial lobe. The right cau-
dal lung lobe is more likely to be the lobe involved if the aspiration is forceful or the aspi-
rated material is solid (e.g., foxtails, other plant material), because the bronchus to this
 lobe is the straightest in relation to the trachea. Dilation of the esophagus in conjunction
with this type of a pulmonary pattern suggests that the aspiration pneumonia may be
 coincidental to megaesophagus.
PARASITIC PNEUMONIA
Toxoplasmosis may produce lesions ranging from a diffuse, nodular pattern to multifocal
alveolar pattern infiltrates in the lungs.5i4-5i7 Capillaria and Aelurostrongylus usually pro-
 duce bronchial and fine, linear interstitial patterns but may produce multifocal alveolar 
infiltrates.
VIRAL PNEUMONIA
Viral pneumonia rarely produces alveolar pattern infiltrates without secondary infection
with bacteria. An exception to this is the pneumonia that is associated with Calicivirus in
cats. This has been reported tobe a rapidly progressive pneumonia that reveals a severe, dif-
fuse alveolar pattern infiltrate.18
186
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPH
FIG. 2-166 A and B, A 12-year-old
female Irish Setter with a 24-hour
history of labored respiration and
coughing. There is an infiltrate,
which is homogeneous, within the
right middle lung lobe. The margins
of the infiltrate are sharply defined
by the lobar borders. Air bron-
chograms are present (arrows). The
radiographic findings are consistent
with
bacterial
 pneumonia.
Diagnosis: Bacterial pneumonia.
B
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
187
FIG. 2-167 A and B, A 10-year-old
male Dachshund with a 6-month
history of chronic nasal discharge.
The dog also had harsh lung sounds
and a grade 2/6 systolic murmur.
There isa fluid-dense infiltrate in the
cranial lung lobes bilaterally. The
infltrate is coalescent and poorly
marginated. There are air bron-
chograms noted within these lung
lobes,especially in the cranial ventral
lung. This is consistent with a bacte-
rial or aspiration pneumonia.
 Diagnosis: Bacterial pneumonia.
B
188
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-168 A and B, A 7-year-old 
female mixed breed dog was brought
for evaluation of a productive cough
that had persisted for 7 months fol-
lowing exposure to smmoke. There are
focal areas of pulmonary density in
the left caudal and right cranial lung
lobes (arrows). There is a diffuse
 increase in pulmonary bronchial and
interstitial densities. The diffuse pul-
monary density is secondary to the
 smoke inhalation and represents
interstitial fbrosis. The focal areas of
density (patchy alveolar pattern
infltrates) are most likely due to sec-
ondary
bacterial
infection.
Diagnosis: Bacterial pneumonia sec-
ondary to chronic interstitial and
bronchial fibrosis due to smoke
 inhalation.
CHAPTER TWO
THE THORAX
189
FIG. 2-169 An 8-year-old male Doberman Pinscher
with a 4-month history of regurgitation, which had been
occurring spontaneously and sporadically. The esopha-
 gus is dilated throughout the thorax. In both A and B the
esophageal walls are evident as thin, soft-tissue densities
(closed arrows). The trachea and cardiac silhouette are
displaced ventrally. There are areas of focal alveolar pat-
tern infltrates within the right cranial, left cranial, and
left caudal lung lobes (open arrows). These are typified
by their coalescence and poorly defined borders. Air
bronchogram signs are not present. The radiographic
findings are indicative of aspiration pneumonia.
 Diagnosis: Megaesophagus with aspiration pneumonia.
The dog was hypothyroid and this was assumed to be the
cause of the megaesophagus.
A
B
190
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
PULMONARY INFILTRATES WITH EOSINOPHILIA
A syndrome has been described in which dogs develop medium to large areas of alveolar
pattrn infltrates (Fig. 2-170)s19527 In some cases asciated findings may include
lymphadenopathy and a bronchial, fine linear interstitial pattern. Less frequently seen are
pleural effusions and nodular masses. The affected dogs usually have an associated
 eosinophilia. The exact cause of the eosinophilia frequently is not determined.
CARDIOGENIC AND NONCARDIOGENIC PULMONARY EDEMA
Pulmonary edema is the flooding of the end-air spaces with fluid. Pulmonary edema can
be subdivided into that caused byleft heart failure, cardiogenic pulmonary edema, and that
due to other causes, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
 Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is the most frequently seen type of pulmonary edema.
It is typified by alveolar pattern infltrates that are located in the hilar and perihilar areas,
but atypical distributions occasionally can be seen (Figs. 2-171 and 2-172). If particularly
severe, the infiltrates may involve all portions of the lung (Fig. 2-173) and free pleural fluid
may be observed. If radiographed early in the pathogenesis of left heart failure or after suc-
cessful treatment, the lesion may be predominately an interstitial pattern infiltrate. The
lesions usually resolve from the periphery toward the hilus, the reverse of their evolution.
 There are many causes of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, including neurologic
problems such as head trauma or seizures, electric shock, severe allergic disease,
 advanced uremia, pancreatitis, pulmonary reexpansion, irritating inhalants such as
smoke or heat, near drowning, radiation damage, and acute respiratory distress syn-
drome.528-s39 The more commonly seen lesions are typically in the dorsal and caudal
portions of the caudal lung lobes and are associated most frequently with electric shock
or seizures (Figs. 2-174 and 2-175). Other types of noncardiogenic edema may be dis-
tributed more diffusely.
NEOPLASIA
The vast majority of primary and metastatic pulmonary tumors cause interstitial pattern
FIG. 2-170 A 6-year-old male Whippet was evaluated for cough. An
absolute eosinophilia was present. The dog's test results for diroflari-
asis were negative. The ventrodorsal radiograph revealed patchy areas
of alveolar pattern infiltrate (arrows) in multiple lung lobes.
Diagnosis: Pulmonary infltrates with eosinophilia. (From Burk RL:
Radiographic examination of the cardiopulmonary system. Vet Clin
North Am 1983; 13:241.)
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
191
FIG. 2-171 A and B, A 4-year-old
female Saint Bernard with acute res-
piratory distress. There is marked
cardiomegaly, and the caudal cardiac
margin is straightened. The tracheal
bifurcation and main stem bronchi
are elevated. There is diffuse alveolar
pattern infiltrate, which is most
severe in the hilar area. Air bron-
chogram signs are present in the
caudal lung lobes. The radiographic
findings are indicative of left heart
failure. Diagnosis: Left heart failure
secondary to dilated cardiomyopa-
thy.
A
B
192
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-172 A and B, An 8-year-old
neutered male Doberman Pinscher
was evaluated for acute respiratory
distress and exercise intolerance.
There is moderate cardiomegaly, but
the caudal cardiac margin is straight-
ened (btack arrows)and the left
atrium bulges dorsally on the lateral
view. There is an alveolar pattern
infltrate with air bronchogram signs
(white arrows). The infltrates are
most severe in the hilar area.
Electrode (E) patches for a continu-
 ous electrocardiogram are present.
The  radiographic findings  are
indicative of left heart failure.
Diagnosis: Left heart failure second-
 ary to dilated cardiomyopathy.
A
B
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
193
FIG. 2-173 A and B,A 6-year-old female Doberman Pinscher with a
3-day history of dyspnea with an acute onset. The dog's heart rate
was rapid. There is a diffuse alveolar pattern infltrate typified by
poorly defned and coalescent densities involving all lung lobes. A
few air bronchogram signs are present. The density is most severe in
the hilar area and radiates outward from that point. B, On the lateral
radiograph the trachea and tracheal bifurcation are elevated. The
main stem bronchi are split (arrows). Although the entire outline of
the cardiac silhouette cannot be seen,the tracheal alterations indicate
left-sided cardiomegaly. The radiographic changes suggest congestive
left heart failure. Diagnosis: Cardiomyopathy with congestive left
heart failure.
A
B
194
FIG. 2-174 A and B, A 4-year-old
female German Shepherd dog with a
history of acute onset of respiratory
distress associated with three seizure
episodes. There is an alveolar pattern
infltrate typified by coalescent and
 poorly defined densities in the dorsal
portions of the caudal lung lobes. Air
bronchogram signs are not present.
The hilar region is less involved. The
radiographic findings are consistent
with a noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema. Diagnosis: Postictal pul-
 monary edema.
B
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
195
A
B
FIG. 2-175 A and B, A 6-month-old male German Shepherd dog with a history of respiratory dis-
tress. An alveolar pattern infltrate typifed by poorly deined and coalescent densities is present in
the dorsal portions of the caudal lung lobes. A few air bronchogram signs are present. The hilar
-d su e o asns a suuy er au pa aas s s u
monary edema. Diagnosis: Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema secondary to electric shock. The own-
 ers discovered that the dog had been chewing on an electric lamp cord.
squamous cell carcinoma of the bronchus, which usually results in partial or complete
atelectasis of the affected lung lobe or lobes.545 Alveolar cell carcinoma usually appears as
multiple, poorly defined foci of alveolar pattern infiltrates in one or more lobes. This also
may be associated with a fine linear interstitial infiltrate. Bronchoalveolar carcinoma fre-
smaller areas of infiltrate or nodule formation in other lobes. Lymphosarcoma rarely may
produce a focal or multifocal alveolar infiltrate.
PULMONARY HEMORRHAGE OR CONTUSION
Pulmonary hemorrhage or contusion may result from chest trauma or coagulopa-
 thy.7,157,159 Rib fractures may or may not be present; however, the presence of recent
rib fractures or a history of recent trauma strongly suggests that the density is a con-
tusion. Any lung lobe or portion of a lobe may be involved. Pneumothorax, pneumo-
mediastinum, hydrothorax, and diaphragmatic hernia can be seen concomitantly with
lung contusion. Uneven lung lobe density in conjunction with bilateral pneumothorax
i aqot a ui susd s aeu rend e ie sisns yoq no xnopau n
is most dense and, in the presence of trauma, this is likely to be a pulmonary contu-
sion.
PULMONARY EMBOLIC DISEASE
 ) si m  u r   o 
hyperadrenocorticism, glomerulonephritis, coagulopathies, and other clinical syn-
dromes.4,546-s3Survey radiography is relatively insensitive in the detection of this prob-
lem. Pulmonary scintigraphy or angiography is more likely to confirm the diagnosis.70
Radiographically, pulmonary emboli occasionally may produce a decreased pulmonary
196
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
FIG. 2-176 A 4-year-old male mixed breed dog with a history of respiratory distress and fever occur-
ring l week following treatment for heartworm disease. A, In the initial thoracic radiograph there is
a local area of interstitial density in the caudal dorsal lung (open arrows). This is indicative of pul-
monary thrombosis or embolization secondary to heartworm treatment. B, On the follow-up radi-
ograph, repeated 10 days after initial evaluation, an enlarged irregular pulmonary artery is evident in
the caudal dorsal lung lobe (closed arrows). This most likely represents thrombosis of the pulmonary
artery. Diagnosis: Pulmonary thrombosis and embolization secondary to treatment for diroflariasis.
density due to oligemia distal to the arterial thrombosis. Rarely, an enlarged major lobar
in such a vessel. More commonly, an alveolar pattern infiltrate due to the hemorrhage,
necrosis, and inflammation is present. These patterns are seen only if major pulmonary
arteries are occluded. Obstruction of minor arteries will not lead to radiographic changes,
because the collateral circulation present at that level prevents significant oligemia to the
tissues. If a thrombosis is caused by diroflariasis, enlarged, tortuous, or irregularly shaped
 pulmonary vessels usually are visible.
Air embolism from diagnostic procedures, such as pneumocystography, or surgical
 procedures may result in cardiac arrest or difficulties. 54 Minor embolizations probably are
not clinically recognized. Severe embolizations usually result in cardiac arrest and death.
 Because air has a different radiographic density than blood, the air may be visible within
the heart and pulmonary arteries in severe cases.
LuNG LOBE TORSION
 Lung lobe torsion usually occurs with hydrothorax. A solitary lung lobe that has a severe
alveolar pattern infltrate and alsohas an abnormal shape maybe seen.ss-s7The involved
 lung lobe will become dense, and air bronchograms may be evident early in the disease.
Later, the lung will fill completely with fluid and the air bronchograms will disappear (Figs.
 2-63 and 2-177). The main lobar bronchus may remain aerated and visible for a short dis-
tance. Abrupt termination of the bronchus after it branches from the trachea may be seen.
The right middle lung lobe is affected most frequently, with the right and left cranial lung
lobes the next most frequent.67 Lung lobe torsion is more common in deep-chested breeds
 of multiple lobes over time has been reported in a dog 56
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
197
FIG. 2-177 A 4-year-old male
Afghan Hound was evaluated for a
sudden
onset
of dyspnea.
Auscultation revealed dull lung
sounds in the left cranial thorax.
Examination of the lateral radi-
ograph reveals a homogeneous den-
sity in the cranial lung lobe area.
Close examination reveals an abrupt
obstruction of the left cranial lung
lobe bronchus (arrow). Diagnosis:
Torsion of the lef cranial lung lobe.
ATELECTASIS
Atelectasis is collapse of a lung lobe. This occurs when the end-air spaces are no longer
flled with air, and it results in the affected lobe being homogeneously tissue dense with a
loss of normal volume.56l Mediastinal shifs and compensatory hyperinflation of other
lung lobes may be noted in association with atelectasis. Complete atelectasis will not have
any air-filled structures and air bronchograms may not be present. There seems to be a
predilection for atelectasis of the right middle lung lobe in cats. The cause of this is
unknown. The general causes of atelectasis include airway obstruction due to tumor,
hypertrophy of luminal epithelium, or foreign matter; compression as seen with tumor,
hydrothorax, or hypostatic congestion; or pneumothorax evidenced by loss of negative
pleural pressure resulting in collapse of a lobe or lobes (Figs. 2-67 and 2-178).
These diseases may become apparent as a primarily linear-reticular or nodular pattern.
 Although overlap frequently exists among these diseases, and even some overlap exists
between alveolar and interstitial patterns, the feature that is demonstrated most frequently
on the radiograph is the one that should be used in developing a list of possible diagnoses.
Disseminated or diffuse interstitial pulmonary patterns may be subdivided into
chronic or active infiltrates. In chronic interstitial patterns, the linear and circular densities
will be thin and fairly well defined, and the pulmonary vessel margins will be minimally
blurred. Well-defined nodular densities of various sizes, many of which can be calcified,
may be present. In contrast, more active infiltrates are wider and less well defined, and ves-
sel margins may be more blurred.
LINEAR AND RETICULAR INTERSTITIAL PATTERNS
PARASITIC PNEUMONIA
Parasitic pneumonia may be seen with Capillaria aerophila, Filaroides milksi, and
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus infections.562-567 These are uncommon,but in severe cases they
may produce focal or multifocal alveolar or interstitial pulmonary patterns. Peribronchial
densities may be present throughout the lung, and multifocal nodular densities are seen
(Fig. 2-179). The most obvious changes reportedly involve the caudal lung lobes. Visceral
198
SMALl ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
FIG. 2-178 A 9-year-old male Rottweiler with an oral mass. Radiographs of the thorax were taken
immediately after completing radiographs of the skull. A, Examination reveals a dense alveolar pat-
tern infiltrate in the right lungs. The cardiac silhouette is shifted to the right. B, Repeat radiograph
  ie sa  am s d d s   
 phology. Diagmosis: Iatrogenic atelectasis and hypostatic congestion of the right lung.
larval migrans may produce multifocal interstitial densities in the caudal dorsal lung lobes.
This is very rare even in severe Toxocara infestation. Leishmaniasis has also been reported
to cause an interstitial pattern.568
VIRAL PNEUmONIA
Viral pneumonia rarely produces radiographic changes. A fine linear-reticular pattern may
occasionally be seen (Fig. 2-180). Many times if infiltrates are present they are due to sec-
 ondary bacterial infection. Calicivirus pneumonia in cats has been reported to progress to
 an alveolar pattern infiltrate.513
IMMUNE OR ALLERGIC PULMONARY DISEASE
A combination of a fine linear or reticular pattern that may be superimposed onto an
equally prominent bronchial pattern may be seen with pulmonary disease caused by
- e ai i) se  o (sd eia) ssd a i  i
182). These changes reflect the infiltration of eosinophils and round cells into bronchial,
peribronchial, and interstitial tissues. Small nodules may be present if large accumula-
tions of infiltrate occur in a single area. This condition also has been termed allergic
pneumonia or allergic pneumonitis. A relatively frequent example of this disseminated
or diffuse fine linear or reticular interstitial infltrate occurs with occult dirofilariasis.
 However, this specific etiology usualy can be recognized because of the cardiovascular
changes.
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
199
FIG. 2-179 A and B, A 2-year-old female cat with a 6-week history of
coughing and dyspnea. There is an increase in pulmonary interstitial
and peribronchial densities noted throughout the lungs. The vascu-
lar structures are obscured. The bronchial walls are thickened. The
radiographic findings are indicative of allergic or parasitic pneumo-
nia. Diagnosis: Aelurostrongylus pneumonia. The parasite was recov-
ered on a tracheal wash.
200
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
FIG. 2-18o A and B, A 3-month-old female Doberman Pinscher with a l-week history of cough.
There is a focal area of interstitial density in the right caudal lung lobe (arows). There is a general-
ized increase in pulmonary interstitial densities. These fndings suggest viralpneumonia complicated
by secondary bacterial infection. Diagnosis: Canine distemper.
CONGESTIVE LEFT HEART FAILURE
An early stage of left heart failure will produce interstitial edema, which starts in the hilar
region and progresses peripherally. With interstitial edema, the enlarged pulmonary
veins still may be visible. Left-sided cardiac enlargement with a large left atrium is
observed most often. On occasion, the pulmonary density is more severe in one lung
 lobe. When this occurs, a superimposed bacterial infection or other process should be
suspected.
LYMPHOMA
Lymphoma involving the pulmonary parenchyma is less common than other presentations
of this disease 3,s5971 When present, it typically will produce a diseminated interstitial
infiltrate, which is often more severe in the perihilar area (Figs. 2-183 and 2-184).
Multifocal nodular densities, alveolar infiltrates, and pleural fluid have been observed.
Tracheobronchial, sternal, or extrathoracic lymphadenopathy may be present and provide
important information leading to the diagnosis.
METASTATIC NEOPLASIA
A poorly defined, diffuse interstitial pattern and, rarely, an alveolar pattern occasionally
 may be present (Fig. 2-185).572 This has been described as lymphangitic metastasis or
pulmonary carcinomatosis, although neoplasms other than metastatic carcinoma may
produce this pattern. Coalescence of the densities produces more solid-appearing masses
or nodules without air bronchograms. Bronchial compression, distortion, or displace-
ment may be visible. Lymphadenopathy is in frequent and air bronchograms rarely occur.
PULMONARY HEMORRHAGE
Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage may occur in animals with disseminated intravascular
coagulation or other coagulopathies, such as warfarin poisoning or von Willebrand's
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
201
FIG. 2-181 A and B, A 3-year-old
 male Pit Bull with a 3-month history
of a dry, nonproductive cough.
There is a diffuse increase in pul-
monary interstitial densities with
loss of normal vascular structures.
There is a mild right-sided car-
diomegaly. The radiographic fnd-
ings indicate a severe interstitial
pulmonary infiltrate. Diagnosis:
Eosinophilic pneumonitis.
B
202
SMALL ANimAL RADIOLOGY
FIG. 2-182 A and B, A 9-year-old male Dachshund with an 8-
month history of a nonproductive cough. There is a generalized
increase in bronchial and interstitial densities. This is indicative of
 allergic pulmonary disease. Diagnosis: Eosinophilic pneumonitis.
disease. A disseminated or diffuse interstitial or alveolar pattern may be present if the dis-
order is not severe. An alveolar pattern is the more common finding. Pleural fluid (ie.,
hemorrhage) may be present.
AZOTEMIA
Azotemia very rarely can provoke an interstitial or alveolar inflammatory response.
 Hemorrhage or bacterial infection may produce a focal or multifocal alveolar or interstitial
infltrate in conjunction with uremia.s39 Pleural and pericardial effusions have been
observed. Pulmonary and pleural calcification may be present with chronic renal failure
(Fig. 2-186).
CHapter TWO The ThoraX
203
FIG. 2-183 A and B, A 3-year-old
spayed cat with a history of weight
loss and anorexia occurring over sev-
eral months. The cat had developed
respiratory distress. There is a
marked increase in pulmonary inter-
stitial densities distributed through-
out the lung. The infiltrate is more
severe in the right caudal lung
lobe. The pulmonary vascular struc-
tures are obscured. Many end-on
bronchi are identified. Diagnosis:
 Lymphoma. The pulmonary infl-
trate was thought to represent an
allergic or parasitic pneumonia. The
diagnosis of lymphoma was made at
necropsy. A similar pulmonary pat-
tern may be observed with feline
infectious peritonitis.
A
B
OLD AGE:INTERSTITIAL FIBROSIS
Chronic disseminated or diffuse interstitial pulmonary patterns, including fine linear and
reticular patterns as well as calcified, discrete nodules, may be observed in pets with pul-
younger dogs with clinical signs of respiratory disease, or due to aging in older dogs and
cats that usually are not clinically affected. The calcified nodules may be either old granu-
lomas that dystrophically calcified or pulmonary osteomata, islands of bone within the
-   s asn go so pe au ea ss uon jo 
inhalation of irritating smoke or dust particles or prior pulmonary disease, which has
 healed leaving scarring within the lung.
204
FIG. 2-184 A and B, A 5-year-old 
male Doberman Pinscher with gen-
eralized lymphadenopathy. There is
a diffuse increase in pulmonary
interstitial densities. The vascular
structures are obscured. Diagnosis:
Lymphoma. The diagnosis was con-
firmed by lymph node biopsy.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
205
FIG. 2-185 A and B, A 14-year-old
female Doberman Pinscher with a 3-
month history of weight loss. The
dog was depressed and dehydrated.
 There is a diffuse increase in pul-
monary
interstitial
densities
throughout the lung. These densities
are poorly defined. Well-defined
nodular densities are not identifed.
The radiographic findings may be
due to disseminated neoplasia, gran-
ulomatous disease, or chronic infec-
tion. Diagnosis: Diffuse metastatic
neoplasia. A lung aspirate was per-
formed and metastatic carcinoma
was detected.
A
B
PNEUMOCONIOSIS
 Inhalation of irritating substances such as smoke or dust particles can produce pulmonary
fibrosis without inducing a severe inflammatory response. This may occur acutely but
 or disseminated pulmonary interstitial density often will be mild and frequently is seen
with advanced age.574,576
206
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
C
D
FIG. 2-186 A 6-year-old female Schnauzer with a 2-week history of anorexia, depression, and vom-
iting. A and B, Thoracic radiographs were obtained at the time of admission. C and D, Follow-up
radiographs were obtained 2 weeks later, following treatment of the dog for chronic renal failure. In
A and B there is a diffuse increase in pulmonary interstitial densities. The vascular structures are
poorly defned. In C and D the pulmonary interstitial densities have increased in severity The den-
sities are sharply defined and appear mineralized. Diagnosis: Pulmonary interstitial mineralization
 associated with chronic renal failure.
NODULAR PULMONARY PATTERN
The term nodular pulmonary pattern is used to describe solid spherical or oval soft-tissue
 densities that are outlined distinctly within the lung. Most nodules originate within the
interstitial tissue, enlarge and compress the surrounding pulmonary parenchyma, and may
 grow to distort or compressthe bronchi. They may represent solid masses or fluid-filled
CHapter TWO THe THoraX
207
cystlike structures. Nodular lung lesions may be well or poorly circumscribed, solitary or
 multiple, and may become very large.
PARASITIC PNEUMONIA
Parasitic pneumonia may be seen with Capillaria aerophila and Aelurostrongylus abstrusus infes-
tations. These infestations are uncommon but in severe cases may produce focal or multifocal
interstitial or alveolar pulmonary patterns. Peribronchial densities may be present throughout
the lung and multifocal nodular densities are common 562-566 The most obvious change report-
 edly involves the caudal lung lobes. Larva migrans may produce multifocal interstitial densities
in the caudal dorsal lung lobes. This is very rare even in severe Toxocara infestation.
Infestation is typified by clearly defined interstitial nodular densities throughout the lungs
(Fig. 2-187). Classic lesions will have a radiolucency, or cavitation, in the periphery of the
lesion, because the flukes inhabit the interstitium immediately adjacent to a bronchus.
More central cavitations also may be observed. Lesions are most common in the right cau-
dal lung lobe. Pneumocysts, which may be septated, may be seen also. Pneumothorax has
been noted on occasion.577-579
FELINE INFECTIOUS PERITONITIS AND CANINE ACTINOMYCOSIS
Feline infectious peritonitis occasionally produces disseminated interstitial or nodular den-
sities.190,580 Pleural and peritoneal fluid are observed more commonly. Similar findings
 have been noted in dogs with actinomycosis.s81,582
MYCOTIC AND OTHER NONBACTERIAL PNEUMONIAS
Mycotic Pneumonia. Mycotic pneumonia usually will produce disseminated intersti-
tial nodular pulmonary infltrates Fig. 2-188).583-s88 Although the infiltrate does not
often progress to a diffuse alveolar pattern, focal alveolar or interstitial infiltrates may
occur. Secondary bacterial pneumonia may alter the pattern into an alveolar form.
Multiple small, miliary, and various-sized nodular densities may be present.
Tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy is seen, but the rate of occurrence varies among the
d asxa a Ps aq a sn is (ai i) sile so s
monary infiltrate. Coalescence of the pulmonary densities usually produces granulo-
matous masses rather than alveolar patterns. Cavitation rarely occurs within the
pulmonary granulomas. Blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, and histoplasmosis all pro-
duce similar radiographic changes. Tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy is somewhat
less frequent in blastomycosis, and lymph node calcification is observed more often in
FIG. 2-187 A 5-year-old female Beagle with exercise
intolerance and hemoptysis. A lateral radiograph
reveals multiple nodular densities (arrows) through-
out all lung lobes. Close examination revealed one
(small arrow) to be cavitated. Diagnosis:
Paragonimiasis.
208
FIG. 2-188 A to C, A 6-year-old 
male mixed breed dog that had a 2-
week history of decreased exercise
tolerance. There is a generalized
increase in pulmonary interstitial
densities. There is a soff-tissue den-
sity in the mediastinum cranial to
the cardiac silhouette (arrows). The
radiographic findings are indicative
of a generalized interstitial pul-
monary infiltrate with cranial medi-
astinal lymphadenopathy. The
differential diagnosis should include
neoplasia and mycotic disease.
Diagnosis: Blastomycosis.
B
C
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
209
FIG. 2-189 A 3-year-old Springer
Spaniel with inappetence, dyspnea,
 and fever. The lateral radiograph
revealed multiple pulmonary nod-
ules (smallarrows) and a mass (M) at
the base of the heart. The caudal
main stem bronchi are displaced
ventrally (arrow) by the mass.
Diagnosis: Histoplasmosis with pul-
monary nodules and tracheo-
bronchial lymph node enlargement.
FIG. 2-190 A 9-year-old female
Brittany Spaniel with mammary
 gland masses. The lateral radiograph
revealed multiple calcified nodules
throughout all lung lobes (small
arrows). No evidence of tissue den-
sity was present in any of the nod-
ules. The tracheobronchial lymph
nodes were enlarged and calcified
(curved
arrows).
Diagnosis:
Calcified nodules and tracheo-
bronchial lymph nodes due to prior
histoplasmosis. No evidence
of
 metastatic neoplasia was found.
histoplasmosis. Calcification of pulmonary nodules may be observed as a sequela to the
pulmonary lesions. When present, they are more likely to be focal or multifocal inter-
 stitial densities or granulomas.
 There is a large group of miscellaneous etiologic agents that can cause disease that
include Bacillus piliformis (Tyzzer's disease), Aspergillus, Pneumocystis carinii, Leishmania,
and Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
210
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-191 A 6-year-old male
German Shepherd dog with exercise
intolerance, anorexia, and weakness.
The lateral radiograph revealed
markedly dilated pulmonary arteries
(arrows) and a large mass (M) in the
 caudal lung. Microflaria were present
M
on a direct blood smear. Diagnosis:
Eosinophilic granuloma. At necropsy,
fragments of a dead adult D. immitis 
were present in the mass.
EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMATOSIS
 Eosinophilic granulomatosis has been described in conjunction with diroflariasis.520 It is
typified by the presence of large nodular masses and some degree of fine linear-reticular
pulmonary markings (Fig. 2-191). Eosinophilic granulomas are also part of the uncom-
(ah ) s o 
LYMPHOMATOID GRANULOMATOSIS AND H1STIOCYTOSIS
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis has been described with large, nodular pulmonary
masses. 602-605 Other findings that have been noted frequently include lobar consolidation and
tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy. Less common findings have included mild hydrothorax,
 sternal and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and a diffuse interstitial lung pattern.
CONGESTIVE LEFT HEART FAILURE
On rare occasion, congestive left heart failure will cause an acinonodular pattern (Fig. 2-
193). This pattern of fine nodular densities tends to coalesce toward the pulmonary hilus.
The pattern is seen more often with chronic heart failure due to dilated cardiomyopathy
than any other cause of heart failure.
GRANULOMA OF FOREIGN MATERIAL
shs pue pau si e eu ui ue pune u Aeu suos snn
within the lung Such material could include plant mater such as plant awns or iatrogenic
substances (Fig. 2-194).
PRImARY PULmONARY NEOPlASIA
 Differentiating primary from metastatic neoplasia or other forms of nodular pulmonary
disease is difficult Although solitary nodules are more likely to be primary neoplasms, the
 possibility of a solitary metastasis or granuloma cannot be excluded.
usually arise in the periphery of the lung and usually are solitary (Figs. 2-195 and
2-196),541,544,606,607 Necrosis within the center of the mass combined with communication
with an airway may result in air accumulation within the soft tissue-dense mass. Cavitation
may be evident radiographically as a decreased (air) density within the tissue-dense mass.
Cavitation is reportedly more frequent in bronchogenic carcinoma and squamous cell car-
cinoma. It may also occur within pulmonary abscesses, traumatic cysts, or hematomas. In
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
211
FIG. 2-192 A 7-year-old mixed breed dog had a cough of 2 weeks
duration. A ventrodorsal view of the thorax revealed a mass in the
right caudal lung lobe. A complete blood count revealed 35,000/mm3
eosinophils. The lesion resolved after 1 month of treatment with
prednisone. Diagnosis: Eosinophilic granuloma.
FIG. 2-193 An 8-year-old male Doberman Pinscher with an acute onset of dyspnea. A murmur and
arrhythmia were auscultated. The lateral radiograph revealed multiple nodular densities (acinon-
Dilated cardiomyopathy with pulmonary edema. The infltrate cleared overnight with treatment of
the heart condition.
212
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-194 A and B, An ll-year-old
spayed female Siamese cat with a
2-year history of chronic coughing.
The cough responded slightly to
treatment with antibiotics and corti-
sone. Multiple nodules of varying
 sizes are present throughout all lung
lobes. The right middle lobe is
atelectatic. The radiographic find-
ings are indicative of multiple soft-
tissue masses, which may
be
neoplastic
or
granulomatous.
Aspiration of one of these nodules
revealed a granulomatous reaction
secondary
lipid material.
 Diagnosis: Granulomas secondary
to aspiration of mineral oil.
A
B
some cases there may be a large mass and multiple small nodules. Infrequently, primary
 neoplasia may appear as numerous,ill-defined, small- to medium-sized masses (Fig. 2-197).
Occasionally, calcification is identified radiographically within primary or metastatic
lung tumors. Small, amorphous calcification may be present within large neoplastic tissue-
dense masses (Fig. 2-198).
 Bronchoalveolar carcinoma may appear as a solitary nodule in the middle or periph-
eral lung areas. However, a more common appearance is that of a poorly defined mass.
 Radiographically apparent tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy is an uncommon find-
ing with primary or secondary lung tumors. When present, it is an unfavorable prognostic
sign. Tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy ocurs most often in association with multicen-
tric lymphosarcoma or granulomatous disease.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
213
FIG. 2-195 A and B, A 10-year-old
female mixed breed dog with multi-
ple mammary tumors. There is a
large soft tissue-dense mass present
in the right caudal lung lobe. The
margins of the mass are well defined.
No other masses are noted. There is a
small amount of gas present in the
cranial thoracic esophagus (arrows).
This is a normal finding. Diagnosis:
Primary lung tumor. Although a
solitary large metastatic neoplasm
may be encountered, it is much less
likely than a primary lung tumor.
A
B
214
FIG. 2-196 A 12-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired cat
had a mild (grade 2/6) systolic murmur. The ventrodorsal view
revealed a l-cm diameter mass in the left caudal lung lobe (arrow).
The cardiac silhouette was within normal limits. The ascending aorta
(a) is seen very clearly. This finding occasionally is seen in older cats
with “lay-down" (i.e., cranial rotated along the sternum increasing 
 sterna contact) hearts. Diagnosis: Bronchogenic carcinoma.
 FIG. 2-197 An 1l-year-old neutered male domestic short-haired cat
had lameness and swelling of the digits of the right front foot. The
ventrodorsal view of the thorax reveals multiple, poorly marginated
tissue densities (arrows) in multiple lung lobes. Diagnosis:
 Bronchogenic carcinoma with metastasis to the toes of the right front
foot.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
215
FIG. 2-198 A and B, An 8-year-old male German
Shepherd dog with a history of lethargy and collapse.
A large soft tissue-dense mass is present in the right
cranial lung lobe. There are several areas of calcifica-
tion noted within this mass. There is an increase in
density in the right middle lung lobe overlying the
cardiac silhouette (arrows). This represents atelectasis
secondary to bronchial compression by the mass.
 Diagnosis: Primary lung tumor.
A
B
216
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
METASTATIC PULMONARY NEOPLASIA
Metastatic pulmonary neoplasia occurs more frequently than primary lung tumors.
Multiple, well-defined, variable-sized nodular densities located in the middle or periph-
eral portions of the lung that are not cavitated and do not displace or obstruct bronchi
tic nodules is very rare. Concomitant tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy is uncom-
mon. A poorly defined diffuse interstitial pattern and, rarely, an alveolar pattern
occasionally may be present. The wide variety of radiographic lesions reported with
pulmonary metastasis results partly from the characteristics of the primary neoplasm.
It also results from concomitant pulmonary hemorrhage, edema, inflammation, infec-
tion, or necrosis.
PULMONARY ABSCESS
 Focal, walled off accumulations of septic matter occasionally may occur within the lung. If
chronic, there may be a discrete mass with no other associated changes (Fig. 2-201). If more
acute, associated inflammation may surround the mass, yielding less distinct borders.
ALLERGIC AND VIRAL BRONCHITIS
   e      d  s
2-202).617,6i8 This is due to an accumulation of eosinophils and mononuclear inflamma-
tory cells in the bronchial walls and both the peribronchial and interstitial tissues. If severe,
allergic bronchial disease can produce an interstitial edematous infiltrate. If the disease
becomes chronic, pulmonary interstitial (peribronchial) fibrosis may result. Viral tracheo-
bronchitis in dogs and most upper respiratory viruses in cats do not produce radiographic
changes unless they are complicated by secondary bacterial infection.
BRONCHIAL DYSGENESIS
Bronchial dysgenesis and associated lobar emphysema have been reported. The major radi-
ographic findings have been areas of hyperlucent lung due to emphysema. On necropsy.
there were marked bronchial changes including lack of normal cartilage, haphazard
these cases.
CHRONIC BRONCHIAL DISEASE
 Chronic bronchial disease and chronic bronchitis in the dog and cat are typified by the
 presence of thickened bronchial wall that, when viewed in cross-section, appear as circles
or tiny nodules with a radiolucent lumen ("doughnuts") or nearly parallel fine radiopaque
lines ("tram lines").621 These findings are common in older individuals but should not be
considered changes of normal aging. Rather, this indicates the frequency of the underlying
 pathologies. Some suspected pathologies include environmental irritants, such as smoke or
 pollution, and immunosuppression resulting in repeated airway infection.
BRONCHIECTASIS
 Bronchiectasis represents an unusual bronchial pattern—it is the loss of the normal pat-
tern of bronchial tapering 513,622-625 Associated with this is a change in bronchial epithe-
lium and mucous characteristics, loss of ciliary function, and bronchial wall thickening
      P d s a  )
multifocal alveolar or interstitial patterns and both chronic and active interstitial infiltrates.
Both tubular and saccular bronchiectasis have been described. In tubular bronchiecta-
sis, the bronchi are dilated centrally and fail to taper until they do so abruptly in the periph-
ery of the lung (Fig. 2-204),513 In saccular bronchiectasis, focal dilations are present along
the bronchi. Air will be trapped within the focal dilations, and they will appear as round or
oval hyperlucent areas (Fig. 2-205). Exudate may accumulate and produce a mixture of
dense and lucent foci within the lung.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
217
FIG. 2-199 A and B, A 12-year-old
female mixed breed dog with an
acute onset of dyspnea, depression,
and ataxia. There was a mass in the
area of the lef thyroid gland. There
is a diffuse increase in pulmonary
interstitial density. Discrete nodular
soft-tissue densities of varying size
are scattered throughout the lung.
The nodular masses in conjunction
with the diffuse interstitial density
indicate a diagnosis of metastatic
tumor. Diagnosis: Metastatic thy-
roid adenocarcinoma.
B
218
FIG. 2-200 A 14-year-old female
German Shepherd dog was brought
for evaluation of a mass in the cervi-
mal soft tissues. There are multiple
soft tissue-dense nodules present,
which vary in size and have well-
defined margins throughout the
lung (arrows). Diagnosis: Multiple
pulmonary metastases.
FIG. 2-201 A 7-year-old male mixed breed dog with a cough
 of l month's duration. The ventrodorsa radiograph revealed
a solitary mass in the left caudal lung lobe (arrows).
Differential considerations included neoplasia, granuloma, or
 abscess. Diagnosis: Pulmonary abscess.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
219
FIG. 2-202 A 4-year-old spayed
female domestic short-haired cat
with acute dyspnea and cyanosis. A,
The lateral radiograph reveals a
severe bronchial pattern throughout
 all lung lobes. B, The close-up view
reveals multiple pairs of poorly
defined parallel lines ("tram lines")
and circular structures ("dough-
nuts") indicative of the bronchial
and
 peribronchial  infiltrate.
 Diagnosis: Feline bronchitis-asthma
symdrome.
A
B
Poor mucosal ciliary function can give rise to chronic degenerative bronchial disease
leading to bronchiectasis.622630 Kartagener's syndrome consists of a triad of problems
a related disease that lacks the situs inversus but shares the clinical characteristics of poor
 pulmonary clearance, predisposition to infections, sterility, and bronchiectasis. 624-630
Although abnormal increases in pulmonary density are much more commonly observed
and more easily recognized, both focal and diffuse decreases in pulmonary density may
be encountered.631-644 Usually a large degree of pathology must be present before the
220
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLO
FIG. 2-203 A and B, A 5-year-old female Cocker
Spaniel with a 6-month history of a cough. There is
marked thickening of the bronchial walls with dilation
and irregularity of the bronchi (arrows). This produces
an increased pulmonary interstitial density that
 obscures the normal pulmonary vascular structures.
This is indicative of severe bronchiectasis. Diagnosis:
Bronchiectasis.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
221
FIG. 2-204 A 5-year-old Cairn
Terrier with a chronic cough. Survey
radiographs revealed bronchial
thickening and a loss of normal
tapering. A late-phase view of a
bronchogram revealed the dilated
 bronchus with minimal tapering and
acute blunting (arrow). This
bronchus is too large to be this far in
 the periphery. The blunting is due to
an endobronchial mucus plug.
 Diagnosis: Tubular bronchiectasis.
FIG. 2-205 A 1-year-old male mixed
breed dog with a history of chronic
respiratory problems. The lateral
radiograph revealed multiple, round,
thick-walled air-filled structures
(solid arrow). Some structures were
flled with a fluid density (open
arrow).
Diagnosis:
 Saccular
bronchiectasis.
condition can be detected radiographically. Focal areas of decreased pulmonary density
n heu sus  um i a o anp a anou pp aq 
Recognizing a generalized decrease in lung density is more difficult. An expiratory radi-
ograph often will accentuate the difference between the normal lung density and the area
of lucency.
 Intrapulmonary or subpleural bullae or blebs are the most frequently observed focal
lucencies, although other cavitary lesions occur. Emphysema is a lesion that is character-
ized by an abnormal increase in the size of the air spaces distal to the terminal bronchioles,
from either dilation of the alveoli or destruction of their walls. It may be focal or diffuse.
Decreased blood flow, or oligemia, may be focal or diffuse and may result in an apparent
decreased pulmonary density, which may be recognized radiographically.
222
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTR
PULMONARY BULLAE AND BLEBS
Pulmonary bullae and blebs produce oval, round, or spherical radiolucent areas with a
thin, smooth, tissue-dense margin (Fig. 2-206). They may be congenital or secondary to
n no   r sm  s n rg nn n
lesions. Although the term bulla usually indicates a lesion within the lung and the term bleb
usually indicates a subpleural lesion, the terms often are used interchangeably.
Pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax may occur as a sequela to rupture of bullae or
blebs. Many traumatic bullae contain both air and fluid A radiograph obtained using a
horizontal x-ray beam may demonstrate the air-fluid interface. Computed tomography
has been used to demonstrate bullae that were not apparent on survey radiography.73
CAVITARY LESIONS
A tissue-dense mass within the lung may become necrotic and communicate with an air-
way, allowing air accumulation within the mass and producing a cavitary
lesion632,63363,637-643Cavitationmay occurwith primary and secndary neoplasmsgra-
ulomas, congenital bronchial cysts, and intrapulmonary abscesses (Figs. 2-207 to 2-209).
impossible to differentiate the cause of the cavitary lesion based solely on its radiographic
features.
EMPHYSEMA
 Focal areas of emphysema are uncommon and usually are accompanied by chronic
 bronchial and interstitial disease (Fig. 2-210). They often are masked by the increased pul-
monary density, which results from the bronchial or interstitial infiltrate. Chronic bron-
chitis and bronchiectasis may result in focal emphysematous areas.
Generalized emphysema, deep inspiration, and overinflation result in similar radi-
an pasod si ap a pe pan sreadde eri a s ideno
to approximately the level of T13 or L1. The cardiac silhouette often appears small. The
lungs appear hyperlucent with well-defined and small pulmonary vessels. Bronchial struc-
tures may appear normal, reduced, or increased in number, size, or wall thickness.
 Radiographs should be obtained at both full inspiration and expiration when generalized
FIG. 2-206 Radiographs of a
 2-year-old female mixed breed dog
were performed after thoracic
trauma. The dog showed evidence of
mild respiratory distress. On the lat-
eral thoracic radiograph there is a
fuid- and air-filled structure evident
and superimposed on the cardiac sil-
houette (arrows). The structure has
thin, soft tissue-dense walls. The car-
diac silhouette is separated from the
sternum. The left caudal lung lobe is
 separated from the thoracic vertebral
bodies by an air density. Diagnosis:
Traumatic bulla and pneumothorax.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
223
FIG. 2-207 A and B, A 2-year-old
male Cocker Spaniel with a 6-month
history of chronic, productive
cough. There are soft-tissue densities
 in the left caudal and accessory lung
lna1ui ae aau (smou) sqo
air-dense cavities within the soft-tis-
 sue density. The radiographic find-
ings indicate chronic infection with
cavitation. This may indicate a for-
eign body pneumonia. Diagnosis:
Chronic bacterial pneumonia with a
cavitated mass. The left caudal lung
lobe was removed surgically because
the dog did not respond to antibiotic
therapy.
A
B
 emphysema is suspected. There are many possible underlying causes, which include
bronchial dysenesis 620,621,634,4
OLIGEMIA
Assessment of lung perfusion is subjective and difficult. Technical errors, variations in tho-
224
FIG. 2-208 A 6-year-old male cat with a 4-month history of
intermittent pyrexia and cough. On the lateral (A) and ven-
trodorsal (B) radiographs there is a sof-tissue density in the
right caudal lung lobe. There are multiple air-containing cavi-
ties within this soft-tissue density (arrows). The margins of the
soft-tissue density are well-defined. The radiographic fndings
indicate a large cavitated mass This may represent a pulmonary
 abscess or a neoplasm. Diagnosis: Abscessed right caudal lung
lobe.
A
B
the evaluation. A decrease in lung perfusion may be focal or diffuse. A diffuse reduction in
lung perfusion is associated most often with right-to-left cardiac shunts such as
Eisenmenger's complex; decreased pulmonary blood flow, or pulmonic stenosis; and
decreased circulating blood volume, or hypovolemia.
 Focal reduction in pulmonary perfusion usually is due to pulmonary thrombosis.
Although associated radiographic changes are uncommon, radiographic signs occasionally
- m a d s e  a s  n  in m s
 pared with the adjacent pulmonary artery, absence of vascular shadows within a normal-
sized lung lobe, and an enlarged central pulmonary artery with abrupt reduction in arterial
 artery enlargement and pleural fluid may be present also.
CHAPTER TWOTHE THORAX
225
FIG. 2-209 A 4-month-old male mixed breed dog had nasal dis-
charge and dull lung sounds in the right caudal lobe. The ventrodor-
sal (A) and lateral (B) views reveal a large, round air density with a
moderately thick capsule in the right caudal lung lobe. Diagnosis:
Bronchial cyst.
B
226
FIG. 2-210 A and B,A 1-year-old male Shetland Sheepdog with a 6-
month history of cough. There is a severe bronchial pattern with
bronchial thickening and calcification. Multiple peribronchial and
diaphragm is flattened and displaced caudally. There is a localized
area of alveolar infiltrate evident in the caudal subsegment of the left
cranial lung lobe (arrows). The radiographic findings are suggestive
of bacterial pneumonia with interstitial fibrosis and hyperinflation
due to chronic emphysema. Diagmosis: Chronic bacterial pneumo-
nia and emphysema.
B
DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH PULMONARY CALCIFICATION
Calcification may occur within normal pulmonary structures as well as in intrapulmonary
lesions. It may be associated with normal aging changes, pulmonary diseases, or systemic
disorders.
a aa e a jo sp u ssd aq a q is  al yo i
degree of calcification and the number of smaller bronchi that become calcified usually
increase with age. Thin linear and circular calcified densities become apparent (Fig. 2-212).
Small nodular calcifications also may be evident in thoracic radiographs of aged dogs.
These may be pleural or intrapulmonary and are probably either osteomata or calcified
 granulomas resulting from previous inflammation.73 They are without clinical significance
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
227
FIG.2-211 A and B, A 5-year-old cat
with acute respiratory distress. On
two ventrodorsal thoracic radi-
ographs there is a decrease in density
within the right lung lobes. The pul-
monary arteries and veins in the left
lung lobes are evident (arrows). The
right caudal lung lobe artery is small
and the pulmonary vein is not iden-
tified. The radiographic fndings are
indicative of oligemia of the right
lung lobes with hyperinflation.
 Diagnosis: Thrombosis of the pul-
monary artery in the right caudal
lung lobe. The diagnosis was con-
firmed by a selective arteriogram.
 The etiology was not determined.
A
B
FIG. 2-212 An ll-year-old male Pit
Bull with weakness and muffled
 heart sounds. On a close-up photo-
graph of the lateral thoracic radi-
ograph there are areas of bronchial
calcification evident. These are com-
mon findings in an older dog. There
were no thoracic abnormalities.
 Diagnosis: Bronchial calcification.
but must be differentiated from other active granulomas and neoplasms. The density of the
nodules combined with their small, usually uniform size and distinct margins identifies
them as pulmonary or pleural osteomas rather than neoplasms (Fig. 2-213).
so s   d s ssd sa 
 and abscesses may become partially or completely calcified.584 Tracheobronchial lymph
228
FIG. 2-213 A 13-year-old female
mixed breed dog with multiple
mammary tumors. A close-up view
of the lateral thoracic radiograph
reveals multiple small mineralized
densities superimposed over the car-
diac silhouette (arrows). The small
uniform size and calcified density of
these nodules indicate that they are
pulmonary or pleural osteomas.
There is no evidence of pulmonary
metastasis. Diagnosis: Pulmonary or
 pleural osteomas.
node calcification has been observed also (see Fig. 2-190).584 Another source of densely
mineralized nodular densities and tracheobronchial lymph nodes is aspiration of barium 
from an earlier diagnostic procedure54,645
 Systemic diseases, such as Cushing's disease, primary and secondary hyperparathy-
roidism, and hypervitaminosis D, can produce varying degrees of intrapulmonary calcifi-
cation.646 These changes usually are distributed evenly throughout thelung and involve the
bronchial walls and pulmonary interstitial tissue. Small nodular calcifications may be pres-
ent.647 Many of these animals have other soft-tissue calcifications (e.g., vascular or subcu-
taneous). Some instances of rapidly progressive pulmonary calcification have been
 described in which the etiology was not established.
CERVICAL SOFT-TISSUE ABNORMALITIES
PHARYNGEAL ABNORMALITIES
 Abnormalities of the oral or nasal pharynx may produce clinical signs indicating either res-
piratory or swallowing disorders or a combination of both. Respiratory disorders may
result from pharyngeal or retropharyngeal masses, swelling, foreign bodies, or trauma.
 Swallowing disorders rarely produce radiographic changes unless they are due to pharyn-
geal masses.
A carefully positioned lateral view with the animal's head and neck extended provides
the most useful information. Ventrodorsal and dorsoventral views are rarely helpful. Slight
rotation or flexion of the head and neck can produce artifactual increases in laryngeal
density and create an illusion of a soft-tissue mass. If the animal is swallowing at the time
of radiographic exposure, the normal pharyngeal airway may be artifactually eliminated.
Thus all abnormalities identified should be confirmed with a well-positioned, properly
exposed lateral radiograph (Fig. 2-214). Both pharyngeal and laryngeal abnormalities may
of the radiographic findings if clinical signs indicate an abnormality in these areas.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
229
FIG. 2-214 A 5-year-old female
Chihuahua with respiratory stridor
of 2 weeks duration. Lateral radi-
 ographs of the larynx were obtained.
A, The initial lateral radiograph of
the larynx was obtained with the ani-
mal's neck flexed. The oral pharynx
 appears to be compressed. The lar-
 ynx is indistinct. A mass in the oral
pharynx was suspected. B, A second
lateral radiograph was obtained with
the head and neck extended. The
larymgeal structures appear normal
in this radiograph. Diagnosis:
 Normal larynx.
A
B
FOREIGN BODIES
Radiopaque foreign objects (e.g., bones or metallic objects) are identified readily. Their
 location should be confirmed on a ventrodorsal and a lateral radiograph. Subcutaneous or
retropharyngeal air or soft-tissue swelling may be visible if mucosal penetration has
occurred. Detecting tissue-dense foreign material may be impossible if it is embedded
pharynx should outline these objects if they project into the pharyngeal lumen. Soft-tissue
swelling or retropharyngeal masses may result from trauma to the pharynx secondary to a
foreign body.
MASSES
 Intraluminal and retropharyngeal masses may narrow the pharyngeal lumen (Fig. 2-215).
These may be associated with the tonsils, retropharyngeal lymph nodes, or salivary glands,
or may arise from the pharyngeal mucosa or surrounding muscles. A decreased pharyngeal
airway; displacement of the soft palate, larynx, or hyoid bones; or distortion of the pha-
ryngeal shape may be observed radiographically (Fig. 2-216). If the mucosal surface of the
pharynx is intact, the margins of the mass will be smooth. Irregularity of the margin and
air within the mass indicates that the mucosal surface has been penetrated. The surround-
ing bony structures (i.e., skull, cervical vertebrae, hyoid bones) should be evaluated care-
fully for radiographic evidence of involvement.
SOFT PALATE
Elongation or swelling of the soft palate may be recognized radiographically. Careful posi-
tioning is mandatory when attempting to evaluate the position of the soft palate and lar-
ynx In the normal dog, the rostral tip of the epiglottis should reach the caudal aspect of
the soft palate. An elongated soft palate will extend beyond the epiglottis and into the
laryngeal airway. The soft palate may be thickened also, but this is an ambiguous radi-
on several sequential radiographs. Visual inspection of the palate is more reliable than radi-
ography for evaluating soft palate thickness.
230
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-215 An ll-year-old female
mixed breed dog with a history of
respiratory distress, which had
increased gradually over a 3-month
period. There is a large soft-tissue
mass in the region of the caudal
nasal and oral pharynx (arrows).
This mass appears to be attached to
the caudal aspect of the soft palate
and is obliterating both the oral and
nasal pharynx. No other abnormali-
ties
are
noted.
Diagnosis:
Melanoma.
FIG. 2-216 A l-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat with
a chronic nasal discharge. The lateral
view reveals a tissue-dense mass in
the nasopharynx (short arrow) and a
tissue density within the osseous
bulla (long arrow). Diagnosis:
 Auropharyngeal polyp.
PHARYNGEAL DYSFUNCTION
The pharynx is a dynamic, muscular structure that normally resists the effect of the intra-
cats, the pharyngeal lumen shape and size remain constant between the inspiration and
expiration. However, an ill-defined syndrome of apparent decreased pharyngeal tone exists
and is seen most often in aging working breed dogs. The etiology has not been defined but
is presumed to be a nonspecific, local neuromuscular deficit. Radiographically, there is a
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
231
dramatic difference in pharyngeal diameter between inspiration and expiration.
Fluoroscopy also can be used to make the diagnosis. Other findings may include a caudal
migration of the larynx, normally found ventral to the atlantoaxial junction and second
 cervical vertebra, and straightening of the hyoid apparatus seen during inspiration, which
parallels the diaphragmatic motion (Fig. 2-217). This finding also may be seen in associa-
tion with restrictive nasal or oral airways.
LARYNGEAL ABNORMALITIES
Laryngeal abnormalities may occur as a result of pharyngeal or retropharyngeal diseases as
 complicated but most structures can be evaluated. The hyoid bones,laryngeal cartilages, and
airway should be evaluated carefully. Artifacts induced by malpositioning and those resulting
from swallowing motions during radiography frequently create an illusion of laryngeal dis-
ease. A suspicious area should be identified on at least two radiographs with the animal's head
and neck extended. Visual inspection of the laryngeal airway and surrounding structures usu-
ally provides more information than radiography; however, lesions arising from the soft tis-
sues around the larynx or from the bony structures can be best evaluated radiographically.
HYOID BONES
The hyoid bones can be evaluated readily. They are usually symmetric and uniformly miner-
alized. Although hyoid bone abnormalities are rare, these bones may be fractured or dislo-
cated in association with laryngeal trauma. This most often occurs secondary to bite wounds
or choke chain injuries. Avulsion of the hyoid bones from the larynx may be observed. Soft-
tissue tumors are rare, although they may displace or destroy the hyoid bones. Infection rarely
affects hyoid bones. Obstructive pharyngeal and laryngeal disease can result in caudal laryn-
 geal migration and a straightening of the hyoid apparatus during inspiration.
FOREIGN BODIES
Radiopaque foreign bodies are detected easily and should be identified on both lateral and
ventrodorsal radiographs (Figs. 2-218 and 2-219). Tissue-dense foreign material may
 mimic laryngeal masses, inflammation, edema, or hemorrhage. Laryngoscopy is recom-
mended if a foreign object is suspected.
FIG. 2-217 Inspiration-timed lateral
view of the laryngeal area in an 8-
year-old female Bichon Frise with a
recent onset of coughing, voice
change, and inspiratory difficulty.
Note the caudal migration of the lar-
ynx and the straightening of the
hyoid apparatus. (Normally the lar-
ynx does not migrate significantly
between inspiration and expiration.
If this lateral view had been repeated
during full expiration, the normal
cranial positioning of the larynx and
the multiple angled hyoid articula-
tions would be restored.) Diagnosis:
Laryngeal obstruction due to laryn-
geal paralysis.
232
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-218 A 4-year-old female
mixed breed dog with a history of
having swallowed a fish hook.
Ventrodorsal (A) and lateral (B)
radiographs of the laryngeal area
revealed gas and mineralized densi-
ties within the soft tissues overlying
the larynx. This was due to a previ-
ous surgical attempt at removal of
the fish hook. The fish hook frag-
ment can be seen in the larynx on
the right side. It appears to be con-
tained within the thyroid cartilage
area. Diagnosis: Opaque foreign
object in the larynx. This foreign
object was identified and removed
by endoscopy.
A
B
FIG. 2-219 A 13-year-old male
 Miniature Schnauzer with a history
of chronic cough. On the lateral
radiograph of the larynx there is a
radiopaque foreign object ventral to
the epiglottis (arrows). This was
identified as a fragment of a plastic
catheter that was imbedded in the
epiglottis. It was secondary to a pre-
vious
transtracheal
 aspiration.
Diagnosis: Laryngeal foreign body.
LARYNGEAL MASSES
Laryngeal tumors and granulomas may arise from or involve the epiglottis, laryngeal car-
tilages, or vocal folds Fig. 2-220).649 The soft tissue-dense mass will obliterate at least part
 of the laryngeal airway and may distort the normal architecture. Distinction between neo-
plasms and granulomata cannot be made based on radiographic changes (Fig. 2-221).
LARYNGEAL SWELLING
Edema, hemorrhage, or inflammation of the larynx may produce similar radiographic
signs. The airway will become more dense and the laryngeal ventricles will be obliterated.
The swelling must be severe before it can be detected radiographically. In most normal
brachycephalic dogs, the larynx is indistinct and recognition of mucosal swelling or edema
is difficult. Eversion of the laryngeal saccule rarely is identified but may produce oblitera-
tion of the normal air density and mimic laryngeal edema.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
233
FIG. 2-220 A 9-year-old neutered
male Russian Blue cat had acute,
severe dyspnea. Examination of the
lateral view of the cervical area
reveals a tissue-dense mass in the lar-
ynx (arrows). Diagnosis: Squamous
cell carcinoma of vocal fold and
larynx.
FIG. 2-221 A 2-year-old male
Labrador Retriever was evaluated for
a 1.5-year history of progressive res-
piratory disorder. There is a large
 soft tissue-dense mass in the region
of the laryngeal cartilages (wide
arrows). It appears to involve both
the arytenoid and thyroid cartilages.
A second soft tissue-dense mass is
evident dorsal to the cricoid cartilage
(long arrows). The esophagus caudal
 to this mass contains a small bolus of
air. Diagnosis: Granuloma.
LARYNGEAL STENOSIS
Congenital or acquired laryngeal stenosis may deform the larynx and narrow or obliterate
 a  g    n  sisons   a
nal deformity or irregular cartilaginous calcification may be recognized radiographically.
LARYNGEAL PARALYSIS
Laryngeal paralysis usually does not produce any static radiographic abnormalities. The
shape of the lateral ventricles may become more rounded instead of elliptical or may be
obliterated. Obstruction of the laryngeal airway may result in distention of the pharynx
and caudal migration of the larynx as the animal attempts to inhale. The cervical trachea
 may narrow and the thoracic trachea may dilate if resistance to airflow is marked.
234
ExTRALUmINAl MASSES
 Displacement of the larynx from its normal position may be associated with lesions aris-
ing from the pharynx or retropharyngeal area. Unfortunately, the position of the larynx
n sd u pn p an  p sn su u sms s
the soft-tissue area between the larynx and pharynx and the cervical spine is proportional
to the distance between the trachea and the spine. This soft-tissue area usually contains
some fascial plane fat streaking that aids in differentiating normal but fatty necks from
 those with retropharyngeal and retrolaryngeal masses of more diffuse infiltrates (e.g., cel-
lulitis). When obvious displacement is present, the direction in which the larynx is dis-
placed provides a clue to the origin of the mass because masses in the retropharyngeal,
retrolaryngeal, and dorsal paratracheal regions displace these structures away from the
bony vertebrae. Displacement of the trachea or hyoid apparatus to the left or right usually
 can be determined on the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral views, facilitating the assessment of 
the side of origin of a mass.
THYROID AND PARATHYROID DISORDERS
 Thyroid masses in dogs are usually large by the time of diagnosis. They may displace the
trachea and be apparent on survey radiographs. Sonography can be useful in evaluating
the thyroid and parathyroid glands 3338,655 The normal thyroid gland appears ellip-
soid and fairly small (Fig. 2-222). Masses may be unilateral or bilateral (Figs. 2-223 and
2-224).
FIG. 2-222 A 2-year-old
male
Chesapeake Bay Retriever with
polyuria,polydipsia,lethargy,weigh
loss,
and
hypercalcemia.
Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B)
 sonograms ofthe lef thyroid reveal a
hyperechoic structure in the area of
the thyroid. The size and architec-
ture are normal. Diagnosis: Normal
thyroid gland.
A
B
FIG. 2-223 An 8-year-old spayed female Chow Chow with a cervical mass of 3 months
duration. A transverse sonogram revealed an enlarged thyroid gland with complex archi-
tecture with multiple hypoechoic to anechoic areas. This may be due to hyperplasia or
neoplasia with cystic areas. Diagnosis: Thyroid carcinoma.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
235
FIG. 2-224 A 12-year-old spayed
female mixed breed dog was evalu-
ated for panting and gagging. A pal-
pable mass was present in the
laryngeal region. Longitudinal (A)
and transverse (B) sonograms
revealed a mass (*) with complex
architecture on both sides of the tra-
chea (arrow). The area distal to the
trachea on the transverse view is
obscured by air in the trachea.
Diagnosis: Thyroid carcinoma.
A
B
FIG. 2-225 A 12-year-old spayed
female domestic short-haired cat
evaluated for a cervical swelling of 2
weeks duration. The longitudinal
(A) and transverse (B) sonograms
reveal an enlarged thyroid gland that
contains an irregularly shaped ane-
choic structure (arrow). Diagnosis:
Thyroid hyperplasia with cyst for-
mation.
A
B
 Feline hyperthyroidism is typified by diffuse but not massive enlargement of one or 
both thyroid glands. Focal areas of enlargement may be seen in some individuals.
Sonography has been used to define size and determine if cystic areas are present within
the glands (Fig. 2-225).655
Sonography also has been used to identify enlarged parathyroid glands.36-38,656
Abnormal glands were enlarged when compared with others in the opposite thyroid and
were markedly hypoechoic (Fig. 2-226).
SWALLOWING DISORDERS
Swallowing is a complex event that involves the pharynx, larynx, and esophagus. It cannot
be evaluated without contrast administration and almost always requires a dynamic exam-
ination using cinefluoroscopy or videofluoroscopy. The events must be examined slowly
and repeatedly before a definite diagnosis can be reached. An esophagram with a single
radiograph or series of radiographs may identify the site (ie., oral, pharyngeal or
esophageal) of the abnormality, but it rarely defines the functional problem. Therefore,
patients with oral or pharyngeal dysphagia should be referred to hospitals that have fluo-
roscopic equipment.
 Retention of food or barium in the oral pharynx suggests an oropharyngeal disorder.
Contrast or food in the nasal pharynx may indicate the failure of the soft palate to close the
nasal pharynx or it may indicate incoordination between pharyngeal muscle contraction
and dorsal movement of the soft palate. Abnormal cricopharyngeal muscular activity may
 produce a cricopharyngeal achalasia, or failure of the muscle to relax; chalazia, or failure to
contract with resulting sphincter incompetence; or incoordination between the pharyngeal
muscle contraction and cricopharyngeal muscle relaxation. Aspiration of food or barium
may indicate a lack of normal laryngeal movement, incoordination between the pharyngeal
236
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 2-226 Sagittal ultrasonogram
of the right thyroid gland in an 8-
year-old spayed female Keeshond
with hypercalcemia. Within the
ovoid thyroid gland (back arrows),
there is a hypoechoic nodule near its
anterior  pole 
(white arrows).
Diagnosis: Parathyroid mass con-
firmed as parathyroid tumor.
 muscles and laryngeal muscles, or a sensory defect that does not allow the animal to detect
 the presence of food within the pharynx Both liquid barium and barium-impregnated
food should be used when studying animals with oropharyngeal disorders. Again,
because of the complex nature of swallowing, static radiographs rarely produce a definite
diagnosis.
REFERENCES
1. Spencer CP, Ackerrman N, Burt JK: The canine Jateral thoracic radi-
 Ographs made in dorsal versus ventral recurmbency. Vet Radiol 1982;
ograph. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:262.
23:3.
 2. Forrest LJ: Radiology corner—-advantages of the three view thoracic
14. Ruehl WW, Thrall DE: The effect of dorsal versus ventral recurn-
radiographic exarmination in instances other than metastasis. Vet
bency on the radiographic appearance of the canine thorax. Vet
Radiol 1992; 33:340.
Radiol 198 1; 22:10.
 3. Biller DS, Myer CW: Case exarmples dermonstrating the clinical util-
15. Holmes RA, Smith FG, Lewis RE, et al: The effects of rotation on the
ity of obtaining both right and lef lateral thoracic radiographs in
radiographic appearance of the canine cardiac silhouette in dorsal
simall animals. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1987; 23:381.
recurmbency.Vet Radiol 1985; 26:98.
4. Lang L, Wortrman JA, Glickiman LT, et al: Sensitivity of radiographic
16. Silverrman S, Suter PF: lnfluence of inspiration and expiration on
detection of lung metastases in the dog. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:74.
canine thoracic radiographs. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:502.
5. Barthez PY, Hornof WJ, Theon AP, et al: Receiver operating charac-
17. Godshalk CP: Comrmon pitfalls in radiographic interpretation of the
teristic curve analysis of the performance of various radiographic
thorax. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1994; 16:731.
 protocols when screening dogs for pulmonary rmetastases. J Am Vet
18. Losonsky IM, Kneller SK: Misdiagnosis in normal radiographic
Med Assoc 1994; 204:237.
anatormy: eight structural configurations simulating disease entities
6. Grandage J: Posture, gravity, and radiologic interpretation. J Am Vet
in dogs and cats.J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191:109.
Radiol Soc 1979; 22:80.
19. Fox PR, Bond BR, Peterson ME: Echocardiographic reference values
7. Ahlberg NE, Hoppe F, Kelter U, et al: A computed tormographic study
in healthy cats sedated with ketarmine hydrochloride. Arm J Vet Res
Of volurme and x-ray attenuation of the lungs of beagles in various
1985; 46: 1479.
body positions. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:43.
 20. Rand JS, Reynolds WT, Priest J: Echocardiographic evaluation of
8. Pechrman RD: Effect of dependency versus nondependency on lung
the effects of rmedetormidine and xylazine in dogs. Aust Vet J 1996;
lesion visualization. Vet Radiol 1987; 28:185.
73:41.
 9. Steyn PF, Green RW: How patient positioning affects radiographic
 21. Moise NS: Echocardiography. In Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline car-
signs of canine lung disease. Vet Med 1990; 85:796.
diology. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1988; p 114.
10. Grandage J: The radiology of the dog's diaphragm. J Srm Anim Pract
22. Nyland TG, Matton JS, Allen AK, et al: Veterinary diagnostic ultra-
1974; 15:1.
sound. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995.
11. Suter PF: Radiographic exarmination. In Ettinger SJ, Suter PF, eds:
 23. Thormas WP: Two-dirmensional, real-tirme echocardiography in the
Canine cardiology. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1970; p 40.
dog: technique and anatormic validation. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:50.
12. Suter PF: Thoracic radiography: a text atlas of thoracic diseases in
 24. Thormas WP, Gaber CE, Jacobs GJ, et al: Recormrmendations for stan-
the dog and cat. Peter F Suter, Wettswil, Switzerland, 1984.
dards in transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography in the dog
13. Carlisle CH, Thrall DE: A comparison of norrmal feline thoracic radi-
and cat. J Vet lntern Med 1993; 7:247.
CHapter TWO THe ThoraX
237
25. Kirberger RM, Bland-van den Berg P, Darazs B: Doppler echocardio-
 cardiac disease in dogs. Vet Rec 2001; 148:707.
graphy in the normal dog: part l, velocity findings and flow patterns.
53. Sleeper MM, Buchanan JW: Vertebral scale systerm to rmeasure heart
Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:370.
size in growing puppies. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 219:57.
 26. Stowater JL, Larmb CR: Utrasonography of noncardiac thoracic dis-
54. Litser AL, Buchanan JW:Vertebral scale systerm to rmeasure heart size
eases in srmall anirmals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:514.
in radiographs of cats. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216:210.
27. Konde LJ, Spaulding K: Sonographic evaluation of the cranial medi-
 55. Bonagura JD, O'Grady MR, Herring DS: Echocardiography: princi-
astinum in small animals. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:178.
ples of interpretation. Vet Clin North Am 1985; 15:1177.
 28. Reichle JK, Wisner ER: Non-cardiac thoracic ultrasound in 75 feline
 56. Boon J, Wingfheld WE, Miller CW: Echocardiographicindices in the
and canine patients. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2000; 41:154.
norrmal dog. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:214.
29. Tidwell AS: Utrasonography of the thorax (excluding the heart). Vet
 57. Piper FS, Reef V, Harmlin RL: Echocardiography in the dormestic cat.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1998; 28:993.
Arm J Vet Res 1979; 40:882.
 30. Kaplan PM, Murtaugh RJ, Ross JN: Utrasound in ermergency veteri-
 58. Jacobs G, Knight Dv: M-rmode echocardiographic measurerments in
nary rmedicine. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1988; 3:245.
nonanesthetized healthy cats: effects of body weight, heart rate, and
31. Kraje BJ, Krahe AC, Rohrbach BW, et al: Intrathoracic and concur-
other variables. Arm J Vet Res 1985; 46:1705.
rent orthopedic injury associated with traurmatic rib fracture in cats:
 59. DeMadron E, Bonagura JD, Herring DS: Two-dirmensional echocar-
75 cases ( 1980- 1998). J A1m Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216:51.
diography in the norrmal cat. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:149.
 32. Tarmas PM, Paddelford RR, Krahwinkel DI: Thoracic traurma in dogs
 60. Morrison SA, Moise NS, Scarlett J, et al: Effect of breed and body
and cats presented for the limb fractures. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
weight on echocardiographic values in four breeds of dogs of differ-
1985; 21:161.
ing somatype.J Vet Intern Med 1992; 6:220.
 33. Bray IP, Lipscombe VJ, White RAS, et al: Utrasonographic exarmina-
 61. Lonsdale RA, Labuc RH, Robertson lA: Echocardiographic parame-
tion of the pharynx and larynx of the norrmal dog. Vet Radiol
ters in training cormpared with non-training Greyhounds. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 1998; 39:566.
Ultrasound 1998; 39:325.
34. Wisner ER, Nyland TG, Mattoon JS: Utrasonographic exarmination
 62. Snyder PS, Sato T, Atkins CE: A cormparison of echocardiographic
of cervical masses in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994;
indices of the nonracing, healthy Greyhound to reference values
35:310.
frorm other breeds. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:387.
35. Wisner ER, Theon AP, Nyland TG, et al: Utrasonographic exarmina-
 63. Schille S, Skroczki M: M-rmode echocardiographic reference values
tion of the thyroid gland of hyperthyroid cats: cormparison to
in cats in the first three rmonths of life. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1999;
(TeO4-)-Te-99m scintigraphy. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:53.
40:49 1.
36. Wisner ER, Nyland TG: Localization of parathyroid carcinorma
64. Rishniw M, Erb HN: Evaluation of four 2-dimensional echocardio-
using high-resolution ultrasound in a dog. I Vet lntern Med 1994;
 graphic methods of asessing left atrial ize in dogs IVet Intern Med
8:244.
2000; 14:429.
37. Wisner ER, Nyland TG: Ultrasonography of the thyroid and
 65. Loyer C, Thormas WP: Biplane transesophageal echocardiography in
 parathyroid glands. Vet Clin North A1m Srmall Anirm Pract 1998;
the dog: technique, anatormy and irmaging planes. Vet Radiol
28:973.
Ultrasound 1995; 36:212.
 38. Wisner ER, Penninck DG, Biller, DS, et al: High-resolution parathy-
 66. Kienle RD, Thormas WP, Rishniw M: Biplane transesophageal echocar-
roid sonography. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1997; 38:462.
diography in the normal cat. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1997; 38:288.
 39. Reese S, Ruppert C: Utrasonographic imaging of the vagosympa-
 67. Gaber C: Doppler echocardiography. Prob Vet Med 1991; 3:479.
thetic trunk. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2001; 42:272.
68. Chiang CH, Hagio M, Yoshida H: Pulrmonary venous flow in normal
 40. Burk Rl: Radiographic definition of the phrenicopericardiac liga-
 dogs recorded by transthoracic echocardiography: techniques,
ment. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1976; 6:216.
 i   I s m e s 
 41. St Vincent R, Pharr JW: Transesophageal ultrasonography of the nor-
60:333.
 Imal canine rmediastinum. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:197.
69. Brown DJ, Knight DH, King RR: Use of pulsed-wave Doppler
42. Srmallwood JE, George TF: Anatomic atlas for computed tormography
echocardiography to determine aortic and pulrmonary velocity
in the rmesaticephalic dog: thorax and cranial abdormen. Vet Radiol
and flow variables in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 1991;
Utrasound 1993; 34:65.
52:543.
43. Feeney DA, Fletcher TF, Hardy, RM: Atlas of correlative irmaging
 70. Koblik PD, Hornoff W, Harnagel SH, et al: A cormparison of pul-
anatormy of the normal dog. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1991.
rmonary angiography, digital subtraction angiography and 99M-
44. Suter PF, Colgrove D, Ewing GO: Congenital hypoplasia of the
Tc-DTPA/MAA ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy for detection of
canine trachea. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1972; 20:773.
 experirmental pulrmonary emboli in the dog. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:159.
71. McKiernan BC, Johnson LR: Clinical pulmonary function testing in
Vet Med 1988; 83:266.
 dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Arm 1992; 22:1087.
46. Burk RL, Corwin LA, Bahr RJ, et al: The right cranial lung lobe
72. Schafer M, Berry CR: Cardiac and pulrmonary artery mensuration in
bronchus of the dog: its identification in a lateral chest radiograph.
feline heartworm disease. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:499.
J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1978; 6:210.
73. Reif JS, Rhodes WH: The lungs of aged dogs: a radiographic-rmor-
47. Toal RL, Losonsky IM, Coulter DB, et al: Influence of cardiac cycle on
 phologic correlation. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1966; 7:5.
the radiographic appearance of the feline heart. Vet Radiol 1985;
 74. Smallwood JE, Beaver BV: Congenital chondrosternal depression
26:63.
(pectus excavaturm) in the cat. Vet Radiol 1977; 18:141.
48. Ahlberg NE, Hansson K, Svensson L, et al: Radiographic heart-vol-
75. Burk RL: Cormputed tomography of thoracic diseases in dogs. J Am
ume estirmation in norrmal cats. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:253.
Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:617.
49. Moon ML, Keene BW, Lessard P, et al: Age related changes in the
76. O'Brien JA, Harvey CE, Tucker JA: The larynx of the dog: its normal
 feline cardiac silhouette. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1993; 34:315.
radiographic anatormy. I Am Vet Radiol Soc 1969; 10:38.
 50. Litser AL, Buchanan JW: Radiographic and echocardiographic rmeas-
77. Kraje BJ, Kraje AC, Rohrbach BW, et al: Intrathoracic and concurrent
urement of the heart in obese cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2000;
 orthopedic injury associated with traurmatic rib fracture in cats: 75
41:320.
cases ( 1980-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216:5 1.
 51. Buchanan IW, Bucheler H: Vertebral scale systerm to measure canine
78. Anderson M, Payne JT, Mann FA, et al: Flail chest: pathophysiology,
heart size in radiographs. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206:194.
treatrment and prognosis. Comp Cont Ed 1993; 15:65.
52. Lamb CR, Wikely H, Boswood A, et al: Use of breed-specific ranges
79. Fossurm TW, Boudrieau RJ, Hobson HP: Pectus excavatum in eight
for the vertebral heart scale as an aid to the radiographic diagnosis of
 dogs and six cats. I An Anirm Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:595.
238
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
 80. Evans SM, Biery DN: Congenital peritoneopericardial diaphrag-
107. Cowan WD, Feeney DA, Walter PA: What is your diagnosis?
Peritoneopericardial hernia in a dog. I Aim Vet Med Assoc 1989;
histories. Vet Radiol 1980; 21:108.
194:1331.
81. Boudrieau RJ, Muir WW: Pathophysiology of traumatic diaphrag-
108. Neiger R: Peritoneopericardial diaphragimatic hernia in cats. Comp
Imatic hernia in dogs. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1987; 9:379.
Cont Educ Pract Vet 1996; 18:461.
 82. Park RD: The diaphragrm. In Thrall DE ed: Textbook of veterinary
109. Angles JM, Allan GS: Ultrasonographic diagnosis of perito-
diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1998; pp
neopericardial hernia in three cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1993;
294-308.
34:457.
83. Valentine BA, Cooper BJ, Dietze AE, et al: Canine congenital
110. Nyska A, Perl S, Bargai U: lnvagination of the stormach into the tho-
diaphragrmatic hernia. J Vet Intern Med 1988; 2:109.
racic esophagus in a dog. Rafuah Veterinarith 1979; 36:146.
 84. Voges A, Bertrand S, Hill RC, et al: True diaphragrmatic hernia in a
111. Alcantara P: The clinical diagnosis of esophageal invagination of
cat. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1997; 38:116.
the stormach in the dog. I South Afr Vet Med Assoc 1971; 42:265.
 85. Bauer MS: Radiographic diagnosis—diaphragrmatic hernia with
112. Clark GN, Spodnick GJ, Rush JE, et al: Belt loop gastropexy in the 
 intrathoracic gastric dilatation in a dog. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:102.
rmanagerment of gastroesophageal intussusception in a pup. J Am
 86. Garson HL, Dodman HN, Baker OJ: Diaphragrmatic hernia, analy-
Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:739.
69iz 086l i uu [es I 'se pue shop u sso 9s yo sis
113. Leib MS, Blass CE: Gastroesophageal intussusception in the dog: a
87. Wilson GP, Newton CD, Burt JK: A review of 116 diaphragrnatic
review of the literature and a case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
hernias in dogs and cats. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1971; 159:1142.
1984; 20:783.
88. Sullivan M, Lee R: Radiological features of 80 cases of diaphrag-
114. Berry CR, Gaschan FP, Ackerman N: Radiographic and ultrasono-
matic rupture. J S1mall Anim Pract 1989; 30:561.
 graphic features of hypertrophic feline muscular dystrophy in two
89. Bellah JR, Spencer CP, Brown DJ, et al: Congenital cranioventral
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1992; 33:357.
abdorminal wall, caudal sternal, diaphragrmatic, pericardial and
115. Barber DL: Radiographic diagnosisdiaphragrmatic asymmetry in
intracardiac defects in Cocker Spaniel litterrmates. I Am Vet Med
a dog. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:56.
Assoc 1989; 194:1741.
116. DeTroyer A, Kelly S, Troyer A: Chest wall rmechanics in dogs with
90. Cornell KK, Jakovljevic S, Waters DJ, et al: Extrahepatic biliary
acute diaphragm paralysis. J Appl Physiol 1982; 53:373.
obstruction secondary to diaphragmatic hernia in 2 cats. J Am
117. Greene CE, Bassinger RR, Whitfield JB: Surgical managerment of
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:504.
bilateral diaphragrmatic paralysis in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
91. Tadrnor A, Zuckerman E, Birnbaum SC: Diaphragmatic hernia in a
1988; 193:1542.
 pregnant bitch. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:585.
118. Young PN, Gorgacz EJ, Barsanti JA: Respiratory failure associated
92. Rendano VT: Positive contrast peritoneography: an aid in the radi-
06h sos ds w u I i e u siseed sdp 
ographic diagnosis of diaphragrmatic hernia. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:67.
16:933.
93. Stickle RL: Positive-contrast celiography (peritoneography) for the
119. Bhargava AK, Rudy RL, Diesem CD: Radiographic anatorny of the
diagnosis of diaphragrmatic hernia in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
pleura in dogs as visualized by contrast pleurography. Vet Radiol
Assoc 1984; 185:295.
1969; 10:61.
 94. Ackerman N, Millrman T: Esophageal hiatal hernia in a dog. Vet
120. Bhargava AK, Burt JK, Rudy RL, et al: Diagnosis of rmediastinal and
Radiol 1982; 23:107.
 heart base turmors in dogs using contrast pleurography. Vet Radiol
95. Miles KG, Pope ER, Jergens AE: Paraesophageal hiatal hernia and
1970; 11:56.
pyloric obstruction in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 193:1437.
121. Lord PF, Suter PF, Chan KF, et al: Pleural, extrapleural and pul-
96. Waldron DR,Moon M, LbMS,tal: Oesophageal hiatal henian
rmonary lesions in srmall animals: a radiographic approach to differ-
two cats.J Small Anirm Pract 1990; 31:259.
ential diagnosis. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1972; 13:4.
 97. Burnie AG, Sirmpson IW, Corcoran BM: Gastro-oesophageal reflux
122. Thrall DE: The pleural space. In Thrall DE, ed: Textbook of veteri-
and hiatus hernia associated with laryngeal paralysis in a dog. J
nary diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1998;
Srmall Anirm Pract 1989; 30:4 14.
pp 322-334.
98. Callan MB, Washabau RJ, Saunders HM, et al: Congenital
123. Harbison ML, Godelski JI: Malignant mesothelioma in urban dogs.
esophageal hiatal hernia in the Chinese Shar-Pei dog I Vet lntern
Vet Pathol 1983; 20:531.
Med 1993; 7:210.
124. Thrall DE, Goldschrmidt MH: Mesothelioma in the dog six case
99. Brinkley CH: Hiatus hernia in a cat. Vet Rec 1990; 127:46.
reports. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1978; 19:107.
100. Bright RM, Sackrman JE, DeNovo C, et al: Hiatal hernia in the dog
125. Cantwell HD, Rebar AH, Allen AR: Pleural effusion in the dog:
and cat; a retrospective study of 16 cases. J Small Anirm Pract 1990;
 principles for diagnosis. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1981; 19:227.
31:244.
126. Davies C, Forrester SD: Pleural effsion in cats: 82 cases (1987-
101. Dhein CRM, Rawlings CA, Rosin E, et al: Esophageal hiatal hernia
1995). I Small Anirm Pract 1996; 37:217.
and eventration of the diaphragrm with resultant gastroesophageal
127. Groves TF, Ticer IW: Pleural fluid rmoverment: its effect on the
reflux. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1980; 16:517.
appearance of ventrodorsal and dorsventral radiographic prjec.
102. Dieringer TM, Wolf AM: Esophageal hiatal hernia and megaesoph-
tions. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:99.
agus cormplicating tetanus in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991;
128. Snyder PS, Sato T, Atkins CE: The utility of thoracic radiographic
199:87.
measurerment for the detection of cardiomegaly in cats with pleural
103. Ellison GW, Lewis DD, Phillips L, et al: Esophageal hiatal hernia in
effusion. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:89.
simall anirmals: literature review and a modified surgical technique.
129. Glaus TM, Rawlings CA, Mahaffey EA, et al: Acute thyrnic hernor-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1987; 232:391.
rhage and hermothorax in a dog JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:489.
104. Berry CR, Koblik PD, Ticer JW: Dorsal peritoneopericardial
130. Ackerrman N, Grain E, Castleman W: Canine nocardiosis. J Am
Imesothelial rermnant as an aid to the diagnosis of feline congenital
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1982; 18: 147.
peritoneopericardial diaphragrmatic hernia. Vet Radiol 1990;
131. Armstrong PJ: Nocardial pleuritis in a cat. Can Vet J 1980; 21:189.
31:239.
132. Barnhart MD, Rasrmuseen LM: Pleural effusion as a cormplication of
105. Hay WH, Woodfield JA, Moon MA: Clinical, echocardiographic
extrahepatic biliary rupture in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1996;
32:409.
hernia in two dogs and a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:1245.
133. Berry CR, Gallaway A, Thrall DE, et al: Thoracic radiographic fea-
106. Barrett R, Kittrell JE: Congenital eritonepericardial diahrag-
tures of anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity in 14 dogs. Vet Radiol
matic hernia in a cat. Vet Radiol 1966; 7:21.
Ultrasound 1993; 34:391.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
239
134. Chastain CB, Greve JH, Riedesel DH: Pericardial effusion fron
  I s i s       1
granulormatous pleuritis and pericarditis in a dog. J Am Vet Med
Med Assoc 1987; 191:1399.
Assoc 1974; 164:1201.
161. Forrester SD: Pneumothorax in a dog with a pulmonary abscess
135. Edwards DF, Nyland TG, Weigel JP: Thoracic, abdorminal and verte-
 and suspected infective endocarditis. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 1992;
 bral actinomycosis: diagnosis and long-term therapy in 3 dogs. JVet
200:351.
Intern Med 1988; 2:184.
162. Dallman MJ, Martin RA, Roth L: Pneurmothorax as the prirmary
136. Fossurm TW: Feline chylothorax. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1993;
 problerm in two cases of bronchoalveolar carcinorma in the dog. J
15:549.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988; 24:710.
137. Fossurm TW, Hodges CC, Scruggs DW, et al: Generalized lyrm-
163. Holtsinger RH, Beale BS, Bellah JS, et al: Spontaneous pneumotho-
phangiectasis in a dog with subcutaneous chyle and lymphan-
rax in the dog: a retrospective analysis of 21 cases. J Am Anirm Hosp
giorma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:213.
Assoc 1993; 29:195.
138. Fossurm TW, Wellrman M, Felford RL, et al: Eosinophilic pleural or
164. Salisbury SK, Forbes S, Blevins WE: Peritracheal abscess associated
peritoneal effusions in dogs and cats: 14 cases (1986-1992). I A1m
with tracheal colapse and bilateral laryngeal paralysis in a dog. J
Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:1873.
Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1273.
139. Rishniw M, Weidrman J, Hornof WJ: Hydrothorax secondary to a
165. Postorino NC, Wheeler SL, Park RD, et al: A syndrorme resermbling
perinephric pseudocyst in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998;
 lyrmphomatoid granulormatosis in the dog. I Vet Intern Med 1989;
39:193.
3:15.
140. Rodriquez JF: Chylothorax in the dog. Eur I Comp Anirn Pract
166. Liu SK, Patnaik AK, Burk RL: Thyrmic branchial cysts in the dog and
1993; 3:77.
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182: 1095.
141. Robins G, Thornton J, Mills J: Bile peritonitis and pleuritis in a dog.
167. O'Dair HA, Holt PE, Pearson GR, et al: Acquired irmrmune mediated
 J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1977; 13:55.
myasthenia gravis in a cat associated with a cystic thyrmus. J Srmall
142. Seuss RP, Flanders JA, Beck KA, et al: Constrictive pleuritis in cats
Anirm Pract 199 1; 32:202.
with chylothorax: 10 cases (1983-1991). J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc
168. Scott-Moncrieff JC, Cook JR, Lantz GC: Acquired rmyasthenia
1994; 30:70.
gravis in a cat with a thyrmorma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;
143. Steyn PF, Wittum TE: Radiographic, epidermiologic and clinical
196:1291.
169. Shaiken LC, Evans SM, Goldschmidt MH: Radiographic findings in
and cats (1982-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:307.
canine malignant histiocytosis. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:237.
144. Gelzer ARM, Downs MO, Newell SM, et al: Accessory lung lobe tor-
170. Lord PF: Radiology of the mediastinurm. Vet Annual 1991; 31:173.
sion and chylothorax in an Afghan Hound. J Am Vet Med Assoc
171. Myer W: Radiography review: the rmediastinurm. Vet Radiol 1978;
1997; 33:171.
19:197.
145. Watson E: Foreign body in the pleural cavity of a dog. Vet Radiol
172. Atwater SW, Powers BE, Park RD, et al: Thymora in dogs; 23 cases
1989; 30:284.
(1980-1991). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205:1007.
146. Waldrop IE, Pike FS, Dulisch ML, et al: Chylothorax in a dog with
173. Bellah JR, Stiff ME, Russell RG: Thyrnorma in the dog: two case
pulrmonary lyrmphangiosarcoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;
reports and review of 20 additional cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;
37:81.
183:306.
147. Glaus TM, Jacobs GJ, Rawlings CA, et al: Surgical rermoval of heart-
 174. Gorrman PD: What is your diagnosis? Anaplastic thyrmorma infiltrat-
worms frorm a cat with caval syndrorme. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;
ing the cranial mediastinurm.J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:993.
206:663.
175. Hunt GB, Churcher RK, Church DB, et al: Excision of a locally inva-
148. Bunch SE, Metcalf MR, Crane SW, et al: Idiopathic pleural effusion 
sive thymorma causing cranial vena caval syndrorme in a dog. I Am
and pulmonary thrormboermbolism in a dog with autoimmune
Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210:1628.
hermolytic anermia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:1748.
176. Klebanow ER: Thyrmorma and acquired rmyasthenia gravis in the
149. Fossurn TW: Severe bilateral fibrosing pleuritis associated with
dog; a case report and review of 13 additional cases. J Am Anim
chronic chylothorax in five cats and two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:63.
1992; 201:317.
177. Poffenbarger E, Klausner JS, Caywood DD: Acquired rmyasthenia
150. Lord PF, Greiner TP,Greene RW, et al: Lung lobe torsion in the dog.
gravis in a dog with thyrmorma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1985;
J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1973; 9:473.
21:119.
151. Stobie D, Carpenter JL: Lyrnphangiosarcorma of the rmediastinum,
178. Gruffy DD, Jones TJ, Gascell CI, et al: Clinical and radiological fea-
rmesentery, and ormentum in a cat with chylothorax. I Am Anim
 tures of anterior mediastinal lymphosarcoma in the cat: a review of
Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:78.
30 cases. Vet Rec 1979; 104:304.
152. Myer CW: Pneumothorax: a radiography review. J Arm Vet Radiol
179. Peaston AE, Chuch DB, Allan GS, et al: Cormbined chylothorax, chy-
Soc 1978; 19:12.
loperitoneurm and cranial vena caval syndrome in a dog with thy-
153. Kern DA, Carrig CB, Martin RA: Radiographic evaluation of
morma. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:1354.
induced pneurmothorax in the dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994;
180. Ellison GW, Garner MM, Ackerman N: Idiopathic mediastinal cyst
35:411.
 in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1994; 35:347.
154. Fagin BD: A radiographic approach to diagnosing pneurmormedi-
181. Gallway PEJ, Barr FJ, Holt PE, et al: Cystic thyrmorma in a cat with
astinurm. Vet Med 1988; 83:571.
 cholesterol-rich fluid and an unusual ultrasonographic appearance.
155. Kramek BA, Caywood DD, O'Brien TD: Bullous emphyserma and
J Srmall Anirm Pract 1997; 38:220.
recurrent pneurmothorax in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1985;
182. Shaiken LC, Evans SM, Goldschmidt MH: Radiographic findings in
186:971.
canine malignant histiocytosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1991; 32:237.
156. Valentine A, Smeak D, Allen D, et al: Spontaneous pneurmothorax in
183. Dunn KJ: What is your diagnosis? Septic mediastinitis. J Small
dogs. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1996; 18:53.
Anirm Pract 1994; 35:265.
157. Griffon DJ, Walter PA, Wallace LJ: Thoracic injuries in cats with
184. Mason GD, Lamb CR, Jakowski RM: Fatal rmediastinal hermorrhage
traumatic fractures. Vet Cormp Orthop Traurma 1994; 7:98.
in a dog. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:214.
158. Gordon LE, Thacher C, Kapatkin A: High-rise syndrome in dogs: 8 1
185. Greene JA, Blevins WE: Recurring gastric dilatation in a dog sec-
cases (1985-1991). J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:118.
 Ondary to caudal rmediastinal abscess. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1978; 
159. Spackrman CJ, Caywood DD, Feeney DA, et al: Thoracic wall and
14:516.
 pulrmonary traurma in dogs sustaining fractures as a result of motor
 186. VanDerLinde-Siprman JS, VanDuk JE: Hematormas in the thymus in
vehicle accidents. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185:975.
dogs. Vet Pathol 1987; 24:59.
240
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
187. van den Broek A: Pneurmormediastinum in seventeen dogs: etiology
 216. Shirorma IT, Anderson SE: Radiographic diagnosis—esophageal for-
and radiographic signs. J Small Anim Pract 1986; 27:747.
eign object. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:126.
188. Harvey CE: lnherited and congenital airway conditions. J Small
 217. Burrows CF: Reversible mega-esophagus in a dog with hypoad.
Anirm Pract 1989; 30:184.
renocorticism. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1987; 28:1073.
189. Coyne BE, Fingland RB: Hypoplasia of the trachea in dogs: 103
 218. Cox VS, Wallace LJ, Anderson VE, et al: Hereditary esophageal dys-
cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:768.
function in the Miniature Schnauzer dog. Am J Vet Res 1980;
190. Montali RJ, Strandberg JD: Extraperitoneal lesions in feline infec-
41:326.
tious peritonitis. Vet Pathol 1972; 9:109.
219. Gaynor AR, Shofer FS, Washabau RJ: Risk factors for acquired
191. Okin R: Pseudormermbranous tracheitis resermbling collapsed tra-
Imegaesophagus in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211:1406.
 chea in a Golden Retriever. Canine Pract 1985; 12:22.
220. Miller M,Hegreberg GA,Lenn VA: Characterization of inhr-
192. Caylor KB, Moore Rw: What is your diagnosis? Severed cervical tra-
ited canine myasthenia gravis. Fed Proceed 1983; 42:1300.
chea and substantial subcutaneous ermphyserma in a cat. J Arm Vet
221. Hendricks JC,Maggi-Price L, Dougherty IF: Transient esophaeal
Med Assoc 1994; 205:561.
dysfunction mirmicking rmegaesophagus in 3 dogs. J Am Vet Med
193. White RN, Milner HR: Intrathoracic tracheal avulsion in 3 cats. J
Assoc 1984; 185:90.
Small Anirm Pract 1995; 36:343.
 222. Hoenig M, Mahaffey MB, Parnell PG, et al: Megaesophagus in two
194. Wong WT, Brock KA: Tracheal laceration frorm endotracheal intu-
cats. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:763.
bation in a cat. Vet Rec 1994; 134:622.
 223. Knowles KE, O'Brien DP, Amann JF: Congenital idiopathic rmegae-
195. Carlisle CH, Biery DN, Thrall DE: Tracheal and larymgeal turmors in
sophagus in a litter of Chinese Shar-Peis: clinical,electrodiagnostic
the dog and cat: literature review and 13 additional patients. Vet
and pathological findings. JI Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:313.
Radiol 1991; 32:1991.
 224. Peeters ME, Ubbink CJ: Dysphagia-associated rmuscular dystrophy:
196. Ackerrman N, Cornelius LM, Halliwell WH: Respiratory distress
a farmilial trait in the Bouvier des Flanders. Vet Rec 1994; 134:444.
associated with Histoplasma-induced tracheobronchial lyrm-
225.SatchellPM,Mahant J A radilogicalappraisal fthe developmnt
phadenopathy in dogs. JAm Vet Med Assoc 1973; 163:963.
and resolution of artificial megaesophagus in a dog. Vet Radiol
197. Salisbury SK, Forbes S, Blevins WE: Peritracheal abscesses associ-
1981; 22:115.
ated with tracheal collapse and bilateral laryngeal paralysis in a dog.
 226. Schwartz A, Favin CE, Greenspan RH, et al: Congenital neurormus-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1273.
 cular esophageal disease in a litter of Newfoundland puppies. Vet
198. Rarmirez O, Hawkins EC: Radiographic diagnosistracheal
Radiol 1976; 17:103.
eosinophilic granuloma/polyp. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:422.
 227. Sharp NJH: Feline dysautonormia. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1990; 5:67.
199. Lappin MR, Prestwood AK: Oslerus osleri: Clinical case, attermpted
 228. Shelton GD, Willard MD, Cardinet GH, et al: Acquired myasthenia
transrmission and epidermiology. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988;
 gravis. Selective involverment of esophageal, pharyngeal and facial
24:153.
Imuscles. J Vet lntern Med 1990; 4:28 1.
 200. Dimski Ds: Tracheal obstruction caused by tree needles in a cat. J
 229. Wise LA, Lappin MR: Canine dysautonormia. Semin Vet Med Surg
Armn Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:477.
1990; 5:72.
 201. Lotti U, Niebauer GW: Tracheobronchial foreign bodies of plant
 230. Van Gundy T: Vascular ring anormalies. Comp Cont Ed 1989; 11:36.
origin in 153 hunting dogs. Cormp Cont Ed 1992; 14:900.
 231. Hurley K, Miller MW, Willard MD, et al: Left aortic arch and right
202. Cantwell HD: Metrizarmide insufflation bronchography: a new
ligarmentum arteriosurm esophageal obstruction in a dog. J Arm Vet
diagnostic approach. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:184.
Med Assoc 1993; 203:410.
 203. Myer W, Burt JK, Davis GQ: A cormparative study of propyliodone 
232. Fingeroth JM, Fossum TW: Late-onset regurgitation associated
and bariurm bronchography in the dog. I Arm Vet Radiol Soc 1974;
with persistent right aortic arch in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
15:44.
1987; 191:981.
 204. O'Brien JA, Buchanan IW, Kelly DF: Tracheal collapse in the dog. J
 233. VanDenlngh TSGAM, VanDerLinde-Siprman JS: Vascular rings in
Arm Vet Radiol Soc 1966; 7: 12.
the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974; 164:939.
205. Hendricks JC, O'Brien JA: Tracheal collapse in two cats. J Arm Vet
 234. Hurley K, Miller MW, Willard MD, et al: Left aortic arch and right
Med Assoc 1985; 187:418.
ligarmenturm arteriosum causing esophageal obstruction in a dog. J
206. Zawie DA: Medical diseases of the esophagus. Comp Cont Ed 1987;
Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:410.
9: 1146.
 235. Uzuka Y, Nakarma S: Persistent right aortic arch in a cat. Cormp
207. Bartges W, Nielson DL: Reversible mgaesophagus asciated with
Anirm Pract 1988; 2:14.
atypical primary hypoadrenocorticism in a dog. I Am Vet Med
 236. Hardie EM, Greene RT, Ford RB: Balloon dilatation for treatrment of
Assoc 1992; 201:889.
esophageal stricture: a case report. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1987;
 208. Whitely NT: Megaesophagus and glucocorticoid-deficient hypoad-
23:547.
renocorticism in a dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1996; 36:132.
 237. Burk RL, Zawie DA, Garvey MS: Balloon catheter dilation of intra-
209. Clifford DH, Lee MO, Lee DC, et al: Classification of congenital
Imural esophageal strictures in the dog and cat: a description of the
neurormuscular dysfunction of the canine esophagus. Vet Radiol
8al Sins pan iaa uuas sase xis jo iodau e pue ainpaood
1976; 17:98.
2:241.
210. Eville P, Ackerman N: The effect of bariurm termperature on
238. Ridgeway RL, Suter PF: Clinical and radiographic signs in primary
esophageal and gastric rmotility in dogs. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:233.
and metastatic esophageal neoplasrms of the dog. I Aim Vet Med
211.GuffyMM: Radiographic examinationof theesophagus of the dog
Assoc 1979; 174:700.
and cat. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1972; 161:1429.
 239. McCaw D, Pratt G, Walshaw R: Squarnous cell carcinoma of the
 212. Hashirm MA, Waterrman AE: Deterrmination of the length and posi-
esophagus in a dog. I Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1980; 16:561.
tion of the lower esophageal sphincter by correlation of external
 240. Rolfe Ds, Twedt DC, Seirm HB: Chronic regurgitation or vormiting
Imeasurerments with combined radiographic and rmanormetric esti-
caused by esophageal leiormyorma in 3 dogs J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
mations in the cat. Br Vet J 1992; 148:435.
1994; 30:425.
 213. Stickle RL, Love NE: Radiographic diagnosis of esophageal diseases
 241. VanBree H, DeRick A, Vandenberge J: Partial esophageal obstruc-
in dogs and cats. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1989, 4:179.
tion by an intrarmural hermatoma in a dog. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:267.
214. Tennille NB: Esophageal diseases. Vet Radiol 1962; 3:30.
242. Fernandes FH, Hawe RS, Loeb WF: Primary squarmous cell carci-
 215. Waterman AD, Hashirm MA: Measurerment of the length and position
noma of the esophagus in a cat. Comp Anim Pract 1987; 1:16.
of the lower esophageal sphincter by correlation of external rmeasure-
 243. Wilson RB, Holcher MA, Laney PS: Esophageal osteosarcoma in a
 Iments and radiographic estirnations in dogs. Vet Rec 1991; 129:261.
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1991; 27:361.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
241
 244. Johnson RC: Canine spirocercosis and associated esophageal sar-
Radiol Soc 1965; 6:21.
coma. Comp Cont Ed 1992; 14:577.
273. Aronson E, McCaw D: Congenital heart disease. Radiography pro-
245. Johnson RC: Canine spirocercosis and associated esophageal sar-
vides a specific diagnosis aid in advising clients with problerm pets.
corma. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1992; 14:577.
Vet Med Rev 1982; 3:4.
246. Bailey WS: Spirocerca-associated esophageal sarcomas. J Arm Vet
274. Ford RB: Congenital diseases of puppies: an overview. Vet Tech
Med Assoc 1979; 175: 148.
1991; 12:155.
247. Harmir AN: Esophageal perforation and pyothorax associated with
275. Patterson DF: Congenital defects of the cardiovascular systerm of
Spirocerca lupi infestation in a dog. Vet Rec 1986; 119:276.
dogs: studies in cormparative pathology. Adv Vet Sci Cormp Med
248. lyoghli B: Esophageal sarcormas associated with canine spirocerco-
1976; 20:1.
sis. Vet Med Simall Anirn Clin 1978; 73:47.
 276. Patterson DF: Hereditary congenital heart defects in dogs. J Small
249. Woods CB, Rawlings C, Barber D, et al: Esophageal deviation in 4
Anirn Pract 1989; 30:153.
Bulldogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:934.
277. Pidduck H:A review of inherited diseases in the dog. Vet Ann 1987;
250. Rendano VT, Zirmmer JF, Wallach MS, et al: Impaction of the phar-
293: 311.
ynx, larynx and esophagus by avian bones in the dog and cat. Vet
 278. Robinson R: Genetic anomalies in dogs. Canine Pract 1991; 16:29.
Radiol 1988; 29:213.
279. Stockman M, Boden E: Inheritable defects. Canine Pract 1991; 261.
 251. Squires RA: Esophageal obstruction by a hairball in a cat. I Srmall
280. Tidholm A: Retrospective study of congenital heart defects in 151
Anim Pract 1989; 30:311.
dogs. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1997; 38:94.
252. Houlton JEF, Herrtage ME, Taylor PM: Thoracic esophageal foreign
 281. VanDeLinde-Sipman JS, VanDenlngh TSGAM, Koerman JP:
bodies in the dog: a review of ninety cases. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1985;
Congenital heart abnorrmalities in the cat: a description of 16 cases.
26:521.
 Zentralbl Veterinarmed 1973; 20:419.
253. Spieliman BL, Shaker EH, Garvey MS: Esophageal foreign body in
282. Kirberger RM, Bland-van den Berg P, Grimbeek RJ: Doppler
 dogs: a retrospective study of 23 cases. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1992;
echocardiography in the normal dog: part ll, factors influencing
28:570.
 blood flow velocities and a comparison between left and right heart
254. Vessal K: Evaluation of bariurn and Gastrografin as a contrast
blood flow. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:380.
rmedia for esophageal perforation and rupture. Am I Roentgenol
 283. Stickle RL, Anderson LK: Diagnosis of comrmon congenital heart
1975; 123:307.
 anormalies in the dog using survey and non-selective contrast radi-
255. Parker NR, Walter PA, Gay J: Diagnosis and surgical managerment of
ography. Vet Radiol 1987; 28:6.
esophageal perforation. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:587.
 284. Oyama MA, Sisson DD: Evaluation of canine congenital heart dis-
 256. Basher AWP: Surgical treatrment of congenital bronchoesophageal
ease using an echocardiographic algorithrm. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
fistula in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:479.
2001; 37:5 19.
257. Van Ee RT, Dodd VM, Pope ER, et al: Bronchoesophageal fistula
 285. Ackerrman N, Burk RL, Hahn AW, et al: Patent ductus arteriosus in
 and transient megaesophagus in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;
the dog: a retrospective study of radiographic, epidermiologic, and
188:874.
 clinical findings. Arm I Vet Res 1978; 39:1805.
258. Freerman LM, Rush JE, Schelling SH, et al: Tracheoesophageal fistula
286. Fox PR, Bond BR, Sormrmer RJ: Nonsurgical transcatheter coil
in two cats.JI Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:531.
occlusions of patent ductus arteriosus in 2 dogs using a pre-
259. Fox SM, Alla FJ, Guilford WG, et al: Bronchoesophageal fistula in 2
formed nitinol snare delivery technique. I Vet lntern Med 1998;
dogs. N Z Vet I 1995; 43:235.
12:182.
260. Muir P, Bjorling DE: Successful surgical treatrment of a bronchoe-
 287. Goodwin JK, Lombard CW: Patent ductus arteriosus in adult dogs:
 sophageal fistula in a cat. Vet Rec 1994; 134:475.
clinical features of 14 cases (1981-1990). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
261. Thrall DE: Esophagobronchial fistula. Vet Radiol 1973; 14:22.
1992; 28:349.
262. Watrous BJ, Suter PF: Normal swallowing in the dog a cinefluoro-
 288. Kaplan PM: Congenital heart disease. Prob Vet Med 199 1; 3:500.
graphic study. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:99.
 289. Goodwin JK, Holland M: Contrast echocardiography as an aid in
263. Watrous BJ, Suter PF: Oropharyngeal dysphagias in the dogs: a
the diagnosis of right-to-left shunting patent ductus arteriosus. Vet
cinefluorographic analysis of experirmentally-induced and sponta-
Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:157.
neously occurring swallwing disorders. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:11.
 290. Pyle RL, Park RD, Alexander AF, et al: Patent ductus arteriosus with
264. Stickle RS: Radiographic evaluation of esophageal function in
pulrmonary hypertension in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1981;
Chinese Shar-Pei pups. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:8 1.
178:565.
 265. Gaskell CJ, Gibbs C, Pearson H: Sliding hiatus hernia with reflux
 291. Ackerman N: A right to left shunting patent ductus arteriosus with
esophagitis in 2 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 1974; 15:503.
secondary pulrmonary hypertension in a dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound
 266. Yaphe W, Giovengo S, Moise NS: Severe cardiormegaly secondary to
1992; 33:141.
anermia in a kitten. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:961.
292. Arora M: Reversed patent ductus arteriosus in a dog. Can Vet J
267. Root CR, Bahr RJ: The heart and great vessels. In Thrall DE, ed:
2001; 42:471.
Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders,
 293. Nelson W: Aorticopulrnonary window. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1986;
Philadelphia, 1998; p 335.
188:1055.
268. Toormbs JP, Ogburn PN: Evaluating canine cardiovascular silhou-
294. Eyster GE, Dalley SB, Chaffee A, et al: Aorticopulrmonary septal
 ettes: radiographic methods and normal radiographic anatormy.
defect in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1975; 167:1094.
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1985; 7:579.
 295. Guglielmini C, Pietra M, Cipone M: Aorticopulrmonary septal
    ri   
 defect in a Gerrman Shepherd dog. I Am Anin Hosp Assoc 2001;
Wolfhound: reference values for the breed. J Arm Anirm Hosp AssoC
37:433.
1999; 35:271.
 296. Eyster GE: Atrial septal defect and ventricular septal defect. Sermin
270. Rendano VT, Alexander JE: Heart size changes in experirmentally-
Vet Med Surg 1994; 9:227.
induced adrenal insufficiency in the dog:a radiographic study. J Am
 297. Allen DG, Johnson JA: Aortic valvular dysplasia with subvalvular
Vet Radiol Soc 1976; 17:57.
aortic stenosis in dogs. Can Vet J 1982; 23:228.
271. Lehmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD, Biller DS, et al: Radiographic evalua-
298. Buoscio DA, Sisson D, Zachary JF, et al: Clinical and pathological
tion of caudal vena cava size in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997;
 characterization of an umusual form of subvalvular aortic stenosis in
38:94.
four Golden Retriever puppies. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:100.
 272. Buchanan JW, Patterson DF: Selective angiography and angiocar-
 299. Fuentes VL, Luis-Fuentes V: Aortic stenosis in Boxers. Vet Ann 1993;
diography in dogs with congenital cardiovascular disease. J Am Vet
33:220.
242
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
 300. Muna WFT, Ferrans FJ, Pierce JE, et al: Discrete subaortic stenosis
 326. Patterson DF, Pyle RL, van Mierop LHS, et al: Hereditary defects of
 in Newfoundland dogs: association of infective endocarditis. Am J
the conotruncal septurm in Keeshond dogs: pathologic and genetic
Cardiol 1978; 41:746.
studies. Am I Cardiol 1974; 34:187.
 301. O'Grady MR, Holrmberg DL, Miller CW, et al: Canine congenital
327. Ringwald RJ, Bonagura JD:Tetralogy of Fallot in the dog linical
aortic stenosis: a review of the literature and commentary. Can Vet
fndings in 13 cases J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1988; 24:33.
J 1989; 30:811.
328. Aronson E, McCaw D: Tetralogy of Fallot. Vet Med Rev 1982; 3:4.
302. Pyle RL, Patterson DF, Chacko S: The genetics and pathology of dis-
 329. Ware WA, Bonagura ID: Multiple congenital cardiac anormalies and
crete subaortic stenosis in the Newfoundland dog. Am Heart J 1976;
Eisenmenger's syndrome in a dog. Cornp Cont Ed 1988; 10:932.
92:324.
330. Feldman EC, Nimmo-Wilkie JS, Pharr IW: Eisenmenger's syndrome
 303. Bonagura JD, Lehmkuhl LB: Congenital heart disease. In Fox PR,
 in the dog: case reports. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 198 1; 17:477.
 Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology.
 331. Nirmmo-Wilkie IS, Feldrman EC: Pulrmonary vascular lesions associ-
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1999; p 485.
ated with congenital heart defects in three dogs. J Am Anirm Hosp
 304. Kienle RD, Thormas WP, Pion PD: The natural clinical history of
Assoc 198 1; 17:485.
canine congenital subaortic stenosis. J Vet lntern Med 1994; 8:423.
 332. Bonagura JD, Lehrmkuhl LB: Congenital heart disease. In Fox PR,
 305. Nakayarma T, Wakao Y, Ishikawa R, et al: Progression of subaortic
Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology.
stenosis detected by continuous wave Doppler echocardiography in
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1999; p 519.
a dog. I Vet Intern Med 1996; 10:97.
 333. Girdon B, Trautvetter E, Patterson DF: Pulrmonary congestion asso-
 306. Levitt L, Fowler JD, Schuh JCL: Aortic stenosis in the dog: a review
ciated with cor triatriaturm in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982;
of 12 cases. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:357.
180:75.
 307. Stepien RL, Bonagura JD: Aortic stenosis: clinical findings in six
 334. Wander KW, Monnet E, Orton EC: Surgical correction of cor tria-
cats. J Srmall Anirn Pract 1991; 32:341.
triaturm sinister in a kitten. J Anirm Hosp Assoc 1998; 34:383.
 308. Lehmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD: Cormparison of Doppler transducer
335. Tobias AH, Thomas WP,Kittleson MD,et al: Cor triatriatum dexter
 placerment sites for estirmating the severity of subaortic stenosis in
in two dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 220:285.
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1994; 55:192.
 336. Jevens DJ, Johnston SA, Jones CA, et al: Cor triatriaturm dexter in
 309. Belanger MC, Di Fruscia R, Durmesnil JG, et al: Usefulness of the
two dogs. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:289.
indexed effective orifice area in the assessment of subaortic stenosis
 337. Otto CM, Mahaffey M, Jacobs G: Cor triatriaturm dexter with Budd-
in the dog. I Vet lIntern Med 2001; 15:430.
Chiari syndrorme and a review of ascites in young dogs. J Simall
 310. Bonagura JD, Lehrmkuhl LB: Congenital heart disease. In Fox PR,
Anirm Pract 1990; 31:385.
Sisson D, Moise NS,eds Texbook of canine and feline cardiolgy.
338. Baryley KA, Lunney I, Ettinger SJ: Cor triatriaturn dexter in a dog. J
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1999; p 485.
Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:153.
 311. Bonagura JD, Lehmkuhl LB: Congenital heart disease. In Fox PR,
 339. Adin DB, Thomas WP: Balloon dilatation of cor triatriaturn dexter
Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology.
in a dog. I Vet Intern Med 1999; 13:617.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1999; p 492.
 340. Fossurm TW, Miller MW: Cor triatriaturm and caval anormalies.
 312. Buchanan JW: Pathogenesis of single right coronary artery and
 Sermin Vet Med Surg 1994; 9:177.
 pulmonic stenosis in English Bulldogs. I Vet lntern Med 2001;
 341. Fine DM, Oliver NB, Walshaw R, et al: Surgical corection of late-
15:101.
onset Budd-Chiari-like syndrorme in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc
313. Fingland RB,Bonagura JD, Myer CW: Pulmonic stenosis in the dog:
1998; 212:835.
29 cases ( 1975- 1984). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:281.
342. Miller MW, Bonagura JD, DeBartola SP, et al: Budd-Chiari-like syn-
 314. Buchanan JW: Pulrmonic stenosis caused by a single coronary artery
drome in 2 dogs. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:277.
in dogs: four cases ( 1965-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:115.
 343. Tobias AH, Thormas WP, Kittleson MD, et al: Cor triatriaturm dexter 
 315. Jacobs G, Mahaffey MB, Rawlings CA: Valvular pulrmonic stenosis
in two dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:285.
in four Boykin Spaniels. I Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:247.
 344. Mitten RW, Edwards GA, Rishniw M: Diagnosis and rmanagerment
 316. Lormbard CW, Ackerman N, Berry CR, et al: Pulmonic stenosis and
of cor triatriatum dexter in a Pyrenean Mountain Dog and an Akita
right to left shunt in 3 dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:71.
Inu. Aust Vet J 2001; 79:177.
317. Malik R, Church DB, Hunt GB: Valvular pulmonic stenosis in
 345. Liu SK, Tilley LP: Dysplasia of the tricuspid valve in the dog and cat.
Bullmastiffs. I Small Anirm Pract 1993:34:288.
J Am Vet Med Assoc i976; 169:625.
 318. Bussadori C, DeMadron E, Santilli RA, et al: Balloon valvuloplasty in
 346. Liu SK: Cardiovascular pathology. In Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline
 30 dogs with pulmonic stenosis: effect of valve rmorphology and annu-
 cardiology. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1988; p 641.
lar size on initial and 1-year outcome. J Vet lntern Med 2001; 15:553.
 347. Buchanan IW: Selective angiography and angiocardiography in
319. Brownlie SE, Cobb MA, Charmbers J, et al: Percutaneous balloon
dogs with acquired cardiovascular disease. I Arm Vet Radiol Soc
valvuloplasty in four dogs with pulmonic stenosis. J Small Anim
1965; 6:5.
Pract 1991; 32:169.
 348. Liu SK, Tilley LP: Malformation of the canine mitral valve cormplex.
 320. Bright JM, Jennings J, Toal R, et al: Percutaneous ballon valvulo-
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1975; 167:465.
plasty for treatrment of pulrmonic stenosis in a dog. I Arm Vet Med
 349. Malik R, Church DB: Congenital mitral insufficiency in Bull
Assoc 1987; 191:995.
Terriers. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1988; 29:549.
 ss d xoh u od  s xh   ie
 350. Lombard CW, Spencer CP: Correlation of radiographic, echocar-
Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology. WB
diographic and electrocardiographic signs of left heart enlargerment
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1999; p 824.
in dogs with mitral regurgitation. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:89.
 322. Liu SK: Pathology of feline heart diseases. Vet Clin North Arm 1977;
 351. Sadanga KK, MacDonald MJ, Buchanan JW: Echocardiography and
7:323.
surgery in a dog with let atrial rupture and hermopericardiurm. I Vet
 323. Bonagura JD, Lehrmkuhl LB: Congenital heart disease. In Fox PR,
Intern Med 1990; 4:216.
Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology.
 352. Bond BR: Problems in veterinary ultrasonographic analysis of
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1999; p 504.
acquired heart disease. Prob Vet Med 199 1; 3:520.
   xe  od  i x   e
 353. Starmoulis ME, Fox PR: Mitral valve stenosis in three cats. J Simall
Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology. WB
Anirm Pract 1993; 34:452.
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1999; p 825.
354. Fox PR, Miller MW, Liu SK: Clinical, echocardiographic and
 325. Liu SK, Etinger SJ: Persistent cormrmon atrioventricular canal in
Doppler irmaging characteristics of mitral valve stenosis in 2 dogs. J
two cats. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1963; 153:556.
An Vet Med Assoc 1993; 201:1575.
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
243
355. Brown WA, Thomas WP: Balloon valvuloplasty of tricuspid steno-
 Doberrman Pinscher dogs. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1982; 18 1:598.
sis in a Labrador Retriever. J Vet lntern Med 1995; 9:419.
 381. Harpster NK: Boxer cardiormyopathy: a review of the long-term
356. Lehmkuhl LB, Ware WA, Bonagura JD: Mitral stenosis in 15 dogs. J
benefits of antiarrhythmic therapy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Vet Intern Med 1994; 8:2.
Pract 1991; 21:989.
357. Zook BC, Paasch LH: Endocardial fibroelastosis in Burrmese cats.
382. Kelly DF, Newsholne SI: Sudden death in related Bloodhounds. J
Am J Pathol 1982; 106:435.
Srmall Anirm Pract 1993; 34:390.
358. Krahwinkel DI, Coogan PS: Endocardial fibroelastosis in a Great
 383. Simpson KW, Bonagura JD, Eaton KA: Right ventricular cardiormy-
Dane pup. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1971; 159:327.
opathy in a dog. I Vet Intern Med 1994; 8:306.
384. Dilated cardiormyopathy in the Newfoundland: a study of 37 cases
 J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:271.
(1983-1994). J A1m Anirm Hosp Assoc 1996; 32:465.
 360. Sisson D, Luethy M, Thomas WP: Ventricular septal defect accom-
 385. Vollmar AC: The prevalence of cardiomyopathy in the lrish
 panied by aortic regurgitation in five dogs. J Arm Anirn Hosp Assoc
Wolfhound: a clinical study of 500 dogs. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
1991; 27:441.
2000; 36:125.
 361. Lombard CW, Ackerman N, Berry CR, et al: Pulmonic stenosis and
 386. Meurs KM, Miller MW, Wright NA: Clinical features of dilated car-
right-to-left atrial shunt in three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;
diormyopathy in Great Danes and results of a pedigree analysis: 17
164:71.
cases (1990-2000). J A1m Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218:729.
 387. Gooding IP, Robinson WF, Wyburn RS, et al: A cardiormyopathy in
tricular septum and agenesis of the ductus arteriosus in a pup. J Am
the English Cocker Spaniel: a clinico-pathological investigation. J
Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:229.
Srmall Anirm Pract 1982; 23:133.
 363. Palacio MJ, Bayon A, Agut A: Dilated coronary sinus in a dog with
 388. Staaden RV: Cardiomyopathy of English Cocker Spaniels. J Am Vet
persistent left cranial vena cava. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1997;
Med Assoc 1981; 178:1289.
38:376.
389. Kittleson MD, Keene B, Pion PD, et al: Results of the Multicenter
364. McEntee K: Clinical vignette. J Vet Intern Med 1998; 12:53.
Spaniel Trial (MUST): taurine- and carnitine-responsive dilated
365. Schulz K, Baruffaldi J, Carrig C, et al: What is your diagnosis?
cardiormyopathy in Aimerican Cocker Spaniels with decreased
 Interruption of the aortic arch and subaortic stenosis in a dog. J Am
 plasrma taurine concentration. I Vet lIntern Med 1997; 11:204.
Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:645.
 390. Gavaghan BJ, Kittleson MD: Dilated cardiornyopathy in an
366. Buoscio DA, Sisson DF, Zachary JF, et al: Clinical and pathological
American Cocker Spaniel with taurine deficiency. Aust Vet J 1997;
 characterization of an unusual forrm of subvalvular aortic stenosis
75:862.
in four Golden Retriever puppies. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1994;
 391. Keene BE, Panciera DP, Atkins CE, et al: Myocardial L-carnitine
30:100.
deficiency in a family of dogs with dilated cardiormyopathy. J Am
367. Palacio MI, Bernal L, Bayon A, etal: Persistent left cranial vena caya
Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:647.
associated with rmultiple congenital anormalies in a six-week-old
 392. Sisson DD, Knight DH, Helinski C, et al: Plasrma taurine concen-
puppy. I Small Anirm Pract 1997; 38:526.
trations and M-mode echocardiographic measures in healthy cats
368. Saimrmarco CD, Regan J, Ward CR, et al: Caudal venous return
and cats with dilated cardiormyopathy. J Vet lntern Med 1991;
through a left azygous vein in a dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995;
5:232.
36:517.
 393. Pion PD: Clinical findings in cats with dilated cardiormyopathy and
369. Beardow AW, Buchanan JW: Chronic rmitral valve disease in
the relationship of findings to taurine deficiency. J Am Vet Med
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels: 95 cases (1987-1991). J A1m Vet Med
Assoc 1992; 201:267.
Assoc 1993; 203:1023.
 394. O'Grady MR, Horne R: Outcorme of 103 asyrmptomatic Doberrman
 370. Darke PGG: Valvular incompetence in Cavalier King Charles
 Pinschers: incidence of dilated cardiormyopathy in a longitudinal
 Spaniels. Vet Rec 1987; 120:365.
study. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med 1995; 9:199.
 371. Pedersen HD, Kristensen BO, Lorentzen KA, et al: Mitral valve pro-
 395. Calvert CA, Pickus CS, Jacobs GJ, et al: Signalment, survival and
lapse in 3-year-old healthy Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. An
prognostic factors in Doberman Pinschers with end-stage car-
echocardiographic study. Can I Vet Res 1995; 59:294.
diormyopathy. I Vet Intern Med 1997; 11:323.
372. Pedersen HD, Lorentzen RA, Kristensen BO: Echocardiographic
396. Calvert CA,HallG,Jacobs G, et al; Clnical and pathologicfndings
Imitral valve prolapse in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels: epidermiol-
in Doberman Pinschers with occult cardiormyopathy that died sud-
ogy and prognostic significance for regurgitation. Vet Rec 2000;
denly or developed congestive heart failure: 54 cases (1984-1991). J
144:315.
Arm Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210:505.
373. Keene BW: Chronic valvular disease in the dog. ln Fox PR, ed:
 397. Lord PF, Wood A, Tilley LP, et al: Radiographic and hermodynarmic
Canine and feline cardiology. Churchill Livingstone, New York,
 evaluation of cardiormyopathy and thromboermbolism in the cat. J
1988; p 409.
Armn Vet Med Assoc 1974:164:154.
374. Kaplan PM, Fox PR, Garvey MS, et al: Acute rmitral regurgitation
398. Lord PF, Tilley LP, Wood A, et al: Radiography and angiocardiogra-
with papillary muscle rupture in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;
phy of feline cardiormyopathy. Vet Radiol 1974; 15:56.
191:1436.
399. Moise NS, Dietze AE, Mezza LE, et al: Echocardiography, electro-
375. Clossa JM, Font A: Traumatic tricuspid insufficiency in a kitten. J
cardiography and radiography of cats with dilatation cardiormyopa-
Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1999; 35:21.
thy, hypertrophic cardiormyopathy, and hyperthyroidism. Am I Vet
 376. Buchanan IW, Kelly AM: Endocardial splitting of the left atriurm in
Res 1986; 47:1476.
the dog with hermorrhage and hermopericardium. Vet Radiol 1964;
400. Laste NJ, Harpster NK: A retrospective study of 100 cases of feline
5:28.
distal aortic thromboermbolism: 1977-1993. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
377. Jacobs GJ, Calvert CA, Mahaffey MB, et al: Echocardiographic
1995; 31:492.
detection of flail left atrioventricular valve cusp frorm ruptured
 401. Peterson EN, Moise NS, Brown CA, et al: Heterogeneity of hyper-
chordae tendineae in 4 dogs. I Vet Intern Med 1995; 9:341.
 trophy in feline hypertrophic heart disease. I Vet Intern Med 1993;
378. Uehara Y, Takahashi M: Quantitative evaluation of the severity of
7:183.
402. Bond BR, Fox PR, Peterson ME, et al: Echocardiographic findings
Sci 1996; 58:249.
h os P ia u I  m so c 
 379. Lombard CW: Echocardiographic and clinical signs of canine
192:1546.
dilated cardiormyopathy. I Small Anirm Pract 1984; 25:59.
403. Fox PR, Peterson ME, Broussard JD: Electrocardiographic and radi-
380. Calvert CA, Chaprman WJ, Toal Rl: Congestive cardiormyopathy in
ographic changes in cats with hyperthyroidisrm: cormparison of
244
Small Animal RadiOloGy And UitrasonoGraphy
 populations evaluated during 1992-1993 vs. 1979-1982. J Arm Anirm
428. Driehuys S, Van Winkle TJ, Sammarco CD, et al: Myocardial infarc-
Hosp Assoc 1999; 35:27.
tion in dogs and cats: 37 cases (1985-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc
404. Moise NS, Dietze AE: Echocardiographic, electrocardiographic and
1998; 213:1444.
radiographic detection of cardiormegaly in hyperthyroid cats. Am J
429. Calvert CA, Mandell CP: Diagnosis and managerment of feline
Vet Res 1986; 47:1487.
heartworm disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180:550.
405. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Cavanaugh PG, et al: Feline hyperthy-
430. Losonsky IM, Thrall DE, Lewis RE: Thoracic radiographic abnor-
roidism: pretreatrment clinical and laboratory evaluation of 131
  mi ss um sp  ui s
cases. J Am Vet Assoc 1983; 183:103.
Radiol 1983; 24:120.
406. Lesser M, Fox PR, Bond B: Non-invasive blood pressure evaluation
431. Thrall DE, Badertscher RR, Lewis RE, et al: Radiographic changes
in cats with left ventricular hypertrophic diseases. J Vet Intern Med
associated with developing dirofilariasis in experimentally infected
1990; 4:117.
dogs. Am I Vet Res 1980; 41:81.
407. Miyarmoto T, Kato M, Kuwarmura M, et al: A first feline case of car-
432. Sottiaux J, Franck M: Pulmonary ermbolism and cor pulmonale in a
diornyopathy associated with hyperthyroidisrm due to thyroid ade-
cat. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1999; 40:88.
noma in Japan. Feline Pract 1998; 26:6.
433. Johnson L, Boon J, Orton EC: Clinical characteristics of 53 dogs
408. Snyder PS, Sadek D, Jones G: Efect of armlodipine on echocardio-
with Doppler-derived evidence of pulmonary hypertension: 1992-
graphic variables in cats with systemic hypertension. JVet Intern
1996. J Vet lntern Med 1999; 13:440.
Med 2001; 15:52.
 434. Venco L, Calzolari D, Morini S: Pulmonary thrormboermbolisrm in a
 409. Medinger Tl, Bruyette DS: Feline hypertrophic cardiormyopathy.
dog with renal armyloidosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998; 39:564.
Cormp Cont Ed 1992; 14:479.
435. Wong MM, Suter PF, Rhode EA: Dirofilariasis without circulating
410. Venco L: Ultrasound diagnosis: left ventricular thrombus in a cat
rmicrofilaria: a problerm in diagnosis. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1973;
with hypertrophic cardiormyopathy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997;
163:133.
38:467.
436. Calvert CA, Losonsky JM, Brown J, et al: Cormparisons of radi-
411. Liu SK, Maron BJ, Tilley LP, et al: Hypertrophic cardiormyopathy in
ographic and electrocardiographic abnorrmalities of canine heart-
the dog. Am J Pathol 1979; 94:497.
worrn disease. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:2.
412. Sisson DD: Heritability of idiopathic myocardial hypertrophy and
437. Lormbard CW, Ackerman N: Right heart enlargerment in heart-
dynarmic subaortic stenosis in Pointer dogs. Abstract. J Vet lntern
worm-infected dogs: a radiographic, electrocardiographic and
Med 1990; 4:118.
echocardiographic correlation. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:210.
413. Fox PF: Feline rmyocardial disease. In Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline
438. Shafer M, Berry CR: Cardiac and pulrmonary artery mensuration in
cardiology. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1988; p 435.
feline heartworrm disease. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:499.
 414. Kienle RD, Thormas WP: Echocardiography. In Nyland TG, Matton 
439. Thrall DE, Calvert CA: Radiographic evaluation of canine heart-
JS, Allen AK, eds: Veterinary diagnostic ultrasound. WB Saunders,
worm disease coexisting with right heart failure. Vet Radiol 1983;
Philadelphia, 1995; p 244.
24:124.
          
440. Thrall DE, Badertscher RR, McCall JW, et al: The pulmonary artery
ventricular diastolic wall rmotion by Doppler tissue irmaging in
circulation in dogs experimentally infected with Diroflaria immitis:
healthy cats and cats with cardiormyopathy. Arm J Vet Res 1999;
its angiographic evaluation. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:74.
60:1478.
441. Thrall DE, Badertscher RR, Lewis RE, et al: Collateral pulrmonary
416. Fox PR: Feline cardiormyopathies. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS,
circulation in dogs experimentally infected with Diroflaria immitis:
eds: Textbook of canine and fline cardiology. WB Saunders,
its angiographic evaluation. Vet Radiol 1980; 21:13 1.
Philadelphia, 1999; p 644.
442. Carlisle DH: Canine dirofilariasis: its radiographic appearance. Vet
417. Calvert CA: Endocarditis and bacterermia. In Fox PR, ed: Canine
Radiol 1980; 21:123.
and feline cardiology. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1988; p 419.
443. Rhone Merieux: lmmiticide treatment record. Rhone Merieux,
418. Anderson CA, Dubielzig R: Vegetative endocarditis in dogs. J Am
Athens, Ga, 1995.
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:149.
444. Rawlings CA, Losonsky IM, Lewis RE,et al: Development and reso-
419. Barr SC, Simpson RM, Schrmidt SP, et al: Chronic dilatative
 lutions of radiographic lesions in canine heartworm disease. J Am
Inyocarditis caused by Trypanosoma cruzin 2 dogs. J Am Vet Med
Vet Med Assoc 1981; 178:1172.
Assoc 1989; 195:1237.
445. Badertscher RR, Losonsky JM, Paul AJ, et al: Two-dirmensional
420. Carpenter JL, Roberts RM, Harpster NK, et al: Intestinal and car-
echocardiography for diagnosis of diroflariasis in nine dogs. J Am
diopulrmonary forms of parvovirus infection in a litter of pups. J
Vet Med Assoc 1988; 193:843.
Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176:1269.
446. Goggin JM, Biller DS, Rost CM, et al: Ultrasonographic identifica-
421. Barr SC, Gossett KA, Klei TR: Clinical, clinicopathologic, and para-
tion of Diroflaria immitis in the aorta and liver of a dog. J Am Vet
sitologic observations of trypanosormiasis in dogs infected with
Med Assoc 1997; 210:1635.
North American Trypanosoma cruzi isolates. Arm J Vet Res 1991;
447. Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC, Coats JR, et al: Heartworrm infection in
52:954.
cats: 50 cases (1985-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217:355.
422. Sisson D, Thormas WP: Endocarditis of the aortic valve in the dog. J
448. Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC, Miller MW, et al: Prevalence of heart-
Arm Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:570.
worrm infection in cats with signs of cardiorespiratory abnorrmali-
423. Toal R: Radiographic diagnosis (valvular endocarditis in a dog). Vet
ties. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212:517.
Radiol Ultrasound 1992; 33:348.
449. Hermesineyer M, Limberg-Child RK, Murphy AJ, et al: Prevalence
424. Bohn FE, Rhodes WH: Angiograrms and angiocardiograrms in dogs
of Dirofilaria immitis infection armong shelter cats. J Am Vet Med
and cats; some unusual filling defects. Vet Radiol 1970; 11:21.
Assoc 2000; 217:211.
425. Jacobs GJ, Calvert CA, Hall DG, et al: Diagnosis of right coronary
450. Selcer BA, Newell SM, Mansour AE, et al: Radiographic and 2-D
artery to right atrial fistula in a dog using two-dirmensional
echocardiographic findings in eighteen cats experimentally exposed
echocardiography. I Small Anirm Pract 1996; 37:387.
to D. immitis via mosquito bites. Vet Radiol U trasound 1996; 37:37.
426. Sotiaux J, Franck M: Echocardiographic appearance of fHail aortic
451. Venco L, Calzolari D, Mazzocchi D, et al: The use of echocardiogra-
valve in a dog with infective endocarditis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
phy as a diagnostic tool for detection of feline heartworm
1998; 39:436.
(Dirofilaria immitis) infections. Feline Pract 1998; 26:6.
o  t       
452. Selcer BA, Newell SM, Mansour AE, et al: Radiographic and 2-D
tract to left atrial fistula associated with endocarditis in a dog. J Am
echocardiographic findings in 18 cats exposed to D. immitis via
Anirm Hosp Assoc 2000; 36:133.
mosquito bites. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1996; 37:37.
CHapter TWO The ThoraX
245
453. DeFrancesco TC, Atkins CE, Miller MW, et al: Use of echocardiog-
481. Edwards NJ: The diagnostic value of pericardial fluid pH determi-
raphy for the diagnosis of heartworn disease in cats: 43 cases
nation. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1996; 32:63.
( 1985-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 200 1; 218:66.
 482. Thormas WP, Reed JR, Bauer TG, et al: Constrictive pericardial dis-
454. Thormas WP, Sisson D, Bauer TG, et al: Detection of cardiac masses
ease in the dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:546.
in dogs by two-dirmensional echocardiography. Vet Radiol 1984;
483. Schubitz LF, Matz ME, Noon TH, et al: Constrictive pericarditis sec-
25:65.
Ondary to Cocidioides immitis infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med
455. Swartout MS, Ware WA, Bonagura JD: lntracardiac turmors in two
Assoc 2001; 218:537.
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1987; 23:533.
484. Fox SM, Burns J, Hawkins J: Spirocercosis in dogs. Cormp Cont Ed
456. Krotje LJ, Ware WA, Niyo Y: lntracardiac rhabdormyosarcorma in a
1988; 10:807.
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:368.
485. lvoghli B: Fatal aortic aneurysm and rupture causedby Spirocerc
457. Keene BW, Rush JE, Cooley AJ, et al: Primary left ventricular
lupi in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1977; 170:834.
hermangiosarcorma diagnosed by endormyocardial biopsy in a dog. I
486. Jacobs G, Patterson D, Knight D: Cormplete interuption of the aor-
Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:1501.
tic arch in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191:1585.
458. Vicini DS, Didier PJ, Ogilvie GK: Cardiac fibrosarcoma in a dog. J
487. Herrtage ME, Gorrman NT, Jefries AR: Coarctation of the aorta in
Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:1486.
a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1992; 33:25.
459. Aronsohn M: Cardiac hermangiosarcorma in the dog: a review of 38
 488. Eyster GE, Carrig CB, Baker D, et al: Coarctation of the aorta in a
cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:922.
dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1976; 169:426.
460. Preez J, Perez-Rivero A, Montoya A, et al: Right-sided heart failure
489. Straw RC, Aronson EF, McCaw DL: Transposition of the great arter-
 in a dog with primary cardiac rhabdormyosarcoma. J Am Anim
ies in a cat. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:634.
Hosp Assoc 1998; 34:208.
 490. Cantwell HD, Blevins WE, Weirich WE: Angiographic diagnosis
 461. Ware WA, Merkley DF, Riedesel DH: lntracardiac thyroid turnor in
 of heart base turmor in the dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1982;
a dog: diagnosis and surgical rermoval. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1994;
18:83.
30:20.
491. Gliatto IM, Crawford MA, Snider TG, et al: Multiple organ metas-
462. Buchanan JW, Boggs LS, Dewan S, et al: Left atrial paraganglioma
tasis of an aortic body tumor in a Boxer. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;
in a dog: echocardiography, surgery, and scintigraphy. I Vet Intern
191:1110.
Med 1998; 12:109.
 492. Hayes HM, Fraurmeni JF: Chermodectoimas in dogs: epidermiologic
463. Ware WA, Hopper DL: Cardiac turmors in dogs: 1982-1995. J Vet
cormparisons with rman. J Nat Cancer Inst 1974; 52:1455.
Intern Med 1999; 13:95.
 493. Hayes HM, Sass B: Chermoreceptor neoplasia: a study of epidermio-
464. Srmith KA, Miller LM, Biller DS: Detection of right atrial herman-
 logical features of 357 cases. I Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
giosarcoma using nonselective angiography in a dog. Can Vet J
1988; 35:401.
1992; 33:673.
494. Patnaik AK, Liu SK, Hurvitz Al, et al: Canine chermodectorma—a
465. Cobb MA, Brownlie SE: lntrapericardial neoplasia in 14 dogs. J
comparative study. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1975; 16:785.
 Srmall Anirm Pract 1992; 33:309.
495. Seat ND, Douglass JP, Godshalk CP, et al: What is your diagnosis?
466. Reed JR, Thormas WP, Suter PF: Pneurmopericardiography in the
 Pericardial chermodectorma in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;
normal dog. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:112.
204:879.
467. Thomas WD, Reed JR, Gomez JA: Diagnostic pneurmopericardiog-
496. Liu SK, Tilley LP, Tappe JP, et al: Clinical and pathological findings
raphy in dogs with spontaneous pericardial effusion. Vet Radiol
in dogs with atherosclerosis: 21 cases (1970-1983). J Am Vet Med
1984; 25:2.
Assoc 1986; 189:227.
468. Berry CR, Lombard CW, Hager DA, et al: Echocardiographic eval-
497. Lefborn BK, Adams WH, Weddle DL: Mineralized arteriosclerosis
uation of cardiac tarmponade in dogs before and after pericardio-
in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1996; 37:420.
centesis: four cases (1984-1986). J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1988;
498. Malik R, Hunt GB, Chard RB, et al: Congenital obstruction of the 
192: 1597.
caudal vena cava in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:880.
469. Font A, Dural N, Dormingo M, et al: Cardiac tarmponade in a dog
499. Cornelius L, Mahaffey M: Kinking of the intrathoracic caudal vena
with visceral leishrmaniasis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1193; 29:95.
cava in five dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1985; 26:67.
470. Rush JE, Keene BW, Fox PR: Pericardial disease in the cat: a retro-
 500. Bolton GR, Edwards NJ, Hoffer RE: Arteriovenous fistula of the
spective evaluation of 66 cases. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:39.
 aorta and caudal vena cava causing congestive heart failure in a cat.
471. Berry CR, Hager DA: Pericardial effusion secondary to chronic
J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1976; 12:463.
endocardiosis and left atrial rupture in a dog. Comp Cont Ed 1988;
 501. Hosgood G: Arteriovenous fistulas: pathophysiology, diagnosis and
10:800.
treatrment. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1989; 11:625.
472. Font A, Durall N, Dormingo M, et al: Cardiac tarmponade in a dog
with visceral leishrmaniasis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:95.
term. Vet Clin North A1m 1983; 13:241.
473. Sisson D, Thormas WP, Reed J, et al: Intrapericardial cysts in the dog.
 503. Suter PF, Chan KF: Disserminated pulrmonary disease in small ani-
 J Vet Intern Med 1993; 7:364.
Imals: a radiographic approach to diagnosis. J Am Vet Radiol Soc
474. Reed JR: Pericardial diseases. In Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline car-
1968; 9:67.
diology. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1988; p 495.
 504. Cogan DC, Carpenter JL: Diffuse alveolar injury in two dogs. J Am
475. Berg I: Pericardial disease and cardiac neoplasia. Sermin Vet Med
Vet Med Assoc 1989; 184:527.
Surg 1994; 9:185.
 505. Jefries AR, Dunn JK, Dennis R: Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis in
476. Berg RJ, Wingfield WE, Hoppes PJ: ldiopathic hemorhagic peri-
a dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1987; 28:203.
cardial effusion in 8 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185:988.
 506. Thayer GW, Robinson SK: Bacterial bronchopneurmonia in the dog:
477. Gibbs C, Gaskell CJ, Darke PGG, et al: Idiopathic pericardial effu-
a review of 42 cases. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:731.
sion in dogs: a review of 14 cases. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1982; 23:483.
 507. Krarmer Rw: The nodular pulmonary opacity: is it real? Vet Radiol
478.Vacirca G, Mantelli F, Ferro E,et al: Pericardial effusion with feline
Utrasound 1992; 33:187.
infectious peritonitis. Comp Anim Pract 1989; 19:25.
 508. Myer W: Radiographic review: the interstitial pattern of pulmonary
479. Voros K, Wladar S, Vrabley T: Clinical features of diseases with peri-
disease. Vet Radiol 1980; 20:18.
cardial fluid accurmulation in dogs. Magyar Allatorvosok Lapja
 509. Myer CW: Radiographic review: the vascular and bronchial pat-
1997; 119:37.
terns of pulrmonary disease. Vet Radiol 1980; 21:156.
480. Less RD, Bright JM, Orton EC: Intrapericardial cyst causing cardiac
 510. Bruckhorst D, Schossier N, Schoon HA: Unilateral congenital
tarnponade in a cat. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 2000; 36:115.
bronchiectasis in a cat. Kleinterpraxis 1990; 35:349.
246
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
 511. Harmerslag KL, Dubielzig R: Acquired cystic bronchiectasis in the
538. Orsher AN, Kolata RJ: Acute respiratory distress syndrorme: a case
dog. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:64.
report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1982; 18:41.
 512. Norris CR, Sarmi VF: Clinical, radiographic, and pathologic fea-
539. Moon ML, Greenlee PG, Burk RL: Uremic pneumonitis-like syn-
tures of bronchiectasis in cats: 12 cases ( 1987-1999). J Arm Vet Med
drorme in ten dogs. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1986; 22:687.
Assoc 2000; 216:530.
 540. Barr F, Guffy-Jones TJ, Brown PJ, et al: Primary lung tumors in the
 513. Myer CW, Burt JK: Bronchiectasis in the dog: its radiographic
cat. J Small Anirm Pract 1987; 28:1115.
appearance. Vet Radiol 1973; 14:3.
 541. Barr FJ, Gibbs C, Brown PJ: The radiological features of primary
514. Ciorba A, Vitellozzi G, Avalos E: Study of pulmonary changes in
lung turmors in the dog: a review of 36 cases. J Srmall Anirm Pract
canine toxoplasrmosis. Atti della Societa ltaliana delle Scienze
1986; 27:493.
Veterinarie 1977; 31:674.
 542. Loser C, Lawrenz B, Werner HG, et al: Prirmary lung turmors with
 515. Feeney DA, Sautter JH, Lees GE: An unusual case of acute dissemi-
rmetastasis to digits in cats. Kleinterpraxis 1998; 43:425.
nated toxoplasrmosis in a cat. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1981; 17:311.
543. Ogilvie GK, Haschek WM, Withrow SJ, et al: Classfication of pri-
rmary lung turmors in dogs: 210 cases (1975-1985). J Am Vet Med
mosis in cats: 100 cases (1952-1990). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993;
Assoc 1989; 195:106.
203:1156.
 544. Ogilvie GK, Weigel RM, Haschek WM, et al: Prognostic factors for
 517. Meier H, Holzworth J, Griffths RC: Toxoplasrmosis in the cat
tunor rermission and survivalin dogs aftersurgery for prirmary lung
fourteen cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1957; 13 1:395.
turmor: 76 cases (1975-1985). J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:109.
 518. Ford RB: lnfectious disease of the respiratory tract. In Sherding RG,
 545. Miles KG: A review of prirmary lung turmors in the dog and cat. Vet
ed: The cat: diseases and clinical managerment. Churchill
Radiol 1988; 29:122.
Livingstone, New York, 1989; p 367.
 546. Klein MK, Dow SW, Rosychuk RAW: Pulmonary thrormboerm-
 519. Lord PF, Schaer M, Tilley L: Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia
bolism associated with irmrmune-mediated hemolytic anemia in
in a dog. I A1m Vet Radiol Soc 1975; 16:115.
dogs: ten cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:246.
 547. Burns MG, Keely AB, Hornof WJ: Pulmonary artery thrormbosis in
os dso w u I shop u siseia udouisoa 
three dogs with hyperadrenocorticisrm. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981;
1988; 24:311.
178:388.
 521. Confer AW, Qualis CW, MaxWilliarms PC, et al: Four cases of pul-
 548. Fluckiger MA, Gormez JA: Radiographic findings in dogs with spon-
Imonary nodular eosinophilic granulormatosis in dogs. Cornell Vet
taneous pulmonary thrormbosis or ermbolism. Vet Radiol i984;
1983; 73:41.
25:124.
 522. Corcoran BM, Thoday KL, Henfrey Jl, et al: Pulmonary infiltration 
 549. LaRue MJ, Murtaugh RJ: Pulmonary thromboembolisrm in dogs: 47
with eosinophils in 14 dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1991; 32:494.
cases (1986-1987).J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:1368.
 523. Corcoran BM, Foster DJ, Fuentes VL: Feline asthma syndrorme: a
 550. Matis U: Post-traurmatic fat ermbolisrm (cat). Kleinterpraxis 1980;
 i s  u usd r al g s asn
25:155.
Anim Pract 1995; 36:48 1.
 551. Ritt MG, Rogers KS, Thormas JS: Nephrotic syndrorme resulting in
 524. McEwen SA, Valli VEO, Hulland TJ: Hypereosinophilic syndrome
thromboembolic disease and disserminated coagulation in a dog. J
in cats: a report of 3 cases. Can J Cormp Med 1985; 49:248.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:385.
 525. Muir P, Gruffydd-Jones T, Brown PJ: Hypereosinophilic syndrorme
 552. Slauson DO, Gribble DH: Thrormbosis cormplicating renal arnyloi-
in a cat. Vet Rec 1993; 132:358.
dosis in dogs. Vet Pathol 1971; 8:352.
 526. Neer TM, Waldron DR, Miller RJ: Eosinophilic pulmonary granu-
553. Venco L, Calzolari D, Morini S: Pulrmonary thrormboermbolisrm in a
Jomas in two dogs and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
dog with renal armyloidosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998; 39:364.
1986; 22:593.
 554. Zontine WJ, Andrews LK: Fatal air ermbolism as a cormplication of
 527. Sutton RH: Pulrmonary eosinophilic granulormatosis in a dog. Aust
 pneurmocystography in 2 cats. Vet Radiol 1978; 19:8.
Vet Pract 1992; 22:172.
555. Seims J, JakovljevicS, Val Alstine W: Radiographic diagnosisung
 528. Raptopoulos D, Papazoglou LG, Patsikas MN: Re-expansion pul-
lobe torsion. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:418.
rmonary ederma after pneurmothorax in a dog. Vet Rec 1995;
 556. Brown NO, Zontine WJ: Lung lobe torsion in the cat. J Am Vet 
136:395.
Radiol Soc 1976; 17:219.
 529. Drobatz KJ, Saunders H, Pugh CR, et al: Noncardiogenic pul-
557. Miller HG, Sherrill A: Lung lobe torsion: a difficult condition to
monary ederma in dogs and cats. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1995;
diagnose. Vet Med 1987; 82:797.
206:1732.
 558. Dye TL, Teague HD, Poundstone ML: Lung lobe torsion in a cat
530. Jarvinen AK,Saario E, Andresen E, et al: Lung injury leading to res-
with chronic feline asthrma. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1998; 34:493.
piratory distress syndrorme in young Dalmatian dogs. J Vet lntern
 559. Johnston GR, Feeney DA, O'Brien TD, et al: Recurring lung lobe
Med 1995; 9:162.
torsion in 3 Afghan Hounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:842.
 531. Lees GE, Suter PF, Johnson GC: Pulrmonary ederma in a dog with
 560. Rooney MB, Lanz O, Monnet E: Spontaneous lung lobe torsion in
acute pancreatitis and cardiac disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978;
two Pugs. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 200 1; 37:128.
172:690.
 561. Lord PF, Gomez JA: Lung lobe collapse: pathophysiologic and radi-
 532. Lopez A, Lane IF, Hanna P: Adult respiratory distress syndrome in
ologic significance. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:187.
a dog with necrotizing pancreatitis. Can Vet J 1995; 36:240.
562. Rendano VT, Georgi JR, Fahnestock GR,et al: Filaroides hirthilung-
 533. McEntee MC, Page RL, Cline JM, et al: Radiation pneurmonitis in
worm infection in dogs: its radiographic appearance. J Am Vet
three dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1992; 33:199.
Radiol Soc 1979; 20:2.
534. Kerr LY: Pulmonary ederma secondary to upper airway obstruction
 563. Pinckney RD, Studer AD, Genta RM: Filaroides hirthi infection in
in the dog: a review of nine cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989;
two related dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 193:1287.
25:207.
 564. Williarmns JF: Parasitic diseases of the respiratory tract. In Kirk RW,
 535. Farrow CS: Near drowning in the dog. I Am Vet Radiol Soc 1977;
ed: Current veterinary therapy Vll. WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
18:6.
1980.
 536. Lord PF: Neurogenic pulmonary ederma in the dog. J Am Anirn
 565. Losonsky JM, Smith FG, Lewis RE: Radiographic findings of
Hosp Assoc 1975; 11:778.
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus infection in cats. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
 537. Kolata RJ, Burrows CF: The clinical features of injury of chewing
1978; 14:348.
electrical cords in dogs and cats. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1981;
566. Losonsky JM, Thrall DE, Prestwood AK: Radiographic evaluation
17:219.
 Of pulrnonary abnorrmalities after Aelurostrongylus abstrusus inocu-
CHAPTER TWO THE THORAX
247
lation in cats. A1m J Vet Res 1983; 44:478.
594. McCully RM, Lloyd J, Juys D, et al: Canine Pneumocystis pneumo-
567. Lamb CR: What is your diagnosis? Flaroides osleri. JI Srmall Anim
nia. J South Afr Vet Med Assoc 1979; 50:207.
Pract 1992; 33:358.
595.Ramsey IK,Foster A, McKay I, et al: Preumocystis carinii pneumo-
 568. Swenson CL, Silverman J, Strormberg PC: Visceral leishrmaniasis in
nia in 2 Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. Vet Rec 1997; 140:372.
an English Foxhound frorm an Ohio research colony. J Am Vet Med
 596. Duarte MIS, Corbett CEP, Laurenti MD, et al: Canine interstitial
Assoc 1988; 193:1089.
pneumonitis in a new endemic area of visceral leishrmaniasis in
 569. Ackerman N, Madewell BR: Thoracic and abdorminal radiographic
western Brazil. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1986; 80:992.
 abnormalities in the multicentric forrm of lymphosarcorma in dogs.
 597. Clercx C, Coignoul F, JakovljevicS, et al: Tuberculosis in dogs: a case
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176:36.
report and review of the literature. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;
 570. Blackwood L, Sullivan M, Lawson H: Radiographic abnorrmalities in
28:207.
canine rmulticentric lymphorma: a review of 84 cases. J Small Anim
 598. Jordan HL, Cohn LA, Arrmstrong PJ: Disserminated Mycobacteriurm
Pract 1997; 38:62.
avium complex infection in 3 Siamese cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 571. Starrak GS, Berry CB, Page RL, et al: Correlation between thoracic
1994; 204:90.
radiographic changes and rermission/survival duration in 270 dogs
 599. Novoa C, Pickering X, Sanchez B, et al: Pathology and diagnosis of
with lyrmphosarcoma. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38:411.
feline tubereulosis in Madrid, Spain. Med Vet 1995; 12:279.
572. Walter PA, Hayes JS, Feeney DA, et al: Radiographicappearance of
600. Shackelford CC, Reed WM: Disserminated Mycobacterium aviu
pulmonary metastases frorm transitional cell carcinoma of the blad-
infection in a dog. I Vet Diagn lInvest 1989; 1:273.
der and urethra of the dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185:411.
601. Wylie KB, Lewis DD, Pechrman RD, et al: Hypertrophic osteopathy
573. Ford RB: Chronic lung disease in old dogs and cats. Vet Rec 1990;
associated with Mycobacteriumfortuitum pneurmonia in adog.J Am
126:399.
Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:1986.
 574. Padrid P, Aimis TC: Chronic tracheobronchial disease in the dog. Vet
 602. Berry CR, Moore PF, Thormas WP, et al: Pulmonary lyrmphomatoid
Clin North Am 1992; 22:1203.
granulormatosis in seven dogs. I Vet Intern Med 1990; 4:157.
575. Lobetti RG, Milner R, Lane E: Chronic idiopathic pulmonary fibro-
603. Kohn B,Arnold P, Kaser-Hotz B,et al: Malignant histiocytosis of the
sis in five dogs. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 2001; 37:119.
dog: 26 cases (1989-1992). Kleinterpraxis 1993; 38:409.
576. Matros L, Riedesel EA, Myers RK: Silicate pneurmoconiosis in a dog:
604. Lucke VM, Kelly DF, Harrington GA, et al: A lyrnphoid granulo-
case report and current concepts of pathogenesis. J Am Anirm Hosp
Imatosis of the lungs in young dogs. Vet Pathol 1979; 16:405.
Assoc 1994; 30:375.
605. Schmidt ML, Ruttermann GR, Neil MHF, et al: Clinical and radi-
577. Pechrman RD: The radiographic features of pulmonary parago-
 ographic manifestations of canine malignant histiocytosis. Vet Q
nirmiasis in the dog and cat. J A1m Vet Radiol Soc 1976; 17:182.
1993; 15:117.
578. Rochat MC, Cowell RL, Tyler RD: Paragonimiasis in dogs and cats.
 606. Koblik PD: Radiographic appearance of prirmary lung turmors in 
Cormp Cont Ed 1990; 12:1093.
cats: a review of 41 cases. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:66.
 579. Pechman RD: Pulmonary paragonimiasis in dogs and cats: a review.
607. Suter PF, Carrig CB, O'Brien TR, et al: Radiographic recognition of
 J Small Anim Pract 1980; 21:87.
 primary and metastatic pulmonary neoplasms of dogs and cat. J
580. Trulove SG, McMahon HA, Nichols R, et al: Pyogranulormatous 
Am Vet Radiol Soc 1974; 15:3.
 pneurmonia associated with generalized noneffusive feline infec-
608. Adarms WM, Dubielzig R: Diffuse pulmonary alveolar septal metas-
tious peritonitis. Feline Pract 1992; 20:25.
tases from marmmary carcinorma in the dog. J Am Vet Radiol Soc
581. Schrmidt M, Wolvekarnp P: Radiographic findings in ten dogs with
1978; 19:161.
thoracic actinormycosis. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:301.
609. Tiermessen l: Thoracic metastases of canine rmarmmary gland
582. Breitschwerdt EB, Watters IW: Pulmonary actinomycosis in a dog.
tumors--a radiographic study. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:249.
Vet Radiol 1983; 24: 186.
610. Forrest LJ, Graybush CA: Radiographic paterns of pulmonary
583. Millman TM, O'Brien TR, Sutter PF, et al: Coccidioidormycosis in
rmetastasis in 25 cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:4.
the dog: its radiographic diagnosis. J A1m Vet Radiol Soc 1979; 20:50.
 611. Harmrmer AS, Bailey MQ, Sagartz JE: Retrospective assessiment of
584. Burk RL, Corley EA, Corwin LA: The radiographic appearance of
thoracic radiographic findings in rmetastatic canine hermangiosar-
pulmonary histoplasrmosis in the dog and cat: a review of 37 case
corma. Vet Radiol U trasound 1993; 34:235.
histories. J Arm Vet Radiol Soc 1978; 19:2.
612. Holt D, VanWinkle T, Schelling C, et al: Correlation between tho-
 585. Walker MA: Thoracic blastormycosis: a review of its radiographic
 racic radiographs and postrmorterm findings in dogs with herman-
manifestations in 40 dogs. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:22.
giosarcorma; 77 cases (1984-1989). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1992;
s
200:1535.
latum in lungs of cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:456.
 613. Miles KG, Lattimer JC, Jergens AE, et al: A retrospective evaluation 
 587. Wolf AM, Green RW: The radiographic appearance of pulmonary
of the radiographic evidence of pulrmonary metastatic disease on
histoplasrmosis in the cat. Vet Radiol 1987; 28:34.
initial presentation in the dog. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:79.
588. Malik R, Dill-Macky E, Martin P, et al: Cryptococcosis in dogs: a ret-
 614. Stone EA, Mahaffey MB: Spontaneous regression of pulmonary
rospective study of 20 consecutive cases. J Med Vet Mycol 1995;
 Imetastases in a dog. Vet Radiol 198 1; 22:58.
33:291.
 615. Waters CB, Morrison WB, DeNicola DB, et al: Giant cell variant of
 589. Poonacha KB, Srmith Hl: Naturally occurring Tyzzer's disease as a
 [malignant fibrous histiocytorma in dogs: 10 cases ( 1986-1993). J A1m
cormplication of distermper and rmycotic pneurmonia in a dog. J A1m
Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205:1420.
Vet Med Assoc 1976; 169:419.
 616. Krecic MR, Blacl SS: Epitheliotropic T-cell gastrointestinal tract
590. Burk RL, Joseph R, Baer K: Systermic aspergillosis in a cat. Vet Radiol
lyrmphosarcorma with metastases to lung and bone in a cat. J Am Vet
1990; 3 1:26.
Med Assoc 2000; 216:524.
591. Clercx C, McEntee K, Snaps F, et al: Bronchopulrmonary and dis-
 617. Moise S, Wiedenkeller D, Yeager A, et al: Clinical, radiographic, and
serminated granulomatous disease associated with Aspergilus fumi-
 bronchial cytologic features of cats with bronchial disease: 65 cases
 gatus and Candida species infection in a Golden Retriever. J A1m
(1980-1986). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:1467.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1996; 32:139.
618. Brownlie SE: A retrospective study of diagnosis in 109 cases of
592. Canfield PIJ, Church DB, Malik R: Preumocystis pneurmonia in a
lower respiratory disease. J Simall Anirm Pract 1990; 31:371.
dog. Aust Vet Pract 1993; 23:150.
 619. LaRue MJ, Garlick DS, Larmb CR, et al: Bronchial dysgenesis and
593. Kirberger RM, Lobett RG: Radiographic aspects of Preurmocystis
lobar emphysema in an adult cat. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 1990;
carinii pneumonia in the Miniature Dachshund. Vet Radiol
197:886.
Ultrasound 1998; 39:313.
620. Hoover IP: Bronchial cartilage dysplasia with rmultifocal lobar
248
 bullous emphyseima and lung torsions in a pup. J Am Vet Med Assoc
638. Lamb CR, Neiger R: Radiology corner: differential diagnosis of pul-
1992; 201:599.
rmonary cavitary lesions. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2000; 41:340.
621. Padrid PA, Hornof WJ, Kurpershoek CI: Canine chronic bronchi-
639. Mitten RW, Reidesel DH, Flatt RE: Cavitating pulmonary metas-
tis—-a pathophysiologic evaluation of 18 cases. J Vet Intern Med
tases in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 173:203.
1990; 4:172.
640.Reif JS, niderWE,KellDFet al: Cavitating mnarymetastas
 622. Stowater Jl: Kartagener's syndrorme in a dog. I Am Vet Radiol Soc
in a dog. Vet Radiol 1969; 10:12.
1976; 17:174.
641. Schiffer SP Hitchcock P, lrwin PF: Prirmary cavitating pulrnonary
623. Edwards DF, Kennedy JR, Toal RL,et al: Kartagener's syndrome in a
 adenocarcinoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 183:112.
Chow Chow dog with normal ciliary ultrastructure. Vet Pathol
642. Selcer BA, Hall LB, McNeel SV, et al: Fibrosarcoma with cavitary
1989; 26:338.
Imetastasis in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:581.
624. Hoover JP, Howard-Martin MO, Bahr RJ: Chronic bronchitis,
 643. Singleton P: What is your diagnosis? Pulrmonary cyst. I Small Anirn
 bronchiectasis, bronchiolitis, bronchiolitis obliterans, and bron-
Pract 1993; 34:204.
chopneurmonia in a Rottweiler with primary ciliary dyskinesia. J
 644. Tennant BJ, Haywood S: Congenital bullous ermphyserma in a dog. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:297.
Srmall Anim Pract 1987; 28:109.
625. Foodman MS, Giger U, Stebbins K, et al: Kartagener's syndrorme in
645. Forbes DC: Bariurm retention in the lungs of a cat. Can Vet J 1989;
an old Miniature Poodle. J Small Anirm Pract 1989; 30:96.
30:509.
626. Afzelius BA, Carlsten J, Karlsson S: Clinical, pathologic, and ultra-
 646. Thrall DE, Goldschmidt MH, Clement RJ, et al: Generalized exten-
structural features of situs inversus and immotile cilia syndrome in
sive idiopathic pulmonary ossification in a dog. Vet Radiol 1980;
a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:560.
21:104-107.
 627. Dhein CR, Prieur DJ, Riggs MW, et al: Suspected ciliary dysfunction 
 647. Berry CR, Ackerman N, Monce K: Pulmonary mineralization in
in Chinese Shar Pei pups with pneumonia. Am J Vet Res
four dogs with Cushing's syndrome. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994;
1990:51:439.
35:10.
 628. Edwards DF, Patton CS, Bermis DA, et al: lmmotile cilia syndrome in 
648. White RAS, Lane JG: Pharyngeal stick penetration injuries in the
3 dogs frorm a litter. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 183:667.
dog. J Small Anim Pract 1988; 26:13.
 629. Kipperman BS, Wong VJ, Plopper CG: Primary ciliary dyskinesia in
649. Flanders JA, Castlerman W, Carberry CA, et al: Laryngeal chon-
a Gordon Setter. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:375-379.
drosarcoma in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 190:68.
630. Randolf JF, Castleman Wl: lmrmotile cilia syndrome in two Old
650. Braund KG, Shores A, Cochrane S, et al: Laryngeal paralysis
English Sheepdog littermates. I Srmall Anirm Pract 1984; 25:679.
polyneuropathy cormplex in young Dalmatians. Am J Vet Res 1994;
 631. Barber DL, Hill BL: Traumatically induced bullous lung lesions in
55:534.
the dog: a radiographic report of three cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 651. Braund KG, Steinberg HS, Shores A, et al: Laryngeal paralysis in
1976; 169:1085.
irnmature and mature dogs as one sign of rmore diffuse polyneu-
632. Silverrman S, Poulos PW, Suter PF: Cavitary pulmonary lesions in
ropathy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:1735.
animals. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1976; 17:134.
 652. Burbidge HM: A review of laryngeal paralysis in dogs. Br Vet J 1995;
633. Anderson Gl: Pulmonary cavitary lesions in the dog: a review of 7
151:71.
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1987; 23:89.
 653. Newell SM, Mahaffey MB, Roberts RE, et al: Laryngeal adenocarci-
634. Bjorling D: Radiographic diagnosiscongenital cystic lung disease
noma in a dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:217.
in a dog. Vet Radiol 1983; 24: 127.
654. Saik JE, Tol SL, Diters RW, et al: Canine and feline laryngeal neo-
635. Crisp MS, Birchard SJ, Lawrence AE, et al: Pulrmonary abscess
 plasia: a 10 year study. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1986; 22:359.
caused by a Mycoplasma sp. in a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1987;
655. Wisner ER, Matoon TJ, Nyland TG, et al: Norrmal ultrasound
191:340.
anatomy of the canine neck. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1991; 32:185.
 636. Culvenor J: Post-traurmatic pneurmatocele in a dog. Aust Vet Pract
656. Wisner ER, Nyland TG, Feldrman EC, et al: Utrasonographic evalu-
1992; 22:120.
ation of the parathyroid glands in hypercalcermic dogs. Vet Radiol
637. Guerin SE, Walker MC, Kelly DF: Cavitating rmycotic pulrmonary
Ultrasound 1993; 34:108.
infection in a German Shepherd dog. I Small Anim Pract 1993;
34:36.
CHAPTER THREE
The Abdomen
RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF THE
ABDOMEN
Abdominal radiography is indicated whenever clinical signs or laboratory findings indicate
the presence of abdominal disease, or whenever a condition is present in which involve-
ment of, or extension to, the abdomen is possible. These characteristics include (1) gas-
trointestinal (GI) signs such as vomiting, diarrhea, tenesmus, anorexia, and unexplained
weight loss, (2) urogenital signs such as polyuria, oliguria, anuria, stranguria, pyuria,
hematuria, polydipsia, and vaginal or preputial discharge or bleding, and (3) nonspecifc
signs such as palpable abdominal masses or organomegaly, suspected hernias or abdomi-
 nal wall masses, anemia, and fever of unknown origin. If there is evidence of direct trauma,
it is advisable to obtain radiographs of the abdomen to ensure that there is no internal
damage. When the origin of the medical problem is obscure and other means do not yield
a diagnosis, or when an animal resists or resents abdominal palpation, abdominal radiog-
raphy may be indicated as a screening technique.
Abdominal ultrasonography usually is performed in association with abdominal radi-
ography. In some cases, such as the diagnosis of pregnancy or in the presence of abdomi-
nal fluid, only the ultrasonographic examination will be performed. This decision often is
based on the experience and training of the ultrasonographer. A combined ultrasono.
graphic and radiographic evaluation usually provides more information than either study
by itself.
TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Radiography of the abdomen should be performed using a consistent set of technical fac-
tors. A formal technique chart should be used to establish the kilovolt (peak) (kVp) and
milliampere-second (mAs) setings for all exposures. If the animal measures greater than
10 cm at the thickest portion of the abdomen within the field of view, a grid should be used
to reduce the effects of scatter radiation. The grid will prevent a haziness that may be mis-
 interpreted as intraabdominal loss of detail due to pathologic causes. The exposure time
should be minimized to reduce motion artifact caused by bowel movement. Although in
some animals exposure times as long as 0.1 second will produce satisfactory results, expo-
sure times of 0.03 second or less are recommended. The radiographs always should be
viewed on a view box with the films consistently oriented. It is customary practice to view
all lateral films with the head facing toward the left, and to view all ventrodorsal or
dorsoventral films with the right side of the patient on the left side of the view box (as if
facing the examiner) and the cranial abdomen in the uppermost position. Consistency in
radiograph orientation facilitates recognition and general familiarity with normal struc-
tures and aids in the interpretation process.
Clipping the hair is essential to achieving a good abdominal ultrasonographic exami-
nation. Limited examination of the abdomen may be possible without doing so in some
animals with a thin hair coat. Wetting the hair coat with alcohol before applying the gel
improves the contact between the skin and transducer. The choice of transducer and gain
settings depends on the patient's size, organ of interest, and availability of equipment.
of interest without noise-laden high gain settings is preferred. Although there is ongoing
249
250
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
controversy over linear versus sector transducers, they each offer advantages and disadvan-
tages. Linear transducers offer a wider near field but are less useful for examining structures
through an intercostal window or beneath the rib cage. Most sector transducers (pie-
shaped image with the narrowest field of view at the point of patient contact) have a
smaller footprint and therefore can be directed between and under the ribs or into the
pelvic inlet. For small animal medicine, either mechanical sector or curved linear- and
radial-array scanners are preferable provided the footprint, or area of patient contact, is
small. A consistent, systematic search pattern is recommended. Usually this means starting
 in the anterior abdomen and continuing along the left side to the posterior abdomen and
returning on the right side. All organs should be evaluated in at least two planes.
Longitudinal and transverse planes are customary, although oblique planes are extremely
Useful. Because the organs may be moveable and not oriented along the transverse, or sagit-
tal, plane of the animal, the planes used are related to the organ being examined and not
s pe ss ea i   ia) e aos  d 
lymph node groups) dorsal plane imaging may be very helpful.
POSITIONING AND V1EW
The routine views of the abdomen are the lateral and ventrodorsal views (Figs. 3-1 and
ally causes the pylorus to be fluid flled, and in some animals it will appear radiographically
as a perfectly round tissue density suggestive of a mass or ball. The other commonly used
positions are the left lateral and dorsoventral views (Figs. 3-3 and 3-4). On the left lateral
position the pylorus usually will contain air and may appear as a radiolucent, round struc-
ture.l The choice between the right and left lateral as the routine view is a matter of per-
sonal preference. The ventrodorsal view is clearly preferable to the dorsoventral view when
evaluating abdominal structures, because positioning for the ventrodorsal view causes the
abdomen to be stretched to its fullest possible length and the abdominal viscera are dis-
tributed evenly throughout the abdomen. Positioning for the dorsoventral view results in
 the abdomen being somewhat bunched up, and the viscera are tightly crowded into a min-
imized space. This crowding makes identification of various structural and pathologic
changes (loss of detail or masses) much more difficult.
FIG. 3-1 A 4-year-old male Cocker
Spaniel (A) and a 3-year-old male
domestic short-haired cat (B). Both
animals were clinically normal. The
 right lateral abdominal radiographs
revealed normal anatomy. Diagnosis:
 Normal abdomen.
Continued
A
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
251
FIG. 3-1, cont'd For legend see previous
page.
B
A
B
FIG. 3-z The same animals as in Fig. 3-1. The ventrodorsal view of the dog (A) and the cat.
(B) revealed normal anatomy. Diagnosis: Normal abdomen.
252
FIG. 3-3 The same dog as in Figure
3-1. The left lateral view of the
abdomendemonstrated normal
anatomy and gas in the pyloric
region of the stomach. Diagnosis:
 Normal abdomen.
FIG. 3-4 The same dog as in Fig. 3-1. The dorsoventral view revealed
a loss of diagnostic quality compared with the ventrodorsal view due
to crowding of the viscera. Diagnosis: Normal abdomen.
Other views of the abdomen are occasionally useful. When a specific organ of interest
(e.g., uterus, urinary bladder, or liver) has restricted mobility relative to other abdominal
structures (e.g., intestine, spleen, stomach), the more mobile organs may be displaced away
from the organ of interest by using focal abdominal compression.23 This is done by
compressing the abdomen directly over the organ of interest with a relatively radiolucent
device, such as a wooden salad spoon. The exposure technique should be reduced to
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
253
compensate for the decrease in abdominal thickness caused by the compression. A 50%
reduction in mAs is the norm. This technique willresult in a radiograph with the structure
of interest relatively isolated from other organs that might have been creating confusing shad-
ows. Another method of isolating relatively immobile abdominal organs radiographically is
to position the animal so that gravity pulls the relatively freely moveable organs away from
the area of interest. In facilities that have a table that tilts, this is done by securing the patient
to one end of the table and then tilting it up 20 to 30 degrees from horizontal.
A view that may be useful in cases in which free peritoneal air is suspected is the left lat-
eral decubitus. For this view, the animal is positioned in left lateral recumbency, and a radi-
e pen a uo p q p aou e um un si un
Normally, in this view, there will be liver lobe or fat seen adjacent to the diaphragm. If free
air is present in the abdominal cavity, it will be trapped above the liver immediately below
the diaphragm and right lateral abdominal wall.
 Ultrasonographic examinations may be performed with the animal in dorsal or lateral
recumbency The choice usually is determined by the experience and training of the ultra-
sonographer. Some patients are more comfortable in lateral recumbency and therefore that
position can be used. For animals that resist both lateral and dorsal recumbency, the examina-
tion may be accomplished with the animal standing. Moving the animal and repeating the scan
is helpful to document a change or lack of change in position of a lesion. This can help to dis-
tinguish bladder tumors, which remain fixed in location, from blood clots, which are usually
moveable. Elevating the head- or tail-end of the table may be useful for increasing access to the
liver in the former case, and to the bladder and prostate in the latter instance. Rectal palpation
may be used to displace the prostate out of the pelvic canal, making it more easily examined.
TECHNICAL EVALUATION OF THE RADIOGRAPH
Abdominal radiographs first must be evaluated for technical adequacy (positioning and
should be exposed at the end of expiration to minimize the crowding and bunching of struc-
tures. Expiration can be evaluated by the position of the diaphragm on the lateral view. In full
expiration, the diaphragmatic crura should cross the spinal column at approximately the
eleventh thoracic vertebra. The lateral view is assessed for rotation by determining if the lat-
eral processes of the lumbar vertebrae and the ilia of the pelvis superimpose. The ventrodor-
sal view is evaluated by checking whether the dorsal spinous process bisects the vertebral
body and whether the lateral vertebral processes are identical in appearance. Occasionally,.
when taking the ventrodorsal view, a dog will twist or curl its body to one side. If this occurs,
a repeat radiograph may be needed to eliminate this positioning artifact. Good radiographic
technique will yield a radiograph that is neither too liht nor too dark but one that readily
differentiates the various densities. In some deep-chested dogs it may be necessary to use dif-
ferent radiographic techniques for the wider cranial as opposed to the narrower caudal
abdomen Presuming that these criteria are met,the radiographs may be evaluated. Both ven-
trodorsal and lateral views should be displayed simultaneously side by side so that any sus-
 pected change can be correlated on both projections.
RADI0GRAPHIC DETAIL
One can recognize various abdominal structures because of the differences between their
radiographic densities. Whenever two structures of the same density touch, their margins will
be obscured, and whenever two structures of different densities touch, a margin will be visible.
The greater the difference in density (e.g., air against soft tissue versus fat against soft tissue)
the more distinct the margin wil be. The major contribution to abdominal detail is the differ-
ence in density between the retroperitoneal, mesenteric, and omental fat, and the soft tissue- or
fluid-dense viscera. Poor abdominal detail (a lack of contrast) may occur for several reasons. A
cachectic animal will have poor abdominal detail, both peritoneal and retroperitoneal, and min-
imal soft tissue dorsal to the spine. The ventral midine will be displaced dorsal to its normal
position, giving a “tucked-up" appearance. Juvenile animals usually exhibit poor abdominal
detail, presumably because of a lack of abdominal fat or the presence of a small amount of peri-
toneal fluid (Fig. 3-5).4 The presence of fluid within the peritoneal cavity will obscure visceral
detail and, depending on the volume of fluid, will produce abdominal distention (Fig. 3-6).5
254
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGy AND ULTRASONOGRaPHY
FIG.3-5 Aradiograph of a 2-month-
old female Doberman Pinscher sus-
pected of having eaten an earring.
There is poor abdominal detail,
which is normal for a juvenile animal.
No  foreign
bodies are seen.
Diagnosis:
Normal
juvenile
abdomen.
FIG. 3-6 A 3-year-old female domes-
tic short-haired cat with a 4-week his-
tory of anorexia and lethargy. There is
 a homogenous tissue density in the
 abdomen that prevents visualization
 of the normal abdominal structures.
The ventral body wall is pendulous,
which suggests the presence of
intraabdominal contents. Differential
diagnoses include peritoneal fluid
accumulation, emaciation, or a juve-
nile abdomen. Diagnosis: Peritoneal
effusion due to FIP
GENERAL TYPES OF RADIOGRAPHIC AND ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
CHANGES
Analysis of a radiograph can reveal only the size, shape, density, position, and architecture
of structures. Using this information, the veterinarian provides the necessary knowledge
concerning anatomy, physiology, and pathology to develop an interpretation. Therefore
knowledge of the appearance of the normal structures and variations among individuals,
breeds, and species is critical. If there is any doubt about a structure, it is helpful to refer to
a radiograph of another animal of the same breed for comparison.
 Ultrasonographic examination reveals the size, shape, echogenicity, position, and internal
architecture of abdominal structures.6-8 It provides information about the internal structure
of most tissue-dense abdominal organs that cannot be obtained from the radiograph. The
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
255
ultrasonographic appearance of abdominal structures is influenced by the artifacts that occur
during ultrasonography. These artifacts are discussed in Chapter 1 and should be reviewed
and thoroughly understood before undertaking abdominal ultrasonography.
ABDOMINAL BOUNDARY STRUCTURES
The abdomen is bordered dorsally by the spine, caudally by the pelvis, ventrally and later.
ally by the body wall, and cranially by the diaphragm. Immediately ventral to the spine is
the sublumbar musculature, the psoas muscles, which may be seen on both views. On the
ventrodorsal view, the sublumbar muscles lie just lateral to the spine from the thora-
columbar junction to the pelvis. On the lateral view, they are fusiform tissue
densities immediately ventral to the spine and extend from the thoracolumbar area to the
pelvis. Immediately ventral to these muscles is the retroperitoneal space, a potential space
that contains the kidneys, ureters, aorta and its major branches, most of the caudal vena
cava and its immediate tributaries, adrenal glands, sublumbar lymph nodes (external iliac,
internal iliac, and coccygeal lymph nodes), and fat. Routinely, the ureters, major blood ves-
sels, adrenal glands, and lymph nodes are not seen. The aorta, a tubular structure running the
length of the retroperitoneal space, may be seen depending on the amount of retroperitoneal
fat. In the end-on view the deep circumflex iliac arteries, small, round tissue densities ven-
tral to L4 or L5, usually are seen. The retroperitoneal space continues around the caudal
aspect of the abdomen at the pelvic canal and contains much of the rectum and most of
the prostate, vagina, and urethra, as well as varying degrees of the urinary bladder. Laterally
and ventrally, the body wall is composed of various muscles, fat, and skin. In particularly
obese animals, these layers may be seen as individual sheets of tissue density separated from
each other by fat. On the lateral view, the body wall is visibly thinner at the xiphoid,
becomes thicker in the midabdomen, and continues at approximately the same thickness
to its insertion at the pubis. On the ventrodorsal view, the lateral body walls are nearly the
same thickness throughout their length. Cranially, the diaphragm separates the abdomen
from the thorax. The diaphragm is composed of two crura and a central dome, or cupola,
which usually are seen readily. The differentiation of these parts is greater in deep-chested
d a m  si a rd ai a s-s n sin p s
 peritoneum, a thin membrane that is not visible radiographically.
 Ultrasonography permits evaluation of the retroperitoneal space.6.7 The aorta and its
branches, as well as the caudal vena cava, can be identified and traced from the diaphragm to
the pelvic canal. Both longitudinal and transverse views should be obtained and the branches
followed as far as possible. The vascular anatomy is helpful when examination of the adren-
als is desired. In cooperative large dogs with limited alimentary gas, normal lymph nodes may
be identified at the root of the mesentery, at the ileocecocolic junction, and in the sublumbar
retroperitoneal space. The psoas muscles and abdominal wall may be examined. The rectus
abdominis muscles are usually visible as paired structures on either side of the ventral mid-
line. They are uniformly echogenic, symmetric in size and shape, and are thinner and less dis
tinct cranially. The psoas muscles can be identified on either side of the aorta. They are
heteroechoic and are symmetric. The jejunal and medial iliac lymph nodes are seen most
often during an ultrasonographic examination.? The iliac, or sublumbar, lymph nodes may
be seen but usually are difficult to identify unless they are enlarged. The ureters cannot be
traced through the retroperitoneal space and even when markedly enlarged are often
obscured by overlying intestines. The diaphragm can be seen as a bright echogenic line cra-
and the lung and not the diaphragm itself. When the diaphragm becomes thickened, such as
in muscular dystrophy, it appears as a heteroechoic structure similar to other muscles.
SPECIFIC ABDOMINAL ORGANS
Liver. On the lateral abdominal radiograph of the dog the liver, a homogeneously tissue-dense
structure, is the most cranial organ extending caudally from the diaphragm to a line approxi-
mately parall to the thirteenth rib, where it abuts the stomach (see Figs. 3-1 and 3-2). In
breeds with shallow chests (e.g., Lhasa Apso) the caudal ventral border of the liver may extend
256
slightly caudal to the thirteenth rib and chondral cartilage, whereas in deep-chested breeds
(e.g., Collies) the edge of the liver may not even extend to the thirteenth rib. In older dogs, the
liver may be more ventrally and caudally located than in younger ones. Regardless of its posi-
tion, the caudal ventral border of the liver should come to a relatively sharp point. A useful
parameter for liver size is the fundic-pyloric axis. The axis is defined by a line drawn on the lat-
eral view through the center of the gastric fundus to the center of the pylorus. This axis should
be parallel to the last two to three intercostal spaces. The caudal margin of the caudate lobe of
the liver may be identified cranial to the right kidney in obese dogs. It can be recognized
because of its triangular shape and position adjacent to the cranial pole of the right kidney. The
appearance of the liver in cats is similar to that in dogs; however, in obese cats a large amount
of fat may accumulate in the area of the falciform ligament, ventral and caudal to the liver, and
may markedly displace the liver dorsally (Fig. 3-7). This radiographic appearance tends to sug-
gest falsely that the liver is abnormally small Onthe ventrodorsal viw, the liver frequentlyis
hard to delineate because many structures are superimposed over it. It is bordered cranially by
the diaphragm. The caudal border is located at the level of the cranial wall of the nondistended
stomach. The liver should extend to both lateral body walls, but in obese animals there may be
fat between the body wall and the liver. The gallbladder, although located slightly to the right
of the midline and in the cranial ventral area of the liver, is not seen routinely on survey
abdominal radiographs because there are rarely significant amounts of fat between it and the
surrounding hepatic lobes. In the cat, the ventral margin of the gallbladder may be seen on the
lateral radiograph as an oval structure extending ventrally beyond the ventral liver margin.
The liver is not always accessible to ultrasonographic scanning, because a portion of it
may be obscured by the overlying stomach. In dogs with deep thoracic conformation, the
liver may be cranial to the last rib and relatively inaccessible to subcostal scanning. Scanning
through the intercostal spaces may be hindered by the overlying lung. The entire liver should
be examined systematically starting on one side and sweeping across to the other. This may
pue apis auo uo uie jeso au ueaq jeis no uum u yeoide ue susn anbai
progress across the abdomen to the other side. The liver can be recognized during an ultra-
sonographic examination because of its position cranial to the stomach and caudal to the
diaphragm. When the liver architecture is abnormal, identification of the bright echogenic
line of the diaphragm is a reliable indicator of the liver's position. The liver parenchyma is
less echogenic (blacker on a black background) than the spleen and ranges from similar to
more echogenic (whiter) than the renal cortex The architecture of the liver is composed of
a uniform texture, which is interrupted by short, highly echogenic paired parallel lines sur.
rounding an anechoic lumen that represent the portal veins and anechoic linear structures
that represent the hepatic veins (Fig. 3-8). The resulting pattern is heteroechoic with the uni-
formly echogenic hepatic cells interrupted by the portal and hepatic veins. The hepatic and
FIG.3-7 A4-year-old female domes-
tic short-haired cat with a 2-day
history of vomiting. The lateral view
revealed marked accumulation of fat
 in the region of the falciform liga-
ment (black f), which separated the
normal liver from the ventral body
wall. The cat responded to sympto-
matic therapy. Diagnosis: Obesity.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
257
portal veins should be approximately the same size in any given liver region. The intrahep-
atic biliary ducts, extrahepatic bile ducts, and hepatic arteries are not evident on a general
ultrasonographic examination unless they are enlarged. The common bile duct may be seen
coursing ventral, but parallel, to the portal vein. It should be less than 3 mm in diameter. The
gallbladder varies considerably in size; however, its ovoid shape is easily recognized and dis-
tinguished from the hepatic vein and caudal vena cava.10-13 Usually the galibladder wall is
poorly visualized or not identified. When visible, the gallbladder wall is normally 2 to 3 mm
thick. Wall thickness and visibility vary with transducer frequency and placement. High-fre-
quency transducers directed perpendicular to the galbladder wall are recommended when
galbladder wall measurements are desired. Measurement of the wall closest to the trans-
ducer is recommended. 13 A small amount of biliary sediment may be identified in a normal
fasting animal. A double gallbladder has been reported as an incidental finding in cats. This
produces a bilobed appearance (Fig. 3-9). The gallbladder may be bilobed, attached at the
neck, or arise from separate cystic ducts.14
 In obese animals, the falciform fat may interfere with attempts to obtain a good image of
the liver and, unless the sonographer is careful, may even be confused with the liver. The
echogenicity of the falciform fat in comparison to the liver can vary from being hyperechoic,
to hypoechoic, or isoechoic. The architecture of the falciform fat is usually more uniform than
that of the liver. It also contains numerous hyperechoic linear streaks, which are closer together
than the hyperechoic walls of portal veins. Liver lobes are more moveable during respiration
while the falciform fat is more stationary. A hyperechoic line may be visible at the interface
between the liver and falciform fat when the axis of the scan beam is perpendicular to the liver
surface. Identifying the architecture of the liver adjacent to the diaphragm and scanning cau-
dally toward the falciform fat are usually helpful in recognizing the difference in architecture
between the falciform fat and the liver, even when the liver is small.
Slice thickness artifacts are encountered frequently when examining the liver. The right
 kidney, gallbladder, and fat in the porta hepatis can create the illusion of hepatic masses.15
Careful examination by moving the transducer to several positions within the standard
sagittal or transverse planes will facilitate recognition of these artifacts.
Stomach. The stomach can be divided into four parts. The cardia is the point where the
esophagus joins the stomach, the fundus is the portion of the stomach to the left and
dorsal to the cardia, the major portion of the stomach is the body, and the pylorus, which
FIG.3-8 Longitudinal sonograms of
the liver of a 4-year-old castrated
male Basset Hound with a history of
abdominal pain of 2 days duration.
The liver is normal. The galbladder
is slightly distended, most likely
because the animal has not eaten
recently. The diaphragm can be seen
as a hyperechoic curved line. The
walls of the portal veins are hypere-
choic. Diagnosis: Normal liver.
258
SMAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-9 A 4-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat was
suspected to have an abdominal
mass. A longitudinal sonogram of
the gallbladder revealed two lobes (1
and 2) to the gallbladder. No mass
was discovered during the study.
Diagnosis: Bilobed gallbladder (nor-
mal variant).
includes the pyloric antrum and pyloric canal, is that portion of the stomach to the right
of the midline and extending cranially to the pyloric sphincter. In the dog, the cranial
wall of the stomach is in contact with the liver, except for a portion of the cardia that
touches the left diaphragmatic crus at the esophagogastric junction. The position of the
caudal wall depends on the amount of material or gas contained within the stomach;
normally this should not extend caudal to L4. The angle the stomach assumes reflects the
liver size. On the lateral view, a line drawn between the cardia and pylorus
(fundic-pyloric axis) should be parallel to or more vertical than the twelfth intercostal
space. The appearance of the stomach depends on the type and volume of gastric con-
tent. If the stomach contains both fluid and air, as is usually the case, a right lateral
recumbent radiograph will have the fluid in the pyloric portion of the stomach and the
u isuap anss punou e se aeudeoei eadde m snod au gsnuy au u i
the midventral portion of the abdomen, just caudal to the liver and caudoventral to the
cardiofundic area of the stomach. The fundus usually will be seen as an air-containing
structure dorsal to the pylorus and caudal to the liver. In a left lateral recumbent radi-
ograph, the pylorus will contain air and the cardiac and fundic portions of the stomach
will contain fluid.l The pylorus usually is located just slightly cranial to the level of the
fundus and body. On the ventrodorsal view, the stomach extends from nearly the left lat-
eral body wall, across the midline, to the area of the right lateral body wall in the normal
dog. In the normal cat, the pylorus is just to the right of the vertebrae on the ventrodor-
sal and dorsoventral views. In the ventrodorsal view, the body of the stomach will con-
tain gas and the cardia and pylorus will contain fluid.16 In the dorsoventral view, the fluid
will be in the body and the cardia and pylorus will contain air. It is very difficult to eval.
uate gastric wall thickness on survey radiographs, because the apparent thickness
depends on the degree of gastric distention as well as the amount and type of gastric con-
 tents. If the gastric wall appears thickened on survey radiographs, air or contrast should
be administered in order to confirm this abnormality. Rugal fold thickness varies with
the degree of gastric distention. Normal gastric fold thickness is reported to range from
 jo adeus au ui uoa 2 os on 7 uoy uam u suui sap u wu g 0n 1
stomach with or without gastric wall thickening is a more significant abnormal finding
than alteration in stomach size.
The ultrasonographic appearance of the stomach varies with the content and degree of
distention. Peristalsis can normally be observed. The stomach may be scanned in both lon-
gitudinal and transverse planes extending from the cardia on the left to the pylorus on the
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
259
FIG. 3-10 Longitudinal sonograms
of the stomach of a 10-year-old
spayed female Yorkshire Terrier with
a history of mammary tumors. The
 abdominal ultrasonography was per-
formed to investigate the possibility
of abdominal metastasis. The dog
was clinically normal. The stomach
is normal. The gastric wall is well
defined and uniform in thickness.
Gas can be identified within the
 stomach. The five layers of the gas-
tric wall can be identified with the
hypoechoic mucosa and muscularis
and the hyperechoic serosa, submu-
cosa, and mucosal or luminal sur-
face. Diagnosis: Normal stomach.
right. The stomach wall thickness varies from 3 to 5 mm, with larger breeds having a
thicker wall. Five layers may be identified starting with a hyperechoic serosa, a hypoechoic
muscularis, a hyperechoic submucosa, a hypoechoic mucosa, and a hyperechoic lumen or
mucosal surface (Figs. 3-10 and 3-11). The luminal gas produces reverberation artifacts,
which are useful in identifying the stomach. The rugal folds may be identified if the stom-
ach is relatively empty, but they disappear when the stomach is distended. Fluid and gas
may be seen swirling around within the stomach as a result of normal peristalsis. Water
may be administered by stomach tube in order to improve examination of the gastric
wall.12,18
Pancreas. The pancreas is immediately caudal to the stomach and medial to the duode-
num. The pancreas has two parts, (1) the left lobe or limb, which is immediately caudal to
the stomach and extends from the gastroduodenal junction to the cardia, and (2) the right
lobe, which is immediately medial to the descending duodenum and extends caudally from
p aqno ansn senud  se u u oun ieponnse a
radiographically because of its small dimensions and the large number of superimposed
structures of similar density. In a very fat cat, a triangular soft-tissue density may be
observed on the ventrodorsal view just caudal to the stomach and medial to the spleen.
This may represent the tip of the left limb of the pancreas.
 Identifying the pancreas during an ultrasonographic examination may be a challenge
even for the expert ultrasonographer. This organ can be identified in a cooperative small
 ied ym see u no rnun aun-u e un um nd
Infusion of 60 ml of isotonic saline per kg of body weight into the peritoneal cavity has
been recommended in order to visualize the pancreas. No complications were encountered
with this technique.19 The pancreas is usually isoechoic when compared with the mesen-
tery, similar in echogenicity to abdominal fat, and hyperechoic when compared with the
liver (Figs. 3-12 and 3-13) 12,19,20 It is most often identified adjacent to the duodenum and
260
FIG. 3-1l Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B to D) sonograms of the
stomach of a 12-year-old castrated
male cat with a history of hema-
tochezia and a palpable abdominal
mass. The stomach is normal. The
distinct layers of the stomach wall are
 not as defined as in the dog: however,
the wall is uniform in width. Gas is
evident within the gastric lumen cre-
ating the reverberation artifact.
 Diagnosis: Normal stomach.
A
D
FIG. 3-12 Transverse sonograms of
a 5-year-old male Miniature Poodle
(A) and an ll-year-old castrated
male Doberman Pinscher (B). The
 pancreas is visible as an echogenic.
somewhat triangular structure
(arrows) adjacent to the duodenum.
A small amount of peritoneal fluid is
 present in the Poodle's abdomen,
while a large amount of peritoneal
fuid is present in the abdomen of
the Doberman. This has caused the 
difference in the echogenicity of the
pancreas in these two dogs. An oval
hypoechoic structure is evident in
the pancreas adjacent to the duode-
num (small arrows). This represents
the
pancreaticoduodenal
vein.
Diagnosis: Normal pancreas.
A
B
 pylorus. An oval hypoechoic structure, which represents the pancreaticoduodenal vein,
may be identified within the pancreas adjacent to the duodenum. In normal animals iden-
relative to the duodenum and stomach can be documented. The right kidney, which is
located dorsal to the pancreas, also can be used as a landmark.19
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
261
FIG. 3-13 Transverse sonogram of
the duodenum and pancreas of a 12-
year-old spayed female dog with a
history of icterus, hepatomegaly, and
splenomegaly. The pancreas is nor-
mal. The oval hypoechoic area is the
pancreaticoduodenal vein. The pan-
creas is triangular in shape and simi-
lar to slightly hypoechoic in echo
intensity to the surrounding normal
fat. Diagnosis: Normal pancreas,
lymphoma.
Spleen. Radiographically, the spleen usually is clearly visible as a homogeneous tissue den-
sity. Its normal size varies. On the lateral view, the canine spleen usually is seen as a trian-
gular density just caudal and slightly ventral to the stomach or liver. This is a
cross-sectional view of the body and/or tail of the spleen. If the spleen is adjacent to and
touches the liver, the lack of contrasting density between them will make exact identifica-
as a m ao i al no  a e pod si ns a i  
may not be apparent in the lateral radiograph. In some cases the head of the spleen, which
appears as a triangular density just caudal to the stomach, may be seen in the dorsal part of
the abdomen, superimposed on or dorsal to the shadow of the right kidney. On the ven-
an  asp anss sn e se us s ann ids au po aoq au m gesnoo
 pan as e i pe s ai on  as pe pn isni 'ais 
the left kidney. If the spleen is positioned so that it crosses the midline, it will be difficult
to visualize its full length. If it is positioned along the left body wall, the entire length of the
spleen may be visible. The variable locations of the spleen are caused by its relatively lax
attachment to the stomach by the gastrosplenic ligament (Fig. 3-14). The spleen of the cat
differs from that of the dog in that it is usually smaller and somewhat less variable in both
size and position. The body and tail of the spleen may not be identified on the lateral view,
and its head may be seen as a small triangular tissue density just caudal and dorsal to the
stomach. Frequently, the entire extent of the spleen may be seen on the ventrodorsal view
in the cat.
The spleen is identified easily during an ultrasonographic examination. It is located on
the left side, caudal or lateral to the stomach. It is moveable and often extends into the cau-
 dal abdomen and across the midline to the right side It may be adjacent to the liver, lateral
to the stomach, may extend into the caudal abdomen along the left lateral abdominal wall,
or may cross the midline caudal to the stomach or cranial to the urinary bladder. The size
262
SmAll ANimAl RADlOlOGY AND ULTRaSONOGRaPHY
 FIG. 3-14 A 3-year-old male West Highland White Terrier with a 1-
 spleen lay along the left lateral body wall (white arrows). This is one
of the many positions that the spleen normally assumes. Diagnosis:
Normal abdomen.
of the spleen varies; when it is small it may be difficult to find. This is especially true in cats.
The spleen is hyperechoic when compared with the liver and renal cortex It has a uniform
homogeneous architecture. The splenic capsule may be evident as a bright marginal line,
although this varies depending on the angle with which the ultrasound beam strikes the
spleen (Fig. 3-15).1l,2 n an animal with peritoneal fluid, the capsule is much more appar-
ent. The splenic veins can be identified as anechoic structures that enter the spleen along
its medial border. These can be followed as they branch within the splenic parenchyma. In
normal dogs, a hyperechoic area may be identified at the splenic margin adjacent to the
splenic veins. This is the result of mesenteric fat within splenic capsular invaginations.
Splenic arteries are rarely seen, although they may be detected by Doppler ultrasonogra-
phy. The shape of the spleen will vary depending on the orientation of the spleen to the
ultrasound beam. It usually is seen as a thin, flat triangle; however, if the beam is oriented
along the long axis of the spleen it can appear as a wider structure. The spleen should be
 examined in both longitudinal and transverse planes. The spleen is useful as an acoustic
window for evaluating the lef kidney. Imaging the kidney through the spleen provides a
comparison for echogenicity of both structures.
 Kidneys. The appearance and location of the kidneys in dogs are affected by the animal's
age, posture, and general body condition. The kidneys are usually apparent, but the intes-
tines may be superimposed over them and may obscure some or all of their perimeter. The
right kidney is identified less frequently than the left, because it is less moveable and is nor-
 mally in contact with the liver. The kidneys become more moveable and, as the dog ages,
will become more ventrally and caudally located. When positioned in lateral recumbency,
the dependent kidney moves cranially and the nondependent kidney droops, becoming
more visible and more bean shaped. The extent of this movement or drooping is vari-
 able.13,22 The kidneys also move a distance of approximately one vertebral body with res-
piration. The right kidney extends from T12 to L1, while the left lies in the area from L1 to
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
263
FIG. 3-15 Transverse sonograms of the spleen of a 5-year-old female
 mixed breed dog brought in for abdominal ultrasonographic evalua-
tion because of a mast cell tumor on the right stifle The spleen is nor-
 mal. The splenic veins can be identified extending to the margin of the
spleen (arrows). Diagnosis: Normal spleen.
L3. On the lateral view, the right kidney is dorsal and cranial to the left kidney and may be
superimposed over the gastric and splenic shadows. Frequently, the cranial pole of the right
kidney is not seen, because it is nestled within the renal fossa of the caudate process of the
caudate lobe of the liver. At this site, there is little or no fat to provide contrast between the
two organs. On the ventrodorsal view, the right thirteenth rib superimposes on the pelvis
of the right kidney. As on the lateral view, it is often difficult to see the cranial pole of the
right kidney on the ventrodorsal view. The left kidney is seen lateral to the spine at the level
of L3 just medial and caudal to the spleen. The normal length of the canine kidney is
approximately 2.5 to 3.5 times the length of the second lumbar vertebral body as measured
on the ventrodorsal view.23-25 Although the normal width, from the medial to lateral bor-
 ders, and depth, from the dorsal to ventral borders, of the kidney are less commonly quan-
tified, these parameters should be evaluated subjectively. The left kidney, which is
somewhat moveable within the retroperitoneal space, may orient itself on the ventrodorsal
 projection at such an angle that its apparent length is shorter than its actual length. In the
average dog, 12 to 20 kg, the kidney measures 6 to 9 cm long, 4 to 5 cm wide, and 3 to 5 cm
thick.
 In the cat, both kidneys are located at the level from L1 to L4, with the right kidney usu-
ally slightly cranial to the left. On the lateral view of the cat, the kidney shadows may be
superimposed on each other in the dorsal midabdomen, or the right kidney may be slightly
cranial and dorsal to the left kidney. The area of overlap of renal shadows may be inter-
 preted incorrectly as a small kidney. On the ventrodorsal view of the cat, it is usually easier
to see the entire perimeter of the kidneys. The right kidney in the cat is located lateral to
the spine and completely caudal to the right thirteenth rib. The left kidney is usually par-
allel to the right or just slightly caudal to it. The normal length of the kidney in the cat is
approximately 2.0 to3.0 times the length of L2.25-28 In the cat, the average kidney measures
3.8 to 4.4 cm long, 2.7 to 3.1 cm wide, and 2.0 to 3.5 cm thick. Feline kidneys appear
smaller with advancing age, and neutered cats have somewhat smaller kidneys than intact
cats.27
264
 If the kidneys are palpable, they can be identified easily during an ultrasonographic exam-
ination. If they are small or contained within the margins of the rib cage, locating them
may be more difficult. The size of the kidney may be measured accurately provided the
transducer is positioned carefully to produce a symmetric image of the kidney. Renal vol-
ume can be computed; however, this parameter is not particularly useful.29-3 The normal
renal pelvis and proximal ureter as well as the renal vein can be identified when high-
frequency transducers are used. The ureter rarely can be traced beyond the renal pelvis.
 Interlobar, arcuate, and interlobular arteries usually are not visible as individual entities,
 although they can be examined using color-flow or duplex Doppler ultrasonography.
The appearance of the kidneys is influenced by the animal's size as well as by the trans-
ducer and machine used. Anatomical detail identified when examining small cooperative
dogs using high-frequency transducers may not be detected during examinations of large.
deep-chested obese dogs. The kidneys usually are examined in three planes: longitudinal,
along a frontal plane; transverse, at right angles to a midsagittal plane; and sagittal. These
planes are referenced to the kidney and not to the overall patient. The orientation of the
kidney to the transducer markedly alters its appearance, and artifacts can be created when
 oblique planes are used. The renal cortex, renal medulla, and renal pelvis can be identified
consistently. The canine renal cortex is brighter than the medulla, with an echo intensity
equal to or slightly less than that of the liver and markedly less than the echo intensity of
the spleen. The canine renal medulla has a few internal echoes but appears more homoge-
nous and hypoechoic relative to the cortex. It is common for individuals performing ultra-
sonographic examinations for the first time to misinterpret the echo intensity of the renal
medulla as hydronephrosis. The renal pelvic recesses, or diverticula, appear as bright,
evenly spaced, round or linear echoes. This appearance is most likely the result of the pres-
ence of renal pelvic fat and the interlobar arteries. The renal pelvis or proximal ureter may
The renal cortex of the cat is markedly hyperechoic when compared with the medulla
because of the presence of fat within the cortex Renal cortical echogenicity is more vari-
able in cats than in dogs. A linear hyperechoic zone observed within the medulla of the cat's
kidney has been associated with the presence of microscopic deposits of mineral within the
tubules in a zone between the corticomedullary junction and the renal crest (Fig. 3-17).
During the ultrasonographic examination, the transducer is moved cranially and
caudally along the kidney in order to obtain a series of transverse scans, or medially and
laterally (or dorsally and ventrally) to obtain a series of longitudinal scans. The spleen
FIG.3-16 Longitudinal (A to C) and 
transverse (D) sonograms of the left
kidney of a 3-year-old male mixed
breed dog. The dog was clinically
normal. The kidney is normal. The
cortex is hypoechoic relative to the
adjacent spleen, which provides an
acoustic window for examination of
the kidney. The renal pelvic recesses
contain fat and appear as hyperechoic
regions in the center of the kidney.
A
The renal medulla is hypoechoic rela-
tive to the renal cortex. In the trans-
verse sonogram (D) the renal hilus is
hyperechoic because of the fat that is
present. The renal pyramid can be
seen as a V-shaped hypoechoic struc-
ture extending into the hyperechoic
hilar fat. Retroperitoneal fat provides
a bright line that outlines the kidney.
 Diagnosis: Normal kidney.
C
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
265
FIG. 3-17 Transverse (A) and longi-
tudinal (B) sonograms of the left
kidney of a 5-year-old castrated male
cat with a history of vomiting and
jaundice of 1-week duration. There
is a thin hyperechoic line visible
within the renal medulla. This is a
normal finding in some cats. It is due
to accumulation of mineral within
the
renal medulla. Diagnosis:
Normal kidney.
A
B
may be positioned between the left kidney and the body wall, providing an acoustic
window for examination of the kidney. The right kidney may be examined through the
a au jo suod amssqo n sous sne iso a sq a aamu r
kidney.
Ureters. The ureters in both the dog and cat extend caudally from the kidneys to the blad-
der, traversing the retroperitoneal space slightly ventral to the lumbar muscles and slightly
lateral to the vertebral column. Normally, because of their small size the ureters are not vis-
ible, but it is helpful to know their course through the abdomen in order to detect condi-
tions such as ureteral calculi. The abdominal portion of the ureter is retroperitoneal in
location and lies adjacent to the psoas muscle. Within the pelvic cavity it enters the genital
fold in the male and the broad ligament in the female. The ureters tunnel through the blad-
der wall and empty into the bladder at the ureteral orifice onto converging ridges called
urethral columns. These columns continue caudally as ridges called plica urethra and meet
to form the urethral crest, which projects into the urethra. In the male, this terminates at
the colliculus seminalis.
The proximal ureter may be identified during an ultrasonographic examination pro-
viding the patient is cooperative and a high-frequency transducer is used. The proximal
ureter forms the base of the Y pelvis that extends along both sides of the renal crest. With
 good resolution, peristalsis may be evident in the proximal ureter just beyond the renal
 pelvis; however, the normal ureter cannot be traced beyond the pelvis. Mild to moderate
renal pelvic dilation (pyelectasis) occurs secondary to intravenous fluid administration,
and this dilation can be observed during the ultrasonographic examination in normal
a aq ueo sii uaa ue aare euai aui  pausinsusi aq is ian ai ge'sao
using Doppler imaging to determine which is the artery and which is the vein. In addition,
the renal vessels branch and enter the kidney away from the renal crest, more dorsal and
ventral than the ureter in the transverse view, while the ureter branches directly on the
renal crest.
Ovaries. In the female, the ovaries are immediately caudal to the kidneys. They are not
identifiable radiographically.
The ovaries are difficult but not impossible to identify during an ultrasonographic
examination. They can be found adjacent to the caudal pole or just caudal and somewhat
lateral to the ipsilateral kidney. The ovaries are hypoechoic and partially obscured by sur-
rounding fat. Their round shape and follicular architecture as well as their relationship to
the ipsilateral kidney make their identification possible (Figs. 3-18 and 3-19). Small ane.
choic cysts and developing follicles have been identified. A lateral scanning plane, rather
than a ventral approach, may facilitate localization and examination of the canine
ovaries.39
266
SMALL ANIMALRADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-18 A, Sagittal ultrasonogram
of an ovary (defined by calipers)
S
from a normal adult bitch. Note the
numerous, similarly sized (3 to 4
mm) anechoic follicles around the
perimeter of the ovary. B, Sagittal
ultrasonogram of an ovary (defined
by calipers) from a normal adult
bitch. Note the large (>8 mm) ane-
choic follicle seen in the plane of the
scan. Compare with A Diagnosis: A,
Normal anestrous ovary. B, Normal
estrous ovary. (Figure courtesy Dr.
Kathy Spaulding.)
A
RT
B
Adrenal Glands. Usually the adrenal glands are not identified radiographically. In older
cats the adrenal glands may become mineralized and therefore evident on the abdomi-
nal radiograph. This is apparently an aging change and is not associated with clinical
signs.
 Identification of the normal adrenals using ultrasonography requires a high-resolution
finding the right adrenal is more difficult. The left adrenal lies adjacent to the aorta just cra-
nial to the vascular pedicle of the left kidney. The adrenal may be found by imaging the left
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
267
FIG. 3-19 Longitudinal sonograms of the left and right kidney and
ovary of a 9-year-old female mixed breed dog with a history of chronic
structures (arrows) caudal to the kidneys. The ovaries appear slightly
enlarged but their architecture is normal. Diagnosis: Normal ovaries.
kidney in a longitudinal plane and then moving or rolling the transducer toward the midline
until the aorta is identified. The adrenal gland will be located adjacent to the left lateral aspect
of the aorta just cranial to the origin of the left phrenicoabdominal artery. An alternative
method of finding the left adrenal gland consists of imaging the aorta transversely and trac-
ing it caudally to the origin of the phrenicoabdominal artery just cranial to the left kidney. A
third method of locating the adrenal gland is to image the ipsilateral kidney in a dorsal plane
with the aorta in the same plane as the kidney. Fanning the transducer dorsally and ventrally
usually will reveal the left adrenal gland. The adrenal gland may be oriented slightly oblique
to the aorta; therefore the transducer must be manipulated until the complete adrenal gland
 is identified in a longitudinal plane. The adrenal gland frequently is masked by overlying
intestines, and gentle pressure using the transducer may be required to displace these intes-
tinal loops away from it.44 The right adrenal gland may be imaged by identifying the caudal
vena cava in a longitudinal plane and moving the transducer toward the right kidney at the
level of the cranial pole. The vena cava may be imaged in the transverse plane and followed
cranially and caudally at the level of the kidney until a cross-section of the adrenal gland is
found. Placing the transducer on the right dorsolateral abdomen in a longitudinal orienta-
tion and identifying the vena cava and the aorta helps to locate the right adrenal gland, which
will be in the plane of the caudal vena cava. Another method of locating the right adrenal
gland is to image the ipsilateral kidney in a dorsal plane, with the caudal vena cava in the same
plane as the kidney. Fanning the transducer dorsally and ventrally usually will reveal the right
left adrenal gland appears bipartite or peanut shaped, with an echo intensity similar to renal
medulla. In some patients, a distinction can be made between the hypoechoic cortex and
 s  ae sod  p  a (o- ) i n
 imaged size of the normal canine adrenal glands varies considerably as reported by various
authors.41,4245 Currently we suggest that a maximal diameter of about 5to6 mm and a max-
 imal length of about 20 mm be considered as a useful guideline for normal dogs. One study
evaluated the use of instilling normal saline into the peritoneal cavity to improve visualiza-
 tion of the adrenal glands and found it was not very helpful.19
268
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-20 Longitudinal sonograms
of the left (A) and right (B) adrenal
glands of an ll-year-old male
 Poodle with a history of chronic uri-
nary tract infections. Both adrenal
glands are normal in size and shape
(arrows). The aorta is visible deep to
the left adrenal gland. The hypo-
echoic adrenal cortex and hyper-
echoic medulla are visible bilaterally
but more clearly identified in the left
adrenal gland. Diagnosis: Normal
adrenal glands.
P
B
Small Intestine. The small intestines are visible on radiographs because of the contrast
 a        an    
 to which their serosal surface can be identified depends upon the amount of fat present
within the peritoneal cavity. The intestines should contain either fuid, air, ingesta, or a mix
of the above. The small intestine of the cat usually has only a small amount of air within
it.46 Other material, such as bone, also may be present within the small intestines. The small
intestines are curvilinear when seen longitudinally and round when seen in cross-section.
With the exception of the descending duodenum, the locations of the various parts of the
small intestine are quite variable in both the dog and cat. On the lateral view, the duode-
num leaves the pylorus in a cranial direction and immediately curls tightly in a right dor-
sal direction, to become directed caudally at a level just dorsal to the midabdomen. The
duodenum then follows a relatively straight course from its turn to the level of L4 or L5. At
this position it turns to the left and becomes the transverse duodenum, which is difficult to
identify radiographically. This extends for a short distance toward the midline where it
turns again to head cranially as the ascending duodenum. On the ventrodorsal view, the
origin of the duodenum may be seen extending cranially for a very short distance before it
curves tightly right and assumes a caudal direction. The descending duodenum may take a
slightly diagonal orientation, with the cranial extent lying along the right lateral abdomi-
nal wall and the caudal extent being slightly to the right of the midline. The position of the
descending duodenum in the cat is similar to that of the dog, except that it originates just
to the right of the midline on the ventrodorsal view. Specific identification of the position
of the transverse and ascending duodenum, as well as specific portions of the jejunum and
ileum, is very difficult because of the moveable nature of these structures. They are dis-
tributed around the root of the mesentery, which extends caudoventrally from the level of
L2 following the course of the cranial mesenteric artery. Most of the mesenteric lymph
nodes are found in this area but normally are not apparent radiographically. The small
 intestine normally contains gas or fluid, unless bone or other material has been eaten. Most
of the gas present comes from ingestion. The diameter of the normal smallintestine varies,
but generally it should be no wider than the width or height of a lumbar vertebral body.
 Evaluation of small intestinal wall thickness cannot be made accurately without a contrast
study, because the apparent thickness will depend on the degree of distention and the
nature of the intestinal contents.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
269
With ultrasonography, the descending duodenum can be traced from the pylorus, has a
relatively consistent position along the right lateral abdominal wall, and has a thicker 
mucosa than other portions of the intestinal tract. The ileum sometimes can be traced to the
ileocecocolic junction; however, the specific portions of the small intestines cannot always
be distinguished with ultrasonography. The lumen of the small intestines always contains
 some gas bubbles and therefore can be recognized as a hyperechoic linear or curved
structure. The wall of the small intestine can be identified and, although the layers of the wall
are the same as the stomach, in most cases all five layers cannot be distinguished.l8 Usually
the hyperechoic lumen, mucosa, and hyperechoic submucosa can be identified, separated by
the hypoechoic lamina propria, tunica muscularis, and serosa appearing as a single hypere-
choic structure. The intestines should be scanned in both longitudinal and transverse planes.
The wall thickness, normally 2 to 3 mm, luminal content, and bowel shape should be exam-
a single intestinal loop usually can be followed for only a short distance because of interfer-
ence from other gas-filled loops. Peristalsis should be observed within the small intestines.
Large Intestine. The large intestine, or colon, begins with the cecum. Although its position is
somewhat variable, the cecum usually is located in the midabdomen ventral to L3 or L4 and
sightly to the right of the midline in the dog. The cecum frequently contains gas and may be
apparent as a spiral or comma-shaped structure on both the lateral and ventrodorsal views. The
cecum of the cat is much smaller, not spiraled, and less frequently identified on survey radi-
ographs. It is slightly more cranial in the abdomen, with its usual location ventral to L2 or L3.
 In both the dog and cat, the ileocolic lymph nodes are located at the ileocecocolic junction
but are not visible radiographically. Cranial to this site, there is a short ascending colon that
extends cranially from the cecum, and a transverse colon that crosses the midline from the right
to the left and connects the ascending colon to the descending colon, which extends caudally to
FIG. 3-21 Sonograms of the
abdomen of a 2-year-old spayed
female Welsh Corgi with a history of
polyuria, polydipsia, and vomiting
for 1 month. There are several loops
of small intestine visible in both lon-
gitudinal and transverse sections.
These intestines are normal. The
lumen is visible as a centrally located
hyperechoic line. The wall is hypo-
echoic with a hyperechoic serosal
surface. Wall thickness is 2 to 3 mm.
 Diagnosis: Normal small intestines.
270
SMALLANIMALRADIOLOGY
the rectum. The transverse colon in both animals is located immediately caudal to the stomach
and, when seen on the lateral view in an end-on projection, may appear as a round tissue den-
sity if it is filed with fluid, a round radiolucency if it is filled with gas, or a granular mixture of
fluid and gas if it contains fecal material. On the ventrodorsal radiograph, the descending colon
is usually on the left of the midline, extending caudally along the lateral abdominal wall On the
lateral radiograph, the colon usually is located in the middle one-third of the abdomen. The
position of the colon varies depending on its content and the amount of retroperitoneal fat that
is present. It may be on the right side in some normal animals and may take an irregular course
through the abdomen when distended with air or filled with fecal material. In some normal
dogs the colon appears tortuous, particularly at the region of the junction between the trans-
verse and descending colons. The distal colon may be deviated to the right or the left by a dis-
tended urinary bladder, particularly on the ventrodorsal view. The normal colon diameter is
usually no more than 2 to 3 times that of the small bowel. The colon may be completely empty
or flled with fluid and appear as a tissue-dense tube, completely gas filled and appear as a rad
olucent tube, completely distended with fecal material and appear as a tube ranging in density
from tissue to bone, or a combination of the above. Because of this high degree of variability, it
is often difficult to recognize colonic lesions without the aid of special procedures.
 The colon can be identified during an ultrasonographic examination; however, most of
its structure is obscured by the highly echogenic nature of its content.12,18 Gas and fecal
material are so highly echogenic that the details of the colon wall often are obliterated. The
size and position of the colon and the absence of peristalsis enable the ultrasonographer to
recognize it and distinguish it from small intestines. When the colon is empty the mucosal
folds may be visible, resulting in a wrinkled appearance of the wall of the colon. Although
the normal colon wall is approximately 2 to 3 mm in width, it may appear thinner when
the colon is distended. In the transverse plane, the colon usually appears as a semicircle
because the gas within the lumen shadows the far wall In the longitudinal plane, the colon
appears as an echogenic line. If the colon is fluid flled, the far wall will be evident and the
tubular nature of the bowel can be recognized. The three portions of the colon can be rec-
ognized because of their position within the abdomen.
Urinary Bladder. The urinary bladder, a teardrop-shaped tissue-dense organ, normally is
seen immediately cranial to the pelvic brim (or prostate gland in the male) and varies in
size depending on the amount of urine it contains. The cranial border of the normal uri-
nary bladder rarely extends cranial to the umbilicus. The degree of urinary bladder disten-
tion usually reflects that the animal has not had the opportunity to urinate, and it is
hazardous to evaluate bladder function based solely on bladder size. When the bladder size
is correlated with the patient's history (i.e., a markedly distended bladder in an animal that
has just urinated would sugest bladder atony or urinary obstruction), some functional
information can be gleaned from the radiograph.
The urinary bladder is ovoid with a cranial blunt vertex, a rounded middle portion or
body, and a neck that leads to the urethra. In the female dog and in both male and female
cats,the bladder normally has a long, gradually tapering neck. In the male dog the bladder
neck is shorter, tapers more abruptly, and is closer to the pelvic brim. All of the bladder is
covered by peritoneum except the bladder neck and proximal urethra, which are retroperi-
toneal. This is important when evaluating patients for bladder trauma, because rupture of
the bladder caudal to the neck will result in retroperitoneal fluid, while rupture of other
portions of the bladder will produce peritoneal fluid. The bladder should be uniformly tis-
sue dense; however, air bubbles may be observed in the bladder of a normal dog or cat that
has been catheterized or less often in one that has had a cystocentesis.
Ultrasonography is ideally suited for examination of the urinary bladder.47 Even a small
bladder not detected by abdominal palpation or radiographs can be identified using ultra-
sonography. The anechoic urine contrasts well with the echogenic bladder wall (Fig. 3-22).
Compression of the abdominal wall by transducer pressure frequently distorts the bladder's
shape. Ultrasonographic artifacts, such as slice thickness and reverberation, can create the
appearance of cellular material within the bladder. The bladder wal can be measured. The
thickness of the bladder wall varies with bladder distention, ranging from approximately 1.5
mm when moderately distended to 3.0 mm when minimally distended.48 A focal thickening
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
271
FIG.3-22 Longitudinal (Ato C) and
transverse (D) sonograms of the
bladder of a l-year-old castrated
 male Boxer with a history of weight
loss and diarrhea of 3 months dura-
tion. The bladder is normal. The
bladder wall is poorly seen because
of the degree of bladder distention.
The ureteral orifice is evident (A)
(arrow). The echoes within the blad-
A
B
der lumen (B) (arrows) represent
turbulence of the urine associated
with a ureteral jet. Other echoes
within the bladder are artifacts due
to electronic noise and reverbera-
 tion. Diagnosis: Normal bladder.
PHRE
SAIN
心
D
FIG. 3-23 Transverse (A and B) and
RSAL
ACU
longitudinal (C and D) sonograms
PHR
of the urinary bladder of a 13-year-
GAIN=
old male Doberman Pinscher who
was reevaluated for bladder polyps,
which had been removed surgically 3
years previously. There is a smooth
 convex bulge on the mucosal surface
of the urinary bladder (arrows). This
 isin the region of the bladder trigone
B
and represents the normal ureteral
 papillae. This could be mistaken for
DEPT
a bladder wall mass. Diagnosis:
ACUSE
Normal bladder.
PURB
GAIN
C
of the bladder wall has been described at the trigone area where the ureter enters the bladder
(Fig. 3-23).49 When the specific gravity of the urine in the bladder is different from the specific
gravity of the urine in the ureter, swirling may be observed secondary to propulsion of urine
from the ureter into the bladder (Figs. 3-22 and 3-24). This may be observed more readily
using color-flow Doppler; however,i the urine contains highly cellular, a significantly higher 
specific gravity, or crystalline material these jets may be observed during routine ultrasono-
 graphic examinations.
 Ultrasonography can be used for guidance when performing a cystocentesis. The nee
dle tip can be observed as it penetrates the bladder (Fig. 3-25).
272
FIG. 3-24 Transverse sonograms of the urinary bladder of a 6-year-
old spayed female mixed breed dog with a history of chronic urinary
tract infection. An echogenic swirl of urine has created the turbulence
visible in the dorsal lef side of the urinary bladder (arrows). This is the 
result of urine being propelled into the bladder lumen from the
ureteral papillae. This occurs when the specific gravity of the urine
within the bladder is different from that in the ureter. This is a normal
phenomenon and has been termed a ureterat jet. Diagnosis: Ureteral
jet.
i nn o a pe iq aen un uamq ie si san a jo aoq ai n
not seen routinely in the normal nongravid female. In fat patients, the uterine body may be
 seen as a tubular soft-tissue structure located between the colon and the bladder or super-
imposed on the urinary bladder.s0
Hysterography has been used for evaluation of uterine abnormalities. Catheterization
of the cervical canal is followed by slow injection of iodinated contrast medium.
Intrauterine pressure is monitored during the contrast injection, and the injection is ter-
minated when the pressure reaches 100 mm Hg. This technique has been used on a limited
basis, mostly because of the difficulty in catheterization and the variability of achieving
flow through the cervix into the uterus.51,52 Ultrasonography is much more useful than
hysterography for evaluation of uterine abnormalities.
The uterine body may be identified during an ultrasonographic examination. It can be
identified either dorsal or dorsolateral to the urinary bladder (Fig. 3-26). It is usually eas-
ier to detect it when examining the bladder in a transverse plane. It appears as a round het-
 eroechoic structure with a very small, mildly hyperechoic lumen.39 It may also be examined
in a longitudinal axis, but orienting the transducer to the uterine body is more difficult.
The uterus must be distinguished from adjacent loops of intestine. However, the normal
uterus usually lacks the echogenic luminal stripe associated with intestines. In some cases
a minimal central stripe may be seen in the normal uterus, particularly during estrus.
Prostate. In male dogs, the prostate is immediately caudal to the urinary bladder and com-
pletely surrounds the urethra. Normally, the prostate does not extend cranial to the pelvic
brim in young, sexually mature dogs. In chondrodystrophic breeds, it is common to see
some of the prostate's perimeter cranial to the brim of the pelvis. When the bladder is dis-
tended it may pull the prostate cranially.
Criteria for determining normal prostatic size have been published but are not used
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
273
FIG. 3-25 Transverse sonograms of the urinary bladder of a 12-year-old
 male Cocker Spaniel with a history of chronic diarrhea and hypoalbu-
 minemia of 2 months duration. A cystocentesis was performed using
ultrasonographic guidance. In the initial images the needle is visible pen-
 etrating the bladder wall and pushing a V-shaped fold of bladder mucosa
into the bladder lumen. As the puncture progresses the mucosa is pene-
trated, and in the last image the tip of the needle becomes visible in the
center of the bladder. This indenting of the bladder mucosa is often
responsible for a failure to obtain urine during a cystocentesis.
Ultrasonographic guidance is extremely valuable when the bladder is
 small or cannot be palpated. Diagnosis: Ultrasonographically guided cys-
tocentesis.
FIG. 3-26 Transverse (A, C, and D)
and longitudinal (B) sonograms of
the caudal abdomen of a 6-year-old
female Dachshund with a history of
vomiting, anorexia, pancytopenia,
 and splenomegaly. The uterus is vis-
ible as a hyperechoic oval or tubular
structure dorsal to the urinary blad-
der and to the right (A, C, and D: + )
or dorsal (B, small white arrows) to
the colon. This represents a normal
uterus. Diagnosis: Normal uterus.
A
B
274
method has been on the lateral view to draw a line parallel or perpendicular to a line drawn
from the sacral promontory to the cranial edge of the pubic bone, the pubic-promontory
axis distance. 4 The normal canine prostate gland should be less than 70% of that distance.
 In the male cat the prostate is a very small accessory sex organ located caudal to the uri-
 an  i  d  no d  n r a  r 
on only three sides and is not normally seen.
 The canine prostate can be examined and measured ultrasonographically,ss-57 Usuallyit is
easiest to identify the prostate by locating the urinary bladder in a transverse plane and then
moving the transducer caudally, following the bladder until the bladder narrows at the neck
re sua aon e se ppi aq uu r asd a siedesp uu pue
in echo intensity to the spleen), round, or bilobed structure surrounding the bladder neck or
 urethra. The median raphe may not be obvious, and the gland may appear more round than 
bilobed. A wall or capsule surrounding the prostate is usually not evident except when the
transducer is perpendicular to the gland surface. The urethra and regional ducts may be seen
as a hypoechoic round or linear structure, but this is uncommon. Small anechoic areas within
the prostate probably represent small intraprostatic cysts. These are more common in older
intact dogs, and whether they are normal or abnormal is debatable. It is difficult to see the
prostateifitraelvitalpalatimusdislactatuft
pelvic canal, making it more accessible to ultrasonographic examination. Tilting the patient
head-down may move the prostate out of the pelvic canal. By distending the urinary bladder
or allowing it to distend by limiting the opportunity to void, the prostate will be pulled ante-
riorly out of the pelvic canal, and this may permit prostatic evaluation. The full urinary blad-
der also will displace the small bowel away from the pelvic inlet, limiting gas interference with
- e d aq pa q a sd d e saop sr  s as
array or small electronic sector transducer within the rectum. Ultrasonographic evaluation of
 prostatic size is subjective but can be compared with the radiographic measurements.
Testicles. The testicles usually are not evaluated radiographically, but they should be eval-
uated using ultrasonography. The normal testicle is uniformly heteroechoic and is hyper-
echoic when compared with most abdominal organs except the spleen (Fig. 3-27). The
mediastinum testis produces a central hyperintense line with some slight shadowing. The
 tail of the epididymis is anechoic or hypoechoic.s8
F1G. 3-27 Longitudinal (A and C)
and transverse (B) sonograms of the
left testicle of a 6-year-old male
Bullmastiff with a history of abnor-
mal ejaculate and low sperm counts.
The testicle is normal. The hyper-
echoic centrally located structure is
the mediastinum testes. The archi-
tecture of the testicle is uniform. The
epididymis is evident in the longitu-
dinal  section (C). Diagnosis:
Normal testicle.
A
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
275
Abdominal Vasculature. Within the abdomen certain vascular structures may be seen in
some normal animals. In animals with large amounts of fat, the aorta and, in some cases,
the caudal vena cava may be seen on the lateral view. They can be recognized because of
their linear shape and position. The aorta is slightly ventral to the spine and branches at the
level of L5, the deep circumflex iliac arteries, and at the level of L6-L7, the external iliac
arteries. The caudal vena cava runs obliquely from the caudal dorsal abdomen in a cran-
ioventral direction toward the liver.
ascularanatomycanbeexamind using ultrasonography962 The caudalena caa and
the aorta and their branches, the hepatic veins, and the portal vein can be detected and exam-
ined. In most vessels, flow can be observed when high-resolution transducers are used with
relatively high gain settings. Color-flow Doppler techniques facilitate flow detection and
qualitative characterization of flow direction, velocity, and uniformity. Flow can be quanti
tated using Doppler ultrasonography. The aorta and caudal vena cava can be examined in
both longitudinal and transverse planes. The aorta is dorsal and slightly to the left of the cau-
dal venal cava. The aortic pulsations can be observed. The wall of the aorta is slightly thicker
than that of the caudal vena cava, but in smaller dogs the wall usually is not identified.59
Aortic pulsations may not be readily apparent and may be transmitted to the caudal vena
cava, making discrimination between these vessels diffcult Compression of the vessels using
the ultrasonographic transducer helps discriminate between the aorta and the vena cava,
because the cava is more easily compressed.59 The celiac and cranial mesenteric arteries can
be detected if the stomach and intestines are relatively empty. They can be followed a short
distance from their origin before being obscured by intestines. The phrenicoabdominal artery
can be identified just cranial to the left kidney and is used as a landmark to locate the left
adrenal gland. The renal arteries may be seen at their origin; however, they are rarely seen in
the renal hilus. Renal arteries can be detected using Doppler imaging even though they can
not be identified specifically. The terminal branches of the aorta can be seen most readily
when the aorta is followed in the transverse plane. The splitting of the aorta into several
round vessels can be identified. These branches are more difficult to follow in the longitudi-
nal plane. It is difficult to follow the vessels beyond the inguinal ring. The caudal vena cava is
wider than the aorta and lacks the pulsations observed in the aorta. The wall of the vena cava
can be identified in some larger dogs. The renal veins sometimes can be identified. Splenic
veins can be identified but usually cannot be traced to the portal vein. The vena cava may be
followed in the transverse or longitudinal planes to the liver, where the hepatic veins can be
observed to join the vena cava. The portal vein can be traced from the confluence of the
choic walls helps to identify the portal vein. The portal vein, hepatic vein, and extrahepatic
bile ducts come together at the porta hepatis. Because of the small size of the extrahepatic bile
ducts compared with that of the portal veins, it is usualy easy to recognize the difference
between these structures. The echogenicity of the walls of the portal vein is helpful in recog-
nizing the intrahepatic portal branches. The hepatic veins course toward the caval hiatus of
the diaphragm, facilitating differentiation of these from dilated intrahepatic bile ducts
Doppler ultrasonography can facilitate characterization of these three structures. Portal
blood flow can be measured using pulsed Doppler ultrasonography. An overestimation of
portal flow usually results. A scanning plane through the right eleventh or twelfth intercostal
space is recommended.62 Doppler techniques can be used to examine intraabdominal arter-
ies and veins. The examination is technically difficult in an awake, unsedated animal. The
value and predictability of this technique are unproved in veterinary medicine; however, it is
helpful in ruling out thrombi hepatofugal portal venous flow, and diroflariasis63-66
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
SPECIAL PROCEDURES: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
The abdominal organs are affected by many lesions that exert their pathologic effect at a
physiologic or anatomical level not discernible by survey radiography. These lesions may
be identified by one or more special (contrast) procedures. Many different special
procedures may be performed to evaluate the abdominal organs. Recommended methods
276
for these procedures vary; however, the principles of interpretation are the same regardless
of technique. The described methods of performing the procedures are those preferred by
the authors.
PERITONEAL CAVITY
Positive-Contrast Peritoneography and Pneumoperitoneum. Radiographic definition of
peritoneal structures or the diaphragm may be improved by the use of either a positive-
quently before ultrasonography became available and are even less commonly used now.
The pneumoperitoneum is performed by placing a needle or catheter through the abdom-
inal wall and inflating the peritoneal cavity with gas. Carbon dioxide or nitrous oxide are
preferred because they are more soluble in blood and more quickly absorbed. Room air is
usually safe and may be used. The amount of gas needed varies, but the abdomen should
be tympanitic after inflation. The radiographic position used varies with the structure of
interest. Positioning should cause theair tosurround the organ of interest, keeping in mind
 that air will rise to the highest point within the abdomen. For example, if the right lateral
liver lobe is of interest, the preferred positioning would be either lateral with the left side
down so that the air would rise to the right side, or a ventrodorsal view performed using a
sd s a e  iu e   e eq x pa
(i.e., with the forelimbs elevated). If there is a risk of diaphragmatic hernia, positive-con-
trast peritoneography is preferred due to the risk of pneumothorax if large amounts of gas
are used in a negative-contrast technique. Positive-contrast peritoneography is most useful
when peritoneal fluid is present. The contrast will mix with the fluid and outline the soft
tissue-dense abdominal viscera. Positive-contrast peritoneography also can be used for
evaluation of the integrity of the diaphragm, but these procedures are used infrequently
because ultrasonography is a much easier technique and because there may be false-nega-
tive peritoneogram findings.
Selective Abdominal Compression. Both normal and abnormal structures within the
abdomen can be obscured by overlying intestines. Selective abdominal compression is a
technique that uses a wooden spoon or paddle to isolate these structures by displacing the
intestines away from the area of interest.23 With the animal in lateral or dorsal recum-
 bency, the structure of interest is palpated and isolated from the intestines. A radiolucent
wooden spoon or paddle is placed over the structure to hold it in place and prevent the
intestines from moving back into the area. The individual who is performing the examina-
tion can then have the hand shielded and out of the primary x-ray beam, and the radi-
ographic exposure can be made. The portion of the abdomen that is of interest will be
compressed or thinner than normal, so the radiographic technique must be reduced to
compensate for the reduced thickness. As in any technique that requires someone to be in
the radiology room at the time of the x-ray exposure, protective devices such as lead gloves
and aprons must be worn. In addition, the x-ray beam must be collimated to the area of
interest rather than exposing the whole abdominal area. This technique can be used very
effectively to displace the intestines away from the kidney when a renal or ureteral calculus
is suspected, to isolate the uterine horns or body, or to isolate an intestinal mass that can
 be palpated but cannot be identified because of overlying gas or ingesta-filled bowel.
PORTALBLOODFLOW
Operative Mesenteric Portography, Splenoportography, and Cranial Mesenteric
Arteriography. Several special procedures are available to evaluate portal blood flow to the
liver. These include the operative mesenteric portogram, the splenoportogram, or the
venous washout phaseof the cranial mesenteric arteriogram6971The splenoportogram is
performed by introducing a needle or catheter into the body of the spleen, preferably near
the origin of the splenic veins. At this time, a manometer may be attached to the system to
determine splenic pulp pressure, a reflection of the pressure in the portal system. After this,
water-soluble iodinated contrast medium (at a dosage of 1 to 2 ml/kg) is injected as rap-
idly as possible, and a radiograph is taken as the last part of the injection is completed.
Placement of the needle within the spleen and stability of the needle during the contrast
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
277
injection, to ensure that the contrast is injected into the spleen and not into the peritoneal
cavity, are the major difficulties in this procedure. Another method of demonstrating these
 s ie   p  a s e p 
 Iodinated water-soluble contrast medium (200 to 400 mg iodine per ml) is injected man-
Jo jed isel aui se uaxi ane sudeoipen pue suaiam apoq jo sy/u I jo sesop e ie a
the injection is delivered. This technique requires either intraoperative radiographs or mul-
tiple closures and repeated openings of the abdominal incision. The third method uses the
venous phase of an injection of contrast into the cranial mesenteric artery.7l Because fluo-
roscopy is required and the detail of the venous phase is sometimes poor, this method is
rently is the technique used most frequently. Transcolonic portography using a radioiso.
tope has become popular as a screening procedure for the detection of portosystemic
shunts. This technique requires the use of a scintillation (gamma) camera and usually is
available only at referral centers.
GALLBLADDER
Cholecystography. Cholecystography is performed to visualize the gallbladder.72-74 This
may be done for a questionable location of the gallbladder (e.g., suspected diaphragmatic
hernia) or if obstruction toble flow is suspected.7,76The aplicabilityof this procedure
in biliary obstruction is quite limited, because the liver handles the contrast medium in the
same manner that it handles bilirubin. Therefore in icteric animals it is quite unlikely the
gallbladder will opacify in an adequate manner, because the liver will regurgitate both bile
and contrast medium and prevent accumulation of the contrast within the gallbladder.
Both oral and intravenous contrast agents have been used in dogs and cats. Oral cholecys-
tography has been performed in dogs using calcium iodopate at a dosage of 150 mg/kg
body weight. In cats, oral cholecystography has been performed using iobenzamic acid at
a dosage of 50 mg/kg and iodopate at a dosage of 150 mg/kg. Radiographs are obtained 12
to 14 hours following contrast administration. Intravenous cholecystography has been per-
formed in dogs using iodipamide at a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg and in cats at a dosage of 1
ml/kg, as well as with meglumine iotroxate at a dosage of 72 mg/kg.77 Although the con-
trast may be seen in the gallbladder as early as 15 minutes postinjection, radiographs usu-
ally are obtained 60 minutes after intravenous injection.
 Percutaneous transhepatic cholecystography has been performed safely in dogs.78 A nee-
dle is placed in the liver under fluoroscopic guidance and radiopaque water-soluble contrast is
 injected as the needle is withdrawn. The gallbladder is identified by flow of contrast into the
lumen. The gallbladder is monitored as it is filled with contrast material, and flling is contin-
ued until the contrast flows into the common bile duct and reaches the duodenum. Aspiration
of the contrast and bile is performed before the neede is removed from the gallbladder.
Twenty to thirty ml of contrast usually is required for average-size dogs (11 to 25 kg). A simi-
lar technique can be used for cholangiography, in which the contrast is identified within an
intrahepatic bile duct or hepatic vein as the needle is withdrawn using fluoroscopy. These tech-
niques are of limited value and are available only at centers that have fluoroscopic equipment.
An alternative to fluoroscopy is ultrasonographically guided cholecystography and is used
when it is specifically indicated to assess the galbladder and extrahepatic biliary ducts.79
Although the gallbladder and bile ducts can be evaluated using ultrasonography, limited
functional information can be obtained. Sincalide, a synthetic cholecystokinin, has been
used to induce gallbladder emptying in order to obtain some functional information and
distinguish between obstructive and nonobstructive biliary disease. The drug is injected
intravenously at a dosage of 0.04 μg/kg, and the response of the gallbladder is monitored
using ultrasonography. Normal dogs and dogs with nonobstructive biliary disease reduce
the volume of the galbladder by 40% within 1 hour, while obstructed dogs reduced their
gallbladder volume less than 20%. Side effects to the injection were not reported.80
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Gastrointestinal Series. Noncontrast radiographs should always precede a GI contrast
study. This approach may save you the effort, the patient the discomfort, and the owner
278
SMAL1
the expense of a contrast study. Even if noncontrast radiographs were obtained several
hours or a day before, they should be repeated. The most commonly performed special
study of the GI tract is the upper GI series using barium. This is indicated when the ani-
mal has exhibited clinical signs of GI disease that have failed to respond to symptomatic
treatment or has other findings (e.g., history of ingestion of foreign matter, suspicious
findings on palpation of the abdomen) that suggest that anatomical evaluation of the GI
tract may be helpful in elucidating the problem. Diarrhea with no other GI sign is rarely
an indication to perform a GI series. The most common mistakes made when performing
a GI contrast study are improper patient preparation, administering too little contrast, and
obtaining too few radiographs after contrast administration. The patient's GI tract should
be empty before contrast administration, because food and fecal material can mimic or
obscure lesions. This is achieved by withholding all food for at least 12 hours and using
laxatives or enemas or both. If necessary, dogs may be sedated with an intravenous dose
of 0.1 to 3.0 mg of acepromazine unless contraindicated by other factors (e.g., a history of 
seizures ). 12,81 Cats may be sedated by the intravenous injection of 10 mg of ketamine or by
intramuscular injection of ketamine (10 mg/lb), acepromazine and ketamine (0.1 mg/lb,
6 mg/lb), or ketamine and diazepam (6 mg/lb, 0.2 mg/lb).82,83 It is important to under-
stand the effects of various sedatives on the GI tract and how they will affect the upper GI
series.84-8 A 25% to 40% weight-to-volume suspension of barium is administered by oro-
gastric or nasogastric intubation at a dosage of 5 to 8 ml/b. We do not recommend the
routine use of iodine-containing, water-soluble contrast medium for this purpose.
Although others have recommended smaller dosages, it is our experience that the most
common problem with this study is the use of an inadequate dose, which fails to distend
the GI tract completely. Commercially premixed products are preferred to barium powder
that requires mixing with water, because the suspending agents in commercially prepared
products seem to produce superior mucosal detail, more uniform passage, less artifactual
uou pue suoi y uoisusns aqis ao e pue uooy pe uoaias
water-soluble iodine-containing contrast media are used by some veterinarians, because
rapid transit by the water-soluble, iodine-containing contrast medium is far outweighed
by the disadvantage of the very poor contrast and detail these products provide, as well as
These agents do not coat the mucosa very well, and the ionic agents may also irritate the
gastric mucosa and cause vomiting. Furthermore, as the contrast medium passes through
the intestine, the hyperosmolar ionic agents draw body fluids into the intestine. This
results in a decreasing density throughout the study and systemic dehydration, which may
be dangerous in an already dehydrated patient. The use of water-soluble agents has been
recommended when bowel rupture is suspected because of the potential for granuloma-
tous peritonitis caused by free barium in the abdominal cavity. Although this is a valid
consideration, the possibility of misdiagnosis because of poor contrast density in cases of
 minimal leakage from small defects in the bowel, coupled with the opportunity to flush
any leaked barium from the abdomen at laparotomy, leads us to recommend the use of
barium for almost all studies.
Instillation by stomach tube requires certainty that the tube is positioned in the stom-
cats,the orogastric tube can be palpated to distinguish it from the trachea if care is exer-
cised. Use of a stomach tube is superior to oral instillation, because it is common for ani-
mals to expectorate a portion of the barium as well as to inhale some of the barium if they
struggle. They also tend to swallow large amounts of air at the same time. Gastric intuba-
tion ensures that the stomach will receive a proper dose of barium so that it is adequately
distended.
It has been reported that the normal time for barium to reach the colon after instil-
lation is 90 to270 minutes in the dog and 30 to 60minutes in the cat.81,83,93-98 In dogs,
radiographs should be taken immediately after the barium has been administered and at
intervals of 15 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, 2 hours, 3 hours, and periodicall thereafter
until the barium reaches the colon. In the cat, barium passes through the normal
GI tract more rapidly, and therefore radiographs should be taken immediately, and after
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
279
10 minutes, 20 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, and hourly thereafter until the barium
reaches the colon and the stomach is empty. The temperature of the barium does not
appear to affect gastric transit time.99 Four views, ventrodorsal, dorsoventral, and left
and right recumbent laterals, should be made immediately after contrast administration,
because different portions of the stomach are profiled in each view. At least a ventrodor-
sal or dorsoventral and a lateral view should be taken at each time thereafter. The ven-
trodorsal view is preferred because it minimizes superimposition of structures and
allows better evaluation. In the normal animal, gastric contractions willbe apparent and
will alter the gastric shape over time. An open pylorus is rarely seen radiographically
because, compared with gastric mixing, pyloric opening is relatively infrequent and of
 s    a po     
varies, a marked delay in beginning the passage of significant amounts of contrast agent
from the stomach implies a pyloric outflow obstruction. Gastric emptying may be pro-
longed in nervous patients, especially cats. These animals will usually resume normal
peristalsis if left in a quiet environment for a few minutes. There is a great deal of varia-
o pasn ae ua say iso os shop ieou soe sa sida ss un uo
as crude estimates. Although each individual dog is consistent, there is considerable vari-
Bop o sop uou uone
 Mixing food with barium to evaluate gastric emptying serves no useful purpose. In
most cases, the liquid barium will separate from the food and transit the intestines while
the food remains in the stomach until it becomes liquefied. Although gastric emptying
time following administration of a barium-food mixture is fairly consistent for an individ-
ual dog,alarge variation is bservedamong dogs6100 Barium-imregnated polethyln
spheres (BIPs) have been used to study gastric and intestinal emptying times with varying
results when compared with other standards.101-106Variation in total gastric emptying time
from 5 to 14 hours or more has been reported.9,100-106
 In the normal intestinal tract, the contrast passes through in a relatively organized fash-
ion. The loops are smooth walled and uniformly distended, with a few constrictions repre-
pattern of symmetric oval contractions, termed a string of beads, has been described in the
duodenum of the normal cat. Irregularities in the duodenum of the dog consisting of
 one or more crater-like lesions result from the presence of gut-associated lymphoid tissue
(Fig. 3-28).12,83
FIG. 3-28 An upper GI series was
performed on a normal dog to
demonstrate the normal lymphoretic-
ular structures called pseudouicers
in the duodenal mucosal surface.
 Radiographic fndings include smooth
and well-defined rectangular out-
pouchings of the mucosal pattern
(arrows) at intervals along the
course of the duodenum. Diagnosis:
 Pseudoulcers in the normal canine
duodenum.
280
Often lesions of the stomach will be seen clearly on the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral
view and not on the lateral view. The paramount principle in evaluating a GI series is the
repeatability of viewing a lesion at least on multiple radiographs, if not in multiple posi-
tions. Thus a study that has a limited number of radiographs may be nondiagnostic. If a
structure appears abnormal on one film but does not remain constant in appearance on at
least the same view throughout the series, it should be regarded as spurious and the study
findings should be considered normal. The GI series is a poor evaluator of physiologic
s s a h re sso po r a ao e i p 
should not be evaluated with the GI series. This is because of the lack of colon distention.
To evaluate the colon radiographically a pneumocolon, barium enema, or double-contrast
enema should be performed.
 Double-Contrast Gastrogram. In most instances the stomach can be evaluated ade-
quately by the combination of survey radiography and a GI series. The double-contrast
gastrogram is recommended for those conditions requiring evaluation of relatively minor
traindicated in animals with diabetes mellitus. Fluoroscopy is recommended, but not
required, to perform this procedure. The patient should be anesthetized or heavily tran-
quilized. Immediately prior to the procedure, glucagon is injected intravenously (0.1 mg
for small dogs to 0.35 mg for large dogs) after which a 100% weight-to-volume barium sus-
pension is administered via a stomach tube at a dosage of 1.5 to 3.0 ml/kg. Following this,
the stomach is distended with air until it is tympanitic (approximately 20 ml/kg) upon per-
cussion. Immediately after the contrast agents have been administered, a minimum of four
views, ventrodorsal, dorsoventral, left lateral, and right lateral, are taken and additional
oblique views may be needed to ensure that every gastric surface is fully evaluated.
Pneumocolon. The easiest radiographic special procedure for the evaluation of the colon
is the pneumocolon.121ll Preparation of the abdomen is not as important as it is for the
GI series. The procedure is performed by inserting a catheter or syringe tip through the rec-
tal sphincter and injecting 1 to 3 ml of air per kg of body weight. Lateral and ventrodorsal
views are then exposed. Based on the appearance of the radiographs, more air may be
added as needed. The technique is useful for evaluating the colon and rectum for intralu-
minal, intramural, and extraluminal lesions. It can be used to demonstrate the cranial
extent of a mass or stricture that narrows the lumen of the colon too much for passage of
an endoscope. It is also useful for identifying the location of the colon and distinguishing
it from distended small intestine.
Barium Enema and Double-Contrast Enema. Evaluation of the colon also may be accom-
plished by the barium or double-contrast enema. Preparation of the colon using multiple
enemas or laxatives is essential, because the colon must be emptied prior to the study. Fecal
material within the lumen of the colon may mimic or obscure a lesion. This contrast tech-
nique rarely is used, because evaluation of the colon using a rigid or flexible colonoscope or
proctoscope is relatively easy. Colonoscopy has the advantage of directly visualizing lesions,
determining their extent, and potentially obtaining a biopsy or cytologic specimen. If the
lesion is not accessible with the equipment available and a pneumocolon will not provide
sufficient information, a contrast enema is indicated. The patient must be anesthetized. A
15% to 20% weight-to-volume barium suspension is instilled at a dosage of 22.2 ml/kg via
a cuffed enema tube. 12,ll2 Lateral and ventrodorsal views should be taken. The barium is
 then drained from the colon, which is then insufflated with an equal volume of air to create
a double-contrast enema. Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs are taken.
ABNORMAL FINDINGS
GENERAL ABDOMEN
Body Wall. Radiographic changes in the size or shape of the body wall are limited to either
increases or decreases in thickness or disruption of continuity. Increases in body wall thick-
ness may be focal or diffuse In focal thickening, the diagnosis may be suggested by the den-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
281
sity. If the thickened portion is fat dense, a lipoma is the probable diagnosis. If the thickened
portion is tissue dense, a tumor, abscess, or granuloma may be present. Occasionally, mam-
 mary or other abdominal wall tumors will contain calcified densities. This may occur in asso-
i   s s  so    s
may appear as focal areas of soft-tissue density peripheral to the body wall (Fig. 3-29). When
- aa pos e a up in spou a ii an dsd si n lm-ao
wall suggests the possibility of infection, edema, or hemorrhage. If enlarged, the inguinal
lymph nodes may be observed as an oval soft-tissue density ventral to the caudal abdominal
wall. Either traumatic or developmental defects in the body wall, through which abdominal
 contents herniate, may not readily be seen, but the displaced abdominal viscera usually will
association with a hernia when intestines are present within the hernia or when subcutaneous
 emphysema is present. The intestines can be recognized by their curvilinear shapes, while the
subcutaneous emphysema tends to be more linearly or irregularly shaped.
 The abdominal wall can be evaluated using ultrasonography, although it is rarely nec-
essary l19-121 wWhen a hernia is present, the defect in the abdominal wall can be identified
by tracing the normal structures that surround the defect. This makes recognition of the
defect easier. Mineral structures, gas, and intestines can be identified within a hernia.
 Ultrasonography is much better at detecting the presence of the urinary bladder within a
hernia than is survey radiography. Ultrasonography is very useful for detecting foreign
bodies within the soft tissues.12 Objects such as wood, glass, or plastic, which may be tis-
sue dense and therefore not detected radiographicall, can be readily identified as hyper-
echoic structures that cause shadows. Enlarged inguinal lymph nodes are usually round or
oval and hypoechoic.
Peritoneal Cavity. The ability to identify viscera within the peritoneal cavity radiograph-
ically results from the presence of abdominal fat. Loss of detail in the peritoneal cavity may
be focal or difuse and may be associated with cachexia, youth, carcinomatosis, steatitis,
FIG. 3-29 A 12-year-old female Golden Retriever with masses on the
ventral body wall. The ventrodorsal view revealed a highlighted tissue
density mass (because the mass was surrounded by air) on the right of
the midline (open white arrow). A normal nipple also is apparent
(small white arrow). Diagnosis: Ventral hernia.
282
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
peritonitis, adhesions, or any form of abdominal effusion, caused by blood, pus, chyle, or
transudate (Fig. 3-31).123-146 A smallamount of peritoneal fluid is normally present in pup-
pies and kittens. Hydroperitoneum may be caused by feline infectious peritonitis (FIP),
right-sided heart failure, bacterial infection, urine as a result of rupture of the urinary tract,
hypoproteinemia, portal hypertension, serosal malignancy, or l
hemorrhage.
Hydroperitoneum may be present in any degree, ranging from minimal, with just slight
blurring of the edges of the abdominal viscera, to marked, causing a homogeneous tissue
density.
FIG. 3-30 A 14-year-old neutered
male mixed breed dog with gagging
for 2 days. There are multiple gas-
flled bowel loops (large white arraw)
ventral to and crossing (small white
arrows) the normal line of the ven-
 tral body wall. Diagnosis: Ventral
hernia.
FIG.3-31 A7-year-old male Siamese
at with anorexia and vomiting for 4
days and pain upon abdominal pal-
pation. There is a mottling of tissue
 density in the normally homogenous
density of the abdominal fat. This is
readily apparent in the fat pads ven-
tral to the abdominal wall(white
arrows). Also noted is hepatomegaly
(black L) and hydrothorax (black H).
Differential diagnoses include steati-
tis or neoplasia with abdominal car-
cinomatosis and thoracic metastases.
Diagnosis: Steatitis (the cat had
 been on an all-tuna diet).
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
283
Occasionally, free air may be seen within the abdomen. The most common cause is pre-
   a od po  a p ra u ns s
34 days, depending mostly on the volume of air administered.147 Air may be present in
readily visible amounts for up to 10 days, and in minimal amounts for up to 30 days after
surgery in normal animals. Penetrating wounds of the abdominal wall and rupture of a
 hollow viscus (stomach or intestine) may result in free peritoneal air.148 Spontaneous
pneumoperitoneum (ie., not associated with surgery or ruptured viscus) is rare. It has
been reported subsequent to gastric volvulus with or without splenic necrosis.149 With
severe intestinal distention secondary to ileus, air may diffuse into the peritoneal cavity
across the thin intestinal wall Pneumoperitoneum is recognized by identifying air density
dissecting between normal structures and often outlining the individual liver lobes, the
abdominal side of the diaphragm, or the nondependent kidney. Increased definition of the
serosal surfaces of the intestines may be evident. Air bubbles and linear or triangular air
patterns may be seen. These are most readily recognized in areas of the abdomen that do
not normally contain small intestines such as around the liver, lateral to the spleen, and
 dorsal to the colon.iso If the diagnosis is questionable, a left lateral decubitus view, a radi-
ograph made with a horizontal x-ray beam with the patient in left lateral recumbency.
should be taken to show the air between the liver and right lateral body wall (Fig. 3-32). A
right lateral decubitus view may also be used, although gas within the stomach may be
 mistaken for free peritoneal air.
FIG. 3-32 A 7-year-old male West
Highland White Terrier with vomiting
and anorexia for 3 days. A, The lateral
view revealed a moderate loss of nor-
mal abdominal detail consistent with
a hydroperitoneum. There is a mildly
dilated loop of small intestine (open
black arrow). Close scrutiny revealed
the suggestion of air density in the
region of the kidneys (solid black
arrow). B, The left lateral decubitus
view revealed the presence of free
abdominal air (white a), which out-
lines the tissue dense diaphragm
(between black arrows) against the air
density of the lung. Differential diag-
noses include rupture of an intestinal
structure, infection of the abdominal
cavity with a gas-forming organism,
or iatrogenic pneumoperitoneum
(secondary to surgery). Diagnosis:
Pneumoperitoneum and peritonitis
A
secondary to a ruptured small intes-
tinal leiomyosarcoma.
B
284
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Occasionally, one or more small, round structures with calcified rims, so-called eggshell
calcifications, will be seen. These structures, if not associated with any abdominal organ, are
probably mesenteric cysts (cholesterol cysts) that are free in the peritoneum and are of no
pathologic significance (Fig. 3-33). Occasionally, blood vessel walls may be calcified. These
appear as pairs of thin linear calcific densities following the paths of the major arteries.
These findings may be the result of advanced renal failure, hyperadrenocorticism, hyper.
parathyroidism, or atherosclerosis (Fig. 3-34).
FIG. 3-33 A 5-year-old male Lhasa
Apso with vomiting for 3 days. There
is a structure with calcified borders
(eggshell calcification) in the caudal
ventral abdomen. Differential diag-
 noses include mesenteric cyst, cystic
calculus, or intestinal foreign body.
On the ventrodorsal view the struc-
ture was not located within the blad-
der or small intestine. Diagnosis:
Mesenteric cyst. The dog's vomiting
resolved with symptomatic treat-
ment.
FIG. 3-34 A 13-year-old castrated
Persian cat with chronic renal dis-
ease. There are fne linear calcifica-
tions outlining portions of the celiac
(black arrow), cranial mesenteric
(open white arrow), and renal arteries
(solid white arrowhead). Differential
 diagnoses include calcification due
to chronic renal failure, hyper-
adrenocorticism, or atherosclerosis.
Diagnosis: Arterial wall calcification
due to chronic renal failure.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
285
Unless present in massive amounts, fluid within the peritoneal cavity facilitates the ultra-
sonographic examination (Fig. 3-35).49,15l If marked distention of the abdomen has
occurred, removal of the fluid is recommended, because the patient will be more comfortable
and will breathe less rapidly and the abdominal wall will be more compressible, allowing the
placement of the transducer closer to the structure of interest. In an experimental study in
dogs, ultrasonography was more sensitive than radiography in detecting abdominal fluid. As
little as 2 ml of fluid per pound of body weight could be detected using ultrasonography.
while at least 4 ml of fluid per pound of body weight were required before the fluid could be
detected radiographical,.is2,153 The nature of the abdominal fluid cannot be determined
paosan aq un asa so jo roqunu aare e suenuos pn au j audenaouosnn uin
as floating grainy objects, and fibrin strands also can be identified. In most instances, the
ultrasonographic examination provides guidance for abdominocentesis. Peritoneal masses or
echoic structures on the parietal peritoneum attached to the body wall or may be seen on the
serosal surface of abdominal viscera. Abdominal abscesses may produce an irregularly
defined hypoechoic mass with little or no through transmission. A definitive diagnosis based
solely on the ultrasonographic examination is rarely possible.156
 Utrasonographic examination of calcified abdominal masses is often unrewarding. The
mineral produces shadowing, which obscures the internal structure of the mass (Fig. 3-36).
However, information can be gathered about the unaffected, adjacent parenchyma, which may
be helpful in explaining the cause or understanding the significance of the calcified lesions.
FIG. 3-35 Sonograms of the abdomen
of a 14-year-old castrated male cat
with a history of abdominal distention
and a palpable abdominal mass. There
is anechoic free peritoneal fluid
throughout the abdomen. This can be
seen outlining the spleen and gallblad-
der (A), the folds of the mesentery and
omentum (B), several intestinal loops
(C to F), and the urinary bladder wall
(D to F). Diagnosis: Ascites, lym-
B
phoma.
C
D
F
286
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-36 Longitudinal sonograms
of the midabdomen of a 14-year-old
astrated male cat with a history of
anorexia and weight loss of4 months
duration. The cat was seropositive
for feline leukemia virus (FeLV).
There is a heteroechoic mass identi-
fed in the midabdomen. This mass
contains many hyperechoic foci of
varying sizes. The mass was not
associated with the GI tract. This is
 indicative of a mesenteric mass with
mineral foci within the mass.
Diagnosis: Lymphoma.
ASS
Air within the peritoneal cavity may be detected during the ultrasonographic exami-
 nation. It is hyperechoic and results in reverberation, comet-tail, and ring-down artifacts
(Fig. 3-37). Important features that identify the presence of free air are its location away
from the intestines and its movement with changes in the animal's position. It is our opin-
ion that peritoneal and retroperitoneal air are best assessed radiographically.
 Masses may be identified in the abdomen. They usually are related to an organ of ori-
gin,based upon their location and their effects upon other regional organs.17 Masses that
may not be clearly identifiable as to origin include lymphadenopathy, tumors of nonspe-
cific origin (e.g., serosal or vascular origins), ectopic pregnancy, foreign bodies, granulo-
mas, or abscesses.154,158-175
Retroperitoneal Space. The retroperitoneum may be affected by the presence of air, fluid, or
masses. The differential diagnosis for retroperitoneal fluid includes hemorrhage (this seems
to be a preferential site for hemorrhage in some cases of warfarin toxicity), pus, urine from
ruptures of the kidney or ureters, and edema fluid.176-179 Pneumoretroperitoneum may
result from dissection of air from a pneumomediastinum, infection with a gas-forming
organism, or a penetrating wound. Retroperitoneal masses are uncommon and may arise
from organs in the area, metastatic spread from other sites, or miscellaneous structures,
including carcinoid tumors.
LIVER AND GALLBLADDER
Radiographic Abnormalities
Density Changes. Radiographic lesions of the liver are frequently nonspecific, but they
will support diagnoses indicated by other data. Density changes in the liver are uncommon,
 although calcifications and gas accumulations have been described.180-187 The liver may be
partly or almost completely calcified in end-stage liver disease, and with abscess, tumor,
 no d o  a        
tion is punctate or stippled, the calcification also may appear as larger aggregations or an
"eggshell" pattern. Choleliths, or gallstones, usually are composed of bile pigments and
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
287
FIG. 3-37 Transverse sonograms of
SPLEEN
the spleen (A and B), cranial
abdomen (C), and caudal abdomen
(D) of an ll-year-old Tibetan Terrier
with a history of chronic vomiting
and melena. There are oval-shaped
hypoechoic masses visible medial to
the spleen and in the caudal
abdomen (arrows). These represent
enlarged abdominal lymph nodes.
There is a focal area of increased
B
echo intensity in the cranial
A
abdomen adjacent to the body wall 
(C). There is a reverberation artifact
associated with this lesion (white
arrows). This is indicative of free
intraperitoneal air. Diagnosis:
Lymphoma, intraperitoneal air sec-
 ondary to bowel perforation.
FIG. 3-38 A 3-year-old female Poodle with vomiting, anorexia, and
jaundice. There is a homogeneously stippled pattern of calcification
involving all the liver lobes. There is poor abdominal detail and mini-
mal sof tissue over the vertebrae consistent with cachexia. Diagnosis:
Hepatic calcification.
may not be radiographically apparent. Those that are partially or completely calcified may
 be seen on noncontrast radiographs (Figs. 3-40 and 3-41). In one study of dogs with clin-
ical signs of cholelithiasis, 48% had radiopaque stones that could be identified on noncon-
obstruct the flow of bile. Gas densities may be seen within the liver parenchyma and within
and around the gallbladder and bile ducts (Figs. 3-42 to 3-44). This may be the result of
infection of the liver or gallbladder by anaerobic gas-forming organisms or, in diabetic
patients, because of infection of these structures by organisms capable of fermenting glucose
288
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 3-39 An 8-year-old male mixed breed dog with a 4-day history
of anorexia and vomiting. There is enlargement of the left lateral liver
lobe that extends caudally to the level of L4 (white arrowheads). The
mass has displaced the left kidney caudally (black arrow) and the car-
dia and fundus of the stomach medially (open black arrow). There are
multiple areas of calcification within the cranial portion of the liver
mass (biack arrowheads). Differential diagnoses include primary liver
tumor with calcification, metastatic tumor with calcification, or
extraskeletal osteosarcoma arising within the liver. Diagnosis:
Extraskeletal osteosarcoma of the left lateral liver lobe.
FIG. 3-40 A 10-year-old neutered
female mixed breed dog with hema-
turia for 1 week. Although there are
 no radiographic fndings pertinent 
to the urinary tract, there are multi-
ple calcific densities in the gallblad-
der (open black arrow). There are a
few mineral-dense structures in the
pylorus of the stomach. These are
 ingested small bone chips (solid black 
arrow). Diagnosis: Gallstones. The
hematuria resolved after treatment
with antibiotics.
CHaPTeR THRee THe ABDOmEN
289
FIG. 3-41 A and B, A 5-year-old
neutered female domestic short-
haired cat had vomiting and jaun-
dice. The lateral and ventrodorsal
views reveal a small mineral density
in the area of the descending duode-
num and pancreas (arrows). A sono-
gram (see Fig. 3-67) revealed calculi
in the common bile duct at this site.
Diagnosis: Choledocholithiasis.
4
B
290
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-42 A 9-year-old male
Standard Poodle with vomiting and
 pyrexia. There is an area of irregular
 gas density seen within the cranial
ventral portion of the liver (black
arrow). Differential diagnoses include
abscess with either a glucose-fer-
menting organism in diabetes melli-
tus or a Clostridium sp. Diagnosiss
Clostridium sp. abscess.
FIG. 3-43 A and B, A 12-year-old
neutered male Labrador was brought
for
evaluation of vomiting.
Radiographic fndings include cau-
dal displacement of the gastric
 pylorus (S) by a focal enlargement of
the liver that contains multiple pock-
ets of gas (arrows). Diagnosis:
Parenchymal gas due to inflamma-
tion and necrosis within a liver
abscess.
Con tinued
A
they are within the bile ducts or gallbladder wall, or the oval shape of the air density when it
is within the galbladder, permit recognition of this condition. When the gas is within an
abscess or necrotic tumor, the air will be more irregularly shaped Identification of the gas on
two views is essential to confirm its position within the liver. Confusion with gas within the
stomach is possible, but the air contained within the liver will be fixed in position when the
animal is moved while the gas within the stomach will change its position.
Size Changes. Liver-size change, either enlarged or abnormally small, is associated
s sasasp sqissod jo isoul o-rire sasesp pabse pue ieuauo yo roquu e um
Chapteｒ THree THe Aｓdomen
291
FIG. 3-43, cont'd For legend see opposite page.
B
FIG.3-44 A4-year-old male English
 Bulldog with anorexia and vomiting
for 3 days. The lateral radiograph
revealed gas in the gallbladder (white
g) and in the immediately adjacent
space (black arrow). Close scrutiny
revealed a round tissue-dense struc-
ture in the neck of the gallbladder
{white arrows) that proved to be a
stone. Diagnosis: Cholelith with
emphysematous cholecystitis and
pericholecystitis due to infection
with Clostridium sp.
extensive and includes both malignant and benign diseases. Some considerations for liver
enlargement include diffuse infiltrative diseases, masses, nodular hyperplasia, acute inflam-
matory disease, macronodular cirrhosis, torsion, and polycystic disease. Some considera-
tions for a small liver include chronic inflammatory disease, fibrosis, cirrhosis, and
portosystemic shunts.
292
The most common radiographic change in the liver is an increase in size. Because the
 normal appearance varies greatly depending on the animal's breed and body condition,
most cranial point on the diaphragm to the caudal-most point on the ventral liver, has been
correlated with liver volume in normal dogs.261 Whether this measurement is useful or
e s e s ae ra s uqou s sd  
indicate hepatomegaly. The greater the number of changes that can be identified, the more
of diffuse hepatomegaly include increased fundic-pyloric axis (defined as a line passing
through the center of the fundic and pyloric regions of the stomach on the lateral view; this
line should be parallel to the twelfth intercostal space), extension of the ventral hepatic bor-
der beyond the thirteenth rib and chondral cartilages, and rounding of the hepatic borders
(Fig. 3-45). On the ventrodorsal view, there may be displacement of the pylorus toward the
midline by the right liver lobes, displacement of the cardia toward the midline by enlarged
left hepatic lobes, and caudal displacement of the stomach, small intestines, and right kid-
ney by enlarged right hepatic lobes. Although hepatic enlargement wil displace the spleen
caudally, the spleen is normally quite moveable. Therefore the position of the spleen is a
 poor indicator of hepatomegaly. Generalized hepatomegaly is a nonspecific finding for 
which the differential diagnoses include hepatitis fatty infltration, either primary or sec-
ondary to diseases such as diabetes mellitus; hyperadrenocorticism, due to hepatic accu-
such as lymphosarcoma, mast cell tumor, hepatocellular carcinoma, carcinoid, or bile duct
carcinoma; and metastatic neoplasia.
 Enlargement of specific hepatic lobes may be more difficult to identify than general-
ized hepatomegaly. In some instances, a pneumoperitoneum may be useful in reaching a
definitive diagnosis by clearly outlining the size and shape of a liver lobe. Enlargement or
masses of the left lateral lobe may cause displacement of the cardia of the stomach to the
right on the ventrodorsal view and dorsally on the lateral view (Fig. 3-46). The small intes-
tine and spleen may be displaced caudally on both views. Enlargement of the right lateral
lobe may cause the duodenum to be displaced medially on the ventrodorsal view and dor.
FIG. 3-45 A 6-year-old female
Poodle with chronic polyuria and
polydipsia. A, On the lateral view
there is extension of the caudal ven-
tral border of the liver well beyond
the chondral arch (black L) and
increased angulation (i.e., an angle
 greater than that of the intercostal
spaces) of the stomach from the fun-
dus (white f) to the pylorus (black p).
Continued
A
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
293
FIG. 3-45, cont'd B, On the ventrodorsal view, the
pylorus (white c) of the stomach is displaced medially.
Diagnosis: Generalized hepatomegaly, in this case
secondary to diabetes mellitus.
B
sally on the lateral view (Fig. 3-47). Enlargement of the caudate lobe may produce a tis-
sue-dense mass in the dorsal, cranial portion of the abdomen. If the caudate process of
this lobe is affected, the right kidney may be displaced caudally from its normal position
(the thirteenth rib crossing the right kidney at the level of the renal pelvis) (Fig. 3-48).
ai ano l jo sioq a o un iu sq  adeao
Differential considerations in all of these instances should include primary neoplasia,
such as hepatocellular carcinoma, carcinoid, or bile duct carcinoma; metastatic neoplasia;
torsion; incarceration; or benign lesions, such as hepatic cyst, abscess, or an unusually
large area of nodular hyperplasia.
Occasionally liver may appear smaller than normal. Because many animals have liv-
 ers that appear small without clinical signs or biochemical abnormalities, it is diffcult to
define the exact measurements that should be considered pathologic. The liver often
shorter, squarer thoracic conformation. The position of the stomach close to the
diaphragm is usually a sign of a small liver in this situation. The fundic-pyloric axis is
decreased in that the pylorus is cranially displaced relative to the fundus. Another way of
describing the situation is that the axis is angled toward the thorax In those cases in which
the liver is quite small, the differential diagnoses should include hypotrophic cirrhosis or
fibrosis (Fig. 3-49). These may be found in association with portosystemic shunts as well as
toxic, metabolic, inflammatory, or idiopathic causes.
 Shape Changes. Abnormalities in liver shape are a significant sign of liver disease and
may occur in the absence of hepatomegaly. Only some of the conditions that produce
hepatomegaly will alter the contour of the liver. Irregular, lumpy liver margins may be
caused by neoplasia, abscesses, cysts, cirrhosis, or nodular hyperplasia (Fig 3-50). Smooth
rounding of the liver edges is a nonspecific finding suggesting hepatic swelling. The radi-
-nn seade iaai  j e os adeus iaai u see aeaapun oi su deio
lar on a radiograph the degree of change that is present will be marked.
294
FIG. 3-46 A 9-year-old female,
mixed breed dog with a 3-week his-
tory of anorexia. A, There is exten-
sion of the liver caudal to the
chondral arch (black L). The spleen
(black s), seen adjacent to the liver,
obscures the liver's caudal border. B,
The left lateral lobe ofthe liver (back
L) extends caudal to its normal posi-
tion and has displaced the spleen
(white s) caudally and the fundus of
the stomach medially (open black
arrows). Differential diagnoses 
included primary or metastatic liver
tumor, nodular hyperplasia, or gran-
uloma. Diagnosis: Leff lateral liver
lobe hepatoma.
S
4
S
Chapteｒ THree THe Aｓdomen
295
FIG. 3-47 A 3-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat with no
clinical problems was brought to the
 clinic for an ovariohysterectomy.
 Physical examination revealed a pal-
 pable mass in the cranial abdomen.
A, There is a smooth-bordered tis-
sue-density mass extending from
the liver caudally beyond the chon-
   )  
ascending and transverse colon
(white c) are displaced tothe left and
caudally by the right-sided abdomi-
nal mass (black arrows). Differential
diagnoses include hepatic neoplasia
(primary or metastatic), granuloma,
or hepatic cyst. Diagnosis: Hepatic
cyst arising from the right lateral
liver lobe.
A
B
296
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
FIG. 3-48 A 9-year-old female Cairn Terrier with a 4-week history of vomiting and partial anorexia.
A, On the ventrodorsal view the right kidney (open black arrows) is displaced caudally from its nor-
mal position where the thirteenth rib would bisect it at the renal pelvis. This is suggestive of an
enlargement of the caudate process of the caudate liver lobe. B, On the dorsoventral pneumoperi-
toneum (this position was used to float the gas into the area of interest), the caudate process of the
caudate lobe of the liver (open white arrow) shows marked rounding and irregularity. The right kid-
ney (solid white arrow) also is seen. Differential diagnoses include hepatic neoplasia (primary or
metastatic) or granuloma. Diagnosis: Caudate liver lobe hepatoma.
    aq  s r  no s a  n
gular, and falciform ligaments between the liver and the diaphragm. Liver lobes may be
displaced by diaphragmatic hernia or, less commonly, by torsion.193 A hernia itself may
cause no dysfunction. However, scarring of the diaphragmatic defect may put pressure on
hepatic vessels and cause clinical signs (e.g, abdominal or pleural effusion, liver-related
enzyme increases) some time after the original injury. Another possible result of trauma to
the liver is fracture of one or more lobes. This is not readily detectable radiographically.
although there usually will be hemorrhage, which causes a loss of detail in the hepatic area.
 Pleural fluid, pleural or pulmonary masses, or tension pneumothorax may put pressure on
 the diaphragm and move the liver caudally. This can be recognized easily and should not
be mistaken for hepatomegaly.
Ultrasonographic Abnormalities
Size Changes. It is difficult to measure the size of the liver objectively, because only a
 small portion of the liver can be seen during an ultrasonographic examination, and
hepatomegaly is a function of liver volume rather than liver area.262 A scheme has been
proposed that uses a single linear measurement from the tip of the ventral lobe to the
diaphragm. In normal dogs, this measurement correlated with liver mass.263 Whether this
technique will be useful in abnormal dogs is not established. A graph of normal measure-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
297
FIG.3-49 A 1-year-old male Bichon Frise with
dementia after eating. A, The liver (back L) is
very small and the angle of the stomach is
directed cranially. There is poor detail due to a
lack of abdominal fat. B, The liver (black L) is
small and the stomach (black s) is displaced
cranially. Diagnosis: Small liver due to por-
tosystemic shunt.
A
B
gained, and this often forms the basis for the impression that the liver is enlarged. If the
liver occupies the entire cranial abdomen and can be identified easily caudal to the last rib
 la si al an ie ne al a m aa sas n pe i a oq 
some patients, the liver is identified more easily on the left side than on the right. This does
not necessarily indicate that the liver is enlarged. Focal enlargement of the liver may cause
displacement of other organs, but this also is difficult to recognize during an ultrasono-
 graphic examination. As is the case for evaluation of the liver size radiographically, round-
ing of the liver margin detected during an ultrasonographic examination may be used as 
an indicator of hepatomegaly
 Recognizing a small liver presents a similar problem. In some dogs, the liver will be
contained within the rib cage, and because of gas within the stomach and overlap from the
298
FIG. 3-50 A 10-year-old neutered
female domestic short-haired cat with
a slight lump and mass on the left
elbow. Physical examination revealed
a palpably irregular cranial abdominal
mass. The lateral radiograph revealed
moderate hepatomegaly and clearly
irregular ventral borders of the liver
revealed multiple hepatic masses.
 Diagnosis: Hepatic cystadenoma.
C
caudal lung lobes it will be almost totally inaccessible to ulrasonographic examination.
This does not indicate that the liver is small. Radiography is preferred to ultrasonography
for determining liver size.
Shape Changes. Alterations in contour of the liver can be recognized using ultra-
sonography. These changes can be observed if the margins of the liver are examined care-
fully. Oblique or off-axis views may be helpful in evaluating the contour of the liver. Minor
irregularities can be detected and any irregularity should be considered abnormal.
 Rounded liver margins may be observed when the liver is enlarged. Although a common
cause of these irregularities is tumor, this also can occur with cirrhosis and nodular
regeneration.
parenchyma are the most important features of the liver examination. The liver is usually
the kidney. This relative echogenicity can be used provided the spleen and kidney are nor-
q     s, a n ss s    s
gained; however, this subjective impression is not totally reliable. The alteration in
echogenicity of the liver may be diffuse or focal. Focal changes are easier to detect because
the surrounding hepatic parenchyma will be normal. Diffuse changes are not detected
easily and may be artifactual.265 A diffuse increase in echogenicity of the liver is nonspe-
cific and may occur as a result of lymphosarcoma, fatty infiltration, fibrosis (cirrhosis), or
steroid hepatopathy (Figs. 3-51 and 3-52).266 A diffuse decrease in echogenicity may be
may be hyperechoic, hypoechoic, or heteroechoic, depending on the stage or severity of the
disease. Focal changes in hepatic echo intensity may result in lesions that are hyper- or
hypoechoic, or a combination of the two.265,269
If it is mild, a fatty infiltration of the liver may not produce radiographic changes. In
some patients, diffusely increased echogenicity with liver enlargement may be recog-
nized. An increased attenuation of the sound beam may be associated with fatty infiltra-
tion of the liver and may create a false impression that the liver is hypoechoic in its
deeper portion. In cats, the ultrasonographic finding of a liver that was hyperechoic
when compared with the echo intensity of the falciform fat was identified as a criterion
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
299
FIG. 3-51 Longitudinal sonograms of
the cranial abdomen of an 8-year-old 
Labrador Retriever with a history of
ascites and lethargy of 10 days dura-
CAIH
tion. There is anechoic peritoneal
fluid. The liver is small, hyperechoic.
and irregular in contour (arrows).
 The architecture of the liver is abnor-
mal, appearing uniformly granular.
 This is indicative of chronic liver dis-
ease with cirrhosis or fibrosis and
ascites. Diagnosis: Cirrhosis of the
liver. A cause was not determined.
FIG. 3-52 Longitudinal sonograms
of the liver of a 3-year-old spayed
female Great Dane with a history of
lethargy, anorexia, icterus, vomiting.
and melena. The architecture of the
liver is coarse with loss of the normal
portal vein echoes. This is indicative
of diffuse liver disease, which may be
due to chronic fbrosis or cirrhosis.
 Diagnosis: Cirrhosis of the liver sec-
ondary to toxin.
common for the echogenicity of the liver of fat cats to be higher, or brighter, than that of
the falciform fat. Blurring of vascular margins and increased attenuation of the ultra-
sound beam were also observed.27l In our experience the comparison of echogenicity
between the liver and falciform fat has not been as useful as the identification of blurring
 of vascular margins. Hepatic lipidosis may rarely produce a focal rather than a diffuse
hyperechoic lesion (Fig. 3-53).
 Focal changes in echogenicity may be poorly defined or well defined. Both solid and
cystic or cavitating lesions may be identified. These focal changes are also somewhat non-
specific and may occur in association with lymphoma, primary or metastatic neoplasia,
lesions with well-defined walls and distal enhancement are most likely hepatic cysts. In
but the liver may also be involved with cyst formations (Fig. 3-57). Although some tumors,
abscesses, and hematomas may appear anechoic, these lesions more often have internal
echoes, a less distinct or irregular wall, and do not show as much distinct posterior enhance-
ment. Hypoechoic lesions may be nodular hyperplasia, tumors, abscesses, or hematomas.
Hyperechoic lesions may be due to nodular hyperplasia; tumor; abscess; hematoma; foreign
body; parenchymal, vascular, or ductal gas; or focal or multifocal mineral deposition or
choleliths. The presence of shadowing or reverberation artifact is helpful in recognizing the
foreign body, gas, or mineral that produces these artifacts and facilitates distinguishing
them from nodular hyperplasia, tumors, abscesses, or hematomas, which usually do not
produce such artifacts. Examination of abdominal radiographs is extremely helpful in
determining if gas or mineral densities are present. Mineral densities that are not associ-
ated with the gallbladder or bile ducts can be associated with granulomas, abscesses,
hematomas, or neoplasias. Air may be observed within a hepatic abscess or neoplasia.
 Mixed hyperechoic and hypoechoic lesions are also nonspecific and may result from any of
the conditions discussed so far. Multifocal hyperechoic or hypoechoic lesions may be due
300
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 3-53 Transverse sonograms of
LIVER
the liver of a 10-year-old female
mixed breed dog with a history of
elevated liver enzymes and a mass
arising from the lateral thoracic wall.
 A poorly defined hyperechoic lesion
is noted in the ventral portion of the
liver (arrows). This could represent a
tumor or infection. A biopsy of the
liver was performed and a histologic
diagnosis of lipidosis was made.
 Diagnosis: Focal hepatic lipidosis.
FIG. 3-54 Longitudinal sonograms
of the liver of an ll-year-old spayed
ABDO
female Golden Retriever with a his-
tory of anemia and lethargy. The dog
E ioy Aisnoaaid Auauads e pu 
splenic hemangiosarcoma. There is a
 poorly  marginated  heteroechoic 
mass within the liver. This is
most likely neoplastic. Diagnosis:
Hemangiosarcoma.
FIG. 3-55 Longitudinal sonograms
of the liver of a 10-year-old spayed
female mixed breed dog with a his-
LIVER
tory of polyuria, polydipsia, and
hepatomegaly of 3 months duration.
LIVER
GAIN
There is a heteroechoic well-defined 
mass (arrows) within the caudate
lobe of the liver. This is indicative of
a liver tumor. Diagnosis: Hepatoma.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
301
 FIG. 3-56 Longitudinal sonograms
 of the liver of a 4-year-old Rottweiler
with a history of a chronic intermit-
tent left axillary abscess that occurred
after a dog fight. There is a septated
heteroechoic mass noted in the region
of the right caudate liver lobe. This
mass could be a hematoma, abscess,
or tumor. Diagnosis: Hematoma.
F1G. 3-57 An 1l-year-old neutered
female Himalayan cat had enlarged
 kidneys. The longitudinal sonogram
revealed multiple anechoic struc-
tures (cysts, C) in both the right kid-
ssoua (T) ral Pue (y) Aau
hepatic involvement.
to tumor or infection (Figs. 3-58 to 3-61). A specific pattern labeled a target or bulls eye
center, resulting from tumor necrosis, and a hypoechoic rim, resulting from the tumor 
itself Biopsy or fine-needle aspirates usually are required to determine the nature of most
focal hepatic lesions.
 Ultrasonography is superior to radiography for evaluation of the gallbladder and bile
 ducts. The size of the gallbladder is extremely variable in normal animals, and almost any
animal that has not been fed for a while or is anorectic will have a large gallbladder. The
normal gallbladder may contain varying degrees of sludge or precipitate (i.e., echogenic
material within the gallbladder).287 Biliary sludge may appear as a tissue or fluid level sono-
 graphically, but it is usually not clinically significant.
302
FIG. 3-58 Longitudinal sonograms
of the liver of a 6-year-old male
Bedlington Terrier with a history of
LIVER
 polyuria, polydipsia, elevated liver
TOER
enzymes, and leucocytosis. There are
multiple hyperechoic foci scattered
diffusely throughout the liver. This
could be the result of mineralization;
however, shadowing is not evident. It
most likely represents diffuse neo-
plasia. Diagnosis: Bile duct carci-
noma.
S5192
ACUSO
LIVER
LIVER
FIG. 3-59 Transverse (A and B) and
longitudinal (C and D) sonograms
of the liver of a 6-year-old castrated
 male Himalayan cat with a history of
 pyrexia, vomiting, and hepatomegaly
 of 2 months duration. The liver con-
 tains multiple poorly defined hypo-
echoic lesions. These could represent
tumors or abscesses. Diagnosis:
Suppurative hepatitis.
A
B
C
D
 However, biliary sludge may be so viscous and organized that it cannot be physiologi-
cally evacuated into the intestine. A stellate pattern, or "kiwi fruit? pattern, in the gallblad-
 der suggests the possibility of a mucocele of the gallbladder.28
 Differentiation between intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary obstruction may be pos-
sible. Dilated anechoic tubular structures radiating outward from the porta hepatis com-
bined with a small galbladder are indicative of intrahepatic biliary obstruction. The bile
ducts appear similar to hepatic veins because their wall are anechoic; however, when
obstructed, they are more numerous, more curved, and have a more irregular branching
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
303
SEPS
FIG. 3-6o Transverse sonograms of
RCUS
the liver of a S-year-old male
PHRR
 Rottweiler with a history of vomiting
GAIN=
and diarrhea of 2 weeks duration.
There are multiple hypoechoic
lesions of various sizes scattered dif-
fusely throughout the liver. These
may represent metastatic neoplasia
or multiple abscesses. Diagnosis:
Metastatic carcinoma.
03:1
GAIN
FIG. 3-61 Transverse (A and B) and
longitudinal (C and D) sonograms of
the liver of a 15-year-old male Jack
 Russell Terrier with a history of vom-
iting, azotemia, and hepatomegaly of
3 weeks duration. There are multiple
hypoechoic lesions scattered dif-
fusely throughout the hepatic
parenchyma. These most likely rep-
resent diffuse neoplasia. Infection
also could produce similar lesions.
B
 Diagnosis: Metastatic adrenal carci-
noma.
C
D
pattern than the hepatic veins (Fig. 3-62), and they converge on the porta hepatis, not the
caudal vena cava. Extrahepatic biliary obstruction would result in an enlarged gallbladder
with dilation of both intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts.289,290 Experimentall,the
common bile duct becomes enlarged within 24 hours following duct ligation, and the
degree of intrahepatic duct dilation in experimental dogs varied, and therefore the size of
the dilated ducts allows only a rough estimate of the duration and degree of the biliary
obstruction. The extrahepatic ducts appear as dilated tortuous tubular structures around
304
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-62 Longitudinal sonograms
of the liver of a 13-year-old spayed
female cat with a history of chronic
pancreatitis. There are multiple tor-
tuous hypoechoic linear structures
throughout the liver. These represent
dilated bile ducts most likely second-
tobiliary  obstruction.
Diagnosis: Biliary obstruction sec-
ondary to chronic pancreatitis.
the porta hepatis. The common bile duct parallels the course of the portal vein and can be
seen as dilated in patients with distal biliary obstruction, pancreatitis, and occasionally
idiopathic biliary ectasia. If the gallbladder cannot be identified during an ultrasono-
graphic examination, it may be obscured by gas within the stomach or small intestines. In
humans, a gallbladder that has a lumen completely filled with gallstones may be difficult to
identify. The shadows produced by the stones will obscure the gallbladder; however, the
 presence of the shadow indicates the position of the gallbladder.
Biliary pseudocyst, or biloma, may occur as a complication of liver biopsy or following
abdominal trauma. An anechoic cystic structure separate and distinct from the galbladder
may be seen during the ultrasonographic examination.291
examination. The reported normal wall thickness is 2 to 3 mm.13 The gallbladder wall will
tion of the gallbladder wall raises questions about edema and inflammation. Thickening of
the gallbladder wall may occur secondary to cholecystitis or edema (Fig. 3-63). Gallbladder
edema may occur secondary to right heart failure or hypoproteinemia. 13 Patients with liver
flukes or cholangiohepatitis may have thickened, irregular gallbladder walls. Any variation
 in the gallbladder wall echo texture uniformity accompanied by wall thickening may indi-
cate cholecystitis. If there is an accompanying area of complex regional fluid around the
gallbladder, the possibility of rupture of the gallbladder must be consid-
masses may occur within the gallbladder secondary to cystic hypertrophy of mucus-pro-
ducing glands within the gallbladder wall (Fig. 3-64). These changes maybe difficult to dis-
tinguish from sludged bile; therefore reproducibility of the finding is very important.96
 The gallbladder wall may become hyperechoic secondary to mineralization or gas
tions. Gallbladder wall mineralization may produce shadowing, and reverberation arti-
facts, such as comet tails, may be observed when air is present. Calcification may occur
within the galbladder wall as a result of chronic inflammation or tumor. Air may be pres-
ent within the gallbladder or bile ducts secondary to emphysematous cholecystitis, migra-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
305
tion of air or gas from the bowel secondary to biliary duct dysfunction or inflammation, or
secondary to some biliary or pancreatic surgical procedures. This will produce a hyper-
echoic gallbladder wall that causes shadows. Reverberation artifacts may be present, and
these will be a clue that the echoes are associated with air. As with calcified densities, an
abdominal radiograph will confirm the diagnosis. If the air or mineral is in the galbladder
wall rather than free within the lumen of the gallbladder, it will remain fixed in position
despite changes in the patient's position. Rotating the patient while observing the
FIG. 3-63 Longitudinal (A and B)
 and transverse (C and D) sonograms
CUS
PURR
of the liver a 12-year-old spayed
female German Shepherd dog who
GAIN=
brought in for evaluation of chronic
epistaxis. The gallbladder is slightly
distended, the gallbladder wall is
slightly thickened and hyperechoic,
and there is echogenic material in
the dependent portion of the gall-
B
bladder. There is shadowing evident
A
deep to this echogenic material
(arrows). This represents small gall-
stones. Diagnosis: Cholecystitis with
mineralized material (gallstones)
2619S
DLAD
within the gallbladder.
DEUSOR
SAIB-
D
FIG. 3-64 Transverse (A and B) and
longitudinal (C and D) sonograms
of the gallbladder of a 3-year-old
male Miniature Poodle with a his-
tory of elevated liver enzymes and
chronic dermatitis of 6 months
duration. There is a hyperechoic
mass within the gallbladder. This
 mass is fixed in position. Diagnosis:
 Polyp within the gallbladder.
A
B
D
306
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGy AnD UiTRaSoNOGRaphY
FIG. 3-65 Longitudinal sonogram of
the liver of a 13-year-old male
Schnauzer with a history of depres-
 sion, anorexia, and bloating. A hyper-
echoic structure is evident in the
dependent portion of the gallbladder.
There is shadowing deep to this struc-
ture. This represents a mineralized
gallstone. Diagnosis: Cholelithiasis.
FIG. 3-66 Longitudinal sonograms of the gallbladder of a 13-year-old spayed female Pit Bull with a
history of hematuria secondary to a transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. The dog was under-
going chemotherapy. There is echogenic material within the dependent portion of the galbladder.
This changes appearance with repositioning of the dog This is helpful in confirming that the mate-
rial is within the gallbladder and is not a slice-thickness artifact. Transverse sonograms (not illus-
trated) are also important to document that the material is within the gallbladder. This represents
inspissated bile or sludge within the gallbladder. This is a common incidental finding. Diagnosis:
Inspissated material within the gallbladder.
movement of the hyperechoic structures will help discriminate between air or mineral in
the gallbladder wall or within the lumen.
Cholelithiasis may be sen as an incidental finding in many animals.292 These stones
may be large and well defined or may consist of a “sand” or sludgelike material (Figs. 3-63,
3-65, and6808,8,868hmayfom hyrecic layerwitin hdeee
 portion of the gallbladder or may be wedged within the gallbladder and remain fixed in
position. Gallstones are usually hyperechoic and may or may not cause shadows.293
Choleliths can change their position within the gallbladder with changes in patient
d    s i  sss o  so
Reverberation or slice-thickness artifacts may project echoes into the gallbladder lumen.
These can be recognized if the ultrasonographer is aware of their occurrence and uses cau-
tion in examining the gallbladder in both longitudinal and transverse planes. The stones
may move into the common bile duct. These stones may or may not result in bile duct
obstruction (Fig. 3-67).
CHAPTER THREETHE ABDOMEN
307
FIG. 3-67 A 5-year-old neutered
female domestic short-haired cat
had vomiting and jaundice. This is
the same case as seen in Fig. 3-41.An
oblique sonogram revealed a dilated
common bile duct containing two
calculi (arrows) near the duodenum.
 Diagnosis: Choledocholithiasis with
bile duct obstruction.
Portosystemic Shunts. Several contrast procedures may be useful when portosys-
temic shunts are suspected. Regardless of the method used, the portal vein should be seen
branching into several intrahepatic radicals (Figs. 3-68 and 3-69). After passing through
the liver, the contrast medium should enter the hepatic vein and then pass into the cau-
dal vena cava. Shunts may go from the portal vein to the azygous vein, perirenal veins,
perineal venous structures, or caudal vena cava (whether from posthepatic portal caval
shunts or a persistent patent ductus venosus) (Figs. 3-70 to 3-72),291,292,294-302
Identification of the presence of portal radicals is important as a prognosticator for suc.
ful.
 Portosystemic shunts can be detected using ultrasonography if the patient is coopera
be identified and traced cranially or caudally. The shunt vessel may be observed connect-
ing the portal vein and the vena cava. The portal vein and caudal vena cava are close
together in the porta hepatis, and caution must be used when examining this area to ensure
that a shunt is not diagnosed incorrectly. Failure to identify the shunt does not exclude the
diagnosis. Alteration in the course of the portal vein or tortuosity of the portal vein is sug-
gestive of a shunt, even though the communication is not obvious (Figs. 3-73 and 3-74).
The diagnosis should be confirmed by other studies, such as portovenography or tech-
renal, may be detected. At times, abnormally large or tortuous veins indicating the presence
of a portosystemic shunt may be identified, although establishing their exact course may be
 difficult. In some cases direct evidence of a shunt may not be apparent, but indirect
evidence (e.g., small liver or a decreased number of portal veins within the liver or both)
may be observed 311,314
ing an ultrasonographic examination. In most cases, this is the result of hepatic venous
congestion secondary to cardiac disease such as right heart failure, pericardial disease, or
an intracardiac mass, resulting in caudal vena caval dilation and lack of respiratory perio-
dicity. The veins will be large and many smaller branches will be visible extending to the
margin of the liver. The evaluation is subjective, but in most cases an experienced ultra-
sonographer has little difficulty recognizing the abnormality (Fig. 3-75).6
308
FIG. 3-68 A lateral radiograph
showing the normal hepatic portal
veins as opacifed by a portogram.
There is a marked pneumoperi-
toneum (i.e., free abdominal air
between the liver and diaphragm
identifed by white a) due to the sur-
gical procedure required to gain
access to the portal vein. Diagnosis:
Normal portogram.
FIG. 3-69 A 1-year-old neutered male domestic short-haired cat had
excessive salivation and occasions of inappropriate behavior. An oper-
 ative mesenteric portogram revealed normal hepatic fow with multi-
ple intrahepatic portal veins (arrows). Diagnosis: Normal intrahepatic
portal veins.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
309
FIG. 3-70 A 2-year-old female
 Bichon Frise with occasional seizures
and periods of stupor after eating.
The
 splenoportogram revealed
direct flow of portal blood to the
liver and the presence of a short
straight shunt (black arrow) directly
to the caudal vena cava (CvC).
Differential diagnoses include extra-
hepatic portacaval shunt or persistent
patent ductus venosus. Diagnosis:
 Persistent patent ductus venosus.
FIG. 3-71 A 2-year-old male Yorkshire Terrier with postprandial depression and occasional seizures.
Survey radiographs had revealed a smalliver The operative mesenteric portogram revealed a soli-
tary shunt going from the portal vein directly to the caudal vena cava. The shunt vessel (black arrow)
is clearly caudal to the caudal border of the liver and goes directly to the caudal vena cava (black cvc).
An esophageal stethoscope is seen in the caudal esophagus. The renal pelves and ureters are seen due
to contrast excretion from prior injections of contrast medium during this study. Diagnosis: Solitary
extrahepatic portocaudal vena caval shunt. No hepatic vessels were seen. This suggested a poorer-than-
normal prognosis for shunt ligation; however, partial ligation of the shunt resulted radiographically in
 increased hepatic blood flow and a resolution of clinical signs.
310
FIG. 3-72 A 2-year-old Yorkshire
Terrier had occasional seizures and
elevated bile acid levels. An operative
mesenteric portogram reveals shunt-
ing of flow away from the liver
through an anomalous shunt vessel
(S) to the azygous vein
(A).
Diagnosis: Portoazygos shunt.
FIG. 3-73 Transverse (A to C) and
longitudinal (D to F) sonograms of 
the liver of a 3-month-old female
mixed breed dog with a history of
chronic diarrhea and hypoalbu-
minemia. There is an enlarged tortu-
ous vein that extended from the
portal vein to the caudal vena cava.
This is indicative of a portosystemic
shunt. Diagnosis: Extrahepatic por-
tosystemic shunt.
A
B
EINS
58
E
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
311
FIG. 3-74 Longitudinal sonograms
of the cranial abdomen of a 10-
month-old male Yorkshire Terrier
with a history of stunted growth,
 dementia, and elevated liver enzyme
values. There is a large vessel (small
white arrows) originating from the
 portal vein (PV) that communicated
with the caudal vena cava (CVC).
This is indicative of an extrahepatic
portacaval
shunt.
Diagnosis:
 Extrahepatic portacaval shunt.
HUNT
FIG. 3-75 Longitudinal sonograms
 of the liver of a 5-year-old male
mixed breed dog with a history of
 respiratory distress of 3 weeks dura-
tion. There is marked hepatic venous 
distention. This is indicative of
venous obstruction, which may be
associated with an intrathoracic
(cardiac or caudal mediastinal)
mass, pericardial disease, or right
heart failure. Diagnosis: Right heart
failure secondary to heartworms.
Arteriovenous Fistula. Ultrasonography has been used to document arteriovenous fis-
tula in dogs. Anechoic, irregular, tortuous tubular structures were identified adjacent to or
within the liver. Depending upon where these are in the liver, they may be confused with
dilated intrahepatic bile ducts except for the blood flow, which can be identified with some
forms o Doppler imaging 318-321 Doppler examination wil usually demonstrae unidirec-
tional, contiuus, and usually pulsatile wwithin thee structures
312
SMALLANIMALRADIOLOGY
Portal Vein Thrombosis. Thrombosis of the portal vein has been reported infre-
quently. In most cases an underlying problem such as pancreatitis, hypercoagulopathy, or
neoplasia was present.322 Congenital lesions are rare.323 Imaging techniques have included
contrast radiography of the portal system, which revealed acquired portosystemic shunts,
and ultrasonography, which revealed intravascular masses or abnormal patterns of blood
flow or both.324,325
Cirrhosis. Doppler ultrasonography has been used in the evaluation of experimentally
induced cirrhosis.326 Extensive extrahepatic portosystemic shunts were identified.
Portal blood flow velocity was markedly reduced from a normal level of 18.1 mm/sec to 9.2
mm/sec. Mean portal blood flow was also reduced from 31 ml/min per kg to 17.2 ml/min
 o s    oa ns  o sle s s  
is imposible to attain a proper incident angle. In these dogs, accurate measurement of por-
tal blood flow velocity cannot be obtained. Qualitative as well as quantitative information
may be obtained from portal Doppler ultrasonography. This includes determination of
patency of the portal vein and direction of flow, evaluation of portosystemic shunts,
recognition of arteriovenous malformations, and discriminating between dilated bile ducts
and hepatic vessels.
ALIMENTARY OVERVIEW
One approach to evaluating the alimentary tract is to view it as a tube that begins at the
mouth and ends at the anus. Functions that are performed along the tract include secre-
tion and lubrication, propulsion, storage, digestion, absorption, flow control, and fluid
equilibration. Any imbalance in these can create a difference in the size of the organ, or
segment of the organ if only part of it is affected, or the relative amounts of fluid and gas
in the organ(s). Even displaced organs have changes in their fluid or gas content, which
may be the first clue to organ malpositioning.
The initial interpretive pass over the alimentary tract should include (1) a determina-
tion of the relative position of these organs and (2) a determination of the relative amount
of fluid and gas present in the various segments. Any evidence of disproportionate gas or
fluid accumulation should be scrutinized further. Some generalities about fluid-gas balance
may be helpful. Although not unequivocally specific, a large buildup of gas in the small
intestine usually is associated with high-grade,complete obstruction (e.g., foreign body or
intussusception), fulminant inflammation (e.g., no peristalsis due to severe viral enteritis),
or severe circulatory disorders (e.g., mesenteric volvulus). By comparison, for the stomach,
a large buildup of gas may indicate aerophagia related to nausea, pain, or dyspnea, with or
without outflow obstruction. A buildup of fluid relative to gas in the stomach, small bowel,
or large bowel is usually indicative of partial obstruction (the gas moves on but the fluid
does not),moderate inflammation or irritation (including exudative, transudative, or hem-
orrhagic disease), and the presence of osmotically active substances (either ingested or pro-
duced in the bowel by chemical or bacterial reactions). From a survey radiographic
perspective, any disruption of an even distribution of fluid and gas among the stomach,
small bowel, and large bowel, as well as within the organs, particularly the small bowel,
should be viewed as suspicious.
The second interpretive pass over the alimentary tract should include (1) a considera-
tion of whether additional views, including repeating the survey radiographs, are indicated
to determine if any suspected fluid-gas imbalance is reproducible, (2) an assessment based
 on species, age, breed, possibly gender, history, and clinical signs about whether what is
seen on the survey radiography fits with the clinical picture, and (3) a determination of
ao da) sampad sadeau no (udeaouosn deapi isnu aa) snsou
can lead to the appropriate choice between endoscopic and contrast radiographic proce-
dures should additional diagnostics be deemed necessary. For instance, fluid-distended
segments and normal segments of small intestine will not be investigated appropriately
using endoscopy. A knowledge of possible diseases, the species, breed, and age predisposi-
tions for certain diseases, the effects of drugs (systemic sedative or specific alimentary
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
313
preparations), and electrolyte status on the various alimentary organs are necessary to
optimize alimentary interpretation at the survey radiographic level.
STOMACH
Density Changes. Gastric lesions may be recognizable on survey radiographs providing the
stomach is filled with air and does not contain a large amount of food. Foreign bodies and
masses may protrude into the lumen and may be apparent. Because of this air-to-mass inter-
face, these tissue-dense lesions will have very discrete borders (Fig. 3-76). If a foreign body is
tant in the stomach, because gastric acid may solubilize lead and zinc and cause metal intox-
ication. Zinc toxicity has been associated with ingestion of nuts, bolts, zinc-containing
ointments, and pennies minted after 1982.327 Food in the stomach may disguise foreign mat-
ter. If food or granular material is present in the stomach of an animal that has a history of
total anorexia or vomiting multiple times, this density most likely represents a foreign body.
Repeat radiographs taken after a fast of 18 to 24 hours may make it clear if the material is
indigestible. Food in the stomach, particularly if surrounded by air, may mimic foreign bod-
ies. Some foreign bodies may appear radiolucent if they are of a fat-dense material, like some
rubber balls, or have air-filled centers, such as seeds, nuts, or pits, and are surrounded by gas-
tric or intestinal fluid (Fig.3-77). Mineralization of the submucosa, appearing as a fine linear
calcification parallel to the mucosal border, may be seen with chronic renal failure (Fig. 3-78).
Size, Shape, or Position Changes. Changes in the size of the stomach may also be an
important sign of dysfunction. Although it is normally a distensible organ, the caudal
border of the stomach should not extend beyond the level of L4. Severe distention of the
stomach may be due to excess gas, food, or fluid within the stomach. Occasionally a dog.
particularly a young one, will simply overeat and the resultant gastric dilation will cause
clinical signs (Fig. 3-79). Gastric dilation in an anorectic or vomiting dog may indicate
some form of pyloric outflow obstruction or gastric dilation or volvulus. Gastric volvu-
lus is rotation of the stomach around its long axis. The degree of rotation may vary from
as little as 90 to 360 degrees or more. The most common is a 180-degree rotation. The
degree of gastric dilation will vary (Figs. 3-80 and 3-81). The classic appearance on a
FIG. 3-76 A 6-year-old male Great
Dane with weight loss for 3 months
and vomiting and diarrhea for 3
days. There are large, irregular tis-
sue-dense masses outlined by air in
the stomach (back g). The caudal
lung lobes revealed a nodular inter-
stitial pattern infltrate. Differential
diagnoses include neoplasia or gran-
uloma. Diagnosis: Tuberculosis with
gastric, hepatic, and pulmonary
involvement.
314
FIG. 3-77 A 5-year-old male Cocker
Spaniel with vomiting, polyuria, and
polydipsia for l day. There is a
markedly dilated, fluid-filled stom-
ach (solid black arrows). A perfectly
 round radiolucency is noted within
the fluid density of the stomach
(open black arrows). Differential
diagnoses include a fat or gas density
gastric foreign body. Diagnosis:
Gastric foreign body (rubber ball).
FIG. 3-78 A 13-year-old male
Miniature Poodle with chronic
 polyuria and polydipsia and vomit-
 ing for 4 days. There is a fine line of
calcification (black arrows) seen
within the stomach wall that paral-
lels the rugal folds. This is consistent
with calcification of the gastric sub-
mucosa secondary to the vasculitis
and gastritis induced by renal failure.
 Diagnosis: Renal gastritis.
survey radiograph is a segmented or compartmentalized “double bubble" stomach on the
lateral view. The rugal folds of the cardia and fundus will be seen ventral and caudal to
the pylorus. If identifiable, the duodenum will be seen residing in a dorsoventral orien-
tation cranial to the body of the stomach. The rugal folds may be seen to the right and
caudal to the smooth-walled pylorus. Right and left lateral recumbent radiographs are
helpful in diagnosing this condition because, in contrast to the normal dog, fluid will be
evident in the pylorus when the dog is in left lateral recumbency and gas will be in the
pylorus when the dog is in right lateral recumbency The spleen may be enlarged and dis-
placed from its normal position. Failure to identify the stomach caudal to the diaphragm
may indicate a diaphragmatic hernia or, more rarely, a hiatal hernia. Failure to identify
the normal stomach in a dog with a dilated, fluid-dense esophagus may indicate gastro-
esophageal intussusception.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
315
FIG. 3-79 A 12-year-old neutered
female Dachshund with acute
abdominal distention. The lateral
view revealed that the stomach is
 severely distended with food and gas.
Differential diagnoses include gastric
distention from overeating, gastric
outflow obstruction, or gastric dis-
tention with volvulus. There is no
segmentation of the stomach or dis-
placement of the pylorus from its
normal position. Diagnosis: Acute
gastric distention.
Only a few morphology-distorting diseases that affect the stomach are not recogniza.
ble on survey radiographs, especially if the stomach contains air or if air is administered to
the patient by stomach tube. Most radiographic changes seen with these diseases affect
either the mucosa or wall of the stomach, and these structures can be delineated by air. If
a portion of the stomach is difficult to evaluate due to the presence of normal gastric fluid,
positional maneuvers, which take advantage of the gravitational effect on air and fluid, can
be used to define that portion of the stomach. Gastric masses, such as tumor, granuloma,
 or gastrogastric intussusception, may be identified on noncontrast radiographs when air is
presentwih th stmachingtrihanlf latealstalanddrsalr
bent radiographs, air within the stomach can be manipulated to define all areas of the
stomach. This will often allow for a diagnosis to be made and saves the cost and stress of a
GI series. As with a contrast study, it is important to identify the lesion on multiple radi-
ographs in order to be confident that the abnormality observed is not merely an artifact.
Infiltrative lesions of the gastric wall, such as tumors or granulomas, may interfere with
normal gastric distention and may alter the shape of the stomach. Although shape alter-
ation is usually the result of gastric wall lesions, incarceration of the stomach by the omen-
tum can also alter the stomach's shape because it will interfere with gastric distention.
Some of these diseases may only be identified using either the GI series or double-contrast
gastrogram. Some gastric diseases, such as nonulcerative gastritis, rarely have recognizable
 sio  no  p  sn  a s
endoscopy or biopsy.
Gastrointestinal Series. For complete evaluation of the stomach during the GI series, ven-
trodorsal, dorsoventral, and right and left lateral radiographs should be taken initially, and
at least a ventrodorsal or dorsoventral and a lateral view (choice of which depends upon
 the area most suspected of harboring pathology) should be taken thereafter as the study
tral versus ventrodorsal) may be determined by which position the animal is most com-
 n A si in  sss e sos  m aq no i 
 multiple views be taken during the study, because the most important diagnostic criterion
is the repeatability of a lesion.
316
SMAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-80 A 5-year-old spayed
Siberian Husky with acute abdomi-
nal distention. A, On the lateral view
there is marked gaseous distention of
the stomach and esophagus (white
e). There is a segmented appearance
to the stomach caused byits twisting.
The pylorus (white p) is seen cranial
to the fundus (white f). B, On the
ventrodorsal view the pylorus (white
p) and duodenum (white d) are seen
left of the midline and appear cranial
to the fundus (white f), which is seen
right of the midline. Diagnosis:
Gastric dilation and volvulus.
B
CHaPTer THRee THe ABDOmEN
317
FIG. 3-81 A l-year-old male Great
Dane with retching for 2 days. A, On
the lateral view a tubular gas density
(duodenum, white d) is oriented
dorsoventrally just caudal to the
liver. Immediately dorsal and caudal
to this is a smooth-bordered, gas-
flled structure (the pylorus of the
stomach, white p). Just caudal to this
is a gas-filled structure (fundus of
the stomach, white f) that has tissue-
dense pillars (rugae, white arrow). B,
On the ventrodorsal view the gastric
fundus (white p) and pylorus (a
smooth-walled, gas-filled structure,
white p) is seen in the left cranial
portion  of
the
abdomen.
 Immediately cranial and extending
to the right of this is the duodenum
(a tubular gas-flled structure, open 
black arrow). Immediately caudal to
the fundus and extending to the
right is the gastric cardia. Diagnosis:
Gastric volvulus.
A
B
318
D
B
FIG. 3-82 A 2-year-old neutered male Persian cat
with vomiting for 4 days. A, The lateral view after 10
minutes revealed normal passage of the barium. B,
The lateral view after 20 minutes revealed some
hypersegmentation of the descending duodenum
(string of pearls, black arrows). C, The ventrodorsal
view after 10 minutes revealed a normal study. D, The
ventrodorsal view after 20 minutes was normal. E, The
ventrodorsal view after 30 minutes revealed opacifica-
tion of most of the small intestine. F, The ventrodor-
al view after l hour revealed that the barium had
reached the colon. The amount of barium that
remained within the stomach was within normal lim-
 its. Diagnosis: Normal GI series.
F
During the normal GI series the stomach should be larger at the cardia and should
taper through the fundic area to the pylorus. The rugal folds, more prominent in the car-
dia and fundus, are directed mainly in a craniolateral-caudomedial orientation. At the
pylorus they become smaller and are directed toward the right side. There may be a slight
irregularity to the otherwise smooth gastric wallat the gastroesophageal junction, which is
located slightly to the left of the midline on the cranial surface. This is sometimes quite
 prominent in normal cats.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
319
Because the normal stomach makes frequent mixing or propulsive motions, the stom-
ach should have different shapes on the multiple views taken during the GI series. If the
shape of the stomach fails to change, it indicates either gastric atony, which will be associ-
ated with gastric dilation, or infiltration of the gastric wall, which will usually not have
marked gastric distention (Fig. 3-83). This radiographic appearance has been referred to as
a leather botte stomach, because the shape of the stomach may be reminiscent of a leather
wineskin. Although all infiltrative lesions must be considered, the most likely diagnosis is
lymphosarcoma. Other differential diagnoses would include eosinophilic gastritis, gastric
adenocarcinoma, gastric fibrosis, mycotic lesions, or various less frequently seen neoplasms.
Gastric Wall Thickening. The normal gastric wall is smooth and uniform and is a few
millimeters thick when the stomach is fully distended. It may be appear much thicker if the
stomach is not distended. The gastric wall thickness may be somewhat difficult to perceive
in animals that do not have adequate body fat to allow identification of the serosal surface
of the stomach. In these instances, thickening may be suggested if there is an unusual
decrease in the size of the stomach lumen or if the stomach does not distend uniformly
when filled with air. Although gastric wall thickening is frequently due to gastric neoplasia,
granulomatous diseases or other infiltrative disease should also be considered in the diag-
nosis. The types of gastric neoplasia include adenocarcinoma, lymphosarcoma, and
leiomyosarcoma. Although these lesions may resemble each other, the diagnosis frequently
can be suggested based on the pattern of change and clinical information. Adenocarcinoma
of the stomach usually appears as a regional thickening of the gastric wall.
Adenocarcinomas rarely have masses that protrude or extrude from the gastric wall. There
is a tendency to develop ulcers within the thickened gastric wall (Fig. 3-84). An important
factor to note when evaluating the lesion for possible treatment by gastrectomy is that the
tumor usually extends in the subserosa well beyond the area that is recognizable radi-
ographically. Lymphosarcoma usualy appears as a more focal mass than adenocarcinoma,
or as a very diffuse lesion with only minimal to moderate wall thickening but with a lack
of motility (Fig. 3-85). Leiomyosarcoma tends to be a mass that extends out from the gas-
tric wall and has limited effect on the gastric lumen. Leiomyosarcoma may also appear as
a distinct mass within the stomach lumen. An infection that should be considered in cases
with gastric wall thickening is phycomycosis, or Zygomycosis.329 The lesion is most often
FIG. 3-83 A 7-year-old female
Siamese cat with vomiting for 2
weeks. Survey radiographs revealed
no abnormalities. The ventrodorsal
view of the GI series revealed a
slightly narrowed distal body and
 pylorus of the stomach. There are no
indications of any gastric constric-
tion due to peristaltic or mixing
motions, nor were any indications
seen on other views. There is an
intraluminal mass in the proximal
duodenum (open black arrow) that
 partially obstructs the lumen. The
gastric findings are indicative of an
infltrative process. The duodenal
mass could be either a foreign body
or neoplasm. Differential diagnoses
of the stomach lesion include lym-
phoma, adenocarcinoma, diffuse
granuloma, or chronic inflammatory
disease. Diagnosis: Diffuse lym-
phoma of the stomach and focal
 lymphoma of the duodenum.
320
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 3-84 A 6-year-old male Basset
Hound with vomiting for 4 weeks
and hematemesis and melena for 3
days. The ventrodorsal view revealed
athickened gastric wall (black arrow-
heads) with a deep ulcer (black
arrows).Differentialdiagnoses
 include neoplasia (adenocarcinoma,
lymphoma, other neoplasms) or
 granuloma. Diagnosis: Gastric ade-
nocarcinoma with an ulcer.
FIG. 3-85 A 10-year-old neutered male Persian cat with chronic
vomiting. There is marked thickening of the gastric wall (open white 
o s si s sd a u  au go usn ym (sn
multiple views. Circumferential mural lesions such as this have dif-
 ferential diagnoses of lymphoma, adenocarcinoma, and granulomas.
Diagnosis: Lymphoma.
found within the pyloric portion of the stomach. Zygomycosis ocurs most often in the
 southern and southwestern United States. In Boxers, thickening of the gastric rugae has
been associated with eosinophilic gastritis.330 The condition is not limited to this breed.
Thickening of the rugal folds with normal gastric wall thickness has been reported with
chronichypertrophicgastriti33332ugalfl thikening maalsbeberved iurmic
S se i s a yo ai a oa a jo s   pe s
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
321
FIG. 3-86 A 12-year-old castrated
Siamese cat with vomiting for 2
months. There is thickening of the
gastric wall in the area of the greater
curvature (open white arrows).
Within this area there is a small
ulcerated area in which the barium
extends into the mass (small white
arrow).  Differential
diagnoses
include ulcerated neoplasia or gran-
uloma. Diagnosis: Small ulcer in
area of inflammation. Examination
 of the pancreas at autopsy revealed
an islet cell tumor. The presumptive
fnal diagnosis was gastrinoma with
gastric ulceration.
with gastric distention, and a marked increase in gastric rugal fold size is required in order
to be confident that the rugal folds are abnormal. Determination of rugal fold thickness is
subjective, and although the ratio of normal rugal fold height to interrugal fold distance is
approximately 2:1; this measurement rarely is used and varies with gastric distention. The
best method of confirming a diagnosis of gastritis is by endoscopy.
Ucers. On occasion, gastric ulcers may be visible on the noncontrast radiographs, but
in most cases a GI series or preferably a double-contrast gastrogram are needed. Gastric
ulcers will appear as protrusions of the barium either into or through the gastric wall. The
ulcers may be secondary to neoplasia, the result of excess gastric acid secretion caused by
gastrinoma (Zollinger-Elison syndrome), or secondary to administration of aspirin or
other nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (Fig. 3-86). Benign ulcers usually will have
much less asociated gastric wallthickening than will malignant ulcers, but differentiation
between the two types is very difficult. Ulcers are diagnosed more easily by gastroscopy.
Gastric Outflow Obstructions. A single radiograph represents a short interval in the
uating pyloric outflow problems. The pylorus remains open briefly, and only a small por-
tion of each bolus passes through the pylorus, with the greatest fraction remaining in the
stomach. Pyloric stenosis, pyloric spasm, intramural gastric neoplasm and granulomas,
 mucosal hypertrophy, and extraluminal masses may interfere with gastric emptying.
Pyloric stenosis and mucosal hypertrophy produce smooth, usually circumferential, nar-
rowing of the pylorus. Tumors and granulomas usually have irregular mucosal surfaces or
are asymmetric with a smooth mucosal surface, or both Retention of significant volumes
 of barium within the stomach more than 30 minutes to hours after administration is sug-
gestive of gastric outflow obstruction. The morphological reasons for this may not be
clearly delineated by the GI study but may include polyps, gastric mucosal hypertrophy.
which can act as a valve, or hypertrophy or spasticity of the pyloric sphincter. Gastric
polyps in the pyloric region will appear as small filling defects protruding into the lumen
322
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-87 A 10-year-old female
Miniature Schnauzer with a l-week
history of vomiting. There is an
irregularly shaped tissue-dense mass
 in the pylorus on all ventrodorsal
views of this series (white arrows).
Differential
polyps, leiomyosarcoma, or granulo-
 mas. Diagnosis: Pyloric polyps.
FIG. 3-88 A 4-year-old female Poodle with projectile vomiting for 3
weeks. The ventrodorsal view shows a round donut-shaped ring of
 e ym piaan si i sd aie Audoadu en
amount of barium. The narrowed pyloric outflow tract is also visible
as a faint, narrow stream of barium extending rostrally (black arrow).
These findings were present on all ventrodorsal views. Differential
diagnoses include pyloric muscular hypertrophy, neoplasia, or gran-
uloma. Diagnosis: Pyloric muscular hypertrophy.
near the pyloric sphincter (Fig. 3-87). These may function as a ball valve causing the out-
flow obstruction. Hypertrophy of the muscular layer of the pylorus and proximal duode-
which appear as circular, smooth, ridgelike filling defects encircling the pyloric outflow
-a  q ou  so s a po ao (- ) p
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
323
asqaeu doadau ieso eeonnsqo mono sse ueiq audeno
ric or asymmetric and may be evident only when a wave of peristalsis pushes the contrast
material into the pylorus. When this occurs, the normal pylorus should be convex on both
 the cranial and caudal aspects. Mucosal hypertrophy may produce a concavity or flattening
 on one side. This should be evident in more than one radiograph during the GI series.
Double-Contrast Gastrography
 Ulcers. The double-contrast gastrogram is most helpful in evaluating the stomach for
benign ulcers, but it is also useful in evaluating some masslesions.10,193Benign gastric
ulcers, which may be difficult to detect on a standard GI series, may become more readily
apparent in the double-contrast study. When evaluating this study, the effects of gravity on
the contrast medium and the normal gastric anatomy must be considered (Fig. 3-89). If
located on a nondependent surface, the ulcers will be seen as lines running in directions
other than the normal gastric rugal folds. On dependent projections, the barium will pud
dle in the ulcer crater (Fig. 3-90).
 Intramural and Intraluminal Lesions. The double-contrast gastrogram may be
helpful in evaluating some cases of gastric carcinoma or other gastric wall masses, par-
ticularly if the masses are small or not located on one of the surfaces that is seen clearly
on the regular GI series (Fig. 3-91). The contrast or air can be used to highlight the lesion
by positioning the patient so that the lesion is dependent (surrounded by barium) or up
(surrounded by air). The position of a filing defect during a double-contrast gastrogram
is helpful in distinguishing between intramural and intraluminal objects. Intraluminal
objects will move freely within the gastric lumen and will therefore move with the bar-
ium during the double-contrast examination. Intramural objects will remain fixed in
location and will therefore be outlined with air on one view and with barium on the
opposite view.
Abnormal Gastric Ultrasonography. The stomach can be evaluated from left to right in a
systematic fashion in both the longitudinal and transverse planes. Gastric wall symmetry
can be observed and wall thickness can be measured, wall layers can be identified, extent of
a wall lesion can be determined, and peristaltic activity can be observed.18,334-336 The
lumen of the stomach also can be evaluated provided the stomach contains fluid without
a large amount of air or ingesta. In some animals, it may be necessary to fill the stomach
with fluid to facilitate the ultrasonographic examination. This is rarely necessary but can
be accomplished easily without sedation of the patient.
Thickening of the gastric wall is the most common sonographic abnormality
seen.336 It must be interpreted cautiously because false-positive examinations have
disruption of the layers of the gastric wall (Fig. 3-92). Generalized thickening may occur
with either inflammatory disease or infiltrative neoplasia (Fig. 3-93). Infiltrative neo-
plasia may disrupt the gastric wall and interfere with identification of the wall layers to
a greater extent than inflammatory disease.36 Gastric lymphoma has various manifes-
tations. However, in cats a transmural circumferential lesion with disruption of the
normal gastric wall architecture, decreased echogenicity, and local interference with
commonly identified.
 Intramural masses may be detected and may produce discrete rounded or lobulated
lesions, which may be outlined by fluid within the gastric lumen. Localizing the mass to a
terizing the mass as neoplastic or inflammatory is not possible. Observing the motion of
  s s sd l o nd a  d  s  s a
ing whether the mass is intramural or intraluminal. Intramural lesions will be fixed in posi-
tion despite peristalsis or changes in patient position. Intramural masses may also interfere
with normal wall movement during peristalsis.
It is more difficult to recognize diffuse gastric wall thickening. If the gastric wall diame-
ter exceeds the normal range of 3 to 5 mm, the wall layers should be examined to see if they
324
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
D
FIG. 3-89 A 2-year-old male Persian cat with vomiting for 1 month. The double-contrast gastrogram
performed immediately after a standard GI series was normal on all views: left lateral (A), right lateral
(B), ventrodorsal (C), and dorsoventral (D). The various regions of the stomach that are visible on
each view are labeled (c) cardia, (e) esophagogastric junction, (b) body, (f) fundus, and (p) pylorus.
Diagnosis: Normal stomach on both double-contrast gastrogram and endoscopic examination.
are asymmetrically widened or disrupted, and the gastric wall should be observed carefully
during peristalsis to determine if there is a segmental loss of motility. Thickening of the gas-
tric wall may be localized to a specific layer and this may be helpful in determining what dis-
 ease is present.336 Localized thickening of the gastric wall with a focal loss of peristalsis may
 be observed in association with pancreatitis. Recognition of the lesion within the pancreas
will help to determine that the gastric wall thickening is secondary. Craters or defects may be
iden tified within the thickened stomach wall when gastric ulcers are present.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
325
FIG. 3-90 A 9-year-old male Giant
Schnauzer with vomiting for l week
and melena and hematemesis for 2
days. The ventrodorsal double-con-
trast gastrogram (performed imme-
diately after a GI series that had
normal results) revealed an irregu-
larly oval structure outlined by a thin
line of barium just to the right of the
midline and on the caudal wall of the
stomach (sotid white arrow). A simi-
lar lesion is poorly outlined on the 
cranial body wall of the stomach
(open white arrow). The pylorus is
tightly closed in this view and the
normal mucosal folds are coated
with barium. Diagnosis: Benign gas-
tric ulcers.
Pyloric outflow obstruction may be recognized during the ultrasonographic examina-
tion. Symmetric or asymmetric thickening of the pylorus or a mass may be observed.
Hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy produces a uniform thickening of the hypoechoic mus-
cular layer of the pylorus. The extent of pyloric wall thickening varies from 9 to 19 mm,
with the thicknes of the muscularis ranging from 3.0 to 5.4 mm. Gastric distention and
vigorous peristalsis were also observed.343
A thickened gastric wall, thickened rugal folds, and loss or decreased definition of the
normal gastric wallayers were identified ultrasonographically in dogs with uremic gastri-
 tric mineralization.34 Changes in the mucosal surface representative of ulcers also may be
identified by ultrasonography 345
 Foreign bodies may be identified using ultrasonography. Most foreign bodies will be
hyperechoic, will have sharply defined margins, and wil have distal shadowing 336,346
Foreign bodies will move readily within the stomach with changes in the patient's position.
 Chunks of dry dog food may have a similar appearance; however, their large number and
uniform size will make them easily recognizable.
Gastrogastric intussusception was identified during an ultrasonographic examination.
A spiraled, tapered echogenic mass was seen in the gastric fundus. The pyloric antrum and
 the body of the stomach could not be identified.328
PANCREAS
Density Changes. Pancreatic lesions are frequently difficult to define radiographically.
 Although several radiographic findings have been described in asociation with pancreatitis,
it is our experience that none of the radiographic findings is reliably present and the absence
of these findings in any specificase should not preclude the diagnosis of pancreatitis347,348
 The most commonly seen radiographic change is an apparent haziness and loss of detail in
because most animals have poor detail in this area due to the large number of contiguous and
adjacent fluid-dense structures. The proximal duodenum may be dilated and fixed in diam-
eter in response to the local inflammation. A similar rigidity may be observed in the gastric
wall adjacent to the left limb of the pancreas. In the ventrodorsal radiograph, the proximal
duodenum may be displaced toward the right lateral abdominal wall and the pylorus may be
displaced toward the midline. This widens the angle or curve between the pylorus and prox-
imal duodenum. The transverse colon may be displaced caudally away from the stomach and
may be either distended and fixed in diameter or completely empty. In severe pancreatitis,
there also may be a haziness throughout the entire abdomen (Fig. 3-94).
326
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-91 A, An 1l-year-old female
mixed breed dog with chronic vom-
 iting for 2 months. The ventrodorsal
 double-contrast gastrogram revealed
an irregular ridge of tissue in the
body of the stomach, the whole sur-
face of which was outlined by bar-
ium (open white arrows). This ridge
of tissue extended to blend in with
the normal serosal border (sotid
white arrow). This indicated a thick-
ening of the gastric wall. Differential
diagnoses include gastric neoplasia
(particularly adenocarcinoma) or
 granuloma. Diagnosis: Gastric ade-
nocarcinoma. B, A 13-year-old
female Dandie Dinmont Terrier with
previous laminectomy for disc
extrusion (the reason the large-
 gauge wire is superimposed over the
spine), multiple partial gastrec-
tomies for gastric mass resections
 sse u sadis ie a)
extending cranial and caudal from
the black arrow), and a splenectomy
performed along with the first gas-
trectomy due to the extension of the
 mass into the gastrosplenic ligament.
 The ventrodorsal double-contrast
gastrogram revealed an area
of
marked narrowing of the gastric
 body (due to the previous surgeries,
solid black arrow). A small mural
 mass is seen on the caudal wall of the
body of the stomach; it protrudes
into the lumen of the stomach (white
arrows). This mass has been followed
for 2 years by sequential radiographs
that show no change in its size.
Histology of the previously resected
masses revealed granulomatous
reaction. Diagnosis: Recurent gas-
tric granuloma with no increase in
size for 2 years.
Pancreatic Masses. Pancreatic neoplasia, pseudocyst, and abscess produce identical
abscess, or "bladder" formation may involve the duodenum or stomach wall (Figs. 3-95
sionally, however, the outline of the mass may be observed. The mass may interfere with
normal gastric or duodenal peristalsis, producing a fixed or rigid wall. The lesions may
distort the shape of the stomach or intestine and may be difficult to distinguish from
 intramural lesions. The transverse colon may be displaced caudally, and the descending
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
327
FIG. 3-92 Transverse (A) and longi-
tudinal (B to D) sonograms of the
pylorus of a 6-year-old Miniature
Poodle with a history of chronic gas-
tric
distention,
anemia,
and
hypoproteinemia. The pylorus is
markedly thickened and irregular
(arrows). This is indicative of a focal
inflammatory or infltrative lesion.
Diagnosis: Gastric carcinoma.
B
D
FIG. 3-93 Transverse sonograms of
the stomach of a 3-year-old male
mixed breed dog with a history of
vomiting of 3 months duration. The
gastric wall is markedly thickened.
 The architecture is abnormal and the
individual layers cannot be identi-
fied. The hyperechoic region with
the comet tail artifacts identifies the
 gastric lumen and the hyperechoic
fat adjacent to the body wall identi-
fes the outer margin of the stomach
wall. The calipers (+) were used to
measure the gastric wall thickness,
which was 1.4 cm. This represents a
neoplastic or infectious lesion.
Diagnosis: Zygomycosis.
 duodenum may be displaced laterally due to a mass effect from the inflammation, buildup
 of scar tissue in the pancreatic area, or from the pancreatic mass itself.358
 In chronic pancreatitis, punctate calcifications may occur in the pancreatic area due to
saponification of mesenteric fat by pancreatic enzymes.361 Either pancreatic tumors or 
 abscesses may have areas of calcification.
Utrasonography of Pancreatic Abnormalities. The descending duodenum and right
kidney are used as landmarks to locate the right (descending) limb of the pancreas, and
-ued aui uum ozqu (asiaasue) yal aul aesot on yeupu e se pasn si yoeois a
 creas is recognized easily as a hyperechoic structure adjacent to the stomach and duo-
denum, it is probably enlarged.12 Pancreatitis, pancreatic abscess, and pancreatic
experimental dogs, free peritoneal fluid in the pancreatic region, dilation and thicken-
ing of the wall of the duodenum, and an inhomogeneous mass were identified 24 to 48
328
FIG. 3-94 A 6-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat that had
chronic periodic anorexia and vom-
iting. The lateral radiograph revealed
a loss of detail throughout the entire
abdomen and is mostly apparent in
the cranial areas. Differential diag-
noses include carcinomatosis, pan-
creatitis, or steatitis. Diagnosis:
Chronic relapsing pancreatitis with
Mponification of mesenteric fat.
hours afer induction of acute pancreatitis.362,366 In dogs with acute pancreatitis, the
pancreatic duct may enlarge and be as big as the pancreaticoduodenal vein.363
Ultrasonography is an extremely valuable diagnostic tool for identifying pancreatitis in
 dogs and cats. Pancreatitis can result in decreased echogenicity of the pancreas relative
to the normal surrounding mesenteric fat. This results from hemorrhage, edema, or
necrosis. Fat saponification associated with chronic pancreatitis may produce an
increase in echogenicity within the mesentery. The pancreas may be either hyperechoic,
hypoechoic, or both. A mass may be observed adjacent to the duodenum or greater cur-
vature of the stomach. This mass usually can be distinguished from the normal mesen-
tery and omentum because it is better defined and usually has areas of hyperechoic,
hypoechoic, or anechoic tissue within it (Figs. 3-97 to 3-99). Duodenal or gastric wall
thickening with limited peristalsis may be observed. Extrahepatic biliary obstruction
may occur as a result of inflammatory obstruction of the common bile duct.367
 Differentiating between a pancreatic abscess and pancreatic neoplasia is diffcult.
 Chronic pancreatitis may rarely produce focal areas of mineralization, and these areas
may be detected as hyperechoic foci that cast distal shadows. Biliary distention may
occur secondary to pancreatic lesions, but its presence is not useful in discriminating 
between tumor and abscess.
 Pancreatic pseudocysts have a variable appearance ranging from well-defined anechoic
lesions with distant enhancement and a few internal echoes to a cavity filled with a sono-
graphically complex fluid that is indistinguishable from an abscess.356,3s9 Aspiration of the
pseudocyst using ultrasonographic guidance can be performed both as a diagnostic proce-
dure (to differentiate it from an abscess) and as a therapeutic procedure. Dilation of the
 pancreatic duct may be mistaken for a pseudocyst.
 Insulinomas may be detected occasionaly using ultrasonography. They appear as
hypoechoic, well-defined nodules that may be identified within the hyperechoic mesenteric
fat in the pancreatic region. The pancreas itself may not be identified. Lymph node metas-
tasis may be indistinguishable from an insulinoma.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
329
B
FIG. 3-95 A,A 7-year-old male Miniature Schnauzer that vomited 5 times the previous day. The dog
has experienced multiple similar bouts. Palpation revealed abdominal tenderness. The lateral radi-
 ograph revealed an ill-defined tissue density (white*) audal to the stomach that displaces the trans-
verse colon (white c) caudally. Differential diagnoses include pancreatic mass, splenic mass, or mass
arising from the caudal gastric wall. Diagnosis: Pyogranuloma ofthe pancreas due to chronic relaps-
ing pancreatitis B, A 5-year-old male domestic short-haired cat with vomiting for I week and a pal-
pable cranial abdominal mass. The lateral radiograph revealed a tissue-dense mass (white *) between
the stomach and the transverse colon (white c). C, The ventrodorsal view of the cat revealed a mass
(black arrows) just to the right of the midline and cranial to the right kidney (white arrows).
Differential diagnoses include chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic neoplasia, or pancreatic bladder.
Diagnosis: Pancreatic bladder.
SMALL INTESTINES
Density Changes. Small intestinal lesions may be detected on survey radiography by an
abnormal density within the intestinal lumen. The bowel will normally contain fluid (tis-
sue density), food (which may contain tissue- and bone-dense material), or air. Air con-
 tained within the GI tract is usually the result of aerophagia.83 Occasionall, a segment of
330
FIG. 3-96 A 7-year-old neutered
female domestic short-haired cat
had been vomiting and had an
abdominal mass. The lateral view
revealed a large mass (C) located
immediately caudal to the stomach.
 Diagnosis: Pancreatic pseudocyst.
FIG. 3-97 Transverse sonograms of
the cranial abdomen of a 4-year-old
 spayed female Schnauzer with a his-
tory of acute abdominal discomfort
and abdominal pain. There is a het-
eroechoic mass surrounded by
hyperechoic fat that extends from
the spleen (A, open arrow) to the
duodenum (C and D, open arrows).
There is a small amount of free peri-
toneal fluid (B, closed arrow). This is
indicative of pancreatitis or a pan-
A
creatic mass. Diagnosis: Pancreatitis.
C
D
small bowel may contain material that has the density and pattern of feces, a mixture of tis-
sue and bone density. This is usually indicative of small bowel obstruction, with desicca-
metal or mineral-dense material, which may indicate ingestion of toxic materials (e.g., lead,
zinc); excretion of contrast agents, due to bile and small intestinal excretion of intravenous
 contrast medium in a patient with severe renal failure; medications such as Kaopectate,
Pepto Bismol, or zinc oxide; or foreign bodies such as metal oxide-coated recording tapes,
coins, needles, 0r staples (Figs. 3-101 and 3-102).
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
331
FIG. 3-98 A 6-year-old neutered
female Miniature Schnauzer had
vomiting and abdominal tenderness.
The longitudinal sonogram revealed
a markedly thickened pancreas (P)
with mixed echogenicity that is seen
adjacent to the descending duode-
num (D). Diagnosis: Pancreatitis.
FIG. 3-99 Transverse (A and D) and
longitudinal (B and C) sonograms of 
the cranial abdomen of a 2-year-old
spayed female Cocker Spaniel with a
history of lethargy and cranial
 abdominal pain. There is a hetero-
 echoic mass in the cranial abdomen
(arrows) medial to the duodenum
(small arrows). The tissue around
 this mass appears hyperechoic. This
is indicative of a pancreatic tumor or
B
abscess.
Diagnosis: Pancreatic
abscess.
DUO
PANCR+
心
D
On rare occasions, gas may accumulate within the bowel wall. This produces a double
line that outlines the intestine. The double line will be present on both sides of the lumen.
 The outer serosal surface is usually smooth while the inner mucosal surface is more undu-
lant. This has been associated with necrosis of the wall caused by a loss of the normal blood
supply, 12 Mesenteric thrombosis, severe bowel wall trauma, and infltrating neoplasms may
cause this radiographic change Infection with a gas-producing organism may produce
emphysema of the bowel wall. This occurs most often in the colon but can occur in the
stomach or small bowel.
332
Small Animal RadiOlogy And UltrasonoGraphy
FIG. 3-100 A 16-year-old neutered
male Siamese cat with vomiting for 6
weeks. A, The lateral view revealed 
feces in the descending large intes-
tine (black L), which extends cra-
nially. Superimposed on the colon is
a dilated, gas-filled loop of small
intestine (white s), which goes on to
become a loop that contains material
of the same density as feces (black s).
B, On the ventrodorsal view the
feces-filled large intestine (black L) is
S
seen to the left of the spine. The gas-
flled small bowel loop (white s) is
 seen going from just to the left of L4
S
to near the right lateral body wall,
where it curls ventrally and now con-
tains material with density the same
as feces (black s). Differential diag-
noses include a small intestinal
obstruction (adenocarcinoma is a
frequent cause for small bowel
obstruction in older Siamese cats, so
this would be the most likely cause)
or a very redundant and tortuous
A
colon being mistaken for small
bowel. Diagnosis: Adenocarcinoma
 of the jejunum.
S
B
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
333
Position Changes. The location of the small intestine is constantly changing due to intes-
tinal peristalsis. This is one of the reasons that detection of focal abnormalities of the small
intestine is difficult. Small bowel displacement is usually a function of passive movement
in response to changes in size and shape of other abdominal organs. This displacement is
an important radiographic change used to determine which abdominal organ is abnormal.
Displacement of the intestines into the pleural cavity indicates a diaphragmatic hernia,
while identification of the intestines in the pericardial sac indicates a peritoneopericardial
diaphragmatic hernia. Displacement of the small bowel into various other hernia sacs (e.g-,
femoral, ventral, paracostal, or perineal) also may be noted (Fig. 3-103). The small intes-
FIG. 3-101 An ll-year-old male
 Saint Bernard that had been given an
excretory urogram the day before
this radiograph. That examination
revealed poor excretion of the con-
trast media. This lateral abdominal
radiograph revealed a nearly homo-
 geneous metallic density throughout
the small intestine with occasional
gas bubbles. Secondary to the kid-
 ney, the routes of excretion of con-
trast medium are through the bile
and directly by the small intestinal
lining cells. Diagnosis: Excretion of
contrast medium via secondary
routes into the intestine.
FIG. 3-102 A 5-year-old spayed
Siberian Husky with vomiting for 1
day. There is plication (bunching
upon itself) of the smallintestine
and eccentricallypositioned, vaguely
triangular gas bubbles in the intes-
tinal lumen. Close examination
revealed fne, linear mineral-dense
structures (white arrow) in the intes-
tinal lumen. Diagnosis: Linear for-
eign body due to ingestion of
recording tape.
334
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
u i an aq us  o aq  n si  s he isi  a
resulting in dilation, defined as a lumen diameter greater than the width of a lumbar ver-
tebra, and identification in the abnormal location.368
With linear foreign bodies, the small intestine characteristically is gathered upon itself
and often centered on the right side of the abdomen. The intestines may have an abnor-
mally large diameter and a pattern of frequent serosal undulations or plications.
Frequently, there are small, teardrop-shaped gas bubbles due to the shape the bowel
assumes as it attempts to pass the foreign body (Fig 3-104).369,370 The extent to which
these findings will be present depends on the diameter and length of the linear foreign
body and the duration of the condition. Some yarns or ropes that have large diameters may
not plicate the intestines. Small intestinal adhesions secondary to peritonitis also may result
in a gathering of the small intestines into a localized area.
Size and Shape Changes. The size and shape of the small bowel are variable depending on
content and motility. That having been said, there are variations in the normal amount of
gas in the stomach and small intestine. In dogs that have not been fed, approximately one-
 u s jo sne pou aoar sus s nu u se ou se a se
small intestine of the cat may be indicative of inflammation or irritation. The most signifi-
cant intestinal size change in either species is dilation. The small bowel diameter normally
should be less than the width of a lumbar vertebral body as viewed on the ventrodorsal pro-
jection, less than 1.6 times the height of L5 in dogs, and should not exceed the diameter of
the large intestine.37l Distention of the small intestine with air, fluid, or food is termed ilus.
Two types of ileus are seen: dynamic and adynamic. In dynamic ileus some peristalsis is
present, and both normal-size and dilated small bowel loops will be present (Fig. 3-105).
This usually is the result of partial or incomplete intestinal obstruction. With complete
obstruction, all of the bowel proximal to the obstruction will dilate eventually. The distal
bowel willbe empty or normal in size. Because 6 to 8 hours is required to empty the bowel
 distal to the obstruction, some gas or feces may be present in these loops for a time after the
obstruction is complete. The intestines proximal to a complete obstruction often distend
with air and fluid while the intestines proximal to a partial obstruction often distend with
fluid as well as indigestible material such as bone and hair. These may appear to be filled
with food or fecal-dense material. The intestine proximal to the obstruction may be dilated
to many times its normal diameter (Fig. 3-106). In partial small bowel obstruction, the
degree of small bowel dilation is often less than that associated with complete obstruction.
FIG. 3-103 A 5-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat that was in
a fight with a German Shepherd dog.
There is a ventral tissue mass that
contains multiple gas-flled loops of
small intestine (white *). Also present
is an extensional fracture or luxation
involving L3 and L4 and subcuta-
neous emphysema in the dorsal soft
tissues. Diagnosis: Ventral hernia,
fracture, or luxation of L3-L4, and
subcutaneous emphysema.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
335
FIG. 3-104 A 6-year-old neutered
female domestic short-haired cat
with vomiting (6 to 8 times per day)
and complete anorexia for 2 days. A,
There is marked plication (bunching
upon itself) of the small intestine
that is seen most easily in the ventral
areas (open black arrows) and multi-
ple small, eccentrically positioned,
vaguely triangular-shaped gas bub-
bles (white arrows). B, The plication
of the small intestine (open black
arrows) and characteristic gas pat-
tern is seen. The majority of the
small bowel is present on the right
side of the abdomen. Diagnosis:
Small intestinal linear foreign body
(sewing thread).
A
B
336
 In adynamic ileus there will be no evidence of peristaltic contractions. Adynamic ileus
is typified by the uniform dilation of all of the affected small bowel. This is most commonly
the result of the administration of parasympatholytic drugs. Other causes may include vas-
vovirus), dysautonomia, and prolonged smallbowel obstruction.37-381
In situations in which the complete bowel obstruction is in the proximal descending duo-
denum, dilation of the small bowel may not be apparent because of the short length of involved
intestine. The stomach will become markedly distended with fluid and gas due to reverse peri-
stalsis, which moves the fluid and gas from the duodenum back into the stomach. These cases
 may be more apparent if both right and left lateral recumbent views are taken (Fig. 3-107).
Obstructions may be caused by foreign bodies, torsion, volvulus, strangulation (such as
from displacement through a rent in the mesentery), intussusception, adhesions, granulo-
FIG. 3-105 A 4-year-old male
Labrador Retriever with vomiting (4
to 5 times per day) for 2 days. The
ateral radiograph revealed marked
dilation of some of the gas-filled
loops (white s) and of some of the
normal-sized loops (sotid black
arrows) of the small intestine. This is
indicative of a dymamic ileus.
Differential diagnoses include for-
eign body, neoplasia, or inflamma-
tion. Careful examination revealed
 an area with density slightly greater
than that of the rest of the small
 intestine and a characteristic pattern
of very small gas lucencies that are
aligned in rows (open black arrows).
Diagnosis: Dynamic ileus secondary
S
to a foreign body (corncob).
FIG. 3-106 A 3-year-old female
Miniature Poodle with a 5-day his-
tory of vomiting. The lateral radi-
ograph revealed that virtually all
identifiable loops of the small intes-
tine are uniformly dilated (adynamic
ileus). Close scrutiny revealed a rela-
tive radiolucency with the shape of a
fruit pit (black arrows). Diagnosis:
Intestinal foreign body (apricot pit)
with adynamic ileus.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
337
the radiographs, many are tissue dense and not identified because they are surrounded by
fluid within the intestines. Nuts or seeds may contain air within their centers or
may have mineral density in their shells and may therefore be evident on the radiograph
(see Fig. 3-106). Other foreign bodies, including corn cobs, may be identified as well (see
Fig. 3-105),385 Although a coiled spring appearance has been described in association with
intussusception, this change is rarely evident. In most cases, the cause of the intestinal
FIG. 3-107 A 4-year-old female
Miniature Poodle with a 2-day his-
tory of vomiting. A, On the right
recumbent lateral view there is mod-
erate fluid distention of the stomach.
Close scrutiny revealed a fluid-
dilated loop of small intestine (black
arrows). B, The left recumbent lat-
eral view causes the air in the stom-
ach to go to the pylorus (white p)
and duodenum (white d), which
revealed marked dilation of the
descending duodenum. The severity
of dilation indicates complete block-
age of the duodenum. Differential
diagnoses include foreign body or
neoplasia. Diagnosis: Duodenal for-
eign body (ball).
A
B
338
obstruction will not be evident on the noncontrast radiograph. If there are noncontrast 
radiographic findings strongly indicative of intestinal obstruction, a GI series may not be
indicated. In these patients, the ineffective peristalsis that produced the ileus will prevent
the contrast from reaching the point of obstruction. This is more often the case in com-
 plete rather than in incomplete obstruction.
Gastrointestinal Series. The GI series may be helpful in defining and delineating lesions
of the small intestine. Although some radiographic changes may be associated more often
with tumor or infection, all may be observed in either condition. A GI series rarely results
in a specific diagnosis and most often confirms the presence of a lesion within the intes-
tines, and a biopsy must be performed in order to establish a specific diagnosis. The GI
series can be normal despite the presence of disease. As with the stomach, the paramount
criterion of a positive finding is its repeatability. The small intestine normally should
sasau a unou ssd pinus ion au saas i au uo aan yoous e se reade
in a column, with some areas of constriction associated with peristalsis. A brush border at
the interface between the intestinal mucosa and the luminal barium is normal.
Mucosal Patterns. There are a large number of normal mucosal patterns ranging from a
thin streak of barium, or "string sign” to a roughly cobbled pattern.107 The only clearly
ena e si sui q a go un s ss i au o und ses pn
appearance of the contrast medium (Fig. 3-108). It may be caused by poorly mixed barium
suspensions, prolonged passage times, instillation of the barium into large volumes of gastric
fluid, disease causing the presence of excess mucus or hemorrhage in the intestines, or, per
haps, a change in the intestinal pH. 12 when flocculation is present, infiltrative bowel diseases
or malabsorption syndromes should be considered, such as lymphangiectasia, chronic enteri-
 tis, plasmacytic/lymphocytic enteritis, eosinophilic enteritis, or lymphoma.
FIG. 3-108 A 1-year-old male German Shepherd dog with chronic
diarrhea. The ventrodorsal view revealed a granular, nonhomoge-
neous appearance to the barium (flocculation) within the small
intestine. This is most consistent with a malabsorption syndrome.
Differential diagnoses include lymphangiectasia, eosinophilic gas-
troenteritis, lymphoma of the small intestine, and chronic enteritis.
Diagnosis: Lymphangiectasia.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
339
small intestine may be considered to be diffuse or focal and either intraluminal, mural, or
extramural. Diffuse intestinal diseases include inflammation, diffuse neoplasms, immune
disease, lymphangiectasia, or hemorrhagic gastroenteritis. Focal intestinal diseases include
fungal granuloma and neoplasia.
 INTRALUMINAL. If intraluminal lesions are relatively small in diameter and short in
the only findings may be narrow linear filling defects within the lumen. These may be due
to ascarids, tapeworms, or linear foreign bodies of short length. In cases of relatively nar-
row-diameter, long, linear foreign bodies, the GI series may reveal a small intraluminal fill-
ing defect with plication or displacement of the small bowel (Fig. 3-109, A). In cases in
which the linear foreign body is relatively wide, the intraluminal flling defect will be seen
but plication will not be significant (Fig. 3-109, B). Most commonly, intraluminal lesions
may be identified because the intestine is dilated at a focal site in both the ventrodorsal and
lateral views, with a smooth and somewhat gradual zone of transition between the normal
diameter and the distention (Fig. 3-110). These lesions usually result in some degree of
intestinal obstruction. These range from partial, such as those seen with baby bottle nip-
- se aa m ss se sqo aando on 'sd on ne pe p mo se sad
eign bodies. Although foreign bodies are the most common intraluminal lesions, other
considerations must include pedunculated or sessile neoplasms that extend into the lumen.
Most intraluminal objects will allow the passage of contrast on all sides, while tumors that
protrude into the intestinal lumen will have at least one point of attachment to the wall.
Careful evaluation of the contrast column in all views may be required in order to dis-
criminate between luminal objects and those that arise from the intestinal wall. In many
cases, laparotomy will be required to determine the exact nature of the lesion.
MuRAL. Mural lesions can be categorized as those with thickening, those that have
ulcerations of the intestinal walls, or those with both. The normal bowel wall thickness
varies depending on whether it is at rest or actively involved in a peristaltic movement.
With fulluminal distention and at rest, the bowel wall is normally a few millimeters thick.
The presence of thickened walls suggests infiltrative disease. The most common causes are
adenocarcinoma or intestinal lymphoma. Adenocarcinoma usually causes a concentric
narrowing ("napkin ring" or "apple core" or "parrot's beak" appearance) of the intestinal
lumen and thickening of the wall over a length of a few centimeters, which leads to an area
of nearly compete intestinal obstruction (Fig. 3-111).386 The normal bowel proximal to the
 a s s  n s po al j r a  aq  
Lymphoma may occasionally cause concentrically thickened and distorted intestinal walls
with varying effects on the lumen diameter, but more commonly it extends over several
centimeters and is not completely circumferential. This multifocal regional variation in
wall thickness has been termed thumbprinting. In dogs, lymphosarcoma may appear as
irregular, small, focal asymmetric thickened areas of the small intestinal wall that neither
have a concentric pattern nor result in obstruction (Fig. 3-112). This may be difficult to dif-
ferentiate from some normal variations, but the repeatability of imaging the lesion is a
strong clue. In cats, the more common sign of lymphosarcoma is thickening of the intes-
tinal walls with luminal dilation. Involvement of the lymph nodes at the ileocolic junction
with minimal radiographic changes is also frequently seen. There may be an obstruction
proximal to the lesion with dilation of the small bowel.
 The other form of mural disease is ulceration. An ulcer may be seen during a contrast
study as a crater-like or linear outpouching of the contrast column. The intestinal wall
may be thickened. A ring-shaped radiolucent defect with a central contrast-containing
portion may be observed also when the ulcer is chronic. This diagnosis is particularly dif-
ficult to establish in the dog's duodenum due to the normal presence of pseudoulcers Fig.
3-113). Representing areas between accumulations of gut-associated lymphoid tissues
(GALT) in the descending and transverse duodenum, pseudoulcers are seen radiographi-
cally as outpouchings of the barium from the normal duodenal lumen.387 They are typi-
 cally on the antimesenteric surface. This may be of itle help radiographically, because the
bowel may rotate on its normal axis and make identification of the mesenteric attachment
difficult.
340
FIG. 3-109 A, A l-year-old male
Coonhound with anorexia, depres-
sion, vomiting, and diarrhea for 2
weeks. The 30-minute lateral view
revealed marked plication of the
majority of the small intestine. This
 appearance is most consistent with a
linear foreign body of small to inter-
 mediate diameter. Diagnosis: Small
intestinal linear foreign body
(sewing thread). B, A 3-year-old
neutered male domestic short-
haired cat with vomiting and
 anorexia for 2 days. The survey radi-
 ographs revealed no abnormalities.
The ventrodorsal view taken at 30
minutes into the GI series revealed
 mild dilation of the small intestine
and an irregular lucent flling defect
that extends over a significant length
of small intestine and is best seen in
the loops in the left portion of the
abdomen (open white arrows). No
plication is sen. Linear foreign bod-
ies that have a wide diameter do not
ause the bowel to plicate but rather
act as any other foreign body that
causes a partial small intestinal
 obstruction. Diagnosis: Small intes-
tinal linear foreign body (athletic
shoelaces).
2
B
 Pathologic ulcers may occur with or without concurrent mural thickening,38 One of 
the more common causes of small intestinal ulceration is mast cell tumor. This frequently
is associated with intestinal wall thickening and most commonly is seen in the duodenum.
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs may also cause intestinal ulceration. Another cause
of intestinal ulceration that is rarely seen is the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. This syndrome,
CHAPTER THREE
THE ABDOMEN
341
FIG. 3-110 A 3-year-old male Cocker Spaniel with vomiting for
2 days. Survey radiographs revealed a distended stomach and
normal intestinal shadows. The GI series revealed a large intra-
luminal mass (flling defect in the barium column) in the prox-
imal duodenum partially obstructing the intestine. This is seen
on both the lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) views. Due to the
location of this obstruction in the proximal duodenum there is
no dilation of the majority of the small bowel. Diagnosis:
"(1eq naqqn-asuods) Apoq uataroy ieupon
A
B
342
FIG. 3-1l1 An 8-year-old. castrated
Siamese cat with vomiting for 2
months. A, The lateral view shows
dilation of the smallintestine but the
cause of this is not readily apparent.
B, On the ventrodorsal view, after 4
hours (delayed passage time), there
is dilation of the ileum, which ends
abruptly due to a concentric restric-
tion of the lumen. A thin stream of
barium is seen extending for approx-
imately 2 cm to a normal-sized por-
tion of ileum (open white arrow).
Differential diagnoses for a focal
concentric lesion include adenocar-
cinoma, lymphoma, or granuloma.
Diagnosis: Adenocarcinoma of the
ileum.
B
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
343
FIG. 3-11z A 9-year-old spayed
mixed breed dog with anorexia for 5
days and melena for 2 days. There
 are areas of marked irregularity to
the mucosal border in the small
bowel (white arrows) suggesting the
 presence of submucosal accumula-
tion of abnormal cells. This appear-
ance was consistent on all views.
Differential diagnoses include any
infiltrative small bowel disease such
 as lymphoma, eosinophilic enteritis,.
 plasmacytic or lymphocytic infiltra-
tive disease, fungal enteritis, and oth-
ers. Diagnosis: Lymphoma of the
small intestine.
FIG. 3-113 A l-year-old female
Miniature Schnauzer with occa-
sional vomiting. The 15-minute lat-
eral view of the GI series revealed
two areas in the descending duode-
num of out-pouching of the barium
from the apparently normal lumen
border (black arrows). Differential
diagnoses  include 
pseudoulcers
(normally present small depressions
in the mucosa of the duodenum of
the dog) or true ulcerative disease.
 Diagnosis: Pseudoulcers.
hypergastrinemia secondary to a pancreatic tumor that produces gastrin, results in
increased production and subsequent dumping of gastric acid into the duodenum.
The radiographic changes show multiple ulcerations and ileus of the affected segment (Fig.
 3-114). A third possible cause of ulceration is trauma from ingestion of foreign material
and the reaction in the bowel wall secondary to the migration of the material.
 Ulcers may be identified in conjunction with diffuse or focal mural diseases. The pres-
ence or absence of ulceration is not helpful in distinguishing between inflammatory and
neoplastic diseases.
ExTRAMURAL. Extraluminal masses may result in a solitary indentation, or
thumbprint, sign on the small bowel. This appears as a narrowing of the intestinal lumen
on one view and a widening of it on the other view, much as would appear if one were to
 press a thumb onto a distensible tube. The mucosal surface over these lesions is usually
smooth. If ulceration or irregularity of the mucosal surface is present, it indicates the lesion
344
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-114 A 6-year-old spayed German Shepherd dog with vomit-
ing for 6 days. There is marked dilation and irregularity of the
descending and transverse duodenum as well as multiple ulcers
extending well beyond the normal intestinal serosal border (black
arrows). Differential diagnoses include ulcers due to mast cell tumor,
gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome), or idiopathic causes.
Diagnosis: Duodenal ulcers, secondary to gastrinoma causing hyper-
secretion of gastric acid.
is either intramural or has invaded into the mucosal from the outside. Extramural lesions
usually are not due to disease of small bowel origin but indicate impingement by other
structures. One example of this type of lesion is adhesions from previous abdominal sur-
gery (Fig 3-115). Enlarged ileocolic lymph nodes may produce an extramural compression
of the ileum or cecum. An extraluminal mass may arise from the intestinal wall and extend
outward to spare the intestinal lumen from compression (Fig. 3-116). This type of finding
is typical of intestinal leiomyosarcoma. These masses may contain gas densities if their cen-
          
Extraluminal masses may occasionally cause intestinal obstruction, but rarely is the
obstruction complete, and in most cases contrast medium readily passes around the mass.
Utrasonography of Small Intestinal Abnormalities. Ultrasonography can be used to
evaluate the size, shape, and wall thickness of the small intestine 18,336 Often, only three lay-
ers of the wall can be seen. Thickening of the small intestine can be detected most easily
when the thickening is asymmetric. The normal intestinal wall width ranges from 2 to 3
mm.l8 The wall of the duodenum is normally slightly thicker than the rest of the small
intestine and may be up to 4.5 mm thick. Variation in bowel wall thickness and diameter
occurs in asociation with normal peristalsis. Variation also has been asociated along with
poor intestinal wall layer definition in cats with inflammatory bowel disease.389 Because
peristalsis can be observed during the ultrasonographic examination, the change in bowel
diameter can be observed directly and dilation of the intestines can be documented. A lack
of peristalsis associated with intestinal dilation would be indicative of ileus. This can be
recognized during the ultrasonographic examination.336 The major problem in detecting
small intestinal distention is distinguishing between the small intestine and the colon.
Active peristalsis indicates that the bowel is the small, not the large, intestine. The position
of the colon is usually fixed, and the course that the colon follows is usually straighter than
the small intestine. These are helpful, although they are not completely reliable, features.
Intraluminal, intramural, and extramural lesions can be detected using ultrasonogra-
phy,390-404 Intraluminal objects can be observed surrounded by mucus or normal intestinal
content. Most foreign objects are hyperechoic and cause shadowing (Fig. 3-117)33,346
They may be masked by the presence of air within the intestinal lumen, but in most cases
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
345
FIG. 3-115 A 6-year-old male Basenji with vomiting
for 3 days, 2 to 3 times per day. The dog had undergone
a laparotomy for a jejunal foreign body 5 weeks prior.
Survey radiographs revealed no abnormalities. The
ventrodorsal view of the GI series revealed three areas
(white arrows) where the bowel is displaced and nar-
rowed. On the lateral view these areas appeared slightly
widened. This is most consistent with an extramural
 process affecting the small intestine. Differential diag-
noses include adhesions obstructing the intestine or
masses adjacent to the intestine causing partial
obstruction. Diagnosis: Multiple adhesions compress-
ing the duodenum.
FIG. 3-116 A 13-year-old female
 Poodle with anorexia for l week and
a palpable abdominal mass. There is
a large ventral midabdominal mass
(open black arrows) with fine linear
gas densities (white arrows) extend-
ing intoit. There is no intestinal dila-
tion. Differential diagnoses include
nonluminal intestinal mass, splenic
mass, or mesenteric lymph node
enlargement. Diagnosis: Small intes-
 tinal leiomyosarcoma.
 manipulation of the bowel using the transducer or changing the patient's position will
improve visualization of the intraluminal object. Ultrasonography is superior to noncon-
trast radiography for detecting GI tumors. Intramural lesions can be detected as the bowel
is examined in both longitudinal and transverse planes, and the lesion can be localized to
a specific layer of the intestine. Intestinal neoplasms are most often heteroechoic but con-
tain hyperechoic or anechoic regions and may protrude into the lumen or from the serosa
(Figs. 3-118 and 3-119). If they are intraluminal, they may be outlined by fluid or ingesta
within the intestine. If they protrude from the serosal surface, they may distort the shape
of the intestines, producing angular gas shadows rather than the normal oval or smooth
346
SMALLANIMALRADIOLOGY
linear shadows seen normally. Some masses may become quite large, and it may be difficult
to determine that they are associated with the bowel. The presence of the bowel's charac-
teristic bright mucosal-submucosal streak may be the primary clue that the mass origi-
nated in or entraps a loop of intestine. Many masses are eccentric to the bowel lumen, and
careful, thorough examination may be required to confirm or identify the intestinal loops
passing through or adjacent to the mass. The presence of gas within an abdominal mass
should be seen as an indication that the mass is bowel associated (Fig. 3-120).39l In cats,
intestinal lymphosarcoma produces a transmural hypoechoic lesion that interferes with
a m s u aa s s aa au  s isd re
no alteration in intestinal shape nor will there be gas within the mass.
 In some cases an intestinal tumor or penetrating foreign body will result in peritonitis
 Or carcinomatosis. Both processes will cause the mesentery to thicken and shrink, resulting
in bunching of the small intestines, usually into a round ball. It is very difficult to identify
the mass or foreign body in these situations. Also, hydroperitoneum of an echogenic vari-
ety is frequently present. A mass may or may not be identifiable (Fig. 3-121).
 In many cases, when observed during real-time ultrasonographic examination, a partially
obstructed bowel segment may appear dilated and contain varying degrees of sloshing liquid
that appears tobe going back and forth with the inadequate peristalsis. Even if the specific site
of the partial obstruction is not found, these findings indicate that either laparotomy or possi-
bly a GI series is indicated, provided survey radiographs have been made. In our experience,
the combination of survey radiographs with either segmental or regional bowel distention, pri-
marily fluid, combined with the appearance at ultrasonography of ineffective, but active, peri-
stalsis is adequate to diagnosis partial obstruction and proceed to surgery without a GI series.
Intussusception canbe identifed using ultrasonography (Fig. 3-122)33,39-397In addi-
tion to the dilation of the intestines and lack of peristalsis, the intussusception itself can be
identified as a multilayered lesion, which appears as linear streaks of hyperechoic and hypo-
echoic tissue in long section and as a series of concentric rings when viewed in cross-section.
 Enteric duplication cysts have been detected using ultrasonography.399 A cystlike mass
partially encircling and sharing a wall with a segment of small intestines was described. The
wall of the mass had three layers, with a hyperechoic inner and outer layer surrounding a
hypoechoic central layer. The hypoechoic central layer was continuous with the hypoechoic
muscular layer of the adjacent normal intestine. Diffuse mobile echoes were identified
FIG. 3-117 Longitudinal (A and B)
serous (a pue ) ssiaasuen pue
of the midabdomen of an 8-year-old 
spayed female Silky Terrier with a
history of chronic vomiting and a
 palpable midabdominal mass. There 
is a hyperechoic curvilinear struc-
ture in the abdomen (arrows). This
structure formed shadows and
appeared to be associated with the
GI tract. This most likely represents a
foreign body but also could repre-
B
sent mineralization of the bowel
wall. Diagnosis: GI foreign body.
C
D
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
347
within the lumen of the cyst. The cysts did not communicate with the intestines and peri-
stalsis was not observed within the cysts.
LARGE INTESTINE
Size Changes. The normal colon may be empty or may contain air, fluid, or fecal material.
It varies in size and position depending on the amount and type of material present.
Normally the colon is no more than 3 times larger in diameter than the small bowel. When
the colon is severely distended, differential diagnoses should include atresia ani, colonic 
 obstruction, megacolon, volvulus, or obstipation (Fig. 3-123).400402
The colon can become distended if the animal is well trained and not allowed to go
outside to defecate. Therefore the size of the colon must always be evaluated relative to
FIG. 3-118 A 14-year-old neutered
 male domestic short-haired cat had
been vomiting and had an abdomi-
nal mass. An oblique sonogram
revealed a normal intestinal loop
(short arrows) and a focal, severe,
concentric
thickeningof the
mucosa-submucosa-muscularis
layer (largest arrows), which arises
abruptly from the normal-sized loop
of intestine (medium-sized arrows).
Diagnosis: Intestinal adenocarci-
noma.
FIG. 3-119 A 9-year-old Yorkshire
Terrier had been vomiting and had
an abdominal mass. A longitudinal 
sonogram reveals a large, eccentric,
hypoechoic mass arising from the
mucosa-submucosa-muscularis
layer (black arrows). The mucosal
lumen is identifed as the white lin-
ear
structure
(white
arrow).
Diagnosis: Leiomyosarcoma.
348
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 3-120 Transverse (A to C) and
longitudinal (D) sonograms of the
abdomen of a 14-month-old cas-
trated male Siamese cat with a his-
tory of anorexia and lethargy of 2
 months duration. A mass was palpa-
ble in the midabdomen. There is a
heteroechoic abdominal mass with
 an eccentrically located hyperechoic
region (arrows), which represents
the intestinal lumen. This is indica-
tive of a bowel-associated mass.
Diagnosis: Feline infectious peri-
A
B
tonitis.
C
FIG. 3-12l An 8-year-old neutered male
domestic short-haired cat had abdominal dis-
tention. A longitudinal sonogram reveals a large
volume of fluid in the peritoneal cavity. It con-
tains numerous echogenic foci (short arrows).
The intestines have gathered into a tight ball
(long arrows). Diagnosis: Echogenic ascites and
bunched intestines due to carcinomatosis from
 a small intestinal adenocarcinoma.
the patient's history or physical examination. If a colonic obstruction is present, the
colon will become markedly distended, but the small intestines usually will remain
normal.
 Congenital short colon has been reported in the dog and cat. In these patients, the 
cecum was located on the left and there was no demarcation of the ascending, transverse,
was congenital rather than secondary to chronic colitis. Chronic colitis can also produce a
 short colon; however, mucosal irregularities should also be present.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
349
FIG. 3-12z Transverse (A) and lon-
gitudinal (B) sonograms of the
midabdomen of a l-year-old male
mixed breed dog with a history of
vomiting and anorexia of l week
duration. There is a multilayered
series of alternating hyperechoic and
hypoechoic bands visible. This is
indicative of an intussusception.
Diagnosis: Intussusception.
A
B
FIG. 3-123 A 7-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired cat
with straining to defecate for 2 weeks. There is a large amount of stool
 in the large intestine that distends it. The stool is nearly of bone density.
which indicates that it is dehydrated. Differential diagnoses include
obstipation of idiopathic causes or secondary to such things as old
pelvic fractures, damage to the cauda equina, or colon obstruction.
Diagnosis: Idiopathic ostipation.
350
Density Changes. Density changes are almost exclusively limited to the presence of for-
eign matter (e.g., stones or metallic material) or obstipation with the presence of fecal
material, which may become nearly bone dense. In cases of exocrine pancreatic insuffi-
ciency, the colon may be flled with fluid-dense stool that is mixed with many gas bubbles.
Rarely, gas may accumulate within the colon wall secondary to chronic colitis because of
gas-producing bacteria, such as Clostridia, and will be visible radiographically as linear
association with some neoplasms. Metallic foreign bodies may be present in the lumen or
rarely may become embedded in the wall of the colon.
FIG. 3-124 A, A 2-year-old male
English Cocker Spaniel was brought
in for evaluation of diarrhea and
tenesmus. Radiographic findings
 include thickened descending colon
wall with a radiolucent streak within
the wall. B, Close-up view with
 arrows pointing to the radiolucent
streak within the wall of the colon.
Diagnosis: Pneumatosis coli.
A
B
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
351
Position Changes. The cecum and ascending colon have a relatively constant position
  (  ais ) o no sd s e un  an 
will be reversed from its normal position without generalized situs inversus being pres-
ent. In both species, the transverse colon usually is found immediately caudal to the
stomach on the ventrodorsal view. If the transverse colon is displaced caudally, a pancre-
atic or splenic mass may be present. Colonic displacement to the left can occur second-
ary to pancreatic or right renal masses or with intussusception of the distal small
intestine or cecum, or both, into the ascending and transverse colon. Torsion may cause
 gross alteration in the normal location of the colon with marked distention of the colon
with gas. Fortunately this is uncommon. As the colon pases through the pelvic canal,
 d    m r a   n  n
mass, a perineal hernia, or pararectal tumor. On the lateral view the colon may be ven-
trally displaced as it passes through the cranial portion of the pelvic canal. This usually
indicates enlargement of the sublumbar (external iliac, internal iliac, and coccygeal)
lymph nodes or some other caudal retroperitoneal mass (extension of a pelvic canal neo-
 plasm). Dorsal colonic displacement in this area indicates a ventral mass that usually is
due to prostatic or uterine enlargement or urethral tumor. Both dorsal and ventral nar-
rowing may occur in cases of prostatic carcinoma with metastasis to the sublumbar
lymph nodes, or may be due to a tumor or stricture within the wallof the colon. Because
the position of the colon varies normally depending on its content, displacement of the
colon from its normal position indicates that the area from which the colon is displaced
should be examined carefully. If a mass displacing the colon is not seen, then the dis-
 placement is a normal variation.
The dog's cecum often contains gas. It is not always identifiable, however. In a dog with
a history of chronic tenesmus, failure to identify the cecum or identification of a small
tubular massin the proximal colon may indicate cecocolic intussuseption (Fig 3-125).406
Special Procedure Findings. Many colonic diseases are apparent only by direct examina-
tion such as endoscopy or by use of contrast radiography, including pneumocolon or bar
ium enema. The fiberoptic endoscope is usually more accurate than most radiographic
special procedures for evaluation of the colon. The major exception occurs when luminal
narrowing or stricture does not permit passage of an endoscope or the process in the colon 
has no mucosal extension.
FIG. 3-125 An adult mixed breed
dog with tenesmus and abdominal
tenderness. Radiographic findings
include ascending colonic lumina
outlining a blunted-ended ovoid
object extending from the ileoceco-
colic junction without visible gas in
the cecum (arrow, expected to be
adjacent to the proximal portion of
the ascending colon). Diagnosis:
Cecocolic intussusception con-
firmed by barium enema.
352
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Either pneumocolon or barium enema may be used to evaluate the colon. The most
difficult problem is being certain that normal colonic content is not mistaken for an intra-
luminal or intramural mass. In most inflammatory colonic diseases, there is no radi-
ographically apparent change. Lymphocytic plasmacytic colitis may produce diffuse
 thickening of the colon wall. In severe cases of ulcerative colitis, the colon wall will appear
thickened, and extensions of the barium column into the thickened wall may be
 observed.407 Inflammation may predispose to intussusception. The most common site for 
intussusception in the dog is the ileocolic junction. In some cases, both the terminal ileum
and cecum may be involved. In most cases, there will be dynamic ileus of the small bowel
with signifcant distention of the small intestine with gas and fluid. Radiographically, there
may be an apparent tissue-dense mass within a gas-filled loop of colon on survey films. The
folded edematous intestinal mucosa produces a pattern that has been described as a coiled
spring when outlined by the gas-filled colon. More frequently, the diagnosis requires a con-
trast study of the colon. The contrast must be administered retrograde, because the ileus
will prevent contrast that is administered orally from reaching the site of the obstruction.
The classic appearance is of a tube within a tube, or intussusceptum into intussuscipiens
(Fig. 3-126). A variant of the intussusception is an inversion of the cecum (see Fig. 3-125).
When this happens, the cecum inverts into the colon and causes some degree of blockage
at the ileocolic junction.406 The shape of the cecum, which is seen as a tissue-dense mass
surrounded by air or barium within the lumen of the colon, permits recognition of this
lesion. The inverted cecum may not completely obstruct air or fluid passage. Therefore it
may not appear to be a distal small intestinal obstruction. Cecal inversion may be diag-
nosed during an upper GI series.
 Tumors and granulomas may produce intramural colonic lesions that may be evident
as thickening of the colonic wall or as tissue-dense masses protruding into the lumen.
These often can be recognized without the administration of contrast, thus relying on the
normal contrast afforded by the gas within the lumen of the colon. Adenocarcinoma may
produce a circumferential intramural lesion (Figs. 3-127 and 3-128). The colon may be
dilated with air, fluid, or feces cranial to the lesion. Rectal administration of air or barium
will outline the extent of the lesion when an endoscope cannot be passed through the area
of narrowing. The mucosa is often irregular and ulcerated. Strictures may also produce cir-
cumferential narrowing: however, they usually have a smooth mucosal surface. In most
cases a biopsy is required to make a specific diagnosis.
 Extramural masses may compress or displace the colon but usually do not distort the
mucosal margin. Prostatic enlargement may compress the colon, and stump pyometra may
produce a smooth indentation of the colon. Enlarged ileocolic lymph nodes can produce a
FIG. 3-126 A l-year-old male Coonhound with vomiting and
anorexia for 3 days and a palpable midabdominal mass. Survey radi-
ographs revealed poor abdominal detail due to cachexia and a
dymamic ileus. The barium enema revealed dilated, gas-flled small 
intestinal loops (white s). There is a tissue-dense mass within the
ascending and transverse large intestine (white i), which is outlined
by a thin line of barium (black arrows) surrounding it. Close scrutiny
revealed a slight depression in the border of the mass at its tip in the
transverse colon (open black arrow). Differential diagnoses include
intussusception, intracolonic neoplasm, or foreign material.
Diagnosis:Ileocolic intussusception.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
353
FIG. 3-127 A 9-year-old male
Golden Retriever with diarrhea for 6
weeks. Survey radiographs revealed
no abnormalities. A, The lateral view
of the barium enema revealed con-
striction of lumen at the junction of
the transverse and descending large
intestine. This“napkin ring"of tissue
 or apple-core appearance of the bar-
ium is indicative of a mural lesion. B,
The ventrodorsal view shows the
patent but severely restricted intes-
tinal lumen through this area (open
black arrow). Differential diagnoses
include carcinoma or granuloma.
Diagnosis: Adenocarcinoma of the
large intestine.
B
354
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-128 A 10-year-old female
Standard Poodle with dyschezia for 4
months and hematochezia for l
week. On the survey radiographs
there was a suspicious tissue density
in the distal descending large intes-
tine and marked distention proximal
to this. The lateral view of the pneu-
mocolon revealed that the rectum is
normal. There is a tissue-dense mass
involving the descending large intes-
tine with a small defect in its middle,
suggestive of a residual lumen (open
white arrow). Proximal to the mass,
the large intestine is severely dilated.
Differential diagnoses include neo-
plasia (adenocarcinoma) or granu-
loma. Diagnosis: Adenocarcinoma
 of the distal large intestine.
 mass adjacent to the colon or cecum. Some degree of small intestinal obstruction also may
occur. The mass will not alter the smooth mucosal surface of the cecum or colon. Perirectal
tumors (perianal masses or metastases) may affect the colon but usually are apparent with-
out contrast studies.
Ultrasonography of Colonic and Cecal Abnormalities. The colon does not lend itself to
ultrasonographic examination very well because it usually contains air. The colon wall can
be evaluated by ultrasonography, although the layers described for the stomach and small
bowel cannot be delineated as clearly. The bright mucosal-submucosal stripe is still identi-
fiable. The thickness of the wall also can be determined, with the thickness limits approxi-
mately the same as those of the small bowel. Diffuse thickening of the colon wall may be
observed in inflammatory and infiltrative disease such as infectious or lymphocytic plas-
macytic colitis (Figs. 3-129 and 3-130). The ultrasonographic findings are nonspecific.
Focal areas of thickening and heteroechoic masses also may be detected. These may be neo-
plasms or granulomas. The terminal colon and rectum are hidden from ultrasonographic
examination by the pelvic canal. Transrectal ultrasonography may be used to evaluate the
rectum; however, the information that can be gained about the colon wall is minimal and
diagnosticians are better served by endoscopic or radiographic techniques.
 In rare cases, the cecum can be identified separately from the colon. Cecal inversion
may produce a structure within the colon that is similar to an intussusception. In long-axis
views, linear streaks of hyperechoic and hypoechoic tissue will be seen, and in transverse
views a series of concentric rings may be observed. The length of the cecal inversion will be
shorter than most intussusceptions.
ABDOMINAL LYMPHADENOPATHY
The normal mesenteric, portal, and related lymph nodes are not visible radiographically.
Lymph nodes can be imaged sonographically, but they are not usually conspicuous.9,61
These appear sonographically as ovoid and uniform bodies with a grainy echo texture
somewhat similar to spleen or testicle. Any mass not specifically part of an abdominal
organ may be an enlarged lymph node as well as a neoplasm, a granuloma, or a hamar-
 a a) us jo n  aq  n u  
   u  o  a) u  np q e n no (
primary site of disease). The latter process is usually from neoplastic sites. Abdominal
lymphadenopathy, particularly of the nodes associated with gut and liver, may be the first
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
355
FIG. 3-129 Transverse (A) and lon-
gitudinal (B) sonograms of the colon
of a 2-year-old spayed female
 domestic short-haired cat with a his-
tory of 1 month of depression,
anorexia, vomiting, and dyschezia
with large amounts of mucus in the
feces. The wall of the colon is
markedly thickened (arrows). This is
indicative of an inflammatory or
infiltrative lesion.
Theentire
descending
 colon was involved.
Diagnosis: Lymphocytic plasma-
cytic colitis.
A
B
FIG. 3-130 Transverse (A and B)
and longitudinal (C and D) sono-
grams of the colon of a 2-year-old
male Boxer with a history of bloody
diarrhea of 4 months duration. The
colon wall is markedly thickened.
 The thickening appears to be mainly
within the mucosa. The mucosal sur-
face is irregular. The lesion involved
the entire colon from the rectum to
the cecum. This may be associated
with inflammatory or infiltrative
A
B
disease. Diagnosis: Ulcerative colitis.
EG
C
 clue about round cel neoplasia, pyogranulomatous disease, and some of the more unusual
 infectious diseases.408-412 When masses suspected to be enlarged lymph nodes are found,
cytologic sampling is indicated, best done with ultrasonographic guidance and careful
regional investigation for a source of stimulation or extension.
URINARY SYSTEM
Diseases of the urinary tract can be categorized into those affecting the upper urinary tract,
the kidneys and ureters, and those affecting the lower urinary tract, the bladder and
urethra. These structures can be evaluated radiographically and the findings may be spe.
cific in some diseases.
356
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTR.
SPECIAL PROCEDURES: TECHNIQUES
EXCRETORY UROGRAPHY
Several safe, rapid, and simple special procedures can be used to evaluate the urinary tract.
- io (da) uaad soua se on paa ose (na) uen ioixa a
venous urogram (IVU), is used to evaluate the size, shape, position, and density of the kid-
neys using sterile, water-soluble ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast media.413-419 The
quality of the study is affected by two major factors, (1) glomerular filtration—-because the
contrast medium is passively filtered by the glomerulus, a decrease in filtration will
decrease the amount of radiopaque material excreted and therefore decrease the density of
the study, and (2) the balance between patient hydration and renal concentrating capacity.
or urine specific gravity, because reabsorption of water within the tubules increases the
concentration and therefore increases the density of the contrast within the kidney and
ureter.23,413,420,421 The renal tubules cannot reabsorb the contrast medium; therefore the
greater the ability of the renal tubules to resorb water, the greater the contrast medium con-
centration and resultant visualization of the collecting system. Although there are no
absolute contraindications to this study, dehydration and oliguria are strong relative con-
traindications. Iodinated contrast medium can create renal problems in circumstances of
low urine flow. Azotemia is not a contraindication, but its presence may require increasing
the contrast medium dose provided the patient is well hydrated and producing urine.421
There are several other precautions to consider based on experience with this procedure in
human beings, including diabetes mellitus, known allergy to iodine, Bence Jones protein-
uria, and combined renal and hepatic failure.422-424 Anaphylactic shock is extremely
unlikely in animals, although in humans using ionic contrast media this occurs in approx-
imately 1 of every 10,000 examinations. However, cutaneous reactions (hives), vomiting.
involuntary urination, and hypotension may occur after contrast administration. If this
reaction has occurred in the past, the study should be avoided. Dehydration has been asso-
ciated with adverse reactions and acute renal failure. In animals with multiple myeloma the
EU should be performed cautiously, because Bence Jones proteins may precipitate in the
renal tubules as a reaction to the contrast medium.414,424 If the study is needed, it can be
performed despite the presence of Bence Jones proteins or high levels of any urinary pro-
tein, provided that the patient is well hydrated and a diuresis continues after the contrast is
injected. In humans, diabetics are considered to be at increased risk for contrast reaction.
This may also be the result of or be exacerbated by dehydration. Contrast-induced acute
renal failure as well as effects on renal function has been documented in the dog and cat
following systemic administration of iodinated contrast media.424-427 In any contrast reac-
tion, the patient should be diuresed and observed. The patient should be managed for
shock as necessary, including the use of rapidly acting glucocorticoids and potentially
atropine, because bradycardia may result from systemic hypotension induced by a con-
trast-medium reaction. The degree of renal dysfunction is not a factor in predicting unde-
sirable reactions, because the contrast medium may be excreted by alternative routes if the
animal has minimal or no renal function. The most common reaction is retching or vom-
iting, which usually occurs during or immediately following the contrast injection, is tran-
sient, and results in no long-term problem. Although there is no documentation of benefit
in animals, we recommend the use of isotonic (nonionic) iodinated contrast medium in
aged or seriously ill patients and in patients with serious renal dysfunction. These agents
have a reduced toxicity in human beings. However, they are more expensive than the ionic
agents and are not totally without risk of contrast-induced renal failure.
As is the case for all abdominal special procedures, the abdomen should be prepared by
withholding food for at least 12 hours prior to the study and by administering laxatives and
be obtained before contrast injection to ensure that the GI tract is empty and to serve as a
precontrast baseline radiograph. The study is performed by injecting an intravenous bolus
of iodinated water-soluble contrast medium with an iodine content equivalent to 660 t0
trast medium should be injected through a previously placed intravenous catheter, which
should be maintained for at least 20 minutes after contrast medium injection.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
357
Anesthesia or sedation may be used to help in positioning and manipulating the patient
for radiography. Animals that are tranquilized or anesthetized may stillretch or vomit fol-
lowing contrast administration. Although not proven, there appears to be a reduced inci-
dence of post-contrast administration vomiting if tranquilizers are used.
 Immediately after contrast injection, ventrodorsal and lateral radiographs should be
taken. Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs should be taken 5, 20, and 40 minutes after
injection. The sequence and timing of the radiographs are determined by the information
provided by the urogram. If the position of the kidneys are the only information desired, a
single radiograph taken immediately following contrast administration may be sufficient. If
the position of the ureters relative to the urinary bladder is of interest, then several radi-
ographs may be required. Some authors recommend the routine use of abdominal com-
pression to block the ureters, interfere with ureteral peristalsis, and distend the renal
collecting system.139 We do not recommend abdominal compression because of the vari-
ability it introduces into the study and the lack of any proven efficacy to facilitate diagnosis.
In patients whose renal function is too poor to yield an adequate urographic study, a second
or third intravenous injection of contrast material can be administered.414 At our current
state of knowledge, we don't recommend total dosage (by one or more injections) exceed-
is some degree of correlation between serum urea nitrogen level and the quality of the EU,
azotemia should not be considered as an absolute predictor of a poor-quality EU429
 Excretion of the contrast material will affect the urinalysis, resulting in an increase in
urine specific gravity, false-positive urine protein determinations, alteration in cellular
morphology, and the presence of unusual-appearing crystals.430,431 Growth of some bacte-
rial speciesis inhibitedby the presence of contrast within the urine432 Because of these fac-
tors, and because a higher contrast dosage may be required if the urine specific gravity is
low, a urinalysis and urine culture should be obtained before administration of the contrast
material.
The contrast study is complete when the questions raised by the history, physical exam
ination, or initial radiographs are answered. This may require a single radiograph or mul-
tiple radiographs obtained over a long period of time. However, because the patterns of
nephrographic opacity have diagnostic utility and they may even signal the onset of con-
trast medium-induced hypotension,the regular sequence described above is suggested as
a general operating procedure. Combining the EU with a pneumocystogram may facilitate
the diagnosis of ectopic ureters, but the use of this combination is a matter of personal
preference. Although not documented in animals, contrast material may increase the echo
intensity of the kidneys, and the diuresis that results from contrast administration may
cause ureteral dilation that could be mistaken for mild hydronephrosis during an ultra-
sonographic examination. For that reason, the ultrasonographic examination usually pre-
cedes the contrast study or should be performed the next day.
CYSTOGRAPHY
Examination of the bladder may be accomplished by several special procedures such as the
these procedures, it is important to ensure that the colon and small bowel are not filled
with fecal material. Food deprivation and the administration of laxatives at least 12 hours
prior to the study are advised. It is usually necessary to perform one or more enemas prior
to the study to evacuate the distal colon. Allow sufficient time for the colon to empty,
because a fluid-filled colon may distort the shape of the bladder.
Complications resulting from cystography are rare. Trauma to the bladder or urethra
may result from catheterization—infection may be introduced into the bladder if the
catheterization is not performed carefully. Rupture of the urinary bladder should not occur
if the bladder is inflated slowly and inflation is stopped when the distended bladder can be
palpated or if the animal shows evidence of pain or discomfort during inflation. On rare
occasion the urinary catheter may become kinked and unable to be removed.439
If ultrasonographic examination of the bladder is expected, this should precede cys-
tography. Air within the bladder will interfere with ultrasonographic examination, and
 bubbles within the contrast may also degrade the ultrasonographic image.
358
DOUBLE-CONTRAST CYSTOGRAPHY
 In most clinical situations, the double-contrast cystogram is the preferred technique to
study the urinary bladder, because it provides the best evaluation of the mucosal sur-
face.440 Furthermore, it is the most sensitive test for identifying free intraluminal objects
(e.g., urocystoliths, blood clots). In performing this procedure, the bladder is catheter.
ized, all urine is removed, and the bladder is distended with a gas such as carbon diox-
ide, nitrous oxide, or air. Although the bladder should be fully distended to evaluate the
bladder wall properly, a determination that the bladder is normal can be made without
complete distention, and distention can mask signs of mild to moderate cystitis.40,441
The volume of gas needed to maximally distend the bladder varies with the individual
and the disease. Bladder palpation is required to judge when adequate distention has
been achieved. After insuffation with gas, a small amount of water-soluble, iodinated
contrast medium (0.5 ml for a cat to 3.0 ml for a large dog) is instilled through the uri-
nary catheter (remember to allow for the dead space in the catheter). After instillation of
both contrast agents, four views are recommended: a right and left lateral, a ventrodor-
sal, and a dorsoventral. If it is practical to take only two views, then one lateral view and
a ventrodorsal view should be performed. However, there is the risk of missing attached
intraluminal objects, such as urocystoliths, polyps, neoplasms, and blood clots, if they are
not in the dependent position and surrounded by the puddle of contrast medium dur-
ing the exposure.442
POSITIVE-CONTRAST CYSTOGRAPHY
and double-contrast cystogram are contraindicated. This is due to the possibility of a fatal
air embolism (as has been reported following pneumocystograms in patients with hema-
turia).443,44 A positive-contrast cystogram (PCC) or EU is recommended. Other consid-
erations when choosing a special procedure for evaluating suspected bladder rupture
include the difficulty in observing free peritoneal air with hydroperitoneum and the supe-
riority of the PCC in delineating the point of bladder rupture. To perform a PCC, all urine
should be removed from the bladder and it should be maximally distended with dilute con-
trast medium at a concentration of about 80 mg of iodine/ml. Right or left lateral, ven-
trodorsal, dorsoventral, and oblique views are recommended as needed, depending on the
differential diagnoses considered.
Normal Cystogram. The normal bladder is ovoid with a tapering neck, which is longer in
the female dog and in the cat than in the male dog. The bladder wall is uniform in diame-
ter. A contrast puddle should be evident in the center of the dependent portion of the blad-
der when a double-contrast cystogram has been performed. Air or contrast may reflux into
 the ureters or renal pelvis following bladder distention.4-448 This is a normal finding.
However, in the presence of cystitis, vesicoureteral reflux may predispose the animal to
pyelonephritis.
RETROGRADE URETHROGRAPHY
Although not uniformly accepted, retrograde urethrography and real-time ultrasonogra-
phy have complementary roles in the assessment of the canine prostate gland.54,449 We rec-
ommend the combination of distention, positive-contrast cystourethrography, and
ultrasonography be performed in sequence (urethrocystogram followed by ultrasono-
gram) to evaluate fully the prostate gland and the associated prostatic and membranous
 portions of the urethra, as well as the neck of the urinary bladder.
The retrograde urethrogram performed without bladder distention will evaluate the
urethra for filling defects, leaks, and obstruction, but variances in the intramural aspects of
the urethra may be underestimated. A retrograde urethrogram infrequently may reveal
prostatic pathology, but the study has little value as a routine procedure for the evaluation
of prostatic disease.450 We do not routinely recommend this procedure for evaluation of
 the prostate gland unless paired with ultrasonography. Ultrasonography provides an easier
and more thorough examination of the prostate gland if only one procedure is to be
performed.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
359
The retrograde urethrogram will evaluate the entire urethra. Water-soluble radiopaque
contrast medium is used at a dosage of 0.5 ml/kg (0.25 ml/b) with a maximal volume per
injection of 20 ml for the largest male dogs. The study should be performed carefully to
avoid air bubbles in the contrast medium, because these may be mistaken for radiolucent
of the catheter should be positioned just beyond the urethral papilla in the female and just
caudal to the os penis in the male. The injection should be made manually with as much
force as is easily obtained, and theradiograph should be exposed as the last portion of con-
trast is injected. Both lateral and ventrodorsal views should be made. The ventrodorsal in 
the male should be slightly oblique to prevent superimposition of the distal and proximal
urethra. Distention of the urinary bladder prior to retrograde urethrography is not always
necessary. 428,433,451-460
Sedation or anesthesia are not required but are recommended to reduce the chance that
the patient will move during the contrast injection. In addition, sedation or anesthesia
helps reduce the possibility of infection by limiting movement-induced catheter contami-
nation during insertion into the urethra.
 Trauma to the urethra and postcatheterization infection are the only complications
systemic circulation if rupture or ulceration of the urethral mucosa is present. This is not
a problem if positive-contrast material is used. However, when air has been used, deaths
 from air embolism have occurred.443,444
Vaginourethrography. In female dogs and cats, especially when ectopic ureters are sus-
pected or the animal is too small for urethral catheterization, vaginourethrography may be
performed. This study is performed by placing a Foley or other balloon-tipped catheter
into the vagina distal to the urethral papilla and injecting iodinated contrast into the
vagina. The urethra usually will fll with contrast as well. An atraumatic forceps usually is
required to close the vagina, keep the catheter in place,and prevent contrast leaking to the
outside463,464 This technique also can be used for the evaluationof urethrorectal or recto-
vaginal fistulas. Anesthesia may be required to keep the patient from struggling during
catheter and forceps placement or contrast injection.
Normal Retrograde Urethrogram. In the male dog, there are three portions of the ure-
thra. These include the prostatic portion, which is surrounded by the prostate gland; the
membranous portion between the prostatic portion and the ischial arch; and the penile
portion extending from the ischial arch to the external urethral orifice. During imaging, the
urethral width varies depending on the degree of bladder distention at the time of ure-
thrography and the volume and pressure of the retrograde injection during radiographic
exposure. Depending on the technique used, the male canine urethra may be either of (1)
relatively uniform width except for a slight narrowing at the pelvic brim, bladder neck, and
at the ischial arch or (2) nonuniform width wherein the prostatic portion is wider than
either the membranous or penile portions and there are no focal narrowings that corre-
spond with anatomical location, although some may be seen due to spasm, particularly in
the proximal membranous portion.* An indentation of the prostatic portion of the urethra
may be present dorsally because of the colliculus seminalis.465 Reflux of a small amount of
contrast into the prostate is normal.449,450 The urethra of the male cat is narowest in the
junction when reasonable retrograde pressure is applied.44-46 Although opinions vary.
there are apparently no significant effects of prepuberal gonadectomy on urethral diame.
ter.466 The urethra of the female dog and female cat is short and wide and tapers to the
external sphincter, but it is like that of the male in that there is variability depending on
 bladder fullness and the volume and pressure of the retrograde injection during radi-
ographic exposure.434,435,454,455
*References 435, 449-452, 456, 457,460.
360
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
ABNORMAL FINDINGS
KIDNEYS
 Renal abnormalities may involve changes in size, shape, position, and density. Criteria for
normal kidney length (2 to 3 times the length of L2 in the cat and 2.5 to3.5 times thelength
of L2 in the dog) have been reported.25 subjectively, the width should be in proportion to
the length. Because the left kidney in the dog is fairly mobile, it may not be positioned at
right angles to the x-ray beam. This may result in a foreshortened image. The kidneys are
normally kidney bean-shaped with smooth, regular borders.
Xs sdeus azis au u sasuu uenoei paenaa si Aup a uu
and the number of kidneys involved may be correlated to develop a table of differential
 diagnoses. Because many diseases have multiple manifestations, they appear on several
lists.
 Size and Shape Changes
Bilateral, Large, Regular (Fig. 3-131)
FELINE. Lymphosarcoma, FIP, perirenal cysts, bilateral ureteral obstruction from
hydronephrosis, primary or metastatic bilateral tumors, bilateral acute pyelonephritis with
limited enlargement, polycystic kidneys, amyloidosis.
CANINE. Bilateral ureteral obstruction from hydronephrosis, bilateral acute
pyelonephritis with limited enlargement, primary or metastatic bilateral tumors, lym-
phosarcoma, amyloidosis, polycystic kidneys, lipidosis secondary to diabetes mellitus, eth-
ylene glycol toxicity, myeloma.
Bilateral, Large, Irregular (Fig. 3-132)
FELINe. FIP, lymphosarcoma, primary or metastatic bilateral tumors, acute
pyelonephritis, polycystic kidneys.
CANINE. Lymphosarcoma, acute pyelonephritis, primary or metastatic bilateral
tumors, polycystic kidneys.
Bilateral, Small, Regular (Fig. 3-133)
FELINE. Chronic interstitial nephritis (CIN), congenital hypoplasia.
CANINE. CIN, dysplasia, hypoplasia.
Bilateral, Small,Irregular (Fig. 3-134)
 FELINE. CIN, infarcts, chronic pyelonephritis.
 CANINE. CIN, infarcts, chronic pyelonephritis, dysplasia.
Unilateral, Large, Regular (Fig. 3-135)
 FELINE. Compensatory hyperplasia, ureteral obstruction, acute pyelonephritis with
limited enlargement, FIP, lymphosarcoma, primary or metastatic tumor, pyonephrosis,
perirenal cyst, renal vein thrombosis.
CANINe. Ureteral obstruction, primary or metastatic tumor, acute pyelonephritis with
limited enlargement, compensatory hyperplasia, renal vein thrombosis, lymphosarcoma,
 pyonephrosis, myeloma, amyloidosis.
Unilateral, Large, Irregular (Fig. 3-136)
FELINe. FIP, primary or metastatic tumor, lymphosarcoma, cyst, abscess.
CANINe. Adenocarcinoma, lymphosarcoma, metastatic neoplasia, cyst, abscess.
Unilateral, Small, Regular (Fig. 3-137)
FELINE. Congenital hypoplasia, CIN.
CANINE. CIN, congenital hypoplasia.
Unilateral, Small, Irregular (Fig. 3-138)
 FELINE. CIN, chronic pyelonephritis, multiple infarcts.
CANINE. CIN, chronic pyelonephritis, multiple infarcts.
Unilateral, Small Contralateral Large (Fig. 3-139)
FELINE AND CANINE. Unilateral chronic pyelonephritis or congenital hypoplasia and
contralateral compensatory hypertrophy.
Normal Size and Shape
FELINE AND CANINE. Acute tubular nephrosis, calculi, kidney rupture, acute
pyelonephritis, neoplasia, amyloidosis. Normal kidney size can never be used as evidence
 that renal disease is not present.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
361
FIG. 3-131 A 5-year-old female
Siamese cat with anorexia and vom-
iting for 4 days. A and B, The kidneys 
are bilaterally enlarged and regularly
shaped. Differential  diagnoses
include lymphoma, FIP, bilateral
obstructive nephropathy, perirenal
cysts, bilateral renal tumors, acute
pyelonephritis, or polycystic renal
disease. Diagnosis: Perirenal cysts.
A
B
Density Changes. Changes in renal density also may be seen. Renal parenchymal min-
eralization may occur as a result of primary nephrocalcinosis, osseous metaplasia or dys-
be associated with disorders of calcium and phosphorus metabolism such as hypervita-
minosis D, primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism, excess or unbalance of calcium and
 phosphorus in the diet, and Cushing's disease. Osseous metaplasia has been described in
 association with hydronephrosis. Nephrocalcinosis also may result from chronic renal fail-
ure as well as being a cause of chronic renal failure. These conditions usually cause the
362
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-132 A 7-year-old male
domestic short-haired cat with
chronic vomiting. A and B, The kid-
 neys are bilaterally enlarged and
irregularly shaped. Differential diag-
noses include lymphoma, bilateral
renal tumors, polycystic disease, or
acute pyelonephritis. Diagnosis:
Lymphoma.
B
 deposition of calcium salts on the medullary pseudopapillae. These present as pyramidal
(inverted V) or linear densities. Mineralization of the renal parenchyma at the cortical
 medullary junction also may occur and will produce a pattern of fine parallel lines at the
cortical medullary junction. Vascular mineralization may also be seen. The vessels can be
recognized because of their linear shape and location. Usually, parallel lines representing
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
363
FIG. 3-133 An 1l-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat with
gradual weight loss, polyuria, and 
polydipsia for 2 months and vomit-
ing for 2 days. A and B, The kidneys
are bilaterally small and regularly
shaped (black arrows). Differential
diagnoses include CIN, chronic
pyelonephritis, or renal hypoplasia.
Diagnosis:
Chronic  interstitial
nephritis.
B
364
FIG. 3-134 A 6-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired
mat with lethargy and anorexia for l month. A and B, The kidneys
are bilaterally small,the left kidneyeven smaller than the right kid-
ney, and markedly irregular in shape. Differential diagnoses
include CIN, chronic pyelonephritis, or renal infarcts. Diagnosis:
Chronic pyelonephritis.
B
the vessel walls or the urothelium reflecting over them are seen perpendicular to the plane
 of the actual renal pelvis. Dystrophic mineralization of the renal parenchyma secondary to
neoplasia, infarct, abscess, or hemorrhage usually results in a poorly defined area of min-
eralization within the renal parenchyma away from the renal pelvis. The pattern of miner-
alization usually is less structured than that seen in renal parenchymal mineralization and
does not conform to renal anatomy. Another cause of increased density is renal pelvic or
 pelvic recess calculi. These may be large or small and will be recognized as oval or irregu-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
365
FIG. 3-135 A 12-year-old male
Cocker Spaniel with vomiting for 3
weeks. A and B, The left kidney is
large with regular and smooth mar-
gins. Differential diagnoses include
obstructive nephropathy, neoplasia,
acute pyelonephritis, pyonephrosis,
compensatory hyperplasia, or renal
vein thrombosis. Diagnosis: Left
renal hydronephrosis of unknown
etiology.
A
B
larly shaped densities in the renal pelvis, possibly in the pelvic recesses. They may become
large and conform to the shape of the renal pelvis as staghorn calculi and may even replace
most of the renal parenchyma (Fig. 3-140). It is sometimes difficult to discriminate
between renal calculi and parenchymal mineralization. An EU or an ultrasonographic
examination may be helpful in distinguishing between these two conditions. Calculi will
366
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTF
FIG. 3-136 A 7-year-old male mixed
breed dog with hematuria for 1
month. A and B, The left kidney is
very large and irregularly shaped.
The right kidney, although difficult
to visualize, is normal in size and
 shape. Differential diagnoses include 
neoplasia, renal cyst, or renal abscess.
Diagnosis:  Nephroblastoma (see
Fig. 3-155).
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
367
FIG. 3-137 A 14-year-old neutered female
domestic short-haired cat with vomiting. A
and B, The left kidney is small and regularly
shaped. The right kidney is normal.
Differential diagnoses include hypoplasia,
CIN, or chronic pyelonephritis. The cat
respondedto
symptomatic therapy.
Diagnosis: Hypoplasia of the left kidney.
A
B
produce filling defects during the EU and may cause hydronephrosis with a dilated renal
pelvis and urine evident surrounding the stone. This can also be seen during the ultra-
sonographic examination.
 Mineralized material within the GI tract may be mistaken for renal mineralization.
 Mineralization must be identified on both lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs to be cer-
 tain that it is associated with the kidneys. If there is a suspicious density, additional radi-
ographs to include oblique views and abdominal compression may be used. Repeating the
radiographs after a few hours often allows the densities to change position if they are asso-
ciated with the GI tract.
Position Changes. An uncommon finding on survey radiographs is the presence of a kid-
 ney in an inappropriate position. Both kidneys in the cat and the left kidney in the dog are
368
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-138 A 12-year-old neutered female
domestic short-haired cat with anorexia for 3
days. A and B, The right kidney is small and
irregularly shaped. The left kidney is within nor-
mal limits for size and shape. Differential diag-
noses include chronic pyelonephritis, CIN, or
multiple renal infarcts. Diagnosis: Chronic
pyelonephritis.
B
fairly mobile. As a dog ages, especially obese dogs, both kidneys become more moveable
 and are often found caudal and ventral to their usual positions. In the dog, caudal dis-
placement of the right kidney is usually associated with enlargement of the caudate liver
lobe. Adrenal masses may displace the kidney caudally and laterally, while ovarian masses
 may displace the kidney cranially. Retroperitoneal masses also can displace the kidney from
q  je no sp au ra u shui q no auo jo sud uisod peu s
the result of a congenital anomaly or traumatic avulsion from the normal location.
Congenital ectopia may be seen with the kidney most often located in the caudal abdomen
just cranial to the bladder.468
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
369
FIG. 3-139 A 10-year-old male
domestic short-haired cat with
tenesmus and vomiting. A and B,
The right kidneyis small and iregu-
larly shaped (open white arraws).
The left kidney is large and regularly
shaped (black arrows). Differential
diagnoses include unilateral chronic
pyelonephritis
congenital
hypoplasia and contralateral com-
pensatory hypertrophy. Diagnosis:
Chronic pyelonephritis of the right
kidney and hypertrophy of the lef.
B
370
FIG. 3-140 A 4-year-old female Maltese with occasional seizures.
The ventrodorsal radiograph revealed a calcific density shaped like a
renal pelvis within the left renal pelvis (back arrow). This location
was confrmed on the lateral view. Diagnosis: Left renal calculus.
Excretory Urography. The EU, also known as intravenous pyelogram or intravenous uro-
 gram, is the radiographic method for evaluating abnormalities of the kidneys and ureters
that are not apparent on the survey radiographs.* The study may be divided into two dis-
ographs exposed within the first few minutes after contrast injection (Figs. 3-141, A and
3-142, A). During this phase, contrast is distributed evenly throughout the renal intravas-
cular compartment and to some extent within the renal tubules.426,474 Homogenous opaci-
fication, or blush, of the kidneys occurs due to the relatively large fraction of total blood
volume that goes to the kidney. This is the ideal phase for evaluation of the renal size and
shape. In some studies, a difference in density between renal cortex and medulla will be
seen and a cortical medullary ratio may be determined. The second phase of the study is
 the pyelogram (Figs. 3-141, Band 3-142, B). During this phase the colcting structures and
 renal pelvis should be seen. This usually is visualized on the radiographs made at or beyond
 5 minutes after contrast injection.
Although not usually considered a phase of the EU, the vascular anatomy sometimes
 can be identified during an EU (vascular nephrogram phase) if the patient is positioned for
radiography before the contrast is injected, the contrast is injected rapidly, and the radi-
 Often the renal artery and vein can be identified in this radiograph. The nephrogram phase
will follow this vascular phase very quickly. In patients with severe renal dysfunction, this
may be the only opportunity to see the kidneys.
 In the dog, the normal kidney has a small, triangle-shaped pelvic sinus and evenly
spaced, regular pelvic recesses, or diverticula. The lobar renal arteries, the first branches
from the renal arteries, may be seen as linear radiolucencies lying between the paired pelvic
recesses. In many normal dogs, the diverticula may not be readily apparent on the EU. In
instances when it is necessary to visualize the diverticula, or when overall opacification of
 the kidney is poor, it may be useful to apply a tight, constricting bandage circumferentially
*References 23, 26, 37,415,416,419, 468-473.
CHAPTER THREETHEABDOMEN
371
A
B
FIG. 3-141 An 1l-year-old female Jack Russell Terrier with polycythemia. A, On the radiograph
made immediately after injection of the contrast medium there is homogeneous opacification of the
renal parenchyma. The other abdominal organs are also highlighted due to the contrast medium in
 a um u rn axa a jo aud rdau asi su n insa 
trast medium is mainly in the vascular compartments and renal tubules. B, The radiograph taken 30
minutes after injection revealed clearly defined diverticula of the collecting system, which contain
contrast medium (black arrow) and pseudopapillae (tissue spaces between the diverticula) (white
arrow) as well as pelvic sinuses (small black arrowhead) and proximal ureters (small white arrowhead).
 This is the late pyelogram phase of the excretory urogram. Diagnosis: Normal excretory urogram.
A
B
FIG. 3-142 A 10-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired cat with hematuria and cystic cal-
 culi. A, On the radiograph made immediately after contrast medium injection there is homogeneous
opacification of the kidneys. This is the nephrogram. B, The radiograph taken 15 minutes after con-
trast injection revealed clearly defined diverticula (black arrow), pseudopapillae (white arrow), pelvic
sinus (smal black arrowhead), and proximal ureters (small white arrowhead). This is the pyelogram
 phase. Diagnosis: Normal excretory urogram.
around the caudal abdomen to occlude the ureters by compression. This willinduce a mild
 iatrogenic hydroureter and hydronephrosis, which may make the renal outline and collect-
ing structures much more apparent (Fig. 3-143). However, this is not recommended unless
absolutely necessary because of the effects on renal function that can persist after the com-
pression is released.128 Although glucagon has been used to achieve renal pelvic and
ureteral dilation, we do not recommend its use. The pseudopapillae, which are renal struc-
372
SmAlL ANImAl RADIOLOGY AND UlTRASONOGRAPHY
kidney is projected at an angle such that the two sets of pelvic recesses are seen separately
(Fig. 3-144). In the cat, some irregularity in nephrographic density may occur due to the
cortical impressions of the subcapsular veins.
 Evaluation of the excretory urography is simplified if the criteria for categorizing sur-
vey images are used.
Bilateral, Large, Regular
FELINE AND CANINE
lecting systems and only a slight decrease in opacification. Focal radiolucent areas within
 F1G. 3-143 A 5-year-old neutered
male Cocker Spaniel with swollen
joints, cystic calculi, and enlarged
lymph nodes. A, The excretory uro-
gram revealed a suggestion of nor-
mal
collecting structures but
visualization was incomplete. B, An
abdominal compression (belly band)
 study more clearly revealed that the
collecting structures were normal.
 Diagnosis: Normal excretory uro-
gram. The dog had multicentric
 lymphoma, which did not involve
the kidneys.
A
B
FIG. 3-144 A 7-year-old male
domestic short-haired cat with
polyuria and polydipsia. The lateral
view of the left kidney during the
oblique view of the kidney such that
both sets of diverticula (black
arrows)  were distinctly  visible.
Diagnosis: Normal excretory uro-
gram.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
373
the parenchyma (focal filling defects) are a less frequent manifestation of renal lymphoma
(Fig. 3-145). Changes in the collecting system are rare; however, the focal form of the dis-
ease may compress a part of the collecting system.
 n n n  s  m r a si  a s
focal form is more common. The focal areas of radiolucency usually will be smaller than
those seen with lymphosarcoma. The collecting system is rarely affected.
PERIRENAL CYSTs. Although the renal shadow is enlarged on the noncontrast radi-
ograph, the kidneys themselves are usually small and slightly irregular in outline, with
normal opacification and normal or irregular collcting systems. There is usually some
ad a po sasd ri an u (ati-e ) no aq nou a ansds a p
contrast may accumulate within the subcapsular cyst in a sufficient quantity to cause
faint opacification.
 HYDRONEPHROsis. The kidney usually is smoothly enlarged, the renal pelvis is uniformly
distended, and the pelvic recesses are smoothly and evenly expanded. In severe instances, the
pelvic recesses may be enlarged so much that they are obliterated as separate structures
and the entire renal pelvis becomes a smoothly marginated, dilated structure. In extreme
cases, the renal parenchyma may be reduced to a shell surrounding the distended renal
pelvis. On the immediate EU, linear opacifications may be seen radiating from the renal
hilus to the periphery of the kidney. After opacification of the renal pelvis develops, which
may take 24 hours or more, these may appear as linear lucency radiating from the pelvis.
These are the remaining intrarenal vascular structures. The pyelogram image is markedly
delayed, if it occurs at all, due to the decreased rate of glomerular filtration (Fig. 3-147).
BILATERAL RENAL TUMORs. Although renal tumors are usually unilateral lesions, they
may be bilateral either due to metastasis from one kidney to the other, metastasis to both
kidneys from a distant site, multicentric tumor, or systemic neoplasia such as lymphoma.
Irregular areas of increased density may be seen during the nephrogram phase due to vari-
ations in the vascularity of the neoplastic tissue and the presence of islands of functional
renal tissue. The pyelogram may reveal distortion of the collecting system if the mass is
focal. Complete obliteration or nonvisualization of the collecting structures may be seen if
the lesion involves most of the renal parenchyma.
FIG. 3-145 A 9-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat with
polyuria and polydipsia for 2
months and palpably enlarged kid-
neys. The kidneys are enlarged and
irregular The collecting structures
are within normal limits. Differential
diagnoses include lymphoma, FIP,
 polycystic kidney disease, or bilateral
renal
tumors.
Diagnosis:
Lymphoma.
374
SmAll ANimAl RADlOlOGY AND ULTRaSONOGRaPHY
FIG. 3-146 A 9-year-old neutered male domestic short-haired cat
with palpably enlarged kidneys but no clinical signs Survey radi-
excretory urogram revealed bilaterally small,regular kidneys (the leff
is superimposed over the spine, open black arrows) with large accu-
mulations of fluid between the kidneys and the renal capsules.
Diagnosis: Perirenal cysts.
 PYELONEPHRITIs. Acute bilateral pyelonephritis appears as a normal to slightly dimin-
ished homogenous density during the nephrogram phase. Mild to moderate dilation of the
renal pelvis and proximal ureters as well as shortening and blunting of the pseudopapillae
 ag(i pe i s sd serd i un us aq u sa d pe
changes are usually irreversible and persist despite resolution of the infection.
ACUTE INTERSTITIAL AND GLOMERULAR NEPHRITIs. The EU may be normal or may have
slightly diminished homogenous density during the prolonged nephrogram phase. The
 pyelogram image may be faint with a normal renal pelvis and normal pelvic recesses visi-
ble. Acute swelling of the kidney may cause compression of the renal pelvic recesses. This
will persist despite properly applied abdominal compression. The EU is not recommended
as a diagnostic technique if this diagnosis is anticipated.
 POLYCYSTIC KIDNEYs. The density during the nephrogram phase will generally be irreg-
ular due to obliteration of normal renal tissue by the cysts. Classically, there is a fine rim of
normally dense renal tissue surrounding the nonopacified cyst. The pyelogram may
show distortion of the collecting structures if the cysts produce pressure upon them (Fig.
3-150).475
AMYLOIDosis. The nephrogram image is usually less opaque than normal. Frequently
the pyelogram image is difficult to see, but the collecting structures are usually normal in
shape and size.473
ETHYLENE GLYCOL TOxICITY. The nephrogram will reveal a smoothly marginated, mild
to moderate enlargement of both kidneys. The nephrogram density may remain the same
or increase in density throughout the study; the pyelogram image either will not be visible
 or will be poorly seen. 426,47
LIPIDOsis. Although there is no documentation in the veterinary literature that animals
with diabetes mellitus are more likely to experience contrast media-induced renal failure,
as is the case for humans, this possibility should be strongly considered in determining the
need for the EU in suspected cases of renal lipidosis secondary to diabetes. If performed,
the EU will appear normal except for the overall renal size.470
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
375
el
A
B
FIG. 3-147 A l-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with a palpably enlarged left kidney
detected on routine examination prior to ovariohysterectomy. A, The 15-minute ventrodorsal view
of the excretory urogram revealed minimal contrast enhancement to the structure except for a few
inear radiodensities that radiated peripherally from the pelvis (white arrows). These represent renal
blood vesselsthat were stretched. B, The 6-hour ventrodorsal view revealed a markedly opacified kid-
ney. This represented the delayed pyelogram finding of hydronephrosis. Diagnosis: Hydronephrosis
of the left kidney.
MULTIPLE MYELOMA. Performing an EU in human patients with multiple myeloma is not
recommended because of the possibility of contrast media-induced renal failure. This reaction
should be considered in animals as well. If an EU is performed, the nephrogram phase will 
 show smoothly enlarged renal outlines with or without patchy areas of decreased density. The
pyelogram phase will show normally shaped collecting structures that may have poor den-
sity.416
Bilateral,Large,Irregular
FELINE AND CANINE. The findings for diseases in this category (lymphosarcoma, FIP,
bilateral renal tumors, acute bilateral pyelonephritis, amyloidosis, and polycystic renal dis-
ease) are the same as described under Bilateral, Large, Regular, except that the renal out-
lines are irregular.
376
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
FIG. 3-148 A 9-year-old female Shih Tzu with occasional vomiting, anorexia, and pyrexia. A, There
are bilaterally enlarged kidneys with shortened diverticula, blunted pseudopapillae, dilated renal
sinuses,and dilated proximal ureters (white arrow). Diagnosis: Acute pyelonephritis. B, An excretory
urogram performed 6 months later for a suspected recurrence of the original problem. There is
marked decrease in size of the left kidney (white arrows) and dilation of the renal sinus. The right kid-
ney is slightly enlarged with a poorly visualized but dilated renal sinus and proximal ureter (black
ney and acute pyelonephritis of the right kidney.
FIG. 3-149 A 6-year-old neutered male domestic short-
haired cat with anorexia, pyrexia, anemia, and pain
upon palpation of the kidneys. Survey radiographs
revealed slightly enlarged kidneys. The excretory uro-
 gram revealed mild renal enlargement, which is smooth
and regular. The diverticula are dilated (small black
arrow), the pseudopapillae are blunted (white arrows),
and the renal sinuses and proximal ureters are dilated
(open black arrow). Diagnosis: Acute bilateral
pyelonephritis.
Bilateral, Small, Regular
FELINE
CIN. Renal opacification during the nephrogram phase usually is less to much less than
normal. The diverticula may appear shortened or normal. The pelvic density is frequently
less than normal.
HYPOPLASIA. In this situation the EU will appear normal. However, all structures are
 proportionately smaller than normal.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
377
A
B
FIG. 3-15o An ll-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired cat with polyuria and polydipsia
for 6 weeks and palpably enlarged kidneys. Survey radiographs revealed that both kidneys were
enlarged and had irregular borders. A, The early stages of the excretory urogram reveal muliple foci
of relative radiolucency separated by septa that are contrast enhanced. B, The later stages show the
multiple cysts more clearly and a distorted renal sinus. Differential diagnoses include polycystic kid-
ney disease, bilateral multifocal renal tumors (metastatic or primary), lymphoma, or FIP. Diagnosis:
Polycystic kidney disease.
FIG. 3-151 A l-year-old female Miniature Schnauzer with vomiting.
polydipsia, and polyuria. The kidneys were not identifable on survey
radiographs. The excretory urogram revealed that the left kidney was
slightly smaller than normal and the right kidney was markedly
smaller. The urinary collecting systems were normal. Differential
diagnoses include congenital renal dysplasia, chronic pyelonephritis,
 or CIN. Diagnosis: Congenital renal dysplasia.
CANINE
CIN AND HYPOPLASIA. The appearance of the EU is similar in both the dog and the
cat.476
 RENAL DYSPLASIA. Renal opacification during the nephrogram phase is usually less than
normal. The renal pelvis and pelvic recesses may not be visualized, but when seen, they may
be normal, small, or asymmetrically enlarged and distorted (Fig. 3-151).
378
Bilateral,Small,Irregular
FELINE AND CANINE
CIN AND RENAL DYSPLASIA. The appearance is similar to that discussed above, except the
kidneys are irregularly shaped.
S n o  a    n  a  s
or indentations to the renal outline with regional areas of less opaque parenchyma (Fig.
3-152). Renal pelvic structures will appear normal.
CHRONIC PYELONEPHRITIs. The nephrogram phase may be normal or somewhat less
dense than normal. Stretching and slight dilation of the renal sinus with loss or irregular-
ity of the diverticula may be seen (Fig. 3-153). Focal flattenings or indentations of the renal
cortex peripheral to the areas of pelvic and pelvic recess irregularities may be present.
Unilateral, Large, Regular
 FELINE AND CANINE. The urographic changes described in bilateral obstruction caus-
ing hydronephrosis, hyperplasia, lymphosarcoma, FIP, and primary and metastatic renal
tumors are the same in unilateral disease for the affected kidney.
 PYONEPHROSIs. A rim of increased opacity with a relatively radiolucent center will be
seen during the nephrogram. There will be no pyelogram image (Fig. 3-154).
 RENAL VEIN THROMBOSIs. Normal to reduced, but homogenous, opacification will be
seen during the nephrogram and may be delayed in onset. Usually, a pyelogram image will
not be seen.193
Unilateral, Large, Irregular
FELINE AND CANINE. The urographic changes described for bilateral cases of FIP and
lymphosarcoma are the same in unilateral disease for the affected kidney.
PRIMARY AND METASTATIC NEOPLASIA. Irregular areas of increased density may be seen
during the nephrogram phase. This is caused by variations in the vascularity of the neo-
gram may reveal distortion of the collecting system if the mass is focal, or complete
obliteration or nonvisualization of the collecting structures if the lesion involves most of
the renal parenchyma (Fig. 3-156).
FIG. 3-152 A 12-year-old male
domestic short-haired cat with vom-
iting.  The survey radiographs
revealed slightly small, markedly
irregular kidneys. The excretory uro-
gram revealed slightly small renal
outlines with focal flattening of the
cortical borders (white arrows). The
renal sinus and proximal ureter of
the left kidney are slightly dilated.
Differential diagnoses include multi-
ple renal infarcts or chronic
pyelonephritis or both. Diagnosis:
Multiple renal infarcts
with
pyelonephritis of the left kidney.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
379
FIG. 3-153 A 4-month-old female
German Shepherd dog with urinary
incontinence since owned. Survey
 radiographs were normal. An excre-
 tory urogram performed after pneu-
 mocystography revealed normal size
and shape of the kidneys. The renal
sinuses were elongated and the
diverticula were not outlined, which
resulted in an appearance of the
 renal pelvis similar to a scimitar. The
 pseudopapillae are markedly blunted
(white arrow). The proximal ureters
are dilated (open black arrow).
Diagnosis: Chronic pyelonephritis
(the dog also had bilateral ectopic
ureters).
 FIG. 3-154 A 6-year-old male domestic short-haired cat with
anorexia for 5 days, vomiting for 3 days, and pyrexia. Survey
 radiographs revealed a slight enlargement of the left kidney. The
excretory urogram on the 15-minute ventrodorsal view revealed
a normal right kidney. The lef kidney shows a persistent
nephrogram image with a relatively radiolucent pelvis and faint
traces of normal-sized diverticula. Differential diagnoses
include pyonephrosis or unilateral obstructive nephropathy.
Diagnosis: Pyonephrosis.
380
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 3-155 A 7-year-old male mixed breed dog with hema-
turia for l month. Survey radiographs revealed an enlarged,
irregularly shaped left kidney (see Fig. 3-136). The nephro-
gram phase of the excretory urogram revealed wispy, irreg-
ular, opacified tubular structures (black arrows) within the
left renal mass consistent, with neovascularity associated
with neoplasia. The right kidney had a flattened area in the
cranial lateral margin suggesting a prior renal infarction.
Differential diagnoses for the left renal mass included vari-
 ous forms of renal neoplasia. Diagnosis: Nephroblastoma.
FIG. 3-156 A 10-year-old male Beagle with polydipsia and
polyuria. There is a marked global, smooth enlargement of
the right kidney with dilation of the renal pelvis, compres-
sion of the diverticula (especially those draining the caudal
pole), and obstruction of the ureter near the caudal pole.
The left kidney and ureter are normal. Differential diag-
noses include neoplasia, either primary or metastatic, with
ureteral involvement or granulomatous disease. Diagnosis:
Renal carcinoma with ureteral strangulation.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
381
SIMPLE RENAL CYST. A smoothly marginated lucency with a well-defined circumferen-
tial rim of functional renal tissue will be seen during the nephrogram. Depending on the
location of the cyst, the collecting system may be distorted (Fig. 3-157).
Unilateral, Small, Regular
 FELINE AND CANINE. The urographic changes described in bilateral hypoplasia and
 CIN are the same in unilateral disease for the affected kidney.
Unilateral, Small, Irregular
FELINE AND CANINE. The urographic changes described in bilateral cases of CIN, chronic
 pyelonephritis, and renal infarcts are the same in unilateral disease for the affected kidney.
Normal Size and Shape
FELINE AND CANINE
ACUTE TUBULAR NEPHROSIs. Acute tubular nephrosis may be induced by excretory
urography. The urographic findings are a nephrogram phase that persists or becomes pro-
gressively more dense with time. A pyelogram phase usually is not noted (Fig. 3-158). In
such instances, treatment with intravenous fluids and diuretics should be instituted.
ACUTE PYELONEPHRITIS, INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, AND GLOMERULAR NEPHRITIS.
Depending upon the severity of the condition, the EU may be normal. If the condition is
severe, a faint nephrogram image or renal pelvic and ureteral dilation may be seen.
 RENAL CALCUL1. The nephrogram findings should appear normal and the pyelogram
will reveal a radiolucent filling defect within the collecting system. If the calculus has
caused obstruction, dilation of the renal sinus and possibly of the diverticula may be seen.
Because pyelonephritis frequently is seen in association with renal calculi, the changes asso-
ciated with pyelonephritis also may be identified.
 sd a     n   si
upon the extent of the renal parenchymal injury associated with the nephrocalcinosis. The
pyelogram image will be normal or slightly irregular; however, filling defects will not be
identified.
 KIDNEY RUPTURE. The perirenal area will be hazy on survey radiographs. The EU will
usually, but not necessarily, show extravasation of contrast medium into the surrounding
soft tissues if the rupture extends into the pelvis.470 The kidney may not excrete contrast.
 If the rupture is close to the renal pelvis, dilation of the pelvis and pelvic recesses may be
present.
FIG. 3-157 A 12-year-old male mixed breed dog with mild para-
paresis. On physical examination an enlarged left kidney was pal-
pated. Survey radiographs revealed that the cranial pole of the left
kidney was enlarged. The excretory urogram revealed that the cranial
pole of the left kidney was enlarged, with a fine rim of contrast-
enhanced renal tissue (white arrows) surrounding a relatively radi-
olucent mass. The cranial urinary collecting structures appear to be
displaced caudally. Differential diagnoses include renal cyst, renal
neoplasia, renal granuloma, or renal abscess. Diagnosis: Simple renal
cyst.
382
SMAL1
L ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-158 A 7-year-old female English Pointer with
polyuria and polydipsia for 2 weeks. A, The immediate lateral
view of the excretory urogram revealed a normal nephro-
 gram image. B, The 20-minute view of the excretory uro-
gram revealed that no collecting structures have become
apparent and that no contrast is seen in the bladder. The den-
sity of the kidney parenchyma is nearly the same as the
immediate view. The nephrogram phase has remained per-
sistent. Diagnosis: Acute renal failure.
A
B
Functional Aspects of the Nephrogram. A qualitative assessment of renal abnormali-
se ud  g nu a snaa aq pd aq un s
glomerular dysfunction, intrarenal or extrarenal obstruction, renal tubular necrosis, and
renal or systemic reactions to intravenous contrast administration may alter the opacity
trends of the nephrogram portion of the EU. Standardization of the contrast dosage and
flming sequence is essential to be able to derive functional information from the contrast
study. The time of maximal nephrographic density and the variations in density before and
after maximal opacity are recommended to differentiate the disease processes. Several
abnormal patterns have been described.
A normal nephrographic density that is followed by a progressively increasing density or
by a persistent density has been associated with contrast-induced systemic hypotension, acute
renal obstruction, and contrast-induced renal failure. Poor nephrographic density followed
by decreasing density has been associated with polyuric renal failure or an inadequate con-
trast dose. Poor initial density followed by increasing opacity has been associated with acute
extrarenal obstruction, systemic hypotension, and renal ischemia. Poor initial density that
does not decrease may occur with glomerular disease or severe interstitial or tubular disease.
Renal Ultrasonographic Abnormalities
 Size. Calipers are part of most ultrasonography machines and can be used to obtain
 direct and accurate measurements of the kidneys. All three renal dimensions can be meas-
ured and renal volume can be calculated.29-3l Renal volumetric dimensions have not
improved the accuracy of ultrasonography in identifying renal abnormalities. The most
useful measurement is the renal length, because it has been repeatedly correlated radi-
measured L2 is that because sonographic measurements are not magnified, they may fall
slightly lower in the established radiographic normal size ranges. Although width and
height have been defined, their utility remains unproved. The ultrasonographic measure-
ments will not be accurate unless the transducer is positioned perpendicular to the plane
of the kidney. Measurements obtained using the ultrasonography machine calipers actually
may be more accurate than radiographic measurements. Diuresis resulting from adminis-
tration of contrast agents, diuretics, or intravenous fluid can cause minimal enlargement of
the kidney, which can be detected and quantitated using the calipers.32,35,36,477-479 Further,
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
383
hypertrophy secondary to unilateral nephrectomy has also been observed.479 Whether
detected by ultrasonography or radiography, the differential diagnoses for renal enlarge-
ment are the same, although the ultrasonographic examination is capable of detecting
smaller degrees of renal enlargement. Reduction in kidney size also can be detected using
ultrasonography. If thekidneys are extremely small,they may be hard to find. If thekidney
is otherwise normal (i.e., there is no alteration in renal parenchymal echo intensity), a spe-
cific diagnosis cannot be made based solely on renal size.
 Shape. Distortion of the renal shape will be produced if the transducer is not oriented
 perpendicular to the kidney. This may be difficult to accomplish, especially when the kid-
ney is positioned cranially under the rib cage. Ultrasonography has been shown to be more
sensitive than excretory urography and renal angiography for detecting slight alterations in
renal contour caused by experimentally produced renal carcinoma.480 Renal shape abnor-
malities are readily detected. However, depending on operator experience, both false-
negative and false-positive results may be encountered. Contour irregularities are usually
nonspecific, but focal and global irregularities and unilateral or bilateral involvement can
be detected and used to distinguish among renal diseases. The shape of the renal cortex and
medulla can be evaluated and a determination can be made if the irregularity of the renal
contour resultsfrom medullary or cortical disease.48l-49 The same difrential considera-
tions apply to ultrasonographic interpretation of shape irregularities as to radiographic
obtained from ultrasonography provides better morphological insight.
sn p q ues au  adsp i sss pe sss ie d
teristics of the mass that is displacing the kidney can be determined. The kidneys may be
 displaced from their normal position by the pressure that the operator exerts on the ultra-
sonographic transducer. This displacement should not be interpreted as a positional
abnormality.
Echo Intensity and Pattern. Echo intensity may be characterized as hyperechoic,
hypoechoic, or anechoic. The echo intensity of the kidney is compared with adjacent
structures, usually the liver and spleen. The canine kidney is normally hypoechoic rela-
tive to the spleen and hypoechoic or isoechoic to the liver.481,488,490 The feline kidney is
parisons are useful only if the liver and spleen are normal.48l The echo pattern may be
uniform or heteroechoic. The renal medulla is normally hypoechoic relative to the renal
cortex. At times the renal medulla appears almost anechoic. Ultrasonographic abnor.
malities may be described as hypoechoic or hyperechoic relative to normal renal cortex
or medulla or relative to the opposite kidney. Ultrasonographic patterns and echo
 intensity are more specific for focal or multifocal renal abnormalities and less specific for
among benign lesions, such as abscesses or hematomas, and malignant lesions, such as
disease. Renal tumors, hemorrhage, abscess, or infarcts may produce focal or multifocal
hyperechoic, hypoechoic, or heteroechoic abnormalities depending on their duration
lesions have been seen in experimental dogs with acute pyelonephritis.486 Diagnosis may
be difficult without biopsy or aspirate.
Intrarenal cysts or hydronephrosis produce anechoic lesions with well-defined near
P iap u audos ttstiatossn qn pue sm i p
degrees of hydronephrosis with minimal renal pelvic or proximal ureteral dilation.487,500
The transverse view is more useful than the longitudinal view for this purpose. The
ureteropelvic junction forms an anechoic Y, which is centered on the renal crest and can
be distinguished from the renal vein, which branches more toward the corticomedullary
junction. As the ureter and renal pelvis dilate, they will appear progressively larger and
will gradually replace the renal medulla and finally the entire renal cortex. The dilated
d   n a a n    a a i sn l sd r
 m (eii- pe gii-e si) r are e suoq a pe si
hydronephrosis, the renal vessels and associated fibrous tissue may appear as
384
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-159 Longitudinal sonograms
of the right kidney of a 16-year-old
KIDHEY
KIDNEY
 spayed female Doberman Pinscher
PURE
with a history of anorexia and vom-
iting for 2 weeks. The dog had a mass
on the right rear foot. There is a het-
eroechoic mass associated with the
renal cortex at the cranial aspect of
the right kidney (arrows). This rep-
resents a renal tumor. Diagnosiss
Metastatic melanoma.
FIG. 3-16o Longitudinal sonograms
of the left kidney of a 10-year-old
male Rottweiler with a history of
anorexia, vomiting, and hematuria
of 3 weeks duration. The renal archi-
tecture is totally obliterated and
replaced by multiple hypoechoic,
somewhat oval-shaped lesions. This
is indicative of renal neoplasia.
Diagnosis: Metastatic carcinoma.
 FIG. 3-161 Longitudinal sonograms
of the left kidney of a 3-year-old cas-
trated male cat with a history of
episodic hind limb paresis. There is a
focal hyperechoic lesion at the corti-
comedullary junction in the cranial
pole of the kidney (arrows). This
most likely represents a renal infarct
or focal area of infection. Diagnosis:
 Renal infarct secondary to hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy.
hyperechoic linear bands that stretch from the renal pelvis to the renal cortex (Fig.
3-164). Pyonephrosis may produce renal pelvic dilation, which appears similar to
hydronephrosis. The fluid usually will be more echogenic, and the complex, cellular
nature of the fluid often can be recognized by the motion of the cells within the puru-
lent material contained in the renal pelvis. Aspiration of the renal pelvis using ultra-
 sonographic guidance will provide a definitive diagnosis. Intrarenal cysts are anechoic,
usually round, vary in size, may be septated, and are located within the renal
-  u   i oi n s i d n    
gitudinal and transverse planes in order to be certain it is in the kidney. The cysts may
be single or multiple, large or small, and may protrude from the renal cortex or be
located completely within the renal parenchyma (Fig. 3-165). Some tumors and
abscesses appear cavitated (loosely termed cystic) while some cysts contain echogenic
may be required for a definitive diagnosis.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
385
FIG. 3-162 Longitudinal (A and B)
and transverse (C and D) sonograms
of the left kidney of a 5-year-old
female Rottweiler with a history of
anorexia and pyrexia of 5 days
duration. There is moderate
hydronephrosis with dilation of the
renal pelvis (arrows). This may be
secondary to infection or obstruc-
tion. Diagnosis: Hydronephrosis
secondary to bladder wall thicken-
A
B
ing, lymphoma.
C
 FIG. 3-163 Longitudinal sonograms
of the leff kidney of a 13-year-old
male Coonhound with a history of
vomiting and diarrhea of 4 weeks
 duration. The ureter and renal pelvis
 are markedly distended. There is a
heteroechoic mass that surrounds
and obstructs the ureter. This is
most likely neoplastic. Diagnosis:
 Retroperitoneal carcinoma with sec-
 ondary hydronephrosis.
 Ultrasonography has been reported to be more sensitive than excretory urography in
 detecting acute pyelonephritis.486 Renal pelvic and proximal ureteral dilation and a hyper-
echoic line along the renal crest have been described as the major findings. A uniformly
echogenic renal cortex, focal hypoechoic or hyperechoic areas within the renal cortex,
and hypoechoic focal lesions within the medulla also have been observed (Figs. 3-166 and
3-167).486 Depending on the interpreters suspicion of pyelonephritis, the sonographic find-
ings in combination with a urinalysis and culture are probably adequate. However, if there
isa question, an EU ofen can confirm or refute pyelonephritis, particlaly in dogs.469
386
FIG. 3-164 Longitudinal sonograms of the left kidney of a
12-year-old castrated male Cocker Spaniel with a history of
vomiting and bloody diarrhea of 1 month duration. There
was a palpable abdominal mass. The left kidney has been
replaced by an anechoic mass that contains hyperechoic lin-
 ear septations. This is indicative of severe hydronephrosis.
Diagnosis: Hydronephrosis.
FIG. 3-165 Longitudinal (A and B)
 and transverse (C and D) sonograms
of the lef kidney of a 9-year-old
 spayed female Schnauzer with a his-
tory of chronic urinary tract infec-
tion and diabetes mellitus. There is a
solitary anechoic lesion in the renal
cortex (arrows) indicative of a renal
cyst. The kidneys are diffusely hyper-
echoic with poor corticomedullary
distinction. This is indicative of dif-
B
fuse renal disease that may be sec-
ondary to chronic infection or
infiltrative disease. Diagnosis:
Solitary renal
cyst, chronic
pyelonephritis.
C
D
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
387
6519
FIG. 3-166 Transverse (A to C) and
ACUSO
longitudinal (D) sonograms of the 
left kidney of a 4-year-old male
Great Dane with a history of hema-
turia of 4 months duration. The
renal architecture is markedly dis-
torted with a large mass arising from
the dorsal surface of the kidney
(arrows). There is poor corti-
comedullary distinction within the
A
B
more normal-appearing portions of
 the kidney. This mass could repre-
sent a tumor or granuloma. A renal
biopsy  was
 performed, and
Escherichia coli pyelonephritis with
DEPTE
renal abscess was diagnosed.
Diagnosis: Pyelonephritis with
abscess.
心
真
FIG. 3-167 Transverse sonograms of
the left kidney of a 9-year-old spayed
female Schnauzer with a history of
urolithiasis of 3 months duration.
 There is mild dilation of the renal
 pelvis (solid arrows). This may be
secondary to obstruction or infec-
 tion. There is a hyperechoic zone in
the renal pelvis (open arrows). This is
indicative
of
pyelonephritis.
 Diagnosis: Pyelonephritis.
 Diffuse uniform hyperechoic patterns may occur in association with lymphosarcoma,
FIP, CIN, chronic pyelonephritis, chronic glomerulonephritis, renal dysplasia, renal miner-
alization, and with hemoglobin or hemosiderin deposits within the kidney (Figs. 3-165 and
3-168 to 3-170).
A diffuse uniform anechoic pattern will occur secondary to hydronephrosis. A diffuse
heteroechoic pattern of hyperechoic and anechoic (cavitating) areas may be seen with
polycystic kidney disease (Figs. 3-171 and 3-172).
Nephrocalcinosis may produce a diffusely hyperechoic kidney but it also can produce
band has been referred to as the medullary rim sign and has been reported in association
with acute tubular necrosis, pyogranulomatous vasculitis, CIN, and hypercalcemia (Figs.
3-174 and 3-175).493 However,this rim sign also has been reported in patients without
 indicate some nonspecific medullary degeneration or mineralization. Acoustic shadowing
may or may not be present. Chronic renal failure also may produce a hyperechoic renal
medulla. Ethylene glycol poisoning produces a similar hyperechoic medulla with a sur-
 rounding hypoechoic area. This has been termed the halo sign and is associated with a
388
FIG. 3-168 Longitudinal (A and B) and transverse (C to F)
 sonograms of the lef kidney of a 4-year-old castrated male
Siamese cat with a history of polyuria,polydipsia, and palpably
comedullary distinction. The renal pelvis is dilated (arrows).
There is peritoneal fluid (C). These findings are indicative of
infiltrative or inflammatory renal disease. Diagnosis:
Lymphoma.
A
D
 pad uqs ose   u-setsusd d
association with leptospirosis.498
  rn  n  sd    s r s
to discriminate between renal calculi and renal pelvic mineralization in the absence of
hydronephrosis. Identifying a dilated renal pelvis around the calculus may help in its recog-
nition. The size of the renal calculus is important in determining whether or not it forms
a shadow, but the amount and type of surrounding tissue will also affect the stone's ability
to produce a shadow. Thicker and less uniform surrounding tissue reduces the amount of
 shadowing. Chemical composition has litle effect on the amount of shadowing. 192
Small amounts of perirenal fluid, either retroperitoneal or subcapsular, may be
detected using ultrasonography. The exact location of the fluid may be difficult to
define; however, if the fluid follows the contour of the kidney, it is probably subcapsular
(Fig. 3-177). An anechoic zone will be observed around the kidney. The echo intensity of
the kidney may be artifactually increased if a large amount of perirenal or peritoneal fluid
is present. This may be seen with renal trauma and hemorrhage, increased renal pelvic
pressure and leakage at or around the parenchymal-collecting system junction, or occa-
 sionally in severe renal inflammation as well as perinephric inflammation or abscess (Fig.
3-178). The only way to clarify the specific characteristics of the fluid is to sample it, usu-
ally by sonographically guided fine-needle aspiration.
DOPPLER ULTRASONOGRAPHY IN RENAL DISEASE
Although oversimplified for the sake of brevity, Doppler ultrasonography is the study of
the blood flow characteristics in both the systolic and diastolic phases of the circulatory
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
389
F1G. 3-169 Transverse (A, E, and F)
and longitudinal (B to D) sono-
grams of the right kidney of a 4-
year-old castrated male Siamese cat
with a history of polyuria, polydip-
rs u aqdid pe s
The renal pelvis is markedly dilated
(arrows). The kidney is enlarged,
irregularly shaped, and contains
B
both hyperechoic and hypoechoic
regions. This is indicative of infiltra-
tive renal disease. Diagnosis:
NEY
Lymphoma.
D
E
FIG. 3-170 Transverse (A) and lon-
gitudinal (B) sonograms of the left
DEPT
kidney of a 9-year-old castrated male
KIDNEY
ACUSON
LTKIDNEY
cat with a history of anorexia, weight
PORB
loss, and icterus of l month dura-
HAIN
tion. The kidney is diffusely hyper-
echoic.This
sis indicative
of
inflammatory or infltrative renal
disease. Diagnosis: Lymphoma.
A
B
cycle. These include velocity (peak as well as spectrum), direction, and periodicity. The
ultrasonographic techniques have been applied to the assessment of canine and feline renal
between renal blood flow velocities in systole versus diastole that have been applied to the
assessment of renal parenchymal disease, including renal transplants. The utility of
Doppler techniques and related indices varies among those using them, but an increased
resistive index may aid in the assessment of the relevance of diffuse, infiltrative renal dis-
ease. Similarly, a normal resistive index may be an encouraging finding in some patients
with acute renal failure and may eliminate the need for further assessments.
390
FIG. 3-171 Longitudinal (A and B)
 and transverse (C and D) sonograms
of the left kidney of a 5-year-old
female Persian cat with a history of
anorexia, diarrhea, hematuria, hypo-
glycemia, and hypoproteinemia of 6
months duration. The size of the
kidney is normal. There are several
irregularly shaped hypoechoic and
anechoic lesions visible within the
renal parenchyma. There is poor cor-
ticomedullary differentiation. There
is anechoic peritoneal fuid. These
fndings are indicative of polycystic
 renal disease with ascites. Diagnosis:
Polycystic kidneys.
C
D
FIG. 3-172 Longitudinal (A, B, and
D) and transverse (C) sonograms of
the right kidney of a 5-year-old
female Persian cat with a history of
anorexia, diarrhea, hematuria,hypo-
glycemia, and hypoproteinemia of 6
months duration. The size of the
kidney is normal; however, the con-
tour is slightly irregular. There are
several irregularly shaped hypo-
echoic and anechoic lesions visible
A
B
within the renal parenchyma. These
fndings are indicative of polycystic
renal disease. There is a small
amount of anechoic peritoneal fluid.
Diagnosis: Polycystic kidneys.
C
D
URETERS
Normal ureters are not seen on radiographs because of their small diameter (1 to 2 mm).
 Few ureteral abnormalities are visible on survey radiographs, but radiodense calculi may
be identified (Fig. 3-179). These vary in size and can be mistaken for mineral material
within the GI tract. However, their position in the dorsal abdomen enables them to be
identified as ureteral calculi In some cases, renal calculi or cystic calculi will also be pres-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
391
FIG. 3-173 Longitudinal (A, B, and
D) and transverse (C) sonograms of
the left kidney of a l2-year-old
Bichon Frise with a history of uri-
nary tract infection of 3 months
duration. There are hyperechoic
regions within the renal pelvis with
shadowing This is indicative of renal
mineralization. Diagnosis: Renal
mineralization.
A
C
FIG. 3-174 Longitudinal (A and B)
 and transverse (C and D) sonograms
DE
of the left kidney of a 4-month-old
female Great Dane with a history of
fever, anorexia, depression, and
reluctance to walk of l month dura-
tion. The kidney is hyperechoic, and
there is a hyperechoic band at the 
junction of the inner and outer renal
medulla. This is indicative of renal
tubular mineralization, acute tubu-
B
lar necrosis, pyogranulomatous vas-
culitis, CIN, and hypercalcemia. A
somewhat similar pattern has been
observed in ethylene glycol toxicity.
Diagnosis: Acute tubular necrosis
and renal mineralization associated
with hypertrophic osteodystrophy.
口
ent, increasing the likelihood of ureteral calculi and making any mineralized density in the
sublumbar or retroperitoneal area more suspicious. Ureteral calculi may be located any-
where from the renal pelvis to the trigone of the bladder. There is a normal density, the
end-on view of the deep circumflex iliac vessels, that can mimic the appearance of a
 ureterolith at the level of the fth and sixth lumbar vertebrae.418 Retroperitoneal masses,
which can be presumed to displace or encompass the ureters, may be seen. These produce
a soft-tissue swelling in the sublumbar or retroperitoneal space. The normal thin line of
392
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGy AND UlTRaSONOGraPHy
FIG. 3-175 Longitudinal (A and C)
 and transverse (B and D) sonograms
of the right kidney of a 14-month-
 old castrated male Siamese cat with a
history of anorexia and lethargy of 2
months duration. The renal cortex is
hyperechoic, and there is a hyper-
echoic linear band at the corti-
comedullary junction. This can
occur secondary to renal mineraliza-
tion, acute tubular necrosis, ethylene 
glycol toxicity, CIN,and pyogranulo-
A
matous nephritis (FIP). Diagnosis:
Pyogranulomatous nephritis (FIP).
C
FIG. 3-176 A 9-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat was
 in renal failure. A longitudinal sono-
 gram revealed a focal, hyperechoic
structure (calculus, C) in the renal
 pelvis that exhibits distal shadowing
(thinner arrows). There is dilation of
the renal pelvis (thicker arrowheads),
indicating obstructive uropathy.
Diagnosis: Renal calculus with
 obstructive uropathy.
soft-tissue density ventral to the vertebrae becomes thickened or irregular in contour.
 Retroperitoneal masses and fluid may displace or obscure the kidneys. Ureteral rupture is
 not specifically identifiable on survey radiographs but may be suggested by the presence of
haziness in the retroperitoneal space and loss of renal outline (Fig. 3-180). Retroperitoneal
hemorrhage without ureteral damage is more common. This is seen in trauma cases asso-
ciated with vertebral or pelvic fractures.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
393
( P V) 3sa 2- 5
and longitudinal (C and D) sono-
grams of the left kidney of an S-year-
 old castrated male cat with a history
of chronic abdominal distention.
 The kidney is small, hyperechoic.
and surrounded by anechoic fluid.
This fluid is limited to the area sur-
rounding the kidney and is not pres-
A
B
ent within the peritoneal cavity.
These findings are indicative of
chronic renal disease with perirenal
fluid. Diagnosis: Chronic renal dis-
ease with subcapsular renal cyst.
C
D
FIG. 3-178 A 14-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat was
in renal failure. A longitudinal sono-
gram of the right kidney revealed
moderate to severe dilation of the
renal pelvis (RP). The renal
 parenchyma (K) reveals no evidence
of corticomedullary distinction and
has coarse architecture. There is fluid
in the subcapsular space (SCF). The
left kidney was very small with poor
internal architecture. Diagnosis:
Hydronephrosis, chronic renal dis-
ease, and subcapsular fluid accumu-
lation.
Excretory Urography
 Normal Findings. Excretory urography is helpful in defining ureteral lesions and is
superior to ultrasonography in this regard. In the normal EU, the ureters appear as narrow,
The ureters exit the renal pelvis medially and curl caudally after a very short distance. It is
unusual to see the entire length of the ureter on any one excretory urographic film. This is
because ureteral peristalsis propels the urine to the bladder. The width of the ureter should
vary due to ureteral peristalsis. As the ureters approach the bladder, they often extend
slightly caudal to their bladder entrance sites and curve back cranially just before entering
the trigone.
394
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-179 A 9-year-old female
Miniature Pinscher with lethargy for
2 weeks and having an arched back,
anorexia, and diarrhea for 2 days.
The lateral radiograph revealed a cal-
cfc density, shaped like the renal
pelvis, in the right renal pelvis (large
back arrow). There is a calcified
ureteral calculus seen ventral to L4
(small black arrow). Excretory urog-
raphy revealed that the ureteral cal-
culus was on the left side (see Fig.
3-182). Diagnosis: Left ureteral cal-
culus and right renal calculus (see
Fig. 3-181).
FIG. 3-180 A 4-year-old female
Miniature Poodle that was shot.
The lateral radiograph revealed
hydrothorax as well as the slug dorsal
to T12. The colon and intestines are
displaced ventrally by the retroperi-
toneal space, which is more tissue
dense than normal (usually of fat
density). Differential diagnoses
include retroperitoneal hemorrhage
or rupture of either a kidney or
ureter with leakage of urine.
Diagnosis: Ruptured right ureter
(see Fig. 3-186).
Abnormal Findings. The most common abnormality of the ureters demonstrated by
may also be rarely seen secondary to ureteral inflammation. The site of the lesion is usually
at the point where the ureteral size changes from dilated to normal. If only a portion of the
ureter is dilated, ureteral calculi, periureteral mass, retroperitoneal fibrosis, ureteral tumor,
ureteral stricture (spontaneous or postoperative), or focal or regional ureteral inflamma-
tion must be considered as diffrential diagnoses (Fig. 3-181). If the entire ureteral length
is dilated,the lesion probably is located at the trigone of the bladder (Fig. 3-182). Ureteral
) a no   n an   ida q  sn a o a
3-183 and 3-184). Ectopic ureters frequently are dilated. If the position of the ureter rela-
tive to the urinary bladder cannot be determined using simple excretory urography, an EU
 combined with a double-con trast cystogram is often helpful.$1-53s
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
395
FIG. 3-181 A 9-year-old female Miniature Pinscher with
lethargy for 2 weeks, having an arched back, anorexia,and diar-
rhea for 2 days. Survey radiographs revealed a large calculus in
the right renal pelvis and the suggestion of a calculusin the left
ureter. The excretory urogram revealed a severely dilated right
s as s in u n e ms 
the calculus (black arrow). The ureter distal to the pelvis is nor-
mal. The left kidney revealed a dilated renal pelvis and proximal
ureter (long white arrows) as well as diverticula. The ureteral
 dilation (small white arrows) ends at the level of the ureteral cal-
culus (open white arrow). Diagnosis: Right renal calculus and
left ureteral calculus with resultant proximal hydroureter and
hydronephrosis (see Fig. 3-179).
FIG. 3-18z A 14-year-old female
mixed breed dog with chronic hema-
turia. There is mild global enlarge-
ment of the left kidney and the
collecting system of the kidney and
the entire length of the ureter (white
arrows). The right kidney is quite
small with no discernible collecting
structures. There is a large flling
defect in the trigone region of the
bladder (black arrow). Differential
diagnoses for the right kidney
include congenital hypoplasia or
chronic atrophic pyelonephritis,
those for the left kidney include
obstructive uropathy or acute
pyelonephritis and ureteritis, and
those for the bladder include neopla-
sia
 or granuloma. Diagnosis:
Transitional cell carcinoma of the
 bladder with obstruction of the left
ureter and
1 chronic atrophic
 pyelonephritis of the right kidney.
396
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-183 An 8-month-old female
Poodle with urinary incontinence
since the owner adopted the dog (4
months). Survey radiographs were
normal. The excretory urogram
revealed the right ureter bypassed
the normal site of entry into the
bladder and extended to enter into
the vagina (black arrow). Diagnosis:
Ectopic right ureter.
FIG. 3-184 A 4-month-old female
German Shepherd dog with urinary
incontinence. A positive-contrast
cystogram and vaginogram (black v)
have been performed. The excretory
urogram revealed that the let ureter
penetrates the serosa of the bladder,
burrows through the submucosa,
and then exits and extends to enter
 into the urethra distal to the urinary
sphincter (black arrows). Diagnosis:
 Ectopic left ureter.
between the serosa and mucosa of the bladder wall. It will appear as a small focal dilation
of the ureter and there may be apparent narrowing of the ureter as it empties into the blad-
der. The ureterocele will produce a round contrast-containing structure at the trigone and
may produce a focal bladder wall mass or filling defect as the bladder fills with contrast. If
ectopic ureter or ureterocele is considered likely, such as in a case of a young, incontinent
female dog, it is helpful to distend the bladder with air and take multiple oblique views of
the pelvic area in addition to the routine views. In some cases, the ureter will penetrate the
bladder serosa, travel in the submucosa, and continue to some distant site of termination 
without spilling urine into the bladder (Fig. 3-185). Ectopic ureter may be unilateral or
bilateral. The presence of contrast within the urinary bladder does not rule out bilateral
ectopic ureters, because the bladder may fill with contrast retrograde from the urethra.
Repair of ectopic ureters usually requires surgical transplantation. Shortly after ureteral
 transplantation into the bladder there will be ureteral dilation. This is probably due to
 postsurgical inflammation, which creates a temporary partial ureteral stenosis. This change
usually will revert to normal condition over several months as the swelling subsides.
The accumulation of contrast medium in the retroperitoneal space identifies ureteral
rupture. The greatest concentration of contrast medium is noted at the level of rupture
(Fig. 3-186). Ureteral dilation may accompany ureteral rupture. Contrast also may accu-
peritoneum.
CHAPTER THREETHE ABDOMEN
397
FIG. 3-185 A l-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat with
incontinence since owned and cysti-
 tis for 3 months. Survey radiographs
were normal. The excretory urogram
revealed an ectopic right ureter
(black arrow), which penetrated the
serosa of the bladder in the trigone
 region and then dilated (ureterocele,
 open white arrow), and then entered
directly into the urethra (solid white
arrow) distal to the urinary sphinc-
 ter. Diagnosis: Right ureteral ectopic
with ureterocele.
FIG. 3-186 A 4-year-old female
Miniature Poodle that was shot.
Survey radiographs revealed an
increased density in the retroperi-
toneal space, hydrothorax, and a slug
lodged in the dorsal portion of the
cranial left abdomen (see Fig. 3-
180). The excretory urogram
revealed a normal left kidney.
 Nephrogram imaging of the right
kidney is poor (open black arrw).
The proximal ureter (sotid black
arrow) is opacifed and there is a
large amount of contrast medium
free in the soft tissues immediately
distal to it (open white arrow).
 Beyond this site the right ureter is
 not seen. Diagnosis: Ruptured right
ureter caused by a gunshot wound.
Ultrasonography of the Abnormal Ureter. Ultrasonography has limited application in
ureter that can be identified ultrasonographically unless the ureter is dilated tremen-
dously. When the ureter is enlarged, it may be traced beyond the renal pelvis but it often
is obscured quickly by the small intestines. The enlarged ureter may be identified
398
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
adjacent to the urinary bladder. The ureter will appear as an anechoic, linear, tubular
structure. If the ureter is identified easily during an ultrasonographic examination, it is
abnormal. Occasionally, a dilated ureter can be traced distally to the site of obstruction
(Fig. 3-187). In most cases, an EU willbe required to determine the cause of the ureteral
dilation. Dilation of the distal ureter may be identified as an anechoic or hypoechoic
 tubular structure extending laterally or dorsally from the bladder trigone. The opening
into the bladder may be visible. Tracing the ureter proximally from the bladder is
difficult.
 Focal dilation of the ureter may occur secondary to trauma. This dilation may become
large, producing an anechoic cystlike structure 540 These structures are usually round or
elliptical, show evidence of distant enhancement, have sharp margins, and may contain
thin septa. Renal pelvic dilation often is seen in conjunction with these ureteral dilations.
The lesion will fill with contrast if renal function and ureteral flow are adequate; however,
this is not usually the case. Ultrasonographically guided drainage may be performed, and
 contrast can be injected into the dilation after urine drainage.
RENAL AND URETERAL OVERVIEW
An approach to diseases of the upper urinary tract is to separate renal parenchymal disease
from renal pelvic and ureteral disease. Although this separation is based around excretory
urography, this differentiation is applicable to survey radiography and to ultrasonogra-
phy.421,474 Parenchymal diseases, assuming there is laboratory evidence of renal dysfunc-
tion, can then be classified on the basis of species, breed, age, and renal size, shape, position,
surface contour, radiopacity, and echogenicity. Similarly, abnormalities of the renal pelvis
and ureter may be classified based on gender, retroperitoneal status (e.g., focal mineral
densities, masses, or fluid infiltrates), size, shape, position, and relevant clinical signs (e.g-,
incontinence). Using this anatomical approach to interpretation fosters forming a list of
differential diagnoses that best fit the clinical and imaging circumstances. It also helps to
determine if additional imaging (e.g., computed tomography) beyond the general
sequence of survey radiographs followed by ultrasonography and/or excretory urography
is applicable.54l A knowledge of the diseases affecting theupper urinary tract is essential to
formulating a logical list of differential diagnoses with appropriate ranking by relative like-
lihood.540-592 Similarly, a relevant degree of familiarity with urolithiasis is essential not only
to making diagnosis of renal, ureteral, bladder, or urethral stones, but also to determining
FIG. 3-187 A 7-year-old Dalmatian
had flank pain and microscopic
hematuria. A longitudinal sonogram
of the left kidney reveals severe dila-
tion of the pelvis (P) with minimal
residual renal cortex (RC).The prox-
imal ureter (U) is dilated up to a site
where there is a hyperechoic struc-
ture  (calculus, C)within it.
Diagnosis: Ureteral calculus with
 obstructive uropathy.
RO
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
399
the risk of occurrence, risk of recurrence, and a reasonable estimate of which therapeutic
approach is applicable 593-607 Finall, a working knowledge of the proven and potential
familial and hereditary renal diseases in dogs (e.g., those affecting the Alaskan Malamute,
Alsatian, Basenji, Beagle, Bernese Mountain Dog, Bull Terrier, Cairn Terrier, Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel, Chinese Shar-Pei, Chow Chow, Cocker Spaniel, Doberman Pinscher,
   s  l   
Keeshond, Lhasa Apso, Miniature Schnauzer, Newfoundland, Norwegian Elkhound, Old
        
Tzu, Standard Poodle, Weimaraner, Wheaten Terrier [soft-coated] breeds) and the
Abyssinian cat is needed to establish whether the patient is at risk for such disease as well
 as to establish a prognosis once the diagnosis is made.608-680
URINARY BLADDER
 Normally, the bladder is a teardrop-shaped organ that is relatively firmly anchored by its
ligaments and the urethra to the caudal abdominal and pelvic areas. The size of the blad-
der varies considerably because of its distensibility however, normal bladders rarely extend
cranial to the umbilicus. Although diseases with identifiable survey radiographic findings
are uncommon, with the exception of radiopaque cystic calculi, there are several changes
in size, shape, density, or location that may be identified by contrast studies and correlated
with sets of differential diagnoses.
Density Changes. Changes in density may affect the wall or contents of the bladder. Most
cystic calculi are radiopaque, have irregular shapes, and are located in the “center" (most
dependent portion) of the bladder (Figs. 3-188 and 3-189). The density of the calculi
depends upon their size and their composition. The relative occurrence rates of the vari-
ous lower urinary tract calculi have been described.* Although the structure of a stone is
infrequently diagnostic as to its composition, there are some strongly suggestive shapes.
Calculi composed of silicates typically are shaped like children's toy jacks. If the calculus is
relatively large (e.g., >10 mm in diameter), smooth, round or ovoid, and the same or less
opaque than the ilial wing and laminated, it is most likely composed of triple phosphates
(struvite), particularly if seen in a female dog. However, struvite stones may form into a
FIG. 3-188 A 4-year-old female
mixed breed dog with chronic hema-
turia and stranguria. Survey radi-
ographs revealed a very large
laminated calcium density in the
bladder (black c). Diagnosis: Cystic
calculus (triple phosphate).
C
*References 594, 596, 599-602, 605, 607.
400
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-189 A 7-month-old female
domestic  short-haired  cat  with
stranguria and pollakiuria for 3
weeks. Survey radiographs reveal
multiple poorly calcified calculi
(white arrows) in the urinary blad-
der. Diagnosis: Multiple cystic cal-
culi.
multitude of shapes. Oxalate calculi do not commonly assume any particular shape, but
they often have a rough surface and are usually in the 3- to 8-mm diameter range. For their
size, they are more dense than struvite and often are equal to or greater than the ilial wing
opacity. There is a predominance of oxalate urocystoliths in middle-aged to older male
dogs. Cats usually have smaller uroliths and the oxalate mineral types are more common
in males, as well as neutered and older cats.68l Struvite stones are more common in 
younger and female cats. Multiple small calculi, also known as cystic sand, may be seen in
dogs or cats and can be clinically significant (Fig. 3-190). A radiograph obtained using a
horizontal x-ray beam with the patient standing may be useful in identifying small opaque
calculi or sand, because this material will form layers in the urinary bladder, thereby
increasing their opacity. If not contaminated with calcium salts, two types of calculi, uric
acid and cystine calculi, are usually radiolucent and not apparent on the survey film. Uric
acid stones, if visible at all, willbe poorly calcified, relatively small, and frequently have an
oblong appearance. Struvite calculi that are composed predominately of ammonium or
e paadsns are iie sune j ue aeu aq A aeudsoud uniu
double-contrast cystogram or ultrasonographic examination is indicated.
Dystrophic mineralization of the bladder mucosa may occur secondary to bladder
inflammation or tumor. In chronic severe cystitis, such as that seen secondary to adminis-
tration of cyclophosphamide, the bladder wall may appear as an eggshell-type of calcifica-
tion affecting only the mucosa (Fig. 3-191). In neoplasms, there may be focal areas of
dystrophic mineralization that usually appear as stippled or small foci of calcification in a
limited portion of the bladder (Fig. 3-192). Focal areas of bladder mineralization may be
differentiated from calculi because of their position. Calculi will tend to remain in the
 dependent portion of the urinary bladder and will move with changes in the patient's posi-
tion. Mural and polypoid mineralization will be fixed in position and will be constant
despite changes in the patient's position.43 Differentiating small ureteral calculi, which are
in the ureter at the trigone, from mineralization of the bladder wall can be difficult.
Gas densities may be seen occasionally in the bladder. The most common cause is the
introduction of a small amount of air when the bladder is catheterized. This produces a
small gas-dense bubble in the center of the bladder (Fig. 3-193). Emphysematous cystitis
may occur in animals (1) that have diabetes mellitus and a bladder infection caused by a
glucose-fermenting organism such as Escherichia coli or (2) with chronic cystitis, when the
 mucosa become hypoxic and infection with a gas-forming organism such as Clostridium
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
401
FIG. 3-190 An ll-year-old male
Miniature Schnauzer with chronic
hematuria. There is a finely stippled
calcific density in the entire bladder,
which is most prominent in the cen-
ter (most dependent portion, black
s). There is also prostatomegaly.
 Differential diagnoses include cystic
sand, calcifcation associated with
 neoplasia, or dystrophic calcification
of bladder mucosa. Diagnosis:
 Multiple small cystic calculi (cystic
sand).
S
FIG. 3-191 A 4-year-old male
German Shepherd dog with chronic
cystitis and tetraparesis and urinary
incontinence for 5 months. There is
diffuse calcified plaque formation of
the mucosa of the bladder and pro-
static urethra. Differential diagnoses
include dystrophic calcification of
the mucosa or calcification associ-
ated with neoplasia. Diagnosis:
Dystrophic calcification of urinary
mucosa.
linear streaking, air bubbles, or as a lucent halo outlining the bladder wall. There also may
be accumulation of gas within the bladder; this will appear as a large radiolucent bubble in
the center of the bladder or as multiple smaller bubbles. Air may dissect from the bladder
Size Changes. Recognition of abnormal bladder size is difficult because of the high degree of
normal variability. In some cases of chronic, partial, or nearly complete urinary obstruction,
the bladder may be enlarged severely such that its cranial border extends cranial to the
402
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-192 A 7-year-old female
Bichon Frise with hematuria for 3
months. The survey radiograph
revealed a finely stippled calcific
density (black arrow) that is limited
to the cranial and ventral portion of
the bladder on the lateral recumbent
view. Differential diagnoses include
calcification associated with neopla-
sia, cystic sand, or dystrophic calcifi-
cation of the mucosa. Diagnosiss
Calcification associated with transi-
tional cell carcinoma.
FIG. 3-193 An 8-year-old male
domestic short-haired cat with
chronic cystitis. There are two round
air densities in the center of the blad-
der (black arrows). These represent
small air bubbles introduced by
catheterization. Because the cat is
in right lateral recumbency the air
rose to highest level in the bladder;
radiographically this is in the
center of the bladder. Diagnosis:
Intravesicular air bubbles due to uri-
nary catheterization.
 umbilicus and the abdominal viscera are displaced cranially (Fig. 3-195). This may be extreme
enough to suggest hydroperitoneum due to the homogenous tissue density in the majority of
 the abdomen; identification of displaced abdominal viscera precludes ascites as the diagnosis.
 as   a aa as   s ss a
Occasionally, the external surface may be distorted due to a congenital anomaly (e.g,
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
403
FIG. 3-194 A 12-year-old female
Miniature Poodle with chronic dia-
betes mellitus and pollakiuria for 2
weeks. The survey radiograph
revealed a gas density dissecting
between the serosa and mucosa
(white arrows) of the bladder.
Differential
 diagnoses include
emphysematous cystitis due to glu-
cose-fermenting or anaerobic gas-
producing bacteria. Diagnosis:
Escherichia coli cystitis secondary to
diabetes mellitus.
FIG. 3-195 A 7-year-old female
Norwegian Elkhound with vaginal
exudate. The lateral radiograph
revealed a homogeneous tissue den-
sity throughout the majority of the
 abdomen. Scrutiny revealed that the
intestines and other abdominal vis-
cera had been displaced cranially.
 This indicated a large caudal abdom-
inal mass. A urinary catheter (white
arrows) was placed to define the
bladder. Differential diagnoses
include enlargement of the uterus,
severe bladder distention, or mass
arising from one of the caudal
abdominal organs. Diagnosis:
Severe bladder distention secondary
to chronic granulomatous urethritis.
urachal diverticulum), trauma (e.g., mucosal hernia), or bladder wall lesion (e.g., transi-
tional cell carcinoma).
Location Changes. On survey radiographs the bladder may be seen in an abnormal loca-
tion. The bladder may be displaced into the hernia sac in perineal, abdominal, or femoral
bladder are continent. The significance of pelvic bladder and its relationship to inconti-
nence is not clea686-688 Complete urethral transection distal to the urinary sphincter at the
404
SmALl ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-196 A, A 13-year-old female Siamese cat that was hit
by a car. There is a loss of contiguity of the ventral abdominal
stripe (rectus abdominis muscle) with a hazy density in the
tissue swelling ventral to it (white arrows). The bladder is not
identified in the abdomen. B, The cystogram portion of the
excretory urogram revealed that the bladder, along with some
gas-containing loops of small intestine (white arrow), is incor-
porated into the hernia sac. Diagnosis: Urinary bladder and
small intestine incorporated in traumatic inguinal hernia.
A
FIG. 3-197 A 6-year-old female
Miniature Poodle that was hit by a
mar. Survey radiographs revealed a
right coxofemoral luxation and gen-
eralized loss of detail throughout the
abdomen. Attempts to catheterize
the bladder were unsuccessful. The
excretory urogram revealed that the
kidneys, ureters, and bladder were
intact. However, the bladder,
although normally distensible, is
severely
displaced cranially.
Diagnosis: Avulsion of the urethra
from the urinary bladder distal to
the urinary bladder sphincter.
trigone of the bladder will result in the bladder retaining its normal size and shape but
being cranially displaced within the abdomen (Fig. 3-197). Enlargement of the prostate can 
 displace the bladder cranially.689-691
 s   d  s   po  
 to the location, shape, and integrity of the bladder; the thickness and regularity of the blad-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
405
der wall and the presence or absence of material within the contrast puddle on the dou-
ble-contrast cystogram.
Shape. Changes in the shape of the bladder may indicate the presence of a bladder diver
ticulum, persistent urachal remnant, localized mural or extramural inflammation, or neo-
plasm. Diverticula are protrusions of the lumen and cystic mucosa through a rent in the
serosa.692 They wil appear as extensions of either the gas or contrast medium beyond the
serosal border of the bladder but are contained within the bladder wall. These may be con-
genital or acquired as a result of trauma. The urachus normally involutes immediately after
birth to become the middle ligament of the bladder. When this occurs, the cranial wall of
the bladder remains regular and smooth. In some instances, involution is incomplete or the
urachal remnant becomes recanalized and provides an outpouching of the bladder lumen
on its cranioventral aspect (Fig. 3-198). Diverticula and persistent urachal remnants pro-
vide an area for urine retention and stagnation. This situation may predispose to chronic
cystitis but also can be the result of the dysuria from cystitis.
 Infiltrative tumors and granulomas (e.g., from a uterine stump) may interfere with
normal bladder distention and may alter the shape of the bladder. These also produce a
mass within the bladder lumen that is much more easily detected on a cystogram than is
the lack of bladder wall distensibility.
Bladder Wall Changes. Bladder wall changes are the most common cystographic abnor-
mality. The normal bladder wall appears very smooth and consistent in thickness, approx-
imately 1 to 2 mm. The appearance of even a few millimeters of increased thickness
compared with the rest of the bladder wall is significant. Bladder wall thickening and irreg-
ularity, which is associated with the inflammation of cystitis, usually is seen in the cranial
ventral aspect of the bladder (Fig. 3-199). One theory is that this site is predisposed to
change because it is normally the most dependent portion of the bladder; therefore bacte-
ria and other particulate matter tend to accumulate there. Another consideration is that it
may be the site most predisposed to retention of small amounts of urine and, therefore, to
the greatest exposure to toxic or inflammatory substances. The entire bladder circumfer-
ence may become thickened and irregular secondary to chronic inflammation. This is com-
mon in the sterile cystitis associated with cyclophosphamide therapy.693-695 Bladder wall
ulceration is most commonly associated with cystitis. The ulcers appear as small areas of
contrast medium adhering to the bladder wall (Fig. 3-200). However, when severe ulcera-
of bladder wall thickening is neoplasia. The most common tumor of the bladder is transi-
tional cell carcinoma. This is usually focal in nature but may, on occasion, be generalized
and diffuse. The mucosal surface may be smooth, but more commonly it is thrown up into
folds, with masses protruding into the lumen of the bladder. Occasionally, a focal tumor
may cause bladder wall thickening on the cranial ventral aspect of the bladder, making
FIG. 3-198 A l-year-old neutered
female domestic short-haired cat
with urinary tract infections for the
past 5 months. A, There is a projec-
tion of a tubular-shaped, soft-tissue
density extending from the apex of
the urinary bladder toward the
umbilicus (white arrows). B, The
double-contrast cystogram revealed
contrast medium within the tubular
structure (white arrow). Differential
diagnoses include persistent urachal
remnant or cystic diverticulum due
to other causes (trauma). Diagnosis:
 Persistent urachal remnant.
A
406
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 3-199 A,A 10-year-old neutered female mixed breed
dog with pollakiuria and hematuria for 2 months. Survey
radiographs were normal. The double-contrast cystogram
revealed mild thickening of the cranial ventral portion of
the bladder (white arrows). Differential diagnoses include
cystitis, cystic neoplasia, or cystic granuloma. Diagnosis:
Cystitis. B, A 9-year-old male domestic short-haired cat
with chronic hematuria. The lateral view of the positive-
contrast cystogram revealed marked thickening of the cra-
nial ventral part of the bladder. Contrast medium has
dissected partially through and under this mucosal thick-
ening. Diagnosis: Cystitis with the dissection of contrast
medium into the submucosa. C, A 5-year-old male
 Samoyed with chronic hematuria. The pneumocystogram
revealed multiple, focal tissue densities projecting into the
bladder lumen as well as marked thickening of the entire 
 bladder wall. Differential diagnoses include polypoid cysti-
tis and bladder neoplasia. Diagnosis: Polypoid cystitis.
P
B
C
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
407
FIG. 3-200 A 7-year-old female
Yorkshire Terrier with hematuria for
1 month. The survey radiographs
were normal. A double-contrast cys-
togram revealed an ulcer crater that
retained contrast medium when it
was on the nondependent surface
(black arrows). Differential diagnoses
include cystitis or neoplasia with a
mucosal ulcer. Diagnosis: Cystitis
with a mucosal ulcer.
differentiation from cystitis difficult; however, tumor is more common at other sites, par-
ticularly the trigone (Fig 3-201). Another tumor that may be identified radiographically is
the botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma. This tumor usually is seen in young dogs, those 1 to 4
years of age, and most commonly is located on the dorsal surface of the trigone of the blad-
der. It consists typically of cauliflower-shaped fingers of tissue protruding into the bladder
(od   a) dou jo s ra 6g(- ) 
may cause a smooth thickening of the wall but there usually is some degree of mucosal
 irregularity and, more commonly, a mass protruding into the bladder lumen (Fig. 3-203).
Polypoid cystitis produces a generalized thickening of the bladder mucosa. Multiple
smooth polypoid masses are evident throughout the entire bladder (see Fig. 3-199).700 Usually
the entire bladder wall is involved, which helps to differentiate this condition from tumors.
It usually is easy to differentiate bladder tumor from chronic cystitis based on the loca-
tion and appearance of the bladder wall irregularity. However, because pyogranulomatous
cystitis and urethritis may resemble an infiltrative tumor, a final diagnosis requires defini-
tive cytologic analysis or biopsy (Fig. 3-204). Lesions that are close to the area of the trigone
should be evaluated by means of an EU in addition to the cystogram in order to determine
the site of ureteral opening into the bladder. A common complication of trigonal lesions,
particularly tumors, is ureteral infiltration and secondary obstruction. This is especially
important if surgical removal of the bladder tumor is anticipated.
Another type of bladder wall change is a rupture or tear.7ol This is usually due to
trauma but occasionally is seen with other diseases. The tear will frequently develop a fib-
rin seal over the rent, which allows partial bladder filling. Eventually, bladder distention
stretches the bladder wall and this exceeds the strength of the fibrin seal. A sequence of par-
tial sealing and subsequent rupture develops, releasing urine into the abdominal cavity. To
assess bladder rupture by cystography, one must produce adequate distention to test for a
partial bladder seal. Positive-contrast cystography or excretory urography should be used
instead of pneumocystography if rupture of the urinary bladder is suspected. Detection of
air leakage in the presence of moderate or significant hydroperitoneum is difficult. The leak
will be detected readily when a positive-contrast medium is used, because there will clearly
be positive contrast distributed throughout the abdomen (Fig. 3-205). Bladder rupture
may be retroperitoneal or into the pelvic cavity. In those cases, the positive contrast will be
contained within the pelvic cavity or retroperitoneal space and may not diffuse into the
peritoneal cavity.
408
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTR
FIG. 3-201 A, A 14-year-old neutered female mixed breed dog
with hematuria for 4 months. The excretory urogram revealed
that there was a large sessle tissue-density mass (black arrows)
at the trigone ofthe bladder. Differential diagnoses include neo-
plasia. Diagnosis: Transitional cell carcinoma. B, A 9-year-old
neutered female Shetland Sheepdog with hematuria for4 weeks.
A double-contrast cystogram revealed multiple large, irregular
masses within the bladder that have irregular surfaces and are
 associated with a thickened bladder wall. Differential diagnoses
include bladder neoplasia, severe cystitis, or bladder granulo-
 mata. Diagnosis: Transitional cell carcinoma.
B
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
409
FIG. 3-202 A l-year-old male Irish
setter with hematuria and stranguria
for 5 months. Survey radiographs
were normal. A double-contrast cys-
togram revealed a cauliflower-like
mass at the bladder trigone.
Differential diagnoses include neo-
plasia or granuloma. Diagnosis:
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.
FIG. 3-203 A 13-year-old female
mixed breed dog with cystitis for 3
months. A and B, There is a focal
soft-tissue mass present in the apex
of the bladder (white arrows). There
is minimal to no thickening of the
bladder where it joins the borders of
the mass. The surface of the mass is
slightly irregular but not thrown into
 multiple folds. Differential diagnoses
 include neoplasia (benign polyp or
malignant transitional cell carci-
noma),adherent cystic blood clot,or
 granuloma. Diagnosis: Polyp in the
urinary bladder.
A
B
 Trauma to the bladder wall during cystography or bladder mucosa defects may result
in injection of contrast material beneath the bladder mucosa. This produces a linear accu-
mulation of contrast material that is fixed in position within the bladder despite changes
 medium will surround the bladder in the subserosal compartment. Either situation can be
observed as a result of vigorous bladder distention. It usually does not result in a serious
injury to the bladder and the contrast is absorbed gradually.
410
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
 Intraluminal Bladder Abnormalities. A double-contrast cystogram, our generally
recommended contrast procedure for evaluating the bladder, is the procedure of choice to
determine the presence of material within the bladder.568 On the double-contrast
cystogram the contrast puddle should be evaluated carefully. Air bubbles, if present, will be
radiolucent and usually are located at the periphery of the puddle due to capillary action.
If not on the periphery, the air bubbles usually are perfectly round (Fig. 3-206).
 Radiolucent calculi also produce filling defects in the puddle. Usually, these are irregularly
shaped, relatively small, and are found in the center of the contrast puddle, the most
FIG. 3-204 A 3-year-old female
Labrador mix with dysuria, hema-
turia, and stranguria. Contrast radi-
ographic fndings include mucosal
irregularity and varying degrees of
intramural thickening in the trigone
 of the urinary bladder and the prox-
imal portion of the urethra.
 Diagnosis: Pyogranulomatous cysti-
tis and urethritis.
FIG. 3-205 A 1-year-old female
German Shepherd dog that had been
hit by a car. A, There are fracture
fragments from the pelvic floor cra-
nial to the pubis. There is a general-
ized loss of contrast throughout the
abdomen and there is a dynamic
ileus. A catheter is in the urinary
bladder and air has been instilled. A
minimally distended, apparently
 intact bladder (white *) is seen. Very
careful examination revealed the
serosal margins of some dilated
 small intestinal loops were apparent
(black arrows), which indicates leak-
 age of air into the abdomen.
Continued
A
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
411
dependent portion of the bladder (Fig. 3-207). Small, minimally opaque or radiolucent cal-
culi may be overlooked in a pneumocystogram, but unless a large amount of positive con-
tast is ued thyareidentifd easily onaoublecontrast ystogram433,5lood cts
may be seen in the center of the contrast puddle and may be round, wedge-shaped, or
irregularly shaped filling defects with very smooth, distinct borders. They are usually larger,
in some cases markedly larger, than most radiolucent calculi (Figs. 3-208 and 3-209). Blood
clots usually will move with changes in the patient's position, and this helps to distinguish
them from tumors, which are fixed in location.433 when blood clots are noted with no
FIG. 3-205 cont'd B, An excretory
urogram, performed the next day
after a Foley urinary catheter and an
abdominal drain were placed,
revealed obvious leakage of contrast
medium into the abdominal cavity
from the urinary bladder. This
demonstrated the superiority of pos-
 itive-contrast techniques in assessing
possible tears in the urinary tract.
Diagnosis:
Ruptured
urinary
bladder.
B
FIG. 3-206 A 4-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat with pol-
lakiuria and hematuria for 2 weeks.
The survey radiograph results were
normal. A double-contrast cys-
au pd sm uan
by
 instilling contrast medium
followed by air. The study revealed
multiple filling defects in the
contrast media. Some are nearly per-
fectly round and on the periphery of
the contrast, which suggests that
they are air bubbles (white arrow).
 Others are somewhat irregular, sug-
 gesting that they are radiolucent cys-
tic calculi (black arrow). Diagnosis:
 Multiple radiolucent calculi.
412
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND UlTRaSONOGRaPHY
A
B
FIG. 3-207 A, A 4-year-old neutered male domestic short-haired cat with chronic hematuria and
stranguria. There are two metal clips noted on the survey view, presumably from the previous cas-
tration. No abnormalities are noted. B, The double-contrast cystogram revealed mild thickening of
the cranial ventral portion of the bladder, two irregularly ovoid filling defects within the puddle that
stayed in the dependent portion regardless of positioning, and a small contrast-filled diverticulum
(white arrow) offthe cranial border of the bladder. Diagnosis: Radiolucent cystic calculi (magnesium 
and ammonium phosphate), cystitis, and cystic diverticulum.
FIG. 3-208 A 4-year-old female
mixed breed dog with hematuria for
6 weeks. A and B, The double-con-
trast cystogram revealed a smallfill-
 ing defect within the contrast puddle
on both views. This indicated that
the mass is moveable within the
bladder. The smooth borders and
size suggest that a calculus is
unlikely. Differential diagnoses
include blood clot or calculus.
Diagnosis: Intravesicular blood clot
secondary to hematuria from a right
 renal adenocarcinoma.
A
B
other bladder abnormalities, the kidneys should be examined carefully because they are
sometimes the source of the hemorrhage. Other material, such as strands of mucus or
other cellular debris, may be noted. Mucus usually will produce thin, linear filling defects.
Cellular debris may produce small amorphous flling defects (Fig. 3-210).
 Several foreign bodies have been described within the urinary bladder.702 Some of 
 these, such as air rifle pellets, are radiopaque and can be identified on the noncontrast radi-
ograph. Others, such as fragments of urinary catheters or migrating plant awns, can be
detected only by cystography. Catheter fragments produce a filling defect within the con-
trast puddle during double-contrast cystography. A pair of parallel radiolucent lines with
      (  a  a  
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
413
FIG. 3-209 An 8-year-old neutered male Siamese cat with
chronic hematuria. There is a very large flling defect within
the center of the contrast puddle. The bladder wall shows
 moderate irregularity and thickening consistent with cysti-
tis. Differential diagnoses include intravesicular blood clot,
neoplasm, or radiolucent calculus. Diagnosis: Intravesicular
blood clot secondary to hematuria due to cystitis.
FIG. 3-210 A 2-month-old male
Akita with hematuria and stran-
guria. There is mild thickening of the
bladder with irregular mucosal
thickening and small linear and
round defects within the puddle of
contrast media. Differential diag-
noses include cystitis with intracystic
debris or neoplasia. Diagnosis:
 Cystitisand intracystic debris (excess 
mucus and desquamated epithe-
lium).
414
fragments.433 Although plant awns are uncommon,they wil produce an irregularly shaped
filling defect with distinct margins within the contrast puddle.
Position of the Urinary Bladder. Occasionally, the location of the bladder may not be appar-
ent on the survey radiograph. This may be due to displacement of the bladder into a hernia, a
very small bladder, or confusion of the bladder with other caudal abdominal masses.703-707 A
cystogram may be helpful in these cases to clearly identify the location of the urinary bladder.
A pneumocystogram usually is sufficient for this purpose. If the bladder is displaced into a her-
nia, the catheter should be passed carefully to avoid traumatizing the urethra. Retroflexion of
the bladder can be recognized from the position of the urethra. The urethra will fold back
upon itself and the vertex of the urinary bladder will be caudal to the bladder neck. Positioning
of the bladder neck within the pelvic canal can be demonstrated during a contrast cystogram.
If the bladder does not displace cranially as it is distended, the possibility of a pelvic bladder
should be considered. The significance of this is controversial, although in some female dogs
Utrasonography of the Abnormal Bladder. Ultrasonography works best when the blad-
der is distended with urine, is within the abdominal rather than the pelvic cavity, and is not
obscured by intestinal contents. It is ideally suited for evaluating the bladder wall and
lumen.47,48,714-723
The bladder can be differentiated easily from other caudal abdominal masses such as
the prostate, a retained testicle, a lymph node, or the uterus. On the other hand, it may be
difficult to distinguish between the urinary bladder and a paraprostatic cyst or other uro-
fies the cyst as a distinct structure separate from the urinary bladder that can be traced to
the region of the prostate gland. A uterus flled with fluid may also mimic a urinary blad-
der; however, identifying both uterine horns, multiple fluid-filled loops, or recognizing the
tubular shape of the uterus will help discriminate among these structures. If necessary, a
contrast cystogram can be used to confirm sonographic suspicions about the relationship
of caudal abdominal cavities to the urinary bladder.
The shape of the bladder is influenced by transducer pressure and by regional
structures beneath or against it as well as from distortion of normal bladder wall
structures528,29,92,7Consequently, a careful examinationof theblader frm all angls
is important before a diagnosis of an abnormally shaped bladder is made. True bladder
shape alteration usually is accompanied by bladder wall abnormalities, such as thickening
or irregularity, so the diagnosis is less difficult.
Cystitis, bladder wall hemorrhage, and tumors produce similar bladder wall abnormal.
ities (Fig. 3-211).724 Cystitis may involve the entire bladder circumference and may pro-
duce a thickened bladder wall with a submucosal hypoechoic zone (Figs. 3-212 to 3-214).
More often, cystitis produces a focal bladder wall thickening at the cranioventral aspect of
the bladder. A urachal diverticulum may be identified during the ultrasonographic exami-
nation as a focal defect in the bladder wall. The wall usually is thickened and iregular and
the anechoic urine helps to define the defect. Most urachal diverticula are small, and
detecting them using ultrasonography and distinguishing them from cystitis are difficult.
The fibrotic remnant of the closed urachus has been identified as a heteroechoic structure
extending cranially from the bladder wall. This probably represented an abnormal urachus
that was not patent at the time of the examination.
Usually, tumors can be detected easily as heteroechoic structures protruding into the
bladder lumen (Figs. 3-215 and 3-216). The attachment of the mass to the bladder wall is
often abrupt, and thickening of the bladder wall at the site of attachment usually can be
recognized.7is Differentiating between an attached blood clot and a bladder tumor may be
impossible.717
Afocal area of bladder wall thickening may be observed at the trigone of the bladder. This
 is the ureteral papillae and should not be mistaken for a focal mass or polyp. Careful exami-
nation using high-frequency transducers permits identification of the ureter within the blad-
der wall or allows detection of the jet of urine that enters the bladder from the ureter (see
Figs. 3-22 to 3-24).
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
415
FIG.3-zl1 Transverse (A and B) and
longitudinal (C and D) sonograms
of the urinary bladder of a 5-year-
 old female Rottweiler with a history
of pyrexia and anorexia of 10 days
duration. There is marked thicken-
ing of the bladder wall. The entire
 bladder was involved. This is indica-
tive of an inflammatory or infiltra-
tive lesion of the bladder. Diagnosis:
A
B
Lymphoma.
FIG. 3-212 Longitudinal (A, B, and 
 D) and transverse (C) sonograms of
the urinary bladder of an 8-year-old
spayed female Australian Shepherd
with a history of autoimmune
hemolytic anemia, which had been
treated with cyclophosphamide for 3
months. The bladder wall is thick-
ened and the contour is irregular.
This is indicative of chronic cystitis.
B
Diagnosis:
Cyclophosphamide
cystitis.
D
 Intraluminal objects, such as crystals, cells, calculi, blood clots, and air bubbles, may be
observed during the ultrasonographic examination.7l7 Crystalline material, cels, air bub-
bles, and fat globules can be observed floating within the usually anechoic urine. Agitation 
of the bladder will increase the movement of these structures. Air bubbles may produce
reverberation artifacts, or comet tails, that help to distinguish them from other floating
objects. They eventually will float to the top of the urinary bladder. A large amount of air 
416
FIG. 3-213 Longitudinal (A to D) and transverse (E
and F) sonograms ofthe urinary bladder of a 9-year-
old spayed female Schnauzer with a history of vom-
iting and diarrhea of l week duration. There is a
hyperechoic structure within the urinary bladder.
The bladder wall is slightly thickened. This is indica-
tive of cystitis with a cystic calculus. Diagnosis:
Cystitis and cystic calculus.
A
B
C
D
E
E
present within the urinary bladder, either from catheterization or from emphysematous
cystitis, can interfere with the ultrasonographic examination. The air is recognized easily
because it is highly echogenic and produces reverberation artifacts. Moving the patient will
help to discriminate between air in the lumen, which moves, versus air in the bladder wall,.
which is fixed. Crystals and cells eventually settle to the dependent part of the urinary blad-
der and can form a thick layer if present in large numbers. Although crystals tend to pro-
duce brighter echoes than cells, an exact diagnosis is difficult.
Urinary catheters produce paired parallel hyperechoic lines within the urinary bladder
(Fig. 3-217). When a Foley catheter is in place, the balloon is recognized easily because of 
its shape.
 Blood clots settle to the dependent portion of the urinary bladder and will move with
 changes in the patient's position. Blood clots are heteroechoic and may be confused with
bladder tumors.717 Movement of the patient and the resulting change in position of the
heteroechoic mass helps determine that the lesion is a free, intraluminal blood clot rather
than a sesile, atached neoplasm (Fig. 3-218). Ultrasonographically guided catheterbiopsy
is a useful technique to clarify the radiographic and ultrasonographic findings using cyto-
logic and histologic sampling.725
Urinary calculi are hyperechoic and often cause shadows (Figs. 3-213, 3-214, 3-219, and
3-220). Although shadowing is not always present, when identified it indicates the presence
of calculi. Calculi settle to the dependent portion of the bladder and move with agitation
of the bladder or changes in patient position (Fig. 3-221). The colon can produce a hyper-
echoic shadow adjacent to the urinary bladder and can appear to be within the bladder.
Examinationof thbladdefromseveraldiffrent anglewillprevent thismista0
 Bladder wall mineralization can be identified as a hyperechoic area within the bladder,
which also forms a shadow. The lesion will be fixed in location when the patient is moved
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
417
FIG. 3-214 Longitudinal sonograms
of the urinary bladder of a 5-year-
old female mixed breed dog with a
history of hematuria and dysuria of
3 weeks duration. The bladder wall is
thickened. Mineral material is pres-
ent in the dependent portion of the
bladder. The findings are indicative
of cystitis with fine sand, or calculi.
Diagnosis: Cystitis with multiple
 small cystic calculi.
FIG. 3-215 Longitudinal (A to C)
and transverse (D) sonograms of the
urinary bladder of a 12-year-old
 spayed female mixed bred dog who
was brought in for evaluation of a
 cutaneous hemangiosarcoma. The
dog was otherwise asymptomatic
and the ultrasonographic examina-
tion was performed to investigate the
 possibility of abdominal neoplasia.
There is a hyperechoic well-defined
A
B
mass attached to the dorsal bladder
wall. This mass appears to be pedun-
culated and remained fixed in posi-
tion despite movement of the
PUR
 patient. This is indicative of a blad-
der mass. Diagnosis: Hemangioma.
心
418
SmAll ANimAl RADlOlOGY AND ULTRaSONOGRaPHY
FIG. 3-z16 Transverse (A and B)
and longitudinal (C and D) sono-
 grams of the urinary bladder of a 10-
year-old male mixed breed dog with
a history of stranguria, hematuria,
and incontinence of 3 months dura-
tion. There is a heteroechoic mass
associated with the right dorsal blad-
der wall. This mass is fixed in posi-
tion and represents a tumor.
Diagnosis:  Transitional cell carci-
A
noma.
C
FIG. 3-z17 Longitudinal sonograms
of the urinary bladder of a 13-year-
old spayed female Pit Bull with a his-
tory of hematuria that was
secondary to a transitional cell carci-
noma of the bladder. The dog was
undergoing chemotherapy. There is
an echogenic structure composed of
two parallel lines located within the
urinary bladder. This represents a
urinary
catheter.
Diagnosis:
Catheter within the urinary bladder.
 or the bladder is agitated, and this helps to determine that the lesion is within the bladder
wall rather than within the lumen.
Air within the urinary bladder produces a hyperechoic lesion that can be recognized as air
rather than mineral, because it floats to the top, the nondependent surface, of the urinary
bladder and produces a comet-tail artifact (see Fig. 3-221) If the air is trapped within the blad-
der wall, such as in emphysematous cystitis, the reverberation artifact will still occur and the
lesion can be recognized as air despite that it does not change position in response to gravity.
URETHRA
 In the male and female dog the urethra differs greatly in length, although in cats its length is
constant diameter connecting the bladder neck to the urethral orifice. Abnormalities detectable
 on survey radiographs are limited. The spectrum of urethral disease mandates specific diag-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
419
( Pe V) 3s3 8- 51
DEUTE
and longitudinal (B and D) sono-
 grams of the urinary bladder of a 4-
year-old male Great Dane with a
history of hematuria of 4 months
duration. There is an echogenic mass
within the urinary bladder. The mass
changes position and shape with
changes in the dog's position and
always remains in the dorsal
A
B
(dependent) portion of the urinary
 bladder. This indicates that the mass
is not arising from or attached to the
 bladder wall and therefore represents
6519
a blood clot rather than a bladder
DEPTH
wall mass. Diagnosis: Blood clot in 
GNER
the urinary bladder.
D
FIG. 3-219 A to C, Longitudinal
sonograms of the urinary bladder of
 an ll-year-old female Dachshund
with a history of abdominal disten-
tion and polycythemia. There is a
highly echogenic cystic calculus visi-
 ble in all three images Shadowing is
 present deep to the cystic calculus. It
is most obvious in the frst image
(white arrows), is less evident in B,
and there is no shadowing observed
in C. Diagnosis: Cystic calculus.
B
C
the base of the os penis in the male dog, or at the urethral papilla in the female dog (Fig. 3-222).
Urethral calculi usually lodge in the distal penile urethra in the cat. Occasionally, fractures of
the os penis may be seen, and if significant callus has formed this may interfere with urination.
 A urethrogram is required in many urethral diseases to characterize the lesions that are
d  e si a ie hu ns m 'n r aa n 
brim in the male dog. The appearance of the prostatic portion of the urethra will
vary depending on whether the retrograde study is performed with the bladder distended
420
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-220 A to D, Longitudinal
 sonograms of the urinary bladder of
PU
a 4-year-old spayed female English
5A:
Cocker Spaniel with a history of
lumbosacral pain. There is echogenic
material in the dependent portion of
the urinary bladder. In scans A and
 D the material is predominantly lay-
ered on the dorsal (dependent) sur-
face (arrows). In scans B, C, and D
the bladder has been agitated and the
A
B
material is evident floating within
the urine. Diagnosis: Sand, or fine
alculi, within the urinary bladder.
150
C
FIG. 3-221 Longitudinal (A and B)
and transverse (C and D) sonograms
of the urinary bladder of a 14-year-
old spayed female mixed breed dog
with a history of polyuria and poly-
dipsia. There is a hyperechoic region
within the urinary bladder with a
reverberation artifact indicating the
 presence of air. This region was con-
sistent in position despite changes in
the dog's position. It is indicative of
air within the bladder wall.
 Diagnosis: Emphysematous cystitis.
A
C
D
(Fig. 3-223).457 The colliculus seminalis may be noticeable as a dorsal filling defect in the
 prostatic urethra (Fig. 3-224).466 In some normal male dogs, the prostatic urethra may
appear narrow but the borders will be smooth and regular. This is considered to be a func-
tion of the intraurethral versus the extraurethral pressure.
Density and Shape Changes. Radiolucent urethral calculi may be seen on the urethrogram
(Fig. 3-225). These will appear as irregularly shaped radiolucencies, usually small ones, within 
the column of contrast media.717 It is important that proper urethrographic technique is fol-
lowed so that air bubbles are not introduced during contrast injection and mistaken for cal-
CHAPTER THREE THEABDOMEN
421
FIG. 3-222 A 6-year-old male
Miniature Schnauzer with chronic
hematuria and acute stranguria.
There are radiodense calculi visible
in the bladder. There are also calculi
seen in the urethra at the level of the
os penis (white arrow). Healed pelvic
fractures are noted as an incidental
finding. Diagnosis: Cystic and ure-
thral calculi.
culi. Air bubbles are usually smooth and round or oval in shape. They may fill the urethra but
do not distend it, and when they are large they become more oval or elongated rather than dis-
 torting the urethral lumen. Calculi are often more iregular in shape with uneven margins.
When they are large they wildistort the urethral contour43,453 Although not totally reliable
differentiating feature, air bubbles often are easily displaced during successive contrast injec-
tions, while calculi tend to remain in a fixed position. Radiolucent calculi can be detected dur
ing urethral catheterization, and the contrast urethrogram is performed to document or
 determine the number and location of the calculi that are present.
Rupture of the urethra may occur as a result of trauma, including iatrogenic trauma,
or tearing by urethral calculi. In urethral rupture, the urethrogram will reveal extravasation
of contrast medium from the lumen (Fig. 3-226). If the rupture involves the distal urethra
in males, the contrast medium may be seen entering the corpus cavernosum urethra where
it will appear as if in multiple small contiguous compartments. It may be possible to see the
d au jo sua a o wsis es a yn p sq  sn
area. If the tear occurs proximal to the level where the corpus cavernosum joins the ure-
thra, the contrast will be seen in the periurethral tissues, dissecting along fascial planes or
accumulating within the pelvic canal.
Urethral carcinoma and granulomatous urethritis are most commonly seen in the
female dog.729-739 These usually are manifested by focal or diffuse irregularity of the ure-
thral lumen (Fig. 3-227). They are nearly impossible to differentiate radiographically, and
exfoliative cytology may be necessary to reach a diagnosis.738 In some cases of neoplasia,
the lesion is predominately in the periurethral area. This produces displacement of the nor-
mal urethral position, but a normal smooth mucosal surface persists. Urethral neoplasia is
seen occasionally in the male dog (Fig. 3-228).433,453,739
ture, surgery, or inflammation, may be seen as an area of decreased urethral lumen size
with a normal urethral mucosal pattern (Fig. 3-229). Because the contrast injection is made
retrograde, the urethra will be dilated distal to the site of urethral stricture or narrowing.
Usually, the point of narrowing must be documented on two views or two contrast injec-
tions so that urethral spasm is not mistaken for a stricture. The urethra is normally nar-
rower at the pelvic brim and at the ischial arch. These should not be confused with
strictures. If a questionable area is detected, the catheter should be positioned as close as
possible to the suspicious area and a contrast injection performed at that location.
422
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND UlTRaSONOGRaPHY
FIG. 3-223 A and B, A middle-aged,
dinically normal Beagle dog was
studied as part of a series of normal
dogs for distention retrograde ure-
thral  morphology.  Radiographic
fndings include a normally dilated
prostatic portion of the urethra with
an  otherwise uniform-diameter,
smooth-surfaced
urethra.
Diagnosis: Normal male canine dis-
tention urethrogram.
B
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
423
FIG. 3-224 A 4-year-old
male
Weimaraner with hematuria. The
urethrogram was within normal lim-
its. The apparent narrowing through
the prostatic urethra is normal.
Differential diagnoses include nor-
mal or prostatic disease; the urethro-
gram findings may be normal in the
face of early prostatic pathology.
Diagnosis: Normal urethrogram.
FIG.3-225 A 12-year-old male mixed breed dog with pollakiuria
and hematuria for 3 weeks and tenesmus for 1 week. A, The sur-
vey radiograph revealed no gross abnormalities. B, The urethro-
gram revealed an iregularlybordered flling defect (white arrow)
in the urethra in the area of the ischial arch. Differential diag-
Diagnosis: Radiolucent urethral calculus.
A
B
424
SMALl ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-226 A 10-year-old male
Poodle with urinary obstruction,
pyrexia, and swelling of the inguinal
 and perineal areas. There were three
radiopaque calculi located approxi-
mately 2 cm proximal to the base of
the os penis as well as several cystic
calculi seen on the survey radi-
ograph. The urethrogram revealed
extravasation of contrast medium
into the corpus cavernosum urethra
(white arrow) at the site of the ure-
thral calculi. The urethra proximal to
this is narrowed, which may be the
result of urethral spasm or peri-
urethral   edema 
orfibrosis.
Diagnosis: Ruptured urethra sec-
ondary to urethral calculi, urethral
 spasm, and cystic calculi.
Congenital anomalies, such as urethrorectal fistulas, urethral diverticula, and duplicate
observed entering the abnormal location if a fistula is present.74l Urethral diverticula ae
easily identified as outpouchings of the urethra that contain contrast material. These out-
pouchings should be consistent on two views or on the same view after two separate con-
trast injections.
Urethral Ultrasonography. The urethra does not lend itself to ultrasonographic exami-
nation because it is contained within the pelvic canal. The prostatic urethra may be
observed as an anechoic linear or oval area within the prostate if the prostate gland can be
visualized.54,57 In most cases, the prostatic urethra is not identified in its entirety. Calculi
may be identified within the urethra as hyperechoic focal lesions that cause shadows. This
is rarely observed, however, and is not necessary for the diagnosis or evaluation of urinary
calculi. Urethral carcinoma may extend onto the bladder neck, and this lesion may be iden-
tified using ultrasonography 716 An increase in the urethral diameter producing a heteroe-
choic round or oval structure without an increase in the size of the urethral lumen usually
is observed in these cases.
OVERVIEW LOWER URINARY TRACT
The techniques and diseases relevant to the lower urinary tract have been described in the
preceding sections. However, some perspective is necessary. First, there is no one lower uri-
nary tract contrast procedure that can identify all abnormalities. Therefore one of the
authors recommends using a lower urinary tract contrast series that includes a pneumo-
cystogram, lateral view only; a double-contrast cystogram, one lateral and ventrodorsal
view at a minimum, with the opposite recumbency lateral view and a dorsoventral view
considered as options if there are questions; a positive-contrast cystogram, lateral and ven-
trodorsal views; and either a voiding or retrograde urethrogram, lateral and ventrodorsal
 ns a o s s s s smn (sp   )
ographs, such as suspicious bladder radiopacities, that disappear on the pneumocys-
togram. These opacities would reappear as filling defects on the double-contrast study.
Some equivocation is expected with lower urinary tract imaging techniques, but this series
eliminates unnecessary confusion.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
425
FIG. 3-227 A, A 12-year-old female mixed breed dog with
chronic stranguria. There was marked irregularity of the ure-
thra with multiple filling defects in both views. Differential
diagnoses include urethritis or urethral neoplasia. Diagnosis:
Chronic urethritis. B, An ll-year-old neutered female German
Shepherd with stranguria for 2 months. There was marked tor-
tuosity of the urethra with marked mucosal irregularity that
extended into the bladder. Differential diagnoses include ure-
thral neoplasia, inflammation, or periurethral fibrosis.
Diagnosis: Transitional cell carcinoma involving the bladder
and urethra.
A
B
Double-contrast techniques typically are thought of as useful for identification of
lower urinary tract filing defects, particularly calculi. However, by varying the concen-
tration of the contrast medium used, most oxalate urocystoliths can be differentiated
 from most struvite urocystoliths.437 By using a double-contrast solution with 80 mg
iodine per ml, most of the oxalate urocystoliths will become isoopaque (e.g., disappear)
within the contrast puddle. This can be useful for prediction of urocystolith mineral
type, but it can be a problem if a contrast medium solution is too dilute when used to
identify urocystoliths.
As ultrasonography becomes more popular, there is the difficult decision as to whether
ultrasonography or contrast radiography should be used for urinary bladder lesions,
whether intraluminal or intramural. Although there are currently no objective compara-
tive data on ultrasonography versus contrast cystography for bladder masses, there are data
426
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-228 A 9-year-old
male
Samoyed with stranguria for 3
weeks. The urethrogram revealed
irregularity to the urethral mucosa
 immediately distal to the ischial arch
(solid white arrows) as well as cavita-
tion of the prostate (open white
arrows) and prostatic enlargement.
Differential diagnoses include pro-
static neoplasia with extension to the
urethra or cavitating prostatitis and
urethritis. Diagnosis: Prostatic car-
cinoma  with extension down the
urethra.
FIG. 3-229 A 7-year-old male
Cocker Spaniel with chronic stran-
guria. The urethrogram revealed
narrowing of the urethra proximal to
the os penis (white arrows), which
was present on multiple views. The
differential diagnoses include ure-
thral neoplasia or periurethral fibro-
sis. Diagnosis: Periurethral fibrosis.
for urocystolith detection. It can be summarized by saying that even under simulated ideal
conditions (e.g., no patient motion, bladder adequately distended), ultrasonography at best
matched contrast radiography for detection of urocystoliths.438 However, it did not pro-
vide any useful architectural insight that would help predict the mineral type of the uro-
cystoliths. Therefore ultrasound users must be aware of the potential shortcomings and
realize that for these reasons as well as the inability to image the urethra using ultrasonog-
 raphy, contrast radiographic techniques are far from antiquated.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
427
FIG. 3-230 A,A l-year-old male Siberian Husky with
chronic hematuria. The retrograde urethrogram
revealed filling of a second tubular structure (black
arrows) that arises near the prostate and extends to
the area of the distal urethra. There are no septations
that would indicate leakage of contrast medium into
the corpus cavernosum urethra. B, A voiding ure-
throgram of the distal penis revealed the normal ure-
thral orifice (open white arrow), contrast medium in
the space between the penis and prepuce (black
arrows), and the termination of the second tubular
structure on the distal prepuce (solid white arrow).
Diagnosis: Incomplete duplicate urethra. C, A 5-
 year-old male Lhasa Apso that had a cystotomy for
cystic calculi 1 year prior to examination. The dog
had been pollakiuric and passing “sand" for 1 day.
The survey radiographs were normal. A retrograde
urethrogram revealed a small radiolucent calculus
(solid white arrow) at the ischial arch and a blind
ended extension of the urethra into the soft tissues
(open white arrow). Diagnosis: Radiolucent urethral 
calculus and urethral diverticulum.
A
B
C
GENITAL SYSTEM
 Contrast techniques, such as vaginography and hysterosalpingography, to visualize
portions of the female genital system have been described but are not used rou-
tinely5747aingrahyhabenusd tmnstrat etopic ureter dint
contrast is injected into the vagina, allowing for the demonstration of flow into the urethra
and into the ectopic ureter. This technique is also useful to identify vaginal clefts, vaginal
strictures, vaginal masses, and vaginal lacerations (Fig. 3-231),749-756
428
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND UiTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-231 A 3-year-old female
 Rhodesian Ridgeback with inability
to accept a male at breeding despite
being in heat. Contrast vagino-
 graphic findings include nondis-
tendible area (arrow) between the
vestibule and the vagina. Survey
radiographic fndings were normal.
Diagnosis: Vaginal stricture.
FIG. 3-232 A 14-year-old female
Collie with polyuria and polydipsia
for 3 months and a palpablyenlarged
 spleen. There is a soft tissue-dense
mass (black arrows) caudal to the left
kidney.  Differential
diagnoses
include enlarged left ovary, intestinal
mass, or mesenteric lymph node.
Diagnosis: Left ovarian papillary
adenocarcinoma.
ABNORMAL FINDINGS
OVARIES
 Although normally not radiographically visible, the ovaries, which are located just caudal to
 the kidneys, may enlarge. Cysts and neoplasia are the more common causes of enlargement,
but hemorrhage must also be considered as a cause of ovarian enlargement (Fig. 3-232). The
position of the adjacent kidney is an important clue to the presence of an ovarian mass,
because the kidney may be cranially and laterally displaced. Malignant ovarian tumors com-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
429
FIG. 3-233 A 7-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat with
anorexia for 2 days. The lateral radi-
ograph revealed massive uterine
enlargement that displaced the
abdominal organs cranially and
slightly dorsally. Differential diag-
noses include uterine enlargement
(pregnancy, pyometra, or mucome-
tra), distention of the urinary blad-
der, or mass arising from the caudal
abdominal
organs.
Diagnosis:
Pyometra.
monly are accompanied by a large amount of peritoneal fluid, usually due to tumor seeding
of the peritoneum, and this masks their presence. It must be remembered that the ovaries are
intraperitoneal. Therefore, depending on the size of the ovarian mass, it may be indistin-
guishable from bowel and it will migrate to a position adjacent to the bowel. Mineralization
may be seen in ovarian masses, but it is not a reliable indicator of whether the mass is malig-
UTERUS AND VAGINA
The uterus is not readily visualized by radiography unless it becomes enlarged.s0,757 In a fat
dog, the uterine body may be visible dorsal to or superimposed upon the bladder and ventral
to the colon on the lateral radiograph. When enlarged, the uterus becomes visible as a tubu-
lar soft-tissue structure that displaces the small intestine cranially, dorsally, and toward the 
midline. The uterus folds upon itself and appears oval or sausage shaped. Although fluid-
flled distended loops of intestine may create a similar appearance, the presence of gas within
and distended small intestines. Uterine disease may be classified according to primary
changes in uterine location, such as torsion and herniation, and primary changes in the uter-
partum,hemorrhage,infection such as pyometra or endometritis, accumulationof secretions
such as mucometra or hydrometra, subinvolution, or neoplasia (Fig. 3-233).769-797 In both
the dog and the cat the differentiation of these conditions may be difficult based solely on
radiographic signs. If the cervix is open, allowing the uterus to drain, or if it is early in the
 proces, the uterus may not be readily apparent. In these instances, abdominal compression
urinary bladder often allows the uterine body to become visible because it cannot be dis-
placed. Although pyometra usually involves the entire uterus, only one horn or only one por-
tion of one horn may be affected. Local or segmental uterine enlargement may be due to
segmental pyometra, neoplasia, granuloma, and retained fetal or placental remnants. In cats,
uterine infection may cause a series of segmental enlargements that mimic pregnancy (Fig.
sseu e se pazusosai aq Aeu sie pue saop paeds u duns suan u jo uou (e-
between the colon and urinary bladder (Fig. 3-236). Tumors of the uterus may appear to be
focal masses, a segmental horn, or diffuse enlargement depending on whether or not the mass
limits passage of uterine contents (Fig. 3-237).
can be technically difficult and require infusion of contrast medium through the cervix or
retrograde from the vagina.798,799
FIG. 3-234 A 7-year-old female
Brittany Spaniel with polyuria and
radiographs were within normal
limits. Because pyometra was a
strong clinical suspicion, a lateral
compression ("spoon") view was
 performed. This revealed a visible
uterus that was larger than normal
(normally the uterus is not seen).
Differential
diagnoses  include
pyometra,
endometritis,
or
mucometra. Diagnosis: Pyometra.
FIG. 3-235 A 7-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with
anorexia and depression for 3 days. The ventrodorsal radi-
ograph revealed segmented tubular densities (black arrows) in
 the lateral portions of the caudal abdomen. Diffrential diag-
noses include pyometra or pregnancy. Diagnosis: Pyometra.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
431
FIG. 3-236 A 12-year-old neutered
female domestic short-haired cat
with anorexia for 5 days. The lateral
radiograph revealed a mass between
the bladder and colon. Differential
diagnoses include uterine stump
infection or neoplasm. Diagnosis:
Abscess of the uterine stump.
FIG. 3-237 A 5-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat with
anorexia for 5 days. The cat was in
heat l week prior to the onset of
symptoms. There is a large sof tis-
sue-density mass between the blad-
C
der (back b) and colon (black c).
 Differential diagnoses include seg-
mental pyometra, uterine tumor, or
focal
 pregnancy.
Diagnosis:
Leiomyosarcoma.
 Unless they are quite large, lesions affecting the vagina are radiographically apparent
only if contrast is used. In most cases, the vagina lends itself to thorough physical or endo-
 scopic examination and radiography rarely is needed. Pneumovaginography or positive-
contrast vaginography may be helpful in outlining the cranial extent of a vaginal mass
when an endoscope cannot be passed beyond a mass or if clear delineation of an anomaly
 cannot be obtained from vaginoscopy. Differentiation between inflammatory and neoplas-
tic lesions is not possible radiographically.
432
FIG. 3-238 Close-up view of pelvic
region of a 2-year-old spayed female
Weimaraner with a history of
chronic hematuria. There is a linear
bone density visible in the perineal
soft tissuesin the region of the vulva.
This represents an os clitoris. It is
usually without clinical signs.
Diagnosis: Os clitoris.
A linear mineralized structure may be seen within the labia or perineal soft tissues. This
represents an os clitoris (Fig. 3-238). It is usually an incidental finding, although it may be
observed in conjunction with anomalies of the genital tract such as pseudohermaphro-
dism.
PREGNANCY
The definitive determination of pregnancy by radiography is not possible until approxi-
mately the forty-second day of pregnancy, when the fetal skeletons mineralize sufficiently
to be visualized (Fig. 3-239). Before this fetal calcification, the visible uterine enlargement
is nonspecific. A symmetric segmentation of the pregnant uterus may be observed at 25 to
30 days of gestation. The mammary glands may become prominent as pregnancy develops,
but this also may be seen with uterine infections and pseudocyesis or may be the result of
a previous pregnancy. The canine uterus involutes by 21 days postpartum. It can be
visible radiographically for about 6 days postpartum by standard survey radiography, but
up to 18 days postpartum using compression techniques.
 Radiography is superior to ultrasonography for determination of liter size in the
raphy to anticipate delivery difficulties. Radiographs are helpful in eliminating pelvic mal-
formation as a cause of dystocia. The fetuses may exhibit signs of fetal death if they have
been dead for some time (i.e., days). The signs of fetal death include gas in the fetal GI
tract or perifetal area or both, overlap of the fron tal and parietal bones over the fontanelle,
loss of fetal flexion, uneven bone density, torso curling, or mummification (Fig. 3-
240).804-810
From a practical standpoint, radiography can be used comfortably to diagnose late
pregnancy and provide a reasonably accurate fetal count. Pelvimetry, or radiographic
measurement of the pelvic canal, to assess the likelihood of dystocia has been described but
there is no fetus lodged in the birth canal, the likelihood of uterine inertia is much greater.
Mummified fetuses are relatively easy to identify because of their distorted fetal bony
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
433
FIG. 3-239 A 4-year-old female
Golden Retriever that had been bred
6 weeks prior to examination. The
lateral radiograph  revealed
an
enlarged uterus that displaced the
small intestines dorsally and cra-
nially. Close scrutiny revealed early
calcification of the fetal skeletons
(black arrows). The presence of
skeletons limits the differential diag-
noses to pregnancy. Diagnosis:
Forty-two-day pregnancy.
F1G. 3-240 A 5-year-old female
Beagle that had been bred 65 days
prior to the examination and had
been in labor for 18 hours. The radi-
 ograph revealed the presence of two
 puppies. The pup nearest the birth
canal has gas within itsmall intes-
tine (white arrow) and overlap of the
bones of the calvarium at the
fontanell. These are signs of fetal
death. The pup more proximal in the
uterus shows no signs of fetal death.
 Diagnosis: Dystocia with one fetus
confirmed dead and the other fetus
 possibly alive. A cesarean section was
performed, and the puppy in the 
birth canal was dead, but the other
was alive.
anatomy, provided the alimentary tract does not contain confusing bony material. Ectopic
 pregnancy can be confusing in that it may be difficult to identify the uterine boundaries
and their relationship to the fetus.
UITRASONOGRAPHY OF THE ABNORMAL OVARY AND UTERUS
The normal anestrus ovary is small and hard to identify, but it becomes larger and more
easily identified during proestrus and estrus.39,812-817 The ovary is normally smooth but
 may become irregularly shaped prior to ovulation. There are almost always small follicle-
434
like structures on the ovary However, before the onset of estrus, some folicles undergo
notable development. These are the ones responding to the follicle-stimulating hormone
and that are being readied for ovulation. Follicles may be identified before ovulation as
anechoic structures within the ovary, and the enlargement, rupture, and regression of the
follicles can be followed with sufficient expertise and practice. At the time of ovulation,the
anechoic follicles become hypoechoic. Follicular diameter in the dog just before ovulation
 is usually around 7 to 8 mm, but variations occur.814 These hypoechoic structures are
replaced by the corpora lutea, which are anechoic centrally with a hypoechoic margin.39
The anechoic central portion of the corpora lutea gradually becomes obliterated. If the
ovary is found easily it may be enlarged. Size comparison with the opposite ovary is help-
ful because there are no absolute normal sizes defined. Ovarian cysts are anechoic, vary in
size, and may be solitary or multiple (Fig. 3-241). Tumors are heteroechoic and may con-
 tain anechoic cystic areas.818-820
Differentiating the pregnant from the nonpregnant uterus using ultrasonography is
 s n   ru s   pe
fluid filled, solid, loculated) and the uterine wallstructure as well as staging of pregnancy
 maternal-fetal evaluation but is unlikely to become a commonly used technique in general
veterinary practice 39840More focused studies using general two-dimensional, real-time
ultrasonographic and echocardiographic techniques also are available for the assessment of
 pregnancy status and impending parturition84-846
Pyometra can be recognized when the uterus is enlarged, thin walled, and filled with
echogenic fluid (Fig. 3-242). When the uterus is enlarged only slightly with a thick wall, a
specific diagnosis is not possible. Endometritis, endometrial hyperplasia, hydrometra,
 mucometra, hematometra, or pyometra may be present (Figs. 3-241 and 3-243).
aodu no sruau e se ieadde Aeu d no na ds au
oval or elongated mass located between the colon and the bladder. Hyperechoic areas that
may represent fibrous tissue or anechoic areas that represent fluid accumulation may be
seen (Figs. 3-244 to 3-246). The location of the mass rather than its echo intensity is usually
diagnostic. Uterine body, vaginal, or cervical tumors are usually more uniform in architec-
ture. However, they can range from hypoechoic to hyperechoic.
 FIG. 3-241 Transverse sonograms of
the caudal abdomen (A to C) and
longitudinal sonogram of the mida-
bdomen (D) of a 14-month-old
female cat with a history of weight
loss, anorexia, depression, and recur-
rent estrus for 2 to 4 months. There
is a round heteroechoic structure
(small arrows) located dorsal and to
the right of the urinary bladder. The
lumen of this structure contains
A
B
echogenic material (A and C) and a
small amount of fluid (B). This
represents an enlarged uterus. A het-
eroechoic structure in the midab-
domen (arrows) represents
an
enlarged ovary (D). The aorta can be
seen deep to the ovary. There are
multiple hypoechoic structures
within the ovary. This is indicative of
a cystic ovary. Diagnosis: Uterine
enlargement with cystic ovary.
C
D
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
435
FIG. 3-242 Transverse (A and C)
and longitudinal (B) sonograms of
ORD
the caudal abdomen of a 10-year-old
female mixed breed dog with a his-
tory of leucocytosis, abdominal pain,
and hypothermia. There is an elon-
gated oval structure in the caudal
abdomen that has a thick echogenic
wall and echogenic material within
the lumen. The structure divides into
B
two tubes in the transverse view (C).
This is indicative of an enlarged
uterus that contains echogenic fluid
and is therefore most likely a pyome-
tra. Diagnosis: Pyometra.
PUR
CAIN:
C
FIG. 3-243 Longitudinal sonograms
of the uterus of a 13-year-old female
Cocker Spaniel with a history of a
mucoid vaginal discharge of 1
month duration. There is uterine
enlargement with multiple hypo-
echoic, irregularly shaped lesions
within the wall of the uterus. This is
indicative of inflammatory or infl-
trative disease of the uterine wall.
Diagnosis:
Cystic endometrial
hyperplasia.
The anestrus uterus may be identified as a tubular structure with hypoechoic walls and
a minimally hyperechoic lumen. It may be identified dorsal to the urinary bladder and can
be traced cranially with diffculty because of overlying small intestines. The laminar struc-
ture of the uterine walls, although recognized, is much less notable than that associated
with the alimentary tract. It is the dominant echogenic strips in the intestine that facilitate 
its differentiation from uterus sonographically.
 Using high-frequency transducers, pregnancy can be detected as early as 10 days in exper-
 imental dogs and 4 days in cats.826-841 In most cases, a pregnancy can be confirmed by 17 to
20 days gestational age. The accuracy with which a diagnosis of pregnancy can be made is
 nearly 99% by 28 days even with somewhat uncertain breeding dates. The blastocyst appears
be observed within the blastocyst. As the blastocyst enlarges,the uterus becomes less tubular
and segmentation can be observed. The diameter of the gestational sac varies even among
fetuses in the same litter. In the dog, fetal cardiac activity can be identified at 20 days, and in
436
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-244 Longitudinal (A and B)
 and transverse (C and D) sonograms
of the caudal abdomen of a 4-year-
old spayed female Samoyed with a
history of chronic urinary inconti-
 nence and acute onset of vomiting
and icterus. There is a heteroechoic
mass located caudal to the urinary
bladder (A and B) and on the left lat-
eral aspect of the bladder (C and D).
This represents a uterine stump.
 Diagnosis: Stump pyometra.
A
C
FIG. 3-245 Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B to D) sonograms of the
LONBODY
L73
TRABODY
posterior abdomen of a 5-year-old 
ACU
spayed female mixed breed dog with
a history of recurrent estrus and a
purulent vaginal discharge, which
persisted despite a second ovariohys-
terectomy with removal of residual
ovarian tissue. There is a hetero-
echoic elongated somewhat oval
mass (arrows) evident caudal and to
the left of the urinary bladder. In the 
DISTANG
region of the cervix is a centrally
located hyperechoic region. This
represents auterine
stump.
Diagnosis: Stump pyometra.
C
D
the cat heart motion is visible at 17 days (Figs. 3-247 and 3-248). Mineralization of the
mandible,ribs, spine, and skull is sonographically detectable at approximately 30 to 33 days
gestational age. These are evident as hyperechoic symmetric structures. By 37 days cardiac
chambers can be identified. The lung and liver have equal echo intensity at 40 days, but the
echo intensity of the lung increases by day 43 (Figs. 3-249 and 3-250). By day 46 long bones 
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
437
FIG. 3-246 A 3-year-old neutered
female mixed breed dog had a vagi-
nal discharge. The longitudinal
sonogram revealed a slightly thick-
ened uterine stump (longer arrows)
that ended in a mixed echogenicity
mass (short arrows). Diagnosis:
Uterine stump granuloma.
 In cats, fetal heart rates remain stable during pregnancy and average 228 beats per
minute (bpm). In dogs, fetal heart rates increase during pregnancy from an average of 214
bpm initially to an average of 238 bpm by day 40. The heart rate slows slightly around the
time of parturition.842 By means of fetal head diameter (HD) measured across the calvar-
ium, body diameter (BD) at the level of the liver, gestational sac diameter (GSD), or crown
a ps sssse on ps aq t udenoos 'sasea () i d
(GA) in queens and bitches. The formulas used include7,38,843.
Bitches:
GA less than 40 days
GA (+/- 3 days) = (6 × GSD) + 20
GA (+/- 3 days) = (3 × CRL) + 27
GA greater than 40 days
GA (+/- 3 days) = (15 × HD) + 20
GA (+/- 3 days) = (7 × BD) + 29
GA (+/- 3 days) = (6 × HD) + (3 × BD) + 30
Queens:
GA greater than 40 days
GA (+/- 2 days) = (25 × HD) + 3
GA (+/- 2 days) = (11 × BD) + 21
The canine uterus is incompletely involuted by ultrasonography until up to 15 weeks post-
partum.837 However, because of its seasonally polyestrous reproductive cycle, the feline
uterus can be sonographically involuted by 24 days postpartum.800
Variability in the appearance of the uterus is observed. In the first 1 to 4 days postpartum,
 the uterus is large and its contents are heteroechoic. Placentation sites may be visible as ovoid
heteroechoic areas. Both hypoechoic and hyperechoic uterine contents are visible, and the
uterine wall is thick. As uterine involution progresses, the wall becomes thinner and placenta-
tion sites become more uniform and les distinguishabl from the rest of the uterine wall.390
PROSTATE
The prostate is normally a bilobed ovoid or round, tissue-dense structure with a
smooth, regular margin, located almost partially or entirely within the pelvic canal. A
438
FIG. 3-247 Transverse sonograms
of the uterus of a 5-year-old female
Basset Hound. The dog was being
evaluated for pregnancy and was
dinically normal. Sonograms were
 obtained at 23 days (A and B) and at
30 days (C and D) postbreeding.
 Fluid is evident within the uterus at
23 days and the fetus can be identi-
fed (arrows). A heart beat could be
detected at this stage. At 30 days
postbreeding,the size of the fetus has
A
E
increased and the head and limb
buds are visible. Diagnosis: Normal
pregnancy.
C
FIG. 3-248 Doppler (A), longitudinal (B to D), and
transverse (E and F) sonograms of the uterus of a 2-
 year-old female Pomeranian. The dog was clinically
normal and the examination was performed as a
routine pregnancy evaluation 30 days after breeding.
The fetal heart beat can be identified in the Doppler
sonogram. The fetus and fetal membranes can be
identified in the other views. Diagnosis: Normal 30-
day pregnancy.
B
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
439
FIG. 3-249 Doppler sonogram and
STD
longitudinal sonograms of the
uterus of a 3-year-old  female
B=23m抽
German Shepherd dog. The exami-
 nation was part of a routine preg-
nancy check 50 days postbreeding.
The dog was clinically normal. The
 Doppler examination identifes the
heart and establishes the heart rate.
 In the longitudinal sonograms the
head of the fetus can be identified.
Diagnosis: Normal pregnancy.
73
DEE
PU
CAI
F1G. 3-250 Longitudinal (A, C, and
D) and transverse sonograms of the
uterus of a 3-year-old German
Shepherd dog 57 days postbreeding.
The dog was clinically normal. The
heart, lung,liver, and stomach can be
identified. Note that the lung is
hyperechoic relative to the liver.
Shadowing is evident due to calcifi-
cation of the ribs (A). Diagnosis:
 Normal pregnancy.
 triangular fat density usually is observed between the bladder neck and the cranial-most
prostate cranial to the pelvic brim may indicate enlargement (Fig. 3-251), but it also
may be the normal migration of the gland out into the caudal abdominal cavity in sex-
ual senescence. The presence of the prostate gland in the caudal abdomen is not an
440
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-251 An 8-year-old male
Miniature Poodle with a small
amount of blood dripping from the
penis for 3 days. The lateral radi-
ograph reveals a moderately
enlarged prostate that is clearly cra-
nial to the brim of the pelvis (black
arrow).  Differential  diagnoses 
 include benign hyperplasia, prostati-
tis, or prostatic neoplasia. Diagnosis:
Prostatitis.
automatic indicator of enlargement. A system of measurement of the normal canine
e an p d as an amq a an o ps p aso
edge of the pubic bond as viewed from the lateral radiographic perspective has been
described.54 In some chondrodystrophic breeds (e.g., Scottish Terriers), the normal
prostate may be located cranial to the pelvic brim. In some animals, the prostate may be
normal to small in size but is displaced cranial to the pelvic brim due to urinary blad-
der or colonic distention. The most common cause of prostatic enlargement is benign
-dea esdou are aeasd r sunisuo rao "eisediadu sesd
sia, intraprostatic cyst, paraprostatic cyst, some intersex anomalies, or inflammatory
including cyst, absces, or tumor. Density changes within the prostate are uncommon.
static abscess, or prostatic carcinoma, but it is most common with carcinoma and is an
indication for biopsy.54 Prostatic neoplasia may be accompanied by enlarged sublumbar
lymph nodes and the formation of periosteal new bone on the ilial wings and ventral
aspects of the caudal lumbar vertebrae secondary to hematogenous metastases (Fig. 3-
252).53,863 In some cases of prostatitis, inflammatory elements will penetrate the pro-
static capsule and there will be hazy, streaky tissue densities in the fat between the
bladder and the prostate (Fig. 3-253). In some male dogs, the persistence of mullerian
ducts will result in the development of paraprostatic cysts. These may be visible as
round, oval, or tubular soft tissue-dense structures in the caudal ventral abdomen.
These masses may be present between the colon and bladder, may be cranial or lateral
to the bladder, or may even be in perineal hernia sacs. They are always attached by a
stalk to the prostate gland, but this attachment may not be radiographicall apparent
 and may have a calcified wall (Figs. 3-254 and 3-255).862
 Urinary tract contrast studies offer little specific information regarding the etiology
of prostatic disease. When there is doubt as to the identity of a caudal abdominal mass,
radiographs with a radiopaque urinary catheter in the bladder, cystograms, or urethro-
grams may be helpful. Although retrograde urethrography may identify a large cystic
 prostatic structure that communicates with the urethra, the more common situation is
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
441
FIG. 3-252 A 9-year-old male
Norwegian
Elkhound
with
stranguria for 2 weeks. The lateral
radiograph revealed mild prostato-
megaly (solid black arrow). The sub-
lumbar lymph nodes show no
enlargement, but there is a marked
periosteal response involving the
ventral aspect of L6 (open black
arrow). Diagnosis: Prostatic adeno-
carcinoma with spinal metastasis.
FIG. 3-253 An 8-year-old male
 Brittany Spaniel with blood dripping
from the penis for 1 week and vom-
iting and anorexia for 3 days. The
lateral radiograph revealed marked
prostatomegaly that displaced the
bladder (btack b) cranially. Close
scrutiny revealed streaks of tissue
density in the normally homogenous
fat density between the prostate and
bladder (white arrows). This usually
is indicative of the spread of inflam-
matory cells through the capsule of
an inflamed prostate. Differential
diagnoses include prostatitis, prosta-
tic neoplasia, or benign prostatic
hyperplasia. Diagnosis: Prostatitis.
either a normal study or a false-negative result (ie., one in which a cystic prostatic
structure does not communicate with the urethra).862 Prostatic abscess, cyst, and
necrotic tumor may produce cavitation within the prostate, which can be filled
with contrast during a contrast urethrogram. A small amount of contrast may reflux
in to a normal prostate. The finding of contrast within the prostate is therefore nonspe-
cific.449,450
442
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGY AND UiTRaSoNOGRaPhY
FIG. 3-254 A 6-year-old male
Cocker Spaniel with a palpable cau-
dal abdominal mass detected on rou-
tine physical examination. The
survey radiograph revealed three
distinguishable caudal abdominal
tissue densities. The cystogram was
performed to determine the position 
of the urinary bladder. The mass
caudal to it was presumed to be the
prostate (black p). Differential diag-
p
noses for the mass cranial and ven-
tral to the opacified urinary bladder
 include paraprostatic cyst, neoplasm
 of the cranial bladder wall, splenic
mass, or other forms of neoplasia.
Diagnosis: Paraprostatic cyst.
FIG. 3-255 A 5-year-old male
Doberman Pinscher with a palpable
audal abdominal mass detected on
routine physical examination. The
ateral radiograph revealed the colon
filled with fecal material,the bladder
(black b) displaced cranially, moder-
ate prostatomegaly (black p), and a
mass (biack arrows) with a calcified
rim (eggshell calcification) between
the bladder and colon. Differential
diagnoses include paraprostatic cyst
or neoplasm arising from the margin
of the colon, prostate, or bladder.
 Diagnosis: Paraprostatic cyst.
p
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF PROSTATIC ABNORMALITIES
 prostate is not too deeply positioned within the pelvic canal, it can be examined easily. A
specific diagnosis can be made in only a few cases, but the number of possible diagnoses
can be reduced based on the ultrasonographic features. Ultrasonography may also be
isho 1o ssaosqe 1oy 1o aeisond au jo Asdonq no uonndse sunp aoupimo noy pasn
drainage.57,875
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
443
FIG. 3-256 Transverse and longitu-
dinal sonograms of the prostate of 6-
year-old male Rottweiler  with a
history of stranguria and chronic
urolithiasis. The prostate is enlarged 
but normally shaped. The architec-
ture is uniform with multiple small
hypoechoic   and    hyperechoic
regions. This is indicative of hyper-
plasia. Diagnosis: Prostatic hyper-
plasia.
EPTH
TATE
FIG. 3-257 Transverse sonograms of
the prostate of an ll-year-old
ACU
male Standard Poodle with
a
PUR
history of chronic hematuria and
prostatomegaly. The prostate is
enlarged and contains multiple small 
hyperechoic foci. These do not form
shadows and therefore may not repre-
sent mineral. This is most likely due
to prostatic neoplasia. Diagnosis:
Prostatic carcinoma.
 Prostatic hyperplasia usually produces a uniformly textured enlarged prostate.5,877,878
The echo intensity of the prostate is normal. Small hypoechoic or anechoic cysts may be
identified (Fig. 3-256).
Prostatitis and prostatic carcinoma can create single or multiple foci of increased echo
intensity (Fig. 3-257).877 Differentiation of these two conditions is difficult when based
444
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-258 Transverse (A to C) and
BDOMEN
longitudinal (D) sonograms of the
prostate of a 9-year-old male mixed
ROSTATE
breed dog with a history of stran-
 guria and incontinence of 3 months
duration. The prostate is hyper-
echoic with multiple hypoechoic-to-
anechoic irregularly shaped lesions
within the prostatic tissue. These are
indicative of prostatic cysts or
abscesses.
Diagnosis: Prostatic
abscesses.
B
OSTATE
C
D
 solely on the ultrasonographic examination. Prostatitis may produce multifocal anechoic
and/or hypoechoic areas with smooth or irregular margins. These lesions result from focal
inflammation or abscess formation. Hyperechoic areas that form shadows may indicate
prostatic mineralization, which may occur in either prostatitis or carcinoma but is more
common with carcinoma. Asymmetric enlargement may be seen more often with prosta-
   i   q     
have a tendency to coalesce. Round or oval hypoechoic masses, which represent sublumbar
lymph node enlargement, may be identified. Ultrasonography is more sensitive than radi-
ography in detecting sublumbar (iliac) lymph node enlargement. Identification of enlarged
lymph nodes during an ultrasonographic examination is a less specific finding and may
occur in association with either tumor or infection. If enlarged lymph nodes are recognized
 on radiographs, neoplasia is most likely but a biopsy is required for a diagnosis.
Prostatic abscesses and intraprostatic cysts produce solitary or multiple hypoechoic
or anechoic lesions (Figs. 3-258 to 3-260). Posterior enhancement and through trans-
mission may be identified in cysts. Cellular echoes within the cavity may be present in
either cysts or abscesses. Cysts may be more smoothly marginated; however, either lesion
may have irregular margins. Tumor necrosis occasionally produces hypoechoic areas
within prostatic neoplasms, and this decreases the specificity of the ultrasonographic
findings.
 Paraprostatic cysts are anechoic or hypoechoic structures that may be tubular or septated
(Fig. 3-261). Mineralization within the wall of the cyst may produce hyperechoic areas that
cause shadows. Infection or hemorrhage within the cyst may produce smallechoes that move
with the prostate may be identified. Criteria that could separate infected from noninfected 
paraprostatic cysts were not identified.873 Distinguishing a large paraprostatic cyst from the
urinary bladder may be difficult, but with careful examination from all sides the distinction
can be made. If necesary the bladder can be catheterized and saline can be injected through
the urinary catheter. The air bubbles within the fluid will be identified easily.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
445
FIG. 3-259 Longitudinal sonograms
of the prostate of a 13-year-old male
West Highland White Terrier with a
history of stranguria, dysuria, and
hematuria of 1 month duration. The
 prostate is enlarged and the architec-
ture is abnormal, with multiple
irregularly shaped hypoechoic and
anechoic areas throughout the
prostate. This is indicative of either
 prostatitis with abscess formation or
multiple prostatic cysts. Diagnosis:
 Prostatitis with multiple abscesses.
FIG. 3-26o Longitudinal (A to C)
and transverse (D) sonograms ofthe
prostate of a 6-year-old male
 Bullmastiff with a history of abnor-
 mal ejaculate and low sperm counts.
There are several anechoic lesions
visible within the prostate (arrows).
These represent intraprostatic cysts.
The remainder of the prostate
appears
normal.
Diagnosis:
B
Prostatic cysts.
BE
ACUS
CHR
口
 Prostatic biopsy or aspiration can be performed easily. The patient should be anes-
thetized or heavily sedated. Core biopsies can be obtained from solid lesions using any of
several biopsy needle types. Biopsy guides may be used; however, directing the needle with-
out the guide is accomplished easily. Cyst or abscess drainage may be performed using
446
FIG. 3-261 Longitudinal (A and B)
 and transverse (C and D) sonograms
STATE
of the prostate of a 9-year-old male
mixed breed dog with a history of
stranguria for 4 months. There is an
anechoic septated structure located
Cranial to the prostate and lateral to
the urinary bladder. The anechoic
lesion can be identifed lateral, ven-
tral, and to the right of the prostate
in the transverse sonograms. This is
 indicative of a paraprostatic cyst.
A
Diagnosis: Paraprostatic cyst.
C
TESTICLES
Unless they are enlarged, undescended testicles are rarely radiographically apparent. They
may be found anywhere from just caudal to the kidneys to the inguinal ring (Fig. 3-262).
Intraabdominal testicles are prone to neoplastic changes, especially Sertoli cell tumors. In
these cases, a large abdominal mass may be accompanied by prominent nipples. Another,
less common cause of enlargement of a retained testicle is torsion.879 Although most scro-
nized radiographically as an irregular enlargement extending through the inguinal ring
into the sublumbar area.
Intrascrotal testicles may undergo a torsion resulting in swelling and pain in the mal-
entities such as orchitis, testicular trauma or hematoma, testicular vascular abnormalities,
scrotal hydrocee, and ciliary dyskinesis should also be considered.88-884 Although
intrascrotal abnormalities are directly accessible via palpation, they are best assessed by
ultrasonography.
UiTRASONOGRAPHY OF THE ABNORMAL TESTICLE
Usually, testicular tumors are hypoechoic, but they also may be heteroechoic or
hyperechoic relative to the surrounding normal testicle. Most are well circumscribed and
round or oval. The size of the tumor and the sharpness of the interface between the tumor
and the normal testicular tissue determine the echogenicity of the tumor. Smaller tumors
tend to be hypoechoic, while larger tumors are often heteroechoic. Only a few hyperechoic
 pe sle nadieus a on pn ose si ss panodan uaq aaeq sion
masses that cannot be palpated can be detected using ultrasonography. A consistent sono-
(- pe 5- s) ad io m pse uq nou su uad sidn
Intraabdominal retained testicles can be identified accurately using ultrasonography
CHAPTER THREE THEABDOMEN
447
FIG. 3-262 A 5-year-old male
Beagle with a retained testicle, ven-
tral alopecia, and enlarged nipples.
There is a tissue-dense mass in the
caudal abdomen (black arrow) and
enlarged sublumbar lymph nodes
(white arrow). Differential diagnoses
include testicular tumor (Sertoli cell
tumor, seminoma), nonobstructing
small intestinal mass (leiomyosar-
coma), or tumor or granuloma aris-
ing from the mesentery. Diagnosis:
 Sertoli cell tumor with metastasis to
 the sublumbar lymph nodes.
FIG. 3-263 Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B) sonograms of the left
ACRT
testicle of an 8-year-old male
 Labrador Retriever with a history of
fecal incontinence, hematuria, and
pyrexia. There is a well-defined
hypoechoic lesion in the caudal por-
tion of the testes. This is indicative of
a testicular tumor. Diagnosis: Sertoli
cell tumor.
A
B
depending on the circumstances. They can be recognized, when found, because of their
normal hyperechoic appearance despite their abnormal location.87 The testicle may
appear hypoechoic when it is atrophied.
 Doppler examination has been used in humans to distinguish testicular torsion from
may not be necessary in dogs. Orchitis and torsion may produce fluid within the scrotum.
Ultrasonography can be used to identify and evaluate the testicle within the fluid-distended
scrotum when it cannot be palpated. Ultrasonography can distinguish the testicular from
 the nontesticular causes for scrotal swelling and can differentiate unilateral from bilateral
disease (Fig. 3-265).887,888
A diffuse, patchy hypoechoic pattern has been identified with orchitis in dogs.
 Enlargement of the epididymis also has been observed.887
448
FIG. 3-264 Transverse (A and B)
and longitudinal (C and D)
 sonograms of the right testicle of a
6-year-old male Bullmastiff with a
history of abnormal ejaculate and
low sperm counts. Two hyperechoic
foci are visible within the testicle.
These represent testicular tumors.
Diagnosis: Sertoli cell tumor.
A
B
C
FIG. 3-265 Transverse (A) and
longitudinal (B) sonograms of the
right testicle of a 9-year-old male
ESTICLE
TESTICLE
Labrador Retriever with a history of
abdominal distention and scrotal
swelling for l month. The testicle is
 normal. There is a large amount of
scrotal fluid surrounding the testicle.
Diagnosis: Scrotal fluid secondary to
splenic mass and ascites.
A
B
HEMOLYMPHATIC SYSTEM
ABNORMAL FINDINGS
SPLEEN
The major abdominal organ of this system is the spleen. There are no practical special pro-
cedures to evaluate the spleen; however, there are a number of changes that may be identi-
fied on survey radiographs. Evaluation of splenic size is completely subjective. The most
common finding in the dog is a generalized enlargement. Determining the significance of
generalized enlargement may be difficult, because the spleen is a very dynamic organ and
its size can change dramatically as a normal response to various physiologic states.
Excessive enlargement may be due to administration of various sedative and anesthetic
drugs (e.g., phenothiazines, barbiturates), passive congestion, torsion, splenitis,
extramedullary hematopoiesis, immune-mediated diseases like splenic hyperplasia, or dif-
fuse infiltration with numerous cellular elements including round cell neoplasia, small
for the response to pharmaceuticals, changes in splenic size in the cat are much less
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
449
common. In cats, generalized splenic enlargement most often indicates infiltrative disease
such as lymphosarcoma or mast cell tumor (Fig. 3-267).
Changes in the shape of the spleen are almost always due to healed fractures or focal
masses. These may be multiple and small, as is frequently seen with nodular hyperplasia,
 n    s s e     
hemangiosarcoma (Fig. 3-268). Splenic hemangiosarcoma in dogs may rupture, resulting
in hemorrhage or metastasis into the adjacent peritoneum (Fig. 3-269). This will appear as
a vaguely definable mass in an area of poor visceral detail.
FIG. 3-266 An 8-year-old male
Standard Poodle with anemia. The
lateral radiograph revealed marked
splenomegaly. Differential diagnoses
include splenic dilation secondary to
tranquilization or anesthesia, lym-
phoma, hypersplenism, autoim-
mune hemolytic anemia, or mast cell 
tumor. Diagnosis: Hypersplenism.
FIG. 3-267 A 5-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat with vom-
iting and anorexia for 2 weeks. The
lateral radiograph revealed diffuse
splenomegaly. Differential diagnoses 
include lymphoma or mast cell
tumor. Diagnosis: Mast cell tumor.
450
The spleen of the dog is fairly mobile within the abdominal cavity. Occasionally, it will
rotate around its omental axis. This results in splenic torsion, as indicated by a generally
enlarged spleen that is displaced from its normal position and with a poorly defined mar-
gin. The gastric shape may be distorted as the pylorus is pulled closer to the cardia due to
traction on the gastrosplenic ligament. The radiographic hallmarks of splenic torsion radi-
ographically are the appearance of a reverse C or double end-on view of the spleen on the
lateral view. This is further supported by the lack of clear visualization of the splenic body
 in the left upper abdomen on the ventrodorsal or dorsoventral views.895-901 Peritoneal fluid
 may be present, especiall around the area of the spleen.898-901
Mineralization of the spleen is rare. Granulomas, hematomas, and tumors may become
 mineralized. Gas may be seen within the spleen secondary to splenic infarct.902
mal. Identification of normal splenic architecture during the ultrasonographic examina-
tion despite splenic enlargement may reflect splenomegaly associated with drugs,
FIG. 3-268 A 6-year-old male
Poodle with anorexia for 2 days. The
lateral radiograph revealed a ventral
tissue-dense mass with clearly dis-
crete margins just caudal to the
stomach and liver (white arrow).
Differential
diagnoses include
masses involving the spleen
(hematoma, leiomyosarcoma, or
hemangiosarcoma) or caudal bor-
ders of a lateral liver lobe (cyst or
neoplasia). Diagnosis: Splenic
hematoma.
FIG. 3-269 An 8-year-old female
German Shepherd dog with acute
 collapse. The lateral radiograph
revealed a mass (black arrow) caudal
and ventral to the stomach that dis-
places the small bowel dorsally. The
borders of the mass are indistinct,
indicating local hydroperitoneum.
Differential
 diagnoses include
splenic mass or lateral lobe hepatic
 mass. The hydroperitoneum suggests
an active process. Diagnosis:
Ruptured hemangiosarcoma of the
spleen.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
451
extramedullary hematopoiesis, or immune-mediated anemia. Infiltrative diseases of
 the spleen, such as lymphosarcoma, can also cause splenic enlargement without altering the
echo intensity or architecture of the spleen. Diffuse alterations in echo intensity of the
spleen may be seen in association with disseminated mast cell tumors and lymphosarcoma,
which may cause a diffuse increase in echo intensity and in splenic torsion which, in turn,
often produces multifocalhypechoic leions that do not alter the plenic contour6,7
Focal splenic lesions are more common. Splenic tumor, nodular hyperplasia, hematoma, or
-a q au s so'(i-e ) ss on o s and a s
 echoic or hypoechoic relative to the normal spleen. Splenic hemangiosarcoma may pro-
duce a mixed or heteroechoic mass with areas ranging from hyperechoic to hypoechoic
when compared with the normal spleen. The hypoechoic regions most likely represent
blood-filled cavernous regions, chronic hematomas, or cysts, while the hyperechoic areas
hyperechoic areas within the spleen. Hyperechoic areas that cause shadowing may be
observed if mineralization of the lesion has occurred. Hematomas may have a similar
appearance, with heteroechoic lesions representing the hematoma in varying states of
m uasisuas  n basnn esdog ue
a biopsy diagnosis, the final diagnosis may be unknown, because some reportedly benign
lesions subsequently develop metastatic neoplasia and prove the original tissue diagnosis
incorrect. The presence of other lesions, such as peritoneal or pericardial fluid, or addi-
tional lesions in the liver, are indicators of neoplasia.913 Lymphosarcoma may be diffuse,
causing a general increase in splenic echo intensity or may produce multiple, poorly mar-
ginated hypoechoic nodules. These nodules do not often alter the splenic contour (i.e.,
s e pe ai a aq  sss sds zo'uds a jo ui   nq
localization of the mass to a portion of the spleen can be difficult Invasion of the gastro-
(e )    m ls iid p s 
 In humans, an acute splenic infarct may be hypoechoic or anechoic, wedge-shaped or
round,irregularly delineated or smooth. In dogs, the appearance of splenic infarct (diffuse
duce focal hypoechoic or isoechoic, circular, well-defined nodular masses with alteration of 
FIG.3-270 Longitudinal sonogram
of the spleen of a 5-year-old female
Great Dane with a history of vomit-
ing, anorexia, and fever of 8 days
duration. The spleen is enlarged and
uniformly hypoechoic. This
is
indicative of splenic torsion or
infarct. Diagnosis: Splenic torsion.
452
FIG. 3-271 Transverse sonograms of
the spleen of a 9-year-old female
Vizsla with a history of acute col-
lapse associated with thrombocy-
 topenia and mild anemia. There isa
hypoechoic round mass associated
with the tail of the spleen (open
arrows) (A). There is a hyperechoic
lesion adjacent to the splenic vein
(arrows) (B and D). An additional
small hypoechoic mass can be iden-
tified (closed arrow) (C). These
A
B
hypoechoic lesions could be tumors
or areas of nodular hyperplasia. The
 position of the hyperechoic lesion
adjacent to the splenic vein identifies
SPLEE
it as an area of infolding of fat at the
splenic hilus. Diagnosis: Nodular
hyperplasia.
FIG. 3-272 A 10-year-old neutered male German
Shorthaired Pointer with vomiting and a tense abdomen.
A and B, Radiographic findings include a midventral
soft-tissue intraperitoneal mass. C, Ultrasonographic
findings include an infiltrative, mixed echo mass (M) in 
the spleen (S) with no liver or other abdominal abnor-
malities except some mildly complex abdominal fluid.
Diagnosis: Leiomyosarcoma.
Continued
A
the splenic contour, or a diffuse hypoechoic or heteroechoic coarse pattern without mar
ginal deformity (Fig. 3-273).902
ABDOmiNal LYmph NODES
The remainder of the intraabdominal hemolymphatic system is composed of various lym-
phatic vessels and lymph nodes. One group is clustered around the mesenteric root ventral
to L2. These rarely are seen radiographically unless they are severely enlarged (Fig. 3-274).
The other major group constitutes the sublumbar lymph nodes: the external iac, internal
iliac, and coccygeal lymph nodes. These lymph nodes are located ventral to the caudal lum-
bar vertebrae and extend into the pelvic canal. Enlargement of these lymph nodes produces
an increased density dorsal to the colon, which alters the normal smooth contour of the
sublumbar muscles. There may be ventral colonic displacement, and in extreme cases the
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
453
FIG. 3-272 cont'd For legend see opposite page.
B
N
LONG
Y7
6.0MH
ABD
PWR
55d1
GAI
C
nodes may impinge upon the colon and cause constipation or dyschezia. Reactive lym-
phadenitis from infection of organs drained, such as the uterus or prostate, primary neo-
plasia as in lymphosarcoma, or metastatic neoplasia in the prostate, testicle, uterine body,
anus, or urinary bladder may enlarge these nodes.
Utrasonography of Lymphadenopathy. Enlarged lymph nodes can be detected readily
during an ultrasonographic examination.9 Most lymph nodes are hypoechoic and may be
round, oval, or irregularly shaped (Figs. 3-35 and 3-275 to 3-277).9 They can be found at
454
SMAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-273 Transverse sonograms of
the spleen of a 7-year-old male Old 
English Sheepdog with a history of
 vomiting and icterus. There are mul-
tiple poorly marginated hypoechoic
lesions within the spleen (arrows).
These may represent abscesses,
infarcts or tumors. Diagnosis:
Splenic infarcts.
FIG. 3-274 A 10-year-old male
Dachshund with polyuria and poly-
dipsia for 2 weeks. The lateral radi-
ograph revealed a large spleen (black
s), enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes
(biack m), and enlarged sublumbar
ymph nodes (white *). A needle-
 shaped foreign body is noted in the 
stomach. Diagnosis: Lymphoma.
m
FIG. 3-275 Longitudinal (A to C)
and transverse (D) sonograms of the
midabdomen of a l-year-old cas-
trated male cat with a history of
anorexia,hepatomegaly,and a palpa-
ble abdominal mass. There are mul-
tiple hypoechoic irregularly shaped
abdorminal masses The hyperechoic
area along the margin of the mass
represents mesenteric fat. These
masses represent enlarged abdomi-
nallymph
nodes. Diagnosis:
A
 Lymphoma.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
455
FIG.3-276 Longitudinal sonograms
of the sublumbar region of a 13-
year-old spayed female mixed breed
a
dog with a history of generalized
lymphadenopathy and anorexia.
There are multiple oval hypoechoic
masses noted in the sublumbar
region. The aorta is visible as a linear
hypoechoic structure ventral to these
masses (a). These findings are
indicative of sublumbar (external
iliac) lymphadenopathy. Diagnosis:
Lymphoma.
FIG. 3-277 A 10-year-old neutered
female German Shepherd dog had a
circumferential rectal mass. A longi-
tudinal sonogram revealed an
enlarged right medial iliac lymph
node.  Diagnosis: lliac
lym-
phadenopathy due to metastatic
neoplasia.
MI-LN
456
the root of the mesentery, along the mesentery adjacent to the intestines, caudal to the
stomach, along the course of the portal vein, adjacent to the ileocecocolic junction, and in
the sublumbar region. The ultrasonographic appearance of the lymph nodes is not partic-
ularly helpful in distinguishing neoplastic from infectious or reactive lymphadenopathy.
Lymph node masses may become large and can be misinterpreted as splenic, hepatic, or
intestinal masses.
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
ABNORMAL FINDINGS
ADRENAL GLANDS
The major abdominal endocrine organs are the adrenal glands and the pancreas (dis-
cussed previously in this chapter under the GI system). In the normal animal, the adre-
nal glands are not seen radiographically. In some cases of neoplasia, the adrenal
enlargement may be mineralized and apparent on the survey radiograph (Figs. 3-278 and
3-279). In cats, dense mineralization has been noted without evidence of adrenal
enlargement, neoplasia, or other disease (Fig. 3-280). The significance of this
mineralization is unknown. One radiographic special procedure that may be helpful in
lateral view with a horizontal x-ray beam (Fig. 3-281). An indirect indication of hyper-
functioning adrenal cortical status, although not specific, is symmetric hepatomegaly
 and nominal vertebral osteopenia, actually osteoporosis.914-917 Some adrenal, as well as
some renal, tumors extend into the caudal vena cava or surround the aorta or both. A
nonselective contrast venogram may show the obstruction or abnormal venous blood
flow patterns. The reproducibility of lesions on serial studies is a key factor in differenti-
ating the normal turbulent renal venous flow into the caudal vena cava and true infiltra-
tive and invasive lesions.
Ultrasonography of Adrenal Abnormalities. The adrenal glands can be measured
directly from the ultrasonographic image 3941,918 Changes in size can be detected pro-
vided care is exercised in obtaining a true sagittal and transverse image so that the
dimension of the adrenal gland is not altered due to obliquity. There are several reports
 of what is thought to represent normal adrenal measurements by ultrasonogra-
phy39,41,918 How adrenal measurements are interpreted seems to depend on a combina-
tion of technical skills and the desired interpretive sensitivity. Readers are referred to the
cited reports and from them the individual's comfort level of interpreting normal versus
abnormal size can be determined. If the range is set too narrow, the problem of false-pos-
itive assessment occurs. If the range is set too wide, the problem of false-negative diag.
noses occurs. Currently we use anything less than 20 mm long and less than 5 to 6 mm
wide with reasonable glandular symmetry as normal in dogs, but that may change with
further refined measurements. In our experience, it is possible for there to be hyper-
adrenocorticism, usually pituitary dependent, in the presence of what would be consid-
ered sonographically normal adrenal glands. Most abnormalities result in an adrenal
intensity of adrenal masses often is similar to that of the renal cortex, although adreno-
cortical tumors range from hypoechoic to hyperechoic. The hypoechoic regions may rep-
Distortion of the shape of the gland may be evident, with rounded nodules causing the
 gland to be asymmetrically shaped. Nonmalignant hyperfunctioning nodules and early
tumors are indistinguishable. Cavitation of the adrenal mass may produce hypoechoic
areas within a heteroechoic mass. Pheochromocytomas appear heteroechoic with ultra-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
457
FIG. 3-278 A 10-year-old female
Miniature Poodle with hematuria
and polydipsia for 2 weeks. The lat-
eral radiograph revealed a tissue-
density mass that has a calcified rim
just cranial to the left kidney (black
arrows). Differential diagnoses
include adrenal adenoma or adeno-
carcinoma. Diagnosis: Adrenal ade-
nocarcinoma.
        
abdominal distention and polyuria and polydipsia. The right kidney
is displaced caudally by the liver. There is a round structure with
eggshell calcification (arrows) immediately cranial to the left kidney.
Diagnosis: Hyperadrenocorticism due to a left adrenal adenocarci-
noma.
458
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 3-280 A 9-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat with
vomiting for l day. The lateral
radiograph revealed two focal areas
of calcification cranial to the kid-
neys (black arrows). Diagnosis:
Calcification  within  the adrenal
glands.
FIG. 3-281 A 10-year-old female
Cocker Spaniel with polyuria and
E sem aiaui suuou z ioy esdipaid
pendulous abdomen and mild
alopecia. Survey radiographs were
within normal limits. A pneu-
moperitoneum was performed. The
horizontal beam lateral radiograph
shows the abdominal gas surround-
ing the retroperitoneal structures.
The left kidney (black l) and right
a
kidney (black r) are clearly demon-
strated. A third tissue-dense struc-
ture (black a) is seen superimposing
the area where the two renal shadows
overlap. Diagnosis: Left adrenal ade-
nocarcinoma.
sonographic characteristics ranging from hypoechoic to hyperechoic. These characteris-
 gland may produce hyperechoic areas that form shadows. 34 These may be associated with
adrenal tumors or may be seen in normal-aged animals. Adrenal tumors may invade into
or entrap the caudal vena cava or aorta, and this may be observed during the ultrasono-
and invasion of the vena cava by ultrasonography or by nonselective angiography.
Alteration of the normal blood flow may be detected using Doppler ultrasonography.
Computed tomography also has been shown to be a useful adrenal imaging modality,927
 For cases with equivocal status (e.g., compressed versus truly invaded by the adrenal
mass) of the regional great vessels in anticipation of a surgical decision, a composite
interpretation is best, one that includes the nonselective venogram, the ultrasonogram
and, if possible, a contrast-enhanced computed tomogram.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
459
FIG.3-28z Longitudinal sonograms
of the cranial abdomen of a 15-year-
old spayed female Dachshund with
acute rear-limb paralysis that
occurred secondary to a fall from the
owner's arms. The dog was pot-
bellied and had a long-standing his-
tory of polyuria and polydipsia.
There is an oval heteroechoic mass
noted (arrows) compressing or
invading the caudal vena cava. The
aorta is evident deep to this mass.
This represents an adrenal tumor.
 Diagnosis: Adrenal adenoma.
NAL
RENAI
PURR
GAIN
CAVA
V.CAVA
AORTA
FIG. 3-283 Longitudinal (A and B)
ADREH
and transverse (C and D) sonograms
of the lef adrenal gland of a 12-year-
old spayed female mixed breed dog
with a history of panting and gag-
 ss aqdied e sm aau 
the laryngeal region. The adrenal
gland is enlarged and abnormally
-s sq A s (s) padeus
 ondary to adrenal tumor of hyper-
A
B
plasia. The cervical mass was
determined to be a thyroid ade-
noma. Diagnosis: Adrenal adenocar-
cinoma.
C
ABNORMALITIES OF THE ABDOMINAL WALL
Along with the various changes that are associated with the estrous cycle and pregnancy in
the cat, changes in the mammary glands must not be forgotten. There is a phenomenon 
se ieadde un i xaduon oualrdady iuu uf au se on pn
 prominent mammary enlargement.928 This must be differentiated from other abdominal
wall disorders, mastitis and, although unlikely, diffuse neoplasia.
460
REFERENCES
1. Love NE: The appearance of the canine pyloric region in right versus
 30. Nyland TG, Kantrowitz BM, Fisher P, et al: Utrasonic determination
left lateral recumbent radiographs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1993;
of kidney volurme in the dog. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:174.
34:169.
31. Felkai CS, Voros K, Vrabely T, et al: Utrasonographic determination
 2. Carrig CB, Mostosky UV: The use of compression in abdominal radi-
of renal volurme in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1992; 33:292.
ography of the dog and cat. J Arm Vet Radiol Soc 1976; 17:178.
 32. Konde L, Wrigley RH, Park RD, et al: Ultrasound anatorny of the
3. Farrow Cs: Abdorminal compression radiography in the dog and cat.
norrmal canine kidney. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:173.
J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:337.
 33. Konde LI: Sonography of the kidney. Vet Clin North Arm Small Anim
 4. Aronsohn MG, Fagella AM: Surgical techniques for neutering 6- to
Pract 1985; 15:1149.
14-week-old kitterns. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:53.
 34. Wood AKW, McCarthy PH: Ultrasonographic-anatomic correlation
5. Macintire DF: The acute abdomen-differential diagnosis and man-
and an imaging protocol of the normal canine kidney. Arm I Vet Res
agerment. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1988; 3:302-310.
1990; 51:103.
6. Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Walter PA: Abdorminal sonography——1989:
35. Walter PA, Feeney DA, Johnston GR, et al: The norrmal feline renal
 general interpretation and abdominal masses. Semin Vet Med Surg
ultrasonograrm: quantitative analysis of irmaged anatorny. Am J Vet
1989; 4:77-94.
Res 1987; 48:596.
7. Nyland TG, Mattoon JS, Allen AK, et al: Veterinary diagnostic ultra-
 36. Walter PA, Johnston GR, Feeney DA, et al: Renal ultrasonography in
 sound. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995.
healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48:600.
-ouos ydepe sopuuuri nsou nouo 8
 37. Yaeger AE, Anderson Wl: Study of association between histologic
 phy and cormputed tormography for exarmination of the abdormen. Vet
features and echogenicity of architecturaly norrmal cat kidneys. Am
Q 1995; 17:30-31.
JVet Res 1989; 50:860.
9. Pugh CR: Utrasonographic examination of abdominal lymph nodes
 38. Pugh CR, Schelling CG, Moreau RE, et al: Utrasound corner: iatro-
in the dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:110.
genic renal pyelectasia in the dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:50.
10. Nyland TG, Park RD: Hepatic ultrasonography in the dog. Vet Radiol
39. England GCW, Yeager AW: Ultrasonographic appearance of the
1983; 24:74.
ovary and uterus of the bitch during oestrus, ovulation and early
11. Nyland TG, Hager DA: Sonography of the liver, gallbladder and
pregnancy. I Reprod Fertil Suppl 1993; 47:107.
 spleen. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1985; 15:1123.
40. Barthez PY, Nyland TG, Feldrman EC: Utrasonography of adrenal
12. Kleine LJ, Lamb CR: Comparative organ imaging: the gastrointesti-
glands in the dog, cat and ferret. Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anim
nal tract. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:133.
Pract 1998; 28:869-885.
13. Spaulding KA: Ultrasound corner. Gallbladder wall thickness. Vet
41. Douglass JP, Berry CR, James S: Utrasonographic adrenal gland
Radiol Utrasound 1993; 34:270.
measurerments in dogs without evidence of adrenal disease. Vet
14. Moentk J, Biller DS: Bilobed gallbladder in a cat: ultrasonographic
Radiol Utrasound 1997; 38:124-130.
appearance. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1993; 34:354.
42. Grooters A, Biller DS, Merryman JL: Utrasonographic parameters of
15. Weber WJ, Spaulding KA: Utrasound corner hepatic pseudormasses
normal canine adrenal glands: cormparison to necropsy findings. Vet
caused by normal anatormic structures in the dog. Vet Radiol
Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:126-130.
Ultras0und 1994; 35:307-308.
43. Kantrowitz BM, Nyland TG, Feldman EC: Adrenal ultrasonography
in the dog: detection of turmors and hyperplasia in hyperadrenocor-
Aust Vet J 1974; 50:529-532.
ticism. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:91.
17. Jakovljevic S, Gibbs C: Radiographic assessment of gastric rmucosal
44. Scheling CG: Utrasonography of the adrenal gland. Prob Vet Med
fold thickness in dogs. Am I Vet Res 1993; 54:1827.
1991; 3:604-617.
18. Penminck DG, Nyland TG, Fischer PE, et al: Utrasonography of the
 45. Voorhout G: X-ray cormputed tormography, nephrotormography and
normal canine gastrointestinal tract. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:272.
ultrasonography of the adrenal glands of healthy dogs. Arm J Vet Res
19. Miles KG, Lattirmer IC, Krause GF, et al: The use of intraperitoneal
1990; 51:625.
fluid as a sirmple technique for enhancing the sonographic visualiza-
46. Weichselbaurn RC, Feeney DA, Hayden DW: Cormparison of upper
tion of the canine pancreas. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:258.
gastrointestinal radiographic findings to histopathologic observations:
 20. Saunders HM: Utrasonography of the pancreas. Prob Vet Med 1991;
a retrospective study of dogs and cats with suspected small bowel infil-
3:583.
trative disease (1985- 1990). Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:418.
 21. Wood AKW, McCarthy PH, Angles JM: Utrasonographic-anatomic
47. Biller Ds, Kantrowitz B, Partington B, et al: Diagnostic ultrasound of
correlation and imaging protocol for the spleen in anesthetized dogs.
the urinary bladder. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:397.
Arm I Vet Res 1990; 51:1433.
48. Giesse Al, Lowry JE, Schaffer DJ, et al: Sonographic evaluation of uri-
 22. Grandage J: Sorme effects of posture on the radiographic appearance
nary bladder wall thickness in norrmal dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound
of the kidneys of the dog. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:165.
1997; 38:132-138.
 23. Feeney DA, Thrall DE, Barber DL, et al: Normal canine excretory
49. Douglass IP: Utrasound corner: bladder wall mass efect caused by
urogram: effects of dose,tirme, and individual dog variation. Am J Vet
the intrarmural portion of the canine ureter. Vet Radiol Utrasound
Res 1979;40:1596
993; 34:107.
 24. Finco Dr, Stiles NS, Kneller SK, et al: Radiologic estimation of kidney
 50. Ackerman N: Radiographic evaluation of the uterus: a review. Vet
size in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1971; 159:995.
Radiol 1981; 22:252.
 25. Lee R, Leowijuk C: Normal pararmeters in abdorminal radiology of
 51. Collery L: Contrast hysterography in the bitch. Ir Vet J 1956; 10:99.
the dog and cat. J Small Anirm Pract 1982; 23:251.
52. Funkquist B, Lagerstedt AS, Linde C, et al: Hysterography in the
26. Feeney DA, Barber DL,Jhnston GR, et al: The excretory urogram.1.
bitch. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:12.
 Techniques, norrmal radiographic appearance and misinterpretation
 53. Stone EA,Thrall DE, Barber DL: Radiographic interpretation of pro-
of norrmal findings. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1982; 4:233-240.
static disease in the dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:115.
27. Barrett RB, Kneller SL: Feline kidney mensuration. Acta Radiol
 54. Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Klausner JS, et al: Canine prostatic dis-
Diagn (Stockh) 1972; 319(Suppl):279.
ease—comparison of radiographic appearance with morphologic
28. Shiroma JT, Gabriel JK, Carter TL, et al: Effect of reproductive status
and rmicrobiologic findings; 30 cases (1981-1985). J Arm Vet Med
 On feline renal size. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:242.
Assoc 1987; 190:1012.
 29. Barr FJ, Holt PE, Gibbs C: Utrasound rmeasurement of normal renal
 55. Cartee RE, Rowles T: Transabdominal sonographic evaluation of the
 pararmeters. J Small Anim Pract 1990; 31:180.
canine prostate. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:156.
CHaPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
461
56. Juniewicz PE, Lemp BM, Batzold FH, et al: Transrectal ultrasonogra-
81. Zontine WJ: Effect of chemical restraint drugs on the passage of
 phy as a rmethod to monitor canine prostatic size in situ: rmeasure-
bariurm sulfate through the stormach and duodenurm of dogs. J Am
rments following endocrine manipulation and ejaculation. Prostate
Vet Med Assoc 1973; 162:878.
1989:14:265-277.
82. Hogan PM, Aronson EA: Efect of sedation on transit time of feline
57. Finn ST, Wrigley RH: Ultrasonography and ultrasound-guided
gastrointestinal contrast studies. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:85.
biopsy of the canine prostate. In Kirk RW, ed Current veterinary
83. O'Brien TR: Radiographic diagnosis of abdominal disorders in the
therapy X. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989.
dog and cat. Covell Park Vet Co, Davis, Calif, 1981.
58. Pugh CR, Konde LJ, Park RD: Testicular ultrasound in the normal
84. Bargai U: The effect of xylazine hydrochloride on the radiographic
dog. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:194.
appearance of the stormach and intestine of the dog. Vet Radiol
59. Spaulding KA: Utrasound corner: helpful hints in identifying the
1982; 23:60.
caudal abdominal aorta and caudal vena cava.Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 85. Hashirm MA, Waterrman AE: Effects of aceprormazine, pethidine and
1992; 33:90.
atropine premedication on lower esophageal sphincter pressure and
60. Finn-Bodner ST, Hudson JA: Abdominal vascular sonography. Vet
barrier pressure in anesthetized cats. Vet Rec 1993; 133:158.
Clin North Am Srmall Anim Pract 1998; 28:887.
86. Maugeri S, Ferre JP Intorre L, et al: Effects of medetomidine on
61. Spaulding KA: A review of sonographic identification of abdorminal
intestinal and colonic rmotility in the dog. I Vet Pharmacol Ther
blood vessels andjuxtavascular organs. Vet Radil 1997; 38:4-23.
1994; 17:148.
62. Kantrowitz BM, Nyland TG, Fisher P: Estirmation of portal blood
87. Nakarmura K, Hara S, Tomizawa N: The effcts of medetormidine
flow using duplex realtime and pulsed Doppler ultrasound imaging
 and xylazine on gastrointestinal motility and gastrin release in the
in the dog. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:222.
dog. I Vet Pharmacol Ther 1997; 20:290.
63. Carter AJ, van Heerden J: Aortic thrormbosis in a dog with glomeru-
88. Steyn PF, Twedt D, Toormbs W: Effect of intravenous diazeparm on
 lonephritis. I S Afr Vet Assoc 1994; 65:189.
 solid phase gastric emptying in norrmal cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound
64. Font A, Closa JM: Utrasonographic localization of caudal vena cava
1997; 38:469.
thrombus in a dog with leishrmaniasis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997;
 89. Agut A, Sanchez-Valverde MA, Lasaosa JM, et al: Use of iohexol as
38:394.
a gastrointestinal contrast mediurm in the dog. Vet Radiol
65. Goggin IM, Biller DS, Rost CM, et al: Utrasonographic identifica-
Utrasound 1993; 34:171.
tion of Dirofilaria immitis in the aorta and liver of a dog. J Am Vet
90. AgutA, Sanchez-Valverde MA, Torrecillas FE, et al: lohexol as a gas-
Med Assoc 1997; 210: 1635.
 trointestinal contrast rmediurm in the cat. Vet Radiol Utrasound
66. Horauf A, Mayer-Kobnick W, Fischer A: Sonographic diagnosis of
1994; 35:164.
aortic thrormbosis in a dog. Tierarztl Prax 1996; 24:374.
 91. Allan GS, Rendano VT, Quick CB, et al: Gastrografin as a gastroin-
67. Rendano VT: Positive contrast peritoneography: an aid in the radi-
testinal contrast rmediurm in the cat. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:110.
ographic diagnosis of diaphragrmatic hernia. J Am Vet Radiol Soc
92. Williarms J, Biller DS, Miyabayashi T, et al: Evaluation of iohexol as
1979; 20:67.
a gastrointestinal contrast medium in norrmal cats. Vet Radiol
68. Stickle Rl: Positive-contrast celiography (peritoneography) for the
Utrasound 1993; 34:310.
diagnosis of diaphragmatic hernia in dogs and cats. J Arm Vet Med
 93. Morgan JP: The upper gastrointestinal tract in the cat: a protocol
Assoc 1984; 185:295.
for contrast radiography. J A1m Vet Radiol Soc 1977; 18:134.
69. Schrmidt S, Suter PF: Angiography of the hepatic and portal venous
 94. Morgan JP: The upper gastrointestinal examination in the cat: nor-
systerm in the dog and cat: an investigative method. Vet Radiol 1980;
 mal radiographic appearance using positive contrast medium. Vet
21:57.
Radiol 198 1; 22:159.
70. Suter PF: Portal vein anormalies in the dog: the angiographic diagno-
 95. Anbjerg I: Gastric ermptying tirme in the dog and cat. J Am Anim
sis. J Arm Vet Radiol Soc 1975; 16:84.
Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:77.
71. Hornof WJ, Suter PF: The use of prostaglandin E, and tolazoline to
96. Miyabayashi T, Morgan JP: Gastric ermptying in the normal dog: a
irmprove cranial mesenteric portography in the dog. IAm Vet Radiol
 con trast radiographic technique. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:187.
Soc 1979; 20:15.
 97. Miyabayashi T, Morgan JP: Upper gastrointestinal examinations: a
72. Allan GS, Dixon RT: Cholecystography in the dog: choice of contrast
radiographic study of clinically norimal Beagle puppies. J Small
 Imedia and optirmurm dose rates. JI Am Vet Radiol Soc 1975; 16:98.
Anirm Pract 1991; 32:83.
73. Allan GS, Dixon RT: Cholecystography in the dog: assessiment of
98. Miyabayashi T, Morgan JP, Atilola MAO,et al: Smallintestinal emp-
radiographic positioning and the use of a double-contrast exarmina-
tying tirme in normal Beagle dogs. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:164.
tion by visual and densitormetric methods. J Aim Vet Radiol Soc 1977;
99. Eville P, Ackerman N: The effect of barium termperature on
18:177.
esophageal and gastric rmotility in dogs. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:233.
74. Carlisle CH: A comparison of techniques for cholecystography in the
100. Burns J, Fox SM: The use of a bariurm rmeal to evaluate total gastric
cat. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1977; 18:173.
ernptying time in the dog. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:169.
75. Allan GS: Cholecystography, an aid in the diagnosis of diaphrag-
101. Allan FJ, Guilford WG, Robertson ID, et al: Gastric ermptying of
Imatic hernias in the dog and cat. Aust Vet Pract 1973; 3:7.
solid radiopaque rmarkers in healthy dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound
76. Cornell KK, Jakovljievic S, Waters D, et al: Extrahepatic biliary
1996; 37:336.
obstruction secondary to diaphragimatic hernia in two cats. J A1m
102. Fucci V, Pechrman RD, Venuogopalan CS, et al: Large bowel transit
Anim Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:502.
times using radiopaque rmarker in normal cats. Vet Surg 1990;
77. Fujita M, Orima H: Effct and safety of meglurmine iotroxate for
19:66.
cholangiocystography in norrmal cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1994;
103. Goggin JM, Hoslinson II, Kirk CA, et al: Comparison of gastric ermp-
35:79.
tying times inhealthy cats simltaneously evalatedwith radiopaque
78. Wrigley RH, Reuter RE: Percutaneous cholecystography in normal
 markers and nuclear scintigraphy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1999; 40:89.
dogs. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:239.
104. Guilford WG, Lwako CR, Allan FJ: Accuracy of localizing
79. Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Johnston GR, et al: Acalculous cholecystitis in
radiopaque rmarkers by abdorminal radiography and correlation
four canine cases: ultrasonographic findings and use of ultrasono-
between their ermptying rate and that of canned food in dogs. Am J
graphic-guided, percutaneous cholecystocentesis in diagnosis. J Am
Vet Res 1997; 58:1359.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:207.
105. Lester NV, Roberts GD, Newell SM, et al: Assessrment of barium-
80. Finn ST, Park RD, Twedt DC, et al: Ultrasonographic assessment of
impregnated polyethylene spheres as a rmeasure of solid-phase gas-
sincalide-induced canine gallbladder ermptying: an aid to the diag-
tric ermptying in norrmal dogs: a cormparison to scintigraphy. Vet
nosis of biliary obstruction. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:269.
Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:465.
462
Small Animal Radiology And Uitrasonography
106. Sparkes AH, Papasouliotis K, Barr FJ, et al: Reference ranges for gas-
133. Johnson GC, Mann FA, Fair N, et al: Transmural intestinal penetra-
trointestinal transit of barium-impregnated polyethylene spheres in
healthy cats. J Small Anirm Pract 1997; 38:340.
sions. J Vet Diagn lnvest 1992; 4:473.
107. Thrall DE, Leininger IR: Irregular intestinal mucosal margination
134. Kipar A, Koehler K, Bellrmann S, et al: Feline infectious peritonitis
in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1969; 155:713.
presenting as a turmor in the abdominal cavity. Vet Rec 1999;
108. Evans SM, Laufer l: Double-contrast radiography in the normal
144:118.
dog. Vet Radiol 198 1; 22:2.
135. Love DN: lsolation of an actinormycete resermbling Actinomyces
109. Evans SM, Biery Dl: Double-contrast radiography in the cat:
viscosus from the peritoneal fluid of a dog. Aust Vet J 1977;
technique and normal radiographic appearance. Vet Radiol 1983;
53:107.
24:3.
136. Mongil CM, Drobatz KJ, Hendricks JC: Traurmatic hermoperi-
110. Evans SM: Double- versus single-contrast radiography in the dog
and cat. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:6.
1995; 31:217.
111. Nyland TG, Ackerman N: Pneurmocolon: a diagnostic aid in
137. Miller MW, Bonagura JD, Dibartola SP, et al: Budd-Chiari-like syn-
abdorminal radiography. I Arm Vet Radiol Soc 1978; 19:203.
drome in two dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:277.
112. Root CR: Contrast radiography of the alimentary tract. In Ticer IW,
138. Robins G, Thornton J, Mils I: Bile peritonitis and pleuritis in a dog.
ed: Radiographic technique in veterinary practice, ed 2. WB
 J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1977; 13:55.
Saunders, Phiadelphia, 1984; p 364.
139. Root CR: Steatitis in cats: its radiographic appearance. Vet Radiol
113. Bellah JR, Spencer CP, Brown DJ, et al: Congenital cranioventral
1971; 12:60.
abdorminal wall, caudal sternal, hermidiaphragmatic, pericardial and
 140. Root CR, Lord PF: Peritoneal carcinormatosis in the dog and cat: its
 intracardiac defects in Cocker Spaniel littermates. J Am Vet Med
radiographic appearance. Vet Radiol 1971; 12:54.
Assoc 1989; 194:1741.
141. Roth L, King IM: Mesenteric and omental sclerosis associated with
114. Biller DS, Moon ML: Radiographic diagnosis—perineal hernia with
 Imetastases from gastrointestinal neoplasia in the dog. J Small Anim
entrapped urinary bladder and leiormyosarcorma of a cecum in a
Pract 1990; 31:27.
dog. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:176.
142. Schwarz T, Morandi F, Gnudi G, et al: Nodular fat necrosis in the
115. Cornell KK, Jakovljevic S, Waters DI, et al: Extrahepatic biliary
feline and canine abdormen. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2000; 41:335.
obstruction secondary to diaphragmatic hernia in 2 cats. J Am
143. Steyn PF, Witturm TE: Radiographic, epidermiologic and clinical
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:502.
aspects of simultaneous pleural and peritoneal effusions. J Am Vet
116. Kipnis RE, Hill RB: An ectopic pregnancy within an inguinal her-
Med Assoc 1993; 202:307.
nia. Canine Pract 1978; 5:45.
144. Surmrmers BA, Sykes G, Martin ML: Pansteatitis rmirmicking infec-
117. Koper S, Smucha M, Silrmanowicz P, et al: Selective abdominal
tious peritonitis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180:546.
angiography as a diagnostic method for diaphragmatic hernia in
145. Walker RL, Monticella TM, Ford RB, et al: Eurnycotic rmycetorma
the dog: an experimental study.Vet Radiol1982;23:50.
caused by Peudallscheria boydit in the abdorminal cavity of a dog.
118. Mann FA, Tanger CH, Boothe HW, et al: Cranial pubic ligarment in 
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:67.
dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 22:519.
146. Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ: High-rise syndrorme in cats. J A1m Vet 
119. Kaplan PM, Murtaugh RJ, Ross IN: Ultrasound in ermergency vet-
Med Assoc 1987; 191:1399.
erinary rmedicine. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1988; 3:245.
147. Probst CW, Stickle RL, Bartlett PC: Duration of pneurmoperi-
120. Larmb CR, Mason GD, Wallace MK: Ultrasonographic diagnosis of
toneurm in the dog. Am I Vet Res 1986; 47:176.
peritoneopericardial diaphragrmatic hernia in a Persian cat. Vet Rec
148. Lonsdale RA, Richardson JA: Pneurmoperitoneurm and gastric per-
1989; 125:186.
 i  oe a i e  
121. Munro E, Stead C: Utrasonographic diagnosis of uterine entrap-
Utrasound 1999; 40:120.
ment in an inguinal hernia. J Small Anim Pract 1993; 34:139.
149. Probst CW, Bright RM, Ackerrman N, et al: Spontaneous pneu-
122. Matteucci ML, Spaulding K, Dassler C, et al: Utrasound diagnosis:
moperitoneurm subsequent to gastric volvulus in two dogs. Vet
intraabdorminal wood foreign body Vet Radiol Utrasound 1999;
Radiol 1984; 25:37.
40:513.
150. Lord PF, Carb A, Halliwell WH, et al: Ermphysermatous hepatic
123. Baker KD, Howlett CR: A case of canine nocardiosis. Aust Vet Pract 
abscess associated with traurma, necrotic hepatic nodular hyperpla-
1974; 4:226-236.
sia and adenorma in a dog. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:46.
124. Barber DL, Mahaffey MB: The peritoneal space. In Thrall DE, ed:
151. Edwards NJ, Mead WW, Haviland DG: Radiographic diagnosis of
Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders,
spontaneous pneurmoperitoneum in a cat. Vet Radiol Utrasound
Philadelphia, 1998; p 441-457.
1994;35:428.
125. Chastain CB, Grier RL, Hogle RM, et al: Actinormycotic peritonitis
152. Spaulding KA: Sonographic evaluation of peritoneal effsion in
in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1976; 168:499.
srmall anirmals. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1994; 34:427.
126. Crowe DR, Lorenz MD, Hardie EM, et al: Chronic peritoneal effu-
153. Henley RK, Hager DA, Ackerrman N: A cormparison of two-dirmen-
sion due to a partial caudal vena cava obstruction following blunt
sional ultrasonography and radiography for the detection of srmall
traurma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:231.
armounts of free peritoneal fluid in the dog. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:121.
127. Dickie CW, Sniff ES: Chlarmydia infection associated with pneu-
154. Merlo M, Larmb CR: Radiographic and ultrasonographic features of
monitis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176:1256.
retained surgical sponge in 8 dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2000;
128. Edwards DF, Nyland TG, Weigel JP: Thoracic, abdorminal and verte-
41:279.
 bral actinomycosis: diagnosis and long-term therapy in 3 dogs. J Vet
155. Kirberger RM, Lambrechts N: The ultrasonographic appearance of
Intern Med 1988; 2:184.
black grain eurmycetorma in the abdormen of a dog. I Am Anim Hosp
129. Fossum TW, Wellman M, Felford RL, et al: Eosinophilic pleural or
Assoc 1993; 29:477.
peritoneal effusions in dogs and cats: 14 cases (1986-1992). J A1m
156. Konde LJ, Lebel IL, Park RD, et al: Sonographic application in the
Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:1873.
diagnosis of intraabdorminal abscess in the dog. Vet Radiol 1986;
130. Gores BR, Berg I, Carpenter IL, et al: Chylous ascites in cats: 9 cases
27:15 1.
(1978- 1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205:1161.
157. Root CR: Abdorminal masses. In Thrall DE, ed: Textbook of veteri-
131. Hardie EM, Rottman JB, Levy JK: Sclerosing encapsulating peri-
nary diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1998;
tonitis in 4 dogs and a cat. Vet Surg 1994; 23:107.
pp 417-440.
132. Hosgood G, Salisbury SK, Cantwell HD, et al: Intraperitoneal circu-
158. Bartels JE: Radiographic appearance of ectopic fetal murmrmifica-
lation and drainage in the dog. Vet Surg 1989; 18:261.
tion. Auburn Vet 1972; 28:67.
CHaPTer THRee THe ABDOmEN
463
159. Blackwood L, Sullivan M, Lawson H: Radiographic abnormalities in 
187. Mullowney PC, Tennant BC: Choledocholithiasis in the dog: a
canine rmulticentric lymphorma: a review of 84 cases. J Srmall Anim
review and a report of a case with rupture of the cormrmon bile duct.
Pract 1997; 38:62.
J Small Anirm Pract 1982; 23:631.
160. Carrig CB, Gourley IM, Philbrick AL: Primary abdorminal preg-
188. Oswald GP, Twedt DC, Steyn P: Campylobacter jejuni bacterermia
 i  I  n asns i e u 
and acute cholecystitis in two dogs. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994;
Assoc 1972; 160:308.
30:165.
161. Court EA, Earnest-Koons KA, Barr SC, et al: Malignant histiocyto-
189. Avgeris S, Hoskinson JI: Emphysermatous cholecystitis in a dog: its
sis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:1300.
radiographic diagnosis. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:344.
162. DeNooy PP: Extrauterine pregnancy and severe ascites in a cat. Vet
190. Burk RL, Johnson GF: Ermphysermatous cholecystitis in a nondia-
Med Simall Anirm Clin 1979; 74:349.
betic dog: 3 case histories. Vet Radiol 1980; 21:242.
163. DiPinto MN, Dunstan RW, Lee C: Cystic, peritoneal mesothelioma
191. Lord PF, Wilkins RJ: Emphyserma of the gall bladder in a diabetic
in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995; 31:385.
dog. I A1m Vet Radiol Soc 1972; 13:49.
164. Goldschmidt MH, Zoltowski C: Anal sac adenocarcinoma in the
192. Sato AF, Solano M: Radiographic diagnosis—liver lobe entraprment
dog: 14 cases. J Small Anirm Pract 1981; 22:119.
165. Krarmer JM, Lesser A: What is your diagnosis? Pelvic hermatorma in
1998; 39:123.
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:118.
193. Owens JM: Radiographic interpretation for the simall anirmal clini-
166. Mahaffey EA, Gabbert N, Johnson D, et al: Disserminated histoplas-
cian. Ralston Purina Co, St Louis, 1982.
rmosis in 3 cats. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1977; 13:46.
 194. Ackerman N, Madewell BR: Thoracic and abdorminal radiographic
167. McEwen SA, Valli VEO, Hulland TJ: Hypereosinophilic syndrome
 abnormalities in the rmulticentric form of lymphosarcoma in dogs.
in cats: a report of 3 cases. Can J Comp Med 1985; 49:248.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176:36.
168. O'Keefe DA, Couto G, Burke-Schwartz C, et al: Systermic Imastocy-
195. Andersson M, Sevelius E: Breed, sex and age distribution in dogs
tosis in 16 dogs. I Vet lntern Med 1987; 1:75.
with chronic liver disease; a dermographic study. J Small Anirm Pract
169. Poonacha KB, Srmith HL: Naturally occurring Tyzzer's disease as a
1991; 32:1.
 cormplication of distermper and rmycotic pneurmonia in a dog. J Am
196. Bergman JR: Nodular hyperplasia in the liver of the dog: an associ-
Vet Med Assoc 1976; 169:419.
ation with changes in the lto cell population. Vet Pathol 1985;
170. Shaiken LC, Evans SM, Goldschmidt MH: Radiographic findings in
22:427.
canine malignant histiocytosis. Vet Radiol 1991; 21:246.
197. Bielsa LM, Greiner EC: Liver flukes in cats. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc
171. Stickle JE, Hribernik TN: Clnicopathological observations in dis-
1985; 21:269.
serminated histoplasimosis in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1978;
198. Black AP: A solitary congenital hepatic cyst in a cat. Aust Vet Pract
14:105.
1983; 13:166.
172. Tormlinson J, Jackson ML, Pharr IW: Extrauterine pregnancy in a
 199. Blunden AS, Simith KC: Generalized armyloidosis and acute liver 
cat. Feline Pract 1980; 10:18.
hermorrhage in 4 cats. J Small Anirm Pract 1992; 33:566.
173. Trevor PB, Saunders GK,
,Waldron DR, et al: Metastatic
 s   a d  a    
extrarmedullary plasrmacytorma of the colon and recturm. J Am Vet
telangiectasis in 18 cats. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1994; 35:73.
Med Assoc 1993; 203:406.
 201. Chapiman BL, Hendrick MJ, Washabua RJ: Granulormatous hepati-
174. Vasseur PB, Feldrman EC: Pyormetra associated with extrauterine
tis in dogs: 9 cases (1987-1990). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:680.
pregnancy in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1982; 18:872.
 202. Church EM, Matthiesen DT: Surgical treatrment of 23 dogs with
175. Zeiss CJ, Jardine H, Hychzerrmeyer H: A case of disserminated tuber-
necrotizing cholecystitis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988; 24:305.
culosis in a dog caused by Mycobacterium avium intracellulare. J Am
203. Cornelius LM, Thrall DE, Halliwall WH, et al: Anormalous por-
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:419.
tosystermic anastomoses associated with chronic hepatic insuffi-
176. Faulkner RT, Krawiec DR, Wallace LJI: Retroperitoneal abscess sec-
ciency in 6 young dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1975; 167:220.
ondary to a bite wound. Canine Pract 1980; 7:35-37.
 204. Dill-Macky E: Chronic hepatitis in dogs. Vet Clin North Aim Srmall
177. Johnston DE, Christie BA: The retroperitoneum in the dog: retroperi-
Anirm Pract 1995; 25:387.
toneal infections. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1990; 12:1035.
205. Doige CE, Furneaux RW: Liver disease and intrahepatic portal
178. Roush JK, Bjoling DE, Lord P: Diseases of the retroperitoneal space
hypertension in the dog. Can Vet I 1975; 16:209.
in the dog and cat. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:47.
206.
. Downs MO, Miller MA, Cross AR, et al: Liver lobe torsion and liver
179. Schermerhorn T, McNarmara PS, Dykes NL, et al: Cullen's sign and
abscess in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212:835.
 207. Edwards DF, MeCracken MD, Richardson DC: Sclerosing cholangi-
in a dog. I Small Anirn Pract 1998; 39:490.
tis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182:710.
180. Brormel C, Leveille R, Scrivani PV, et al: Gallbladder perforation
associated with cholelithiasis and cholecystitis in a dog. I Srmall
in dogs. Vet Radiol 1987; 28:192.
Anirm Pract 1998; 39:541.
 209. Ewing GO, Suter PF, Bailey CS: Hepatic insuffciency associated
181. Brormel C, Srmeak DD, Leveille R: Porcelain gallbladder associated
with congenital anomalies of the portal vein in dogs. J Arm Anin
with primary biliary adenocarcinorma in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Hosp Assoc 1974; 10:463.
1998; 213:1137.
 210. Farrar ET, Washabau RJ, Saunders HM: Hepatic abscesses in dogs:
182. Cantwell HD, Blevins WE, Hanika-Rebar C, et al: Radiopaque
14 cases (1982-1994). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1996; 208:243.
hepatic and lobar duct choleliths in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 211. Foley P, Miller L, Graharn K, et al: Cholecystadenocarcinorma in a
1983; 19:373.
cat. Can Vet J 1998; 39:373.
183. Carlisle CH: Radiographic anatormy of the cat gallbladder. Vet
 212. Gagne JM, Weiss DJ, Arrmstrong PJ: Histopathologic evaluation of
Radiol 1977; 18:170.
feline inflarmmatory liver disease. Vet Pathol 1966; 33:521.
184. Harris SJ, Sirmpson JIW, Thoday KL: Obstructive cholelithiasis
 213. Glardon O, Fluckiger M, Keller M, et al: Liver lobe torsion: contri-
and gall bladder rupture in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 1984;
bution to the differential diagnosis of the acute abdomen.
25:66 1.
Kleinterpraxis 1987; 32:207.
185. Jacobs TM, O'Brien RT: What is your diagnosis? Hepatormegaly and
 214. Grooters AM, Scherding RG, Johnson SE: Hepatic abscesses in dogs.
cholelithiasis with mineralization of the biliary tract in a dog. I Am
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1995; 17:833.
Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211:291.
215. Gutbrod F, Geber E, Heuschmann-Giebiger l: Occlusion of the bile
186. Kirpensteijn J, Fingland RB, Urich T, et al: Cholelithiasis in dogs: 29
duct in a dog caused by thickening of bile. Prakt Tierarzt 1987;
cases (1980-1990). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:1137.
68:44.
464
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
 216. Hawe RS: What is your diagnosis? Liver abscess adjacent to gall-
 245. Watkins PE, Pearson H, Denny HR: Traurmatic rupture of the bile
bladder in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:1653.
duct in the dog: a report of 7 cases. J Small Anirm Pract 1983; 24:73 1.
 217. Haywood S, Rutgers HC, Christian MK: Hepatitis and copper accu-
 246. Weiss DJ, Gagne JM, Armstrong PJ: Relationship between inflarm-
mulation in Skye Terriers. Vet Pathol 1988; 25:408.
matory hepatic disease and inflarmmatory bowel disease. J Am Vet 
 218. Hunt GB, Mahoney P, Bellinger CR: Successful managerment of an
Med Assoc 1996; 209:1114.
iatrogenic biliary pseudocyst in a dog. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 1997;
 247. Wellman ML, Davenport DJ, Morton D, et al: Malignant histiocyto-
33:166.
sis in four dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:919.
 219. Hunt GB, Malik R, Chaprman BL, et al: Ascites and hypertension in 
 248. Willard MD, Bailey MQ, Hauptrman J, et al: Obstructed portal
3 young dogs with non-fibrosing liver disease. J Smal Anin Pract
venous flow and portal venous thrormbus in a dog. J Am Vet Med
1993; 34:428.
Assoc 1989; 194:1449.
 249. Carrmichael KP, Miller M, Rawling CA, et al: Clinical, hematologic,
Vet J 1972; 13:160.
and biochermical features of a syndrorme in Bernese Mountain Dogs
 221. Johnson SE, Crisp SM, Smeak DD, et al: Hepatic encephalopathy in 
 characterized by hepatocellular degeneration. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
two aged dogs secondary to a presumed congenital portal azygous
1996; 208:1277.
shunt. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:129.
 250. Crawford MA, Schall WD, Jensen RK, et al: Chronic active hepatitis
 222. Kosovsky JE, Manfra-Maretta S, Matthiesen DT, et al: Results of
in 26 Doberrman Pinschers. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:1343.
 partial hepatectomy in 18 dogs with hepatocellular carcinoma. J Am
251. Danderslebel IV, Janichen T, Fiebiger l, et al: Lipid storage disease in
Anim Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:203.
the Fox Terrier similar to Wolman's disease of man. Tierarztl Prax
 223. LaDue-Miller T, Graehler RA, Fagin B: What is your diagnosis?
1986; 14:253.
Hepatic abscess in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209:1701.
252. Hultgren BD, Stevens JB, Hardy RM: Inherited, chronic progressive
 224. Lawrence HJ, Erb NH, Harvey HJ: Non-lynphormatous hepatobil-
hepatic degeneration in Bedlington Terriers. Am J Vet Res 1986;
iary rmasses in cats: 41cases ( 1972-1991). Vet Surg 1994; 23:365.
47:365.
225. Lipowitz Al, Poffenbarger E: Gallbladder perforation in a dog. I m
 253. Johnson GF, Zawie DA, Gilbertson SR, et al: Chronic active hepati-
Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:838.
tis in Doberman Pinschers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180:1438.
 226. Loevan KO: Spontaneous hepatic rupture secondary to armyloidosis
254. Jensen AL, Nielsen OL: Chronic hepatitis in 3 young Standard
 in a Chinese Shar Pei. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:577.
Poodles. I Vet Med 199 1; 38: 194.
 227. Matthiesen DT, Lammerding I: Galbladder rupture and bile peri-
 255. Loeven KO: Hepatic armyloidosis in two Chinese Shar Pei dogs.
tonitis secondary to cholelithiasis and cholecystitis in a dog. J Am
 J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1994; 204:1212.
Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:1282.
 256. Pidduck H: A review of inherited diseases in the dog. Vet Ann 1987;
 228. MeConkey S, Brigg C, Solanbo M, et al: Liver torsion and associated
27:293.
bacterial peritonitis in a dog. Can Vet J 1997; 38:438.
 257. Rand JS, Best SJ, Mathews KA: Portosystermic vascular shunts in a
 229. MeGavin MD, Henry I: Canine hepatic vascular hamartorma associ-
family of American Cocker Spaniels. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1988;
ated with ascites. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1972; 160:864.
24:265.
 230. McKenna SC, Carpenter JL: Polycystic disease of the kidney and
 258. Robinson R: Genetic anormalies in dogs. Canine Pract 199 1; 16:29.
liver in the Cairn Terrier. Vet Pathol 1980; 17:436.
 259. Thornburg LP, Crawford SJ: Liver disease in West Highland White
 231. Miller WH, Scott DW, Buerger RG, et al: Necrolytic migratory ery-
Terriers (copper toxicosis). Vet Rec 1986; 118: 110.
therma in dogs: a hepaticocutaneous syndrorme. J Arm Anirm Hosp
 260. Ubbink GJ, VanDeBrock J, Meyer HP, et al: Prediction of inherited
Assoc 1990; 26:573.
 portosystermic shunts in lrish Wolfhounds on the basis of pedigree
232. O'Keefe DA, Couto G, Burke-Schwartz C, et al: Systermic mastocy-
analysis. A1m J Vet Res 1998; 59:1553.
tosis in 16 dogs. J Vet lntern Med 1987; 1:75.
 261. vanBree H, Jacobs V, Vandekerkhove P: Radiographic assessrment of
 233. Ortermberg L, Scararmal I: Chronic primary hepatitis in dogs: study
liver volurme in dogs. Arm I Vet Res 1989; 50:1613.
of 10 clinical cases. Rev Med Vet ( Toulouse) 1995; 76:199.
262. Godshalk CP, Badertscher RR ll, Rippy MK, et al: Quantitative ultra-
 234. Pechrman RD, Thrall DE: The liver and spleen. In Thrall DE, ed:
sonic assessrment of liver size in the dog. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:162.
Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders,
 263. Barr F: Utrasonographic assessment of liver size in the dog. J Small
Philadelphia, 1998; pp 458-465.
Anirm Pract 1992; 33:359.
 235. Rutgers HC, Haywood S, Kelly DF: Ildiopathic hepatic fibrosis in 15
 264. Barr F: Norrmal hepatic rmeasurerments in rmature dogs. J Srmall
dogs. Vet Rec 1993; 133:115.
Anirm Pract 1992; 33:367.
236.Shiga A,ShirotaK,hida T,t al: Morphologic study on a case f
 265. Biller DS, Kantrowitz B, Miyabayashi T: Ultrasonography of diffuse
canine hepatic nodular fibrosis. J Vet Med Sci 1996; 58:28 1.
liver disease. I Vet lntern Med 1992; 6:71.
 237. Thormson MJ, King TJ, Copeland SE: Cholecystitis and gall bladder
 266. Lamb CR, Hartzband LE, Tidwell AS, et al: Utrasonographic find-
rupture in a dog. Aust Vet Pract 1996; 26:114.
ings in hepatic and splenic lyrmphosarcorma in dogs and cats. Vet
 238. Tormlinson J, Black A: Liver lobe torsion in a dog. I Am Vet Med
Radiol 1991; 32:117.
Assoc 1983; 183:225.
 267. Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Hardy RM: Two-dirmensional ultra-
 239. Valentine BA, Porter WP: Multiple hepatic abscesses and peritonitis
sonography for assessment of hepatic and splenic neoplasia in the
caused by eugonic ferrmenter-4 bacilli in a pup. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 dog and cat. J An Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:68.
1983; 183:1324.
 268. Larmb CR, Wrigley RH, Simpson KW, et al: Utrasonographic diag-
 240. Vulgamott JC: Hepatic encephalopathy associated with acquired
nosis of portal vein thrombosis in four dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 porta caval shunt in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175:724.
1996; 37:121.
241. VanDenlngh TSGAM, Rothuizen J, Meyer HP: Portal hypertension
 269. Voros K, Vrabely T, Papp L, et al: Correlation of ultrasonographic
associated with prirmary hypoplasia of the hepatic portal vein in
dogs. Vet Rec 1995; 137:424.
J Srmall Anirm Pract 199 1; 32:627.
 242. VanDenlngh TSGAM, Rothuizen J: Hepatoportal fibrosis in 3
270. Nicoll RG, O'Brien RT, Jackson MW: Qualitative ultrasonography
young dogs. Vet Rec 1982; 110:575.
of the liver in obese cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:47.
 243. Warrlich A: Torsion of a liver lobe without peritoneal hernia in a
 271. Yaeger AE, Moharmrmed H: Accuracy of ultrasonography in the
9-month-old Persian cat. Prakt Tierarzt 1998; 79:1031.
 s  i        
 244. Waters CB, Morrison WB, DeNicola DB, et al: Giant cell variant of
53:597.
Imalignant fibrous histiocytorma in dogs: 10 cases (1986-1993). J Am
 272. Stowater IL, Larmb CR, Schelling SH: Utrasonographic features of
Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205:1420.
canine nodular hyperplasia. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:268.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
465
273. Barr FJ: Liver ultrasound in the dog. Vet Annual 1991; 31:120.
301. Vogt JC, Krahwinkel DJ, Bright RE, et al: Gradual occlusion of
274. Carlisle CH, WU JX, Heath JR: The ultrasonic anatorny of the
extrahepatic portosystermic shunts in dogs and cats using the
hepatic and portal veins of the canine liver Vet Radiol 1991; 32:170.
armeroid constrictor. Vet Surg 1996; 25:495.
275. England GCw: Renal and hepatic ultrasonography in the neonatal
302. Wilson K, Scrivani PV, Levielle R: What is your diagnosis?
dog. Vet Radiol U trasound 1996; 37:374.
 Portocaval and portoazygos shunts and microhepatica in a dog.
 276. Edmunds G, Carlisle CH: Ultrasonographic anatomy of the feline
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211:415.
liver. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1993; 34:458.
303. Carlisle CH, Wu JX, Heath TJ: Anatormy of the portal and hepatic
277. Leveille R, Biller Ds, Shiroma IT: Sonographic evaluation of the
Aq ia ai jo una s iy siq e  a jo su
cormmon bile duct in cats. I Vet Intern Med 1996; 10:296.
ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:227.
278. Newell SM, Selcer BA, Cornelius LM: lmaging techniques for eval-
304. Holt DE, Schelling CG, Saunders HM, et al: Correlation of ultra-
uating feline hepatobiliary disease in cats. Vet Med 1994; 89:859.
 sonographic findings with surgical, portography and necropsy find-
279. Nyland TG: Ultrasonic patterns of canine hepatic lyrmphosarcorma.
ings in dogs and cats with portosystermic shunts: 63 cases
Vet Radiol 1984; 25:167.
(1987-1993). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1995; 207:1190.
280. Nyland TG, Barthez PY, Ortega TM, et al: Hepatic ultrasonographic
 305. Lamb CR: Utrasonographic diagnosis of congenital portosystemic
and pathologic findings in dogs with canine superficial necrolytic
shunts in dogs: results of a prospective study Vet Radiol Utrasound
derrmatitis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1996; 37:200.
1996; 37:281.
281. Nyland TG, Hager DA, Herring DS: Sonography of the liver, gall
 306. Lamb CR: Ultrasonography of portosystermic shunts in dogs and
bladder and spleen. Semin Vet Med Surg 1989; 4:13.
cats. Vet Clin North Arm Srmall Anirm Pract 1998; 28:725.
282.NylandTG,Kobik PD,TelyerSE:Utrasnographic evaluatin f
 307. Lamb CR, Forster VanHijfte MA, White RN,et al: Ultrasonographic
biliary cystadeno1mas in cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:300.
 diagnosis of congenital portosystermic shunts in 14 cats. J Srmal]
 283. Osje IT, VanDenlngh TSGAM, Van DerLinde-Siprman JS: Polycystic
Anirn Pract 1996; 37:205.
kidney and liver disease in cats. Vet Q 1998; 20:136.
 308. Lee YW: Pulsed Doppler ultrasonographic evaluation of portal
284. Santilli RA, Biller DS: Utrasonography of the liver andbiliary tract.
 blood flow in dog with experirmental portal vein ligation. J Vet Med
Eur J Comp Anim Pract 1994; 4:57.
Sci 1999; 61:59.
285. Schwarz LA, Penninck DG, Leveille-Webster C: Hepatic abscesses in
309. Daniel GB, Bright R, Olis P, et al: Per rectal portal scintigraphy
13 dogs: a review of the ultrasonographic findings, clinical data and
using 99rm technetiurn pertechnetate to diagnosis portosystermic
therapeutic options. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998; 39:357.
 shunts in dogs and cats. J Vet lntern Med 1991; 5:23.
286. Wrigley RH: Radiographic and ultrasonographic diagnosis of liver
310. Tiermessen 1, Rothuizen J, Voorhout G: Utrasonography in the
 diseases in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Arm Srmall Anirm Pract
diagnosis of congenital portosystermic shunts in dogs. Vet Q 1995;
1985; 15:21.
17:50.
287. Brormel C, Barthez PT, Leveille R, et al: Prevalence of gallbladder
 311. Wrigley RH, Konde LJ, Park RD, et al: Ultrasonographic diagnosis
sludge in dogs assessed by ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Utrasound
of portacaval shunts in young dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;
1998; 39:206.
191:421.
288. Besso JG, Wrigley RH, Gliatto JM, et al: Utrasonographic appear-
312. Wrigley RH, Macy DW, Wykes PM: Ligation of ductus venosus in a
 ance and clinical findings in 14 dogs with gall bladder rmucocele. Vet 
dog, using ultrasonographic guidance. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1983;
Radiol Ultrasound 2000; 41:261.
184:1461.
289. Diez-Bru N, Garcia-Real 1, Lolorebs MP, et al: Utrasonographic
313. Wu JX, Carlisle CH: Utrasonographic exarmination of the canine
appearance of extrahepatic biliary obstruction in a dog: a descrip-
liver based on the recognition of the hepatic and portal veins. Vet
tion of 7 cases. Eur J Cormp Anin Pract 1995; 15:182.
Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:234.
290. Nyland TG, Gillett NA: Sonographic evaluation of experimental
314. Payne JT, Martin RA, Constantinescu GM: The anatormy and
bile duct ligation in the dog. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:252.
ermbryology of portosystemic shunts in dogs and cats. Sernin Vet
291. Berry CR, Ackerman N, Charach M, et al: latrogenic biloma (biliary
Med Surg (Srmall Anim) 1990; 5:76.
315. Koblik PD, Yen CK, Kormtebedde J, et al: Comparison of transcolonic
1992; 33:145.
123-iodoarmphetarmine and portal vein injections of 99imTc-
 292. Neer TM: A review of disorders of the galbladder and extrahepatic
biliary tract in the dog and cat. I Vet lIntern Med 1992; 6: 186.
tal dogs with acquired portosystermic shunts. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:170.
 293. Jensen Al, Kock J, Snekvik K: Unusual ultrasonographic presenta-
 316. McEvoy FJ, Foster-vanHijfte MA, White RN: Detection of portal
tion of cholecystolithiasis in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 1994; 35:420.
 blood flow using per rectal 99m Tc-pertechnetate scintigraphy in
 294. Birchard SJ, Biller DA, Johnson SE: Differentiation of intrahepatic
normal cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998; 39:234.
versus extrahepatic portosystermic shunts in dogs using positive-
 317. Moon Ml: Diagnostic imaging of portosystermic shunts. Semin Vet
contrast portography. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:13.
Med Surg 1990; 5:120.
295. Boothe HW, Howe LM, Edwards JF, et al: Multiple extrahepatic por-
 318. Bailey MQ, Willard MD, McLoughlin MA, et al: Ultrasonographic
tosystermic shunts in dogs: 30 cases (1981-1993). I Arm Vet Med
findings associated with congenital hepatic arteriovenous fistula in
Assoc 1996; 208: 1849.
three dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:1099.
296. Bostwick DR, Twedt DC: lntrahepatic and extrahepatic portal
 319. Landers EA, Mitten RW: lntrahepatic arteriovenous fistula with
venous anormalies in dogs: 52 cases (1982-1992). J Am Vet Med
portosystermic communications. Vet Radiol 1978; 19:70.
Assoc 1995; 206:1181.
320. Rogers WA, Suter PF, Breznock EM, et al: lntrahepatic arteriove-
297. Hawe RS, Mullen HS: An unusual portacaval anormaly as a cause of
nous fistulae in a dog resulting in portal hypertension, portacaval
hepatic encephalopathy in a cat. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1984;
shunts and reversal of portal blood flow. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
20:987.
1977; 13:470.
298. Lamb CR, White RN: Morphology of congenital intrahepatic por-
 321. Lamb CR, Burton CA, Carlisle CH: Doppler rmeasurerment of
tacaval shunts in dogs and cats. Vet Rec 1998; 142:55.
sd enpume
299. Maretta SM, Pask AJ, Greene RW, et al: Urinary calculi associated
Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:77.
with portosystemic shunts in 6 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981;
322.
. VanWinkle T, Bruce E: Thrormbosis of the portal vein in 11 dogs.
178:133.
Vet Pathol 1993; 30:28
300. Scavelli TD, Hornbuckle WE, Roth L, et al: Portosystermic shunts
323. Hunt GB, Bellinger CR, Borg R, et al: Congenital interruption of the
in cats: seven cases (1976-1984). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1986;
 portal vein and caudal vena cava in dogs: 6 cases and a review of the
189:317.
literature. Vet Surg 1998; 27:203.
466
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
 324. Willard MD, Bailey MQ, Kauptrman J, et al: Obstructed portal
 350. Suter PF, Lowe R: Acute pancreatitis in the dog: a clinical study with
venous flow and portal vein thrombosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;
ermphasis on the radiographic diagnosis. Acta Radiol Suppl 1972;
194:1449.
319:195.
 325. Lamb CR, Wrigley RH, Sirmpson KW, et al: Ultrasonographic diag-
 351. Root CR: Abdominal masses: the radiographic differential diagno-
nosis of portal vein thrormbosis in 4 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
sis. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1974; 15:26.
1996; 37:121.
352. Bellinger CR,Ikiw JIE, Malik R: Cystogastrostomy in the treatment
 326. Nyland TG, Fisher PE: Evaluation of experirmentallyinduced canine
of pancreatic pseudocyst/abscess in 2 dogs. Vet Rec 1989; 125:181.
hepatic cirrhosis using duplex Doppler ultrasound. Vet Radiol
353. Edwards DF, Bauer MW,WalkerMA,etal: Pancreatic rmasses in7dogs
1990; 31:189.
following acute pancreatitis J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:189.
 327. Luttgen PJ, Whitney MS, Wolf AM, et al: Heinz body hemolytic ane-
354. Hines BE, Salisbury SK, Jakovljevic S, et al: Pancreatic pseudocyst
mia associated with high plasrma zinc concentration in a dog. J Am
associated with chronic active necrotizing pancreatitis in a cat. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:1347.
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1996; 32:147.
 328. Hurml RA, Konde LJ, Sellon RK, et al: Gastrogastric intussusception
 355. Lamb CR, Sirmpson KW, Boswood A, et al: Ultrasonography of pan-
in a dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:150.
creatic neoplasia in the dog: a retrospective review of 16 cases. Vet
 329. Miller Rl:Gastrointestinal phycomycosis in 63 dogs. I Am Vet Med
Rec 1995; 137:65.
Assoc 1985; 186:473.
 356. Love NE, Jones C: What is your diagnosis? Pancreatic carcinorma
 330. Van Der Gaag ll, Happe RD, Wolvekarmp WTC: A boxer dog with
liver metastases in a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:1285.
chronic hypertrophic gastritis resermbling Menetrier's disease in
 357. Rutgers C, Herring DS, Orton EC: Pancreatic pseudocyst associated
man. Vet Pathol 1976; 13:172.
with acute pancreatitis in a dog: ultrasonographic diagnosis. J Am
 331. Happe RP, Van Der Gaag ll, Wolvekarmp WTC: Pyloric stenosis
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1985; 21:411.
caused by hypertrophic gastritis in three dogs. J Small Anim Pract
 358. Salisbury SK, Lantz GC, Nelson RW, et al: Pancreatic abscess in
1981; 22:7.
dogs: six cases (1978-1986). J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1988; 193:1104.
 332. Huxtable CR, Mils JN, Clark WT, et al: Chronic hypertrophic gas-
 359. Srmith SA, Biller DS: Resolution of a pancreatic pseudocyst in a dog
tritis in a dog: successful treatrment by partial gastrectormy. I Small
following percutaneous ultrasonographic-guided drainage. I Am
Anim Pract 1982; 23:639.
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1998; 59:673.
333. Walter MC, Goldschrmidt MH, Stone EA, et al: Chronic hyper-
360. Wolfsheimer KJ, Hedund CS, Pechrman RD: Pancreatic pseudocyst
trophic pyloric gastropathy as a cause of pyloric obstruction in the
in a dog with chronic pancreatitis. Canine Pract 1991; 16:6.
dog. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1985; 186:157.
 361. Ackerman N, Silverman S: Intra-abdorminal soft tissue calcifica-
 334. Agut A, Wood AKW, Martin ICA: Sonographic observations of the
tions. Mod Vet Pract 1977; 58:619.
gastroduodenal junction of dogs. Am I Vet Res 1996; 57:1277.
 362. Nyland TG, Mulvaney MH, Strombeck DR: Utrasound features of
335.Newe SM,Graham I RobertsGD,t al Sonographyof thenr
experirmentally induced pancreatitis. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:260.
mal feline gastrointestinal tract. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1999;
 363. Larmb CR: Dilation of the pancreatic duct: an ultrasonographic
40:40.
fnding in acute pancreatitis. J Small Anirm Pract 1989,; 30:410.
 336. Penninck DG, Nyland TG, Kerr LY, et al: Ultrasonographic evalua-
 364. Larmb CR, Sirmpson KW: Utrasonographic findings in cholecys-
tion of gastrointestinal diseases in srmall animals. Vet Radiol 1990;
 tokinin-induced pancreatitis in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1995;
31:134.
36:170.
337. Lamb CR, Hijfte MF: Ultrasound corner-beware the gastric
 365. Morita Y, Yakiguchi M, Hasuda J, et al: Endoscopic ultrasonography
 pseudormass. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1994; 35:398.
of the pancreas in the dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:552.
338. Penninck DG, Moore AS, Tidwell AS, et al: Utrasonography of ali-
366. Murtaugh RJ, Herring DJ, Jacobs RM, et al: Pancreatic ultrasonog-
 mentary lymphosarcorma in the cat. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994;
35:299.
Radiol 1985; 26:27.
 339. Grooters AM, Biller DS, Ward H, et al: Utrasonographic appear-
 367. Simpson KW, Shirorma JT, Biller DS, et al: Antermortem diagnosis of
ance of feline alimentary lyrmphoma Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994;
pancreatitis in four cats. J Small Anim Pract 1994; 35:93.
35:468.
368. Parker WM, Presnell KR: Mesenteric torsion in the dog: two cases.
 340. Kazer-Hotz B, Hauser B, Arnold P: Utrasonographic findings in
Can Vet J 1972; 13:283.
369. Felts JF, Fox PR, Burk Rl: Thread and sewing needles as gastroin-
37:51.
testinal foreign bodies in the cat: a review of 64 cases. J Am Vet Med
 341. Penninck DG, Moore AS, Glaito J: Ultrasonography of canine gas-
Assoc 1984; 184:56.
tric epithelial neoplasia. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:342.
 370. Root CR, Lord PF: Linear radiolucent gastrointestinal foreign bod-
 342. Rivers WJ, Walter PA, Johnston GR, et al: Canine gastric neoplasia:
ies: the radiographic appearance. Vet Radiol 1971; 12:45.
utility of ultrasonography in diagnosis. J Am Anim Hosp AssoC
 371. Graharm JP, Lord PF, Harrison JM: Quantitative estirmation of intes-
1997; 33:144.
tinal dilation as a predictor of obstruction. J Small Anirn Pract 1998;
 343. Billr DS, Partington BP, Miyabayashi T, et al: Utrasonographic
39:521.
appearance of chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy in the dog.
 372. Castellano C, Idiart J, Ibargoyen G: Mesenteric torsion in a dog. Vet
Vet Radiol U trasound 1994; 35:30.
Med Small Anirm Clin 1983; 78:1360.
 344. Grooters AM, Miyabayashi T, Biller DS: Sonographic appearance of
 373. Farrow CS: Radiographic appearance of canine parvovirus enteritis.
Wrermic gastropathy in four dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1994; 35:35.
 J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180:43.
 345. Penninck D, Matz M, Tidwell A: Utrasonography of gastric ulcera-
374. Harvey HJ, Rendano VT: Srmall bowel volvulus in dogs. Clinical
tion in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38:308.
 346. Tidwell AS, Penninck DG: Ultrasonography of gastrointestinal for-
 375. Nermzek JA, Walshaw R, Hauptman JG: Mesenteric volvulus in the
eign bodies. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33: 160.
dog: a retrospective study. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:357.
 347. Kleine LJ, Hornbuckle WE: Acute pancreatitis: the radiographic
 376. Schrauwen E: Canine dysautonormia: another case report. Vet Rec
findings in 182 dogs. J A1m Vet Radiol Soc 1978; 19:102.
1993; 132:663.
 348. Garvey MS, Zawie DA: Feline pancreatic disease. Vet Clin North Am
 377. Shealy PM, Henderson RA: Canine intestinal volvulus: a report of 9
Srmal Anirm Pract 1984; 14:1231.
new cases. Vet Surg 1992; 21:15.
 349. Gibbs C, Denny HR, Minter HM, et al: Radiological features of
378. Westermarck E, Frimaila-Parnanen E: Mesenteric torsion in dogs
inflarmrmatory conditions of the canine pancreas. J Srmall Anim
with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency: 21 cases (1978-1987). J Am
Pract 1972; 13:531.
Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:1404.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOmEN
467
 379. Wise LA, Lappin MR: Canine dysautonormia. Semin Vet Med Surg
408. Baldwin CJ, Panciera RJ, Morton RJ, et al: Acute tularermia in three
1990; 5:72.
 dormestic cats. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:1602.
 380. Wolfe DA, Myer CW: Obstructing intestinal abscess in a dog. J Am
409. Ciararmella C, Oliva G, DeLuna R, et al: A retrospective clinical
Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:518.
study of canine leishrmaniasis in 150 dogs naturally infected by
381. Wright JF, Berman E: lntestinal torsion in the cat. Feline Pract 1973;
Leishmania infantum. Vet Rec 1997; 141:539.
3:42.
410. Grooters AM, Couto CG, Andrews JM, et al: Systermic
382. Hassinger KA: Intestinal entraprment and strangulation caused by
Mycobacterium smegmatis infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
rupture of the duodenocolic ligament in 4 dogs. Vet Surg 1997;
1995; 206:200.
26:275.
411. Kohn B, Arnold P, Kaser—Hotz B, et al: Malignant histiocytosis of
383. Hosgood G, Bunge M, Dorfrman M: Jejunal incarceration by an
the dog: 26 cases (1989-1992). Kleinterpraxis 1993; 38:409.
ormental tear in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 1200:947.
412. Malik R, Dill-Macky E, Martin P,et al: Cryptococcosis in dogs; a ret-
 384. Laughlin R, Kuzma AB: lntestinal strangulation caused by inter-
 S        s 
 abdorminal lipormas in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:1610.
33:291.
385. Lamb CR, Hansson K: Radiological identification of non-opaque
413. Ackerman N: Intravenous pyelography. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
intestinal foreign bodies. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:87.
1974; 10:277.
386. Kosovsky IE, Matthiesen DT, Patniak AK: Srmall intestinal adeno-
 414. Ackerrman N: Intravenous pyelography—interpretation of the
carcinorma in cats: 32 cases ( 1978-1985). JA1m Vet Med Assoc 1988;
study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1974; 10:281.
192:233.
415. Bartels JE: Feline intravenous urography. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
 387. O'Brien TR, Morgan IP, Lebel Jl: Pseudoulcers in the duodenurm of
1973; 9:349.
the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1969; 155:713.
 416. Biery DN: Upper urinary tract. ln O'Brien TR, ed: Radiographic
388. Ackerman N, Root C: Benign duodenal ulceration and perforation 
diagnosis of abdorminal disorders of the dog and cat. Covell Park
in a dog. Vet Radiol 198 1; 22:19.
Vet Co, Davis, Calif, 1981.
389. Baez JL, Hendrick MI, Walker LM, et al: Radiographic, ultrasono-
 417. Borthwick R, Robbie B: Large volurme urography in the cat. J Small
graphic, and endosopic findings in cats withinfammatorybowel
Anirm Pract 1971; 12:579.
disease of the stormach and simallintestine: 33 cases (1990-1997). J
 418. Kneller SK: Role of the excretory urograrm in the diagnosis of renal
Arm Vet Med Assoc 1999; 215:349.
 and ureteral disease. Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anirm Pract 1974;
390. Graharm JP, Newell SM, Roberts GD, et al: Utrasonographic features
4:843.
 of canine intestinal pythiosis. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2000; 41:273.
419. Lord PF, Scott RC, Chan KF: Intravenous urography for evaluation of
391. Myers NC, Penninck DG: Utrasonographic diagnosis of gastroin-
 renal disease in srmall anirmals. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1974; 10:139.
testinal simooth rmuscle turmors in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
420. Feeney DA: Effect of dose on quality of excretory urography. J Am
1994; 35:391.
Vet Radiol Soc 1977; 18:34.
392. Penninck DG, Moore AS, Tidwell AS, et al: Utrasonography of ali-
421. Feeney DA, Barber DL, Johnston GR, et al: The excretory urogram.
mentary lyrmphosarcoma in the cat. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994;
l. Interpretation of abnormal findings. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet
36:299.
1982; 4:32 1.
 393. Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Feeney DA, et al: Utrasonographic features of
 422. Byrd L, Sherman Rl: Radiocontrast-induced acute renal failure: a
intestinal adenocarcinorma in five cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1997;
clinical and pathophysiologic review. Medicine 1979; 58:270.
38:300.
423. Davidson AJ: Diagnosis of renal parenchymal disease. WB
394. Spohr A, Kock J, Jensen Al: Ultrasonographic findings in the
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1984.
Basenji with irmmunoproliferative enteropathy. J Small Anim Pract
424. Walter PA, Feeney DA, Johnston GA: Diagnosis and treatment of
1996; 36:79.
adverse reactions to radiopaque contrast agents. In Kirk RW, ed:
395. Kantrowitz BM, Dirmski D, Swalec K, et al: Utrasonographic detec-
Current veterinary therapy IX. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1986.
tion of a jejunal intussusception and acute renal failure due to eth-
425. Carr AP, Reed AL, Pope ER: Persistent nephrograrm in a cat after
ylene glycol toxicity in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988; 24:697.
 intravenous urography. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:350.
396. Larmb CR, Mantis P: Ultrasonographic features of intestinal intus-
426. Feeney DA, Barber DL, Osborne CA: The functional aspects of the
susception in 10 dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1998; 39:437.
nephrograrm in excretory urography:a review.Vet Radiol 1982; 23:42.
397. Watson DE, Mahaffey MB, Neuwirth LA: Ultrasonographic detec-
427. Feeney DA, Osborne CA, Jessen CR: Effect of rmultiple excretory
tion of duodenojejunal intussusception in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp
urograms on glomerwlar fltration of normal dogs: a preliminary
Assoc 1991; 27:367.
report. Am J Vet Res 1980; 41:960.
 398. Manczur F, Voros K, Vrebely T,et al: Sonographic diagnosis of intes-
428. Root CR: Contrast radiography of the urinary systerm. In Ticer JW,
tinal obstruction in the dog. Acta Vet Hung 1998; 46:35.
 ed: Radiographic technique in veterinary practice, ed 2. WB
399. Spaulding KA, Cohn LA, Millr RT,et al: Enteric duplication in two
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1984; 374.
dogs. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:83.
429. Thrall DE, Finco DR: Canine excretory urography: is quality a func-
400. Bredal WP, Thoresen Sl, Kvellstad A: Atresia coli in a nine week old
tion of BUN? J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1976; 12:446.
kitten. I Small Anim Pract 1994; 35:643.
430. Feeney DA, Osborne CA, Jessen CR: Effects of radiographic con-
401. Drobatz KJ, Hughes D, Hill C: Volvulus of the colon in a cat. J Vet
trast media on results of urinalysis, with ermphasis on alteration in
Ermerg Crit Care 1996; 6:99.
specific gravity J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176:1378.
402. Holt D, Johnston DE: Idiopathic megacolon in cats. Comp Cont 
 431. Feeney DA, Walter PA, Johnston GR: The effect of radiographic 
Educ Pract Vet 1991; 13:1411.
 contrast media on the urinalysis. In Kirk RW, ed: Current veterinary
403. Fluke MH, Hawkins EC, Eliott GS, et al: Short colon in two cats
 therapy IX. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1986.
and a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:87.
432. Ruby AL, Ling GV, Ackerman N: Effect of sodiurm diatrizoate on the
404. Anderson GR, Geary IC: Canine pneurmatosis coli. J Am Anirm Hosp
in vitro growth of three cormrmon canine urinary bacterial species.
Assoc 1973; 9:354.
Vet Radiol 1983; 24:222.
405. Morris El: Pneumatosis coli in a dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992;
433. Park RD: Radiology of the urinary bladder and urethra. lIn O'Brien
33:154.
TR, ed: Radiographic diagnosis of abdorminal disorders of the dog
406. Miller WW, Hathcock JIT, Dillon AR: Cecal inversion in eight dogs.
 and cat. Covell Park Vet Co, Davis, Calif, 1981.
 J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:1009.
434. Johnston GR, Feeney DA: Cormparative organ irmaging: lower uri-
407. Ewing GO, Gormez JA: Canine ulcerative colitis. J Am Anim Hosp
nary tract. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:146.
Assoc 1973; 9:392.
435. Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Osborne CA: Urethrography and cystog-
468
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
raphy in cats, part 1. Techniques, normal radiographic anatomy and
 I Vet Res 1986; 47:2491.
artifacts. Comp Cont Ed 1982; 4:823.
460. Ticer JW, Spencer CP, Ackerrman N: Positive contrast retrograde
436. Rhodes WH, Biery DN: Pneurmocystography in the dog. Vet Radiol
urethrography: a useful procedure for evaluating urethral disorders
1967; 8:45.
in the dog.Vet Radiol 1980; 21:2.
437. Weichselbaurm RC, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, et al: In vitro evaluation
461. Johnston GR, Stevens JB, Jessen CR, et al: Effects of prolonged dis-
 Of contrast medium concentration and depth effects on the radi-
tention of retention catheters on the urethra of dogs and cats. Am J
ographic appearance of specific canine urolith mineral types. Vet
Vet Res 1983; 44:223.
Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:396.
462. Johnston GR, Stevens JB, Jessen CR, et al: Complications of retro-
438. Weichselbaum RC, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, et al: Urocystolith detec-
grade contrast urethrography in dogs and cats. A1m I Vet Res 1983;
tion: comparison of survey, contrast radiographic and ultrasono-
44:1248.
graphic techniques in an in vitro bladder phantorm. Vet Radiol
 463. Allen WE, France C: A contrast radiographic study of the vagina
Utrasound 1999; 40:386.
and uterus of the norrmal bitch. J Small Anirm Pract 26:153; 1985.
439. Buchanan JW: Kinked catheter: a cormplication in pneurmocystogra-
464. Gibbs PEC, Latharm J: An evaluation of positive contrast vaginogra-
phy. Vet Radiol 1967; 8:54.
 phy as a diagnostic aid in the bitch. JI Small Anim Pract 24:53 1,1984.
440. Mahaffey MB, Barber DL, Barsanti JA, et al: Sirmultaneous double-
465. Jacobs G, Barsanti J, Prasse K,et al: Colliculus seminalis as a cause
contrast cystography and cystometry in dogs. Vet Radiol 1984;
 of a urethral filling defect in two dogs with Sertoli cell testicular
25:254.
neoplasms. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:1748.
441. Mahaffey MB, Barsanti JA, Crowell WA, et al: Cystography: effect of
466. Root MV, Johnston SD, Johnston GR, et al: The effect of prepu-
technique on diagnosis of cystitis in dogs. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:261.
beral and postpuberal gonadectormy on penile extrusion and ure-
442. ScrivanPLeveilleR,CollisTheffect of patient posioning
thral diameter in the domestic cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1996;
on rmural filling defects during double-contrast cystography. Vet
37:363.
Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38:355.
467. Miller JB, Sande R: Osseous metaplasia in the renal pelvis of a dog
443. Ackerman N, Wingfield WE, Corley EA: Fatal air ermbolism associ-
with hydronephrosis. J A1m Vet Radiol Soc 1980; 21:146.
468. Kaufmann ML, Osborne CA, Johnston GR, et al: Renal ectopia in a
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1972; 160:1616.
dog and a cat. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1987; 190:73.
444. Zontine WJ, Andrews LK: Fatal air embolisrm as a complication of
 469. Barber DL, Finco DR: Radiographic findings in induced bacterial
pneumocystography in two cats. J Arm Vet Radiol Soc 1978; 19:8.
pyelonephritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175:1183.
445. Christie BA: Vesicoureteral reflux in dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
470. Biery DN: Radiographic evaluation of the kidneys. In Bovee KC, ed:
1973; 162:772.
Canine nephrology. Harwell Publishing, Philadelphia, 1984; p 275.
446. Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Tomlinson MJ, et al: Maxirmurn disten-
 471. Ettinger SJ, Feldrman EC: Ethylene glycol poisoning in a dog. Mod
tion retrograde urethrocystography in norrmal male dogs: occur-
Vet Pract 1977; 58:237.
rence of vesicoureteral reflux. A1m I Vet Res 1984; 45:453.
472. Kneller SK: Role of the excretory urograrm in the diagnosis of renal
447. Kipnis RM: Vesicoureteral reflux in a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1975;
and ureteral disease. Vet Clin North Arm Srmall Anim Pract 1974;
167:288.
4:843.
448. Newrman L, Bucy JG, McAlister WH: Incidence of naturally occur-
 473. Watson ADJ: The nephrotic syndrome due to renal arnyloidosis in
ring vesicoureteral reflux in rmongrel dogs. lnvest Radiol 1973;
a dog. Aust Vet I 1971; 47:398.
8:354.
474. Feeney DA, Barber DL, Osborne CA: Advances in canine excretory
449. Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Osborne CA, et al: Maxirmurm-distention
urography. Gaines Veterinary Syrmposiurm 1981; 30:8.
retrograde urethrocystography in healthy male dogs: occurrence
475. Biller DS, Chew DJ, DiBartola SP: Polycystic kidney disease in a
and radiographic appearance of urethroprostatic reflux. Am J Vet
family of Persian cat. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1288.
Res 1984; 45:948.
476. Johnson ME, Denhart JD,Graber ER: Renal cortical hypoplasia in a
450. Ackerman N: Prostatic reflux during positive retrograde urethrog-
litter of Cocker Spaniels. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 1972; 8:268.
raphy in the dog. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:25 1.
477. Cartee RE, Selcer BA, Patton CS: Utrasonographic diagnosis of
451. Ackerman N: Use of the pediatric Foley catheter for positive-con-
renal disease in srmall anirmals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176:426.
trast retrograde urethrography Mod Vet Pract 1980; 684.
478. BarrFJ: Evaluation of ultrasound as a methodof assessing renal size
452. Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Osborne CA, et al: Efects of intravesical
in the dog. I Srmall Anim Pract 1990; 31:174.
hydrostatic pressure and volume on the distensibility of the canine
479. Jakovljevic S, Rivers WJ, Chun R, et al: Results of renal ultrasonog-
 prostatic portion of the urethra. Arm I Vet Res 1985; 46:748.
raphy perforrmed before, during and after adrministration of saline
453. Johnston GR, Jessen CR, Osborne CA: Retrograde contrast ure-
{0.9 NaCl) solution to induce diuresis in dogs without evidence of
thrography. In Kirk RW, ed: Current veterinary therapy Vl. WB
renal disease. Am I Vet Res 1999; 60:405.
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1977.
480. Ackerman N, Hager DA, Kaude IV: Utrasound appearance and
454. Johnston GR, Jessen CR, Osborne CA: Effects of bladder distention 
early detection of VX 2 carcinorma in the rabbit kidney; comparison
on canine and feline retrograde urethrography. Vet Radiol 1983;
with renal angiography and excretory urography. Vet Radiol 1989;
24:271.
30:88.
455. Johnston GR, Osborne CA, Jessen CR: Effects of urinary bladder
481. Walter PA, Johnston GR, Feeney DA, et al: Utrasonographic evalu-
distention on the length of the dog and cat urethra. Am J Vet Res
ation of renal parenchymal disease in dogs: 32 cases ( 1981-1986).
1985; 46:509.
 J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191:999.
456. Johnston GR, Osborne CA, Jessen CR, et al: Effects of urinary blad-
482. Konde LJ, Wrigley RH, Park RD, et al: Sonographic appearance of
der distention on location of the urinary bladder and urethra of
renal neoplasia in the dog. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:74.
healthy dogs and cats. A1m I Vet Res 1986; 47:404.
483. Konde LJ, Park RD, Wrigley RH, et al: Comparison of radiography
457. Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Osborne CA, et al: Dirmensions of the
and ultrasonography in the evaluation of renal lesions in the dog.
 prostatic and rmermbranous urethra in norrmal male dogs during
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 188:1420.
maximum distention retrograde urethrocystography. Vet Radiol
484. Walter PA, Johnston GR, Feeney DA, et al: Applications of ultra-
1984; 25:249.
sonography in the diagnosis of parenchymal kidney disease in cats:
458. Barsanti JA, Crowell W, Losonsky J, et al: Complications of bladder
24 cases (198 1-1986). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:92.
distention during retrograde urethrography. Am J Vet Res 1981;
 485. Biller DS, Schenkrman Dl, Bortnowski H: Utrasonographic appear-
42:819.
ance of renal infarction in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1991;
459. Poogird W, Wood AKW: Radiologic study of the canine urethra. Am
27:370.
CHApTeR THRee THE ABDOmEN
469
486. Neuwirth L, Mahaffey M, Crowell W, et al: Comparison of excretory
 509. Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Polzin DJ: Utrasonographic-guided percuta-
urography and ultrasonography for detection of experimentally
neous antegrade pyelography: technique and clinical application in
induced pyelonephritis in dogs. Arm J Vet Res 1993; 54:660.
the dog and cat. J Aim Anirm Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:61.
487. Kaude JIV, Kekormoki M, Walker D, et al: lrmaging of unilateral
510. Pollard R, Nyland TG, Bernsteen L, t al: Utrasonographic evaa
hydronephrosis in an experirmental anirmal. Acta Radiol Diagn
tion of renal autografts in normal cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1999;
(Stockh) 1985; 25:501.
40:380.
488. Konde LJ: Renal sonography. Semin Vet Med Surg 1989; 4:32.
 511. Ackerrman N: Canine ureteral ectopia. Cal Vet 1978; 32:9.
512. Allen WE, Webbon PM: Two cases of urinary incontinence in cats
 of the canine and feline urinary tract. Eur I Comp Vet Pract 1995;
associated with acquired vagino-ureteral fistula. J Srmall Anim Pract
5:55.
1980; 21:367.
490. Churchill JA, Feeney DA, Fletcher TF, et al: Age and diet effects On
 513. Allworth MS, Hoffrman KL: Crossed renal ectopia with fusion in a
relative renal echogenicity in geriatric bitches. Vet Radiol
cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1999; 40:357.
Ultrasound 1999; 40:642.
 514. Bank SE, Flerming IR, Bruning TN: Urinary incontinence in a bitch
491. Yeager AE, Anderson Wl: Study of association between histologic
caused by vaginoureteral fistulation. Vet Rec 1991; 128: 108.
features and echogenicity of architecturally normal cat kidneys. Am
 515. Bebko RL, Preir JE, Biery DN: Ectopic ureters in a male cat. J AIm
J Vet Res 1989; 50:860.
Vet Med Assoc 1977; 171:738.
492. Barr FJ, Patteson MW, Lucke VM, et al: Hypercalcermic nephropa-
516. Breitschwerdt EB, Olivier NB, King GK, et al: Bilateral
thy in three dogs: sonographic appearance. Vet Radiol 1989;
hydronephrosis and hydroureter in a dog associated with congeni-
30:169.
tal urethral structure. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1982; 18:799.
493. Biller DS, Bradley GA, Partington BP: Renal rmedullary rim sign:
 517. Burbidge HM, Jones BR, Mora MT: Ectopic ureter in a male cat. N
ultrasonographic evidence of renal disease. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
ZVet I 1989; 37:123.
1992; 33:286.
 518. Chambers JN, Selcer BA, Barsanti JA: Recovery from severe
494. Mantis P, Lamb CR: Most dogs with medullary rim sign on ultra-
 hydroureter and hydronephrosis after ureteral anastormosis in a
sonography have no demonstrable renal dysfunction. Vet Radiol
dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191: 1589.
Ultrasound 2000; 41:164.
 519. Dean PW, Bojrab MJ: Canine ectopic ureter Cormp Cont Educ Pract
495. Adarms WH, Toal RL, Walker MA, et al: Early renal ultrasonographic
Vet 1988; 10:146.
 520. Grauer GF, Freerman LF, Nelson AW: Urinary incontinence associ-
Vet Res 1989; 50:1370.
ated with an ectopic ureter in a female cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
496. Adarms WM, Toal RL, Brieder MA: Ultrasonographic findings in
1983; 182:707.
dog and cats with oxalate nephrosis attributed to ethylene glycol
 521. Hagar DA, Blevins WE: Ectopic ureter in a dog: extension from the
intoxication: 15 cases (1984-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991;
 kidney to the urinary bladder and to the urethra. J Am Vet Med
199:492.
Assoc 1986; 189:309.
497. Adarms WH, Toal RL, Breider MA: Ultrasonographic findings in
 522. Jergens AE, Miles KG, Turk M: Bilateral pyelonephritis and
ethylene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning in a pregnant queen and 4
hydroureter associated with rmetastatic adenocarcinorma in a dog.
fetal kittens. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:60.
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1988; 1993:961.
498. Forrest LJ, O'Brien RT, Trermelling MS, et al: Sonographic renal
 523. Johnston GR, Osborne CA, Wilson IW, et al: Farmilial ureteral
1866l unosen e ia sisodsda ym shop ot ui shuy 
ectopia in the dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1977; 13:168.
39:337.
524. Liska WD, Patnaik AK: Leiormyorma of the ureter in a dog. I Am
499. Pollard R, Nyland TG, Bernsteen L, et al: Utrasonographic evalua-
Anim Hosp Assoc 1977; 13:83.
tion of renal autografts in normal cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1999;
 525. Leib MS, Allen TA, Konde KJ, et al: Bilateral hydronephrosis attrib-
40:380.
utable to bilateral ureteral fibrosis in a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
 500. Felkai C, Voros K, Fenyves B: Lesions of the renal pelvis and proxi-
1988; 192:795.
Imal ureter in various nephro-urological conditions and ultrasono-
 526. Lennox IS: A case report of unilateral ectopic ureter in a male
graphic study. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:397.
Siberian Husky. I Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:331.
501. King W, Kirmrme-Srmith C, Winter J: Renal stone shadowing: an
 527. MacCoy DM, Ogilvie G, Burke T, et al: Postovariohysterectormy
investigation of contributing factors. Radiology 1985; 154:191.
 502. Daley CA, Finn-Bodner ST, Lenz SD: Contrast-induced renal failure
 528. McLoughlin MA, Hauptman JG, Spaulding K: Canine ureteroceles:
 docurmented by color-Doppler irmaging in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp
a case report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989;
Assoc 1994; 30:33.
25:699.
 503. Koch J, Jensen AL, Wenck A, et al: Duplex Doppler rmeasurerments 
 529. Moroff SD, Brown BA, Matthiesen DT,et al: Infiltrative ureteral dis-
 of renal blood flow in a dog with Addison's disease. J Small Anin
ease in fermale dogs; 41 cases (1980-1987). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Pract 1997; 38:124.
1991; 199:247.
504. Morrow KL, Salman MD, Lappin MR, et al: Cormparison of the
530.
.Osborne CA, Dieterich HF, Hanlon GF, et al: Urinary incontinence
resistive index to clinical pararmeters in dogs with renal disease. Vet
due to ectopic ureter in a male dog. JArm Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:911.
Radiol Utrasound 1996; 37:193-199.
 531. Owen R, Ap R: Canine ureteral ectopia—a review. J Srmall Anirm
505. Nyland TG, Fisher PE, Doverspike M, et al: Diagnosis of urinary
Pract 1973; 14:407.
tract obstruction in dogs using duplex Doppler ultrasonography.
 532. Ross LA, Lamb CR: Reduction of hydronephrosis and hydroureter
Vet Radiol Utrasound 1993; 34:348.
 associated with ectopic ureters in two dogs after ureterovesical
 506. Rivers BJ, Walter PA, O'Brien TD, et al: Duplex Doppler estirmation 
anastormosis.J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1497.
 of Pourcelot resistive index in arcuate arteries of sedated norrmal
 533. Scott RC, Greene RW, Patnaik AK: Unilateral ureterocele associated
cats. J Vet lntern Med 1996; 10:28.
with hydronephrosis in a dog. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1974; 10:126.
 507. Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Letourneau JG, et al: Duplex Doppler estirma-
 534. Smith CW, Burke TJ, Froehlich P, et al: Bilateral ureteral ectopia in
tion of resistive index in arcuate arteries of sedated, norrmal fermale
a rmale cat with urinary incontinence. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;
dogs: implications for the use in the diagnosis of renal failure. J Am
182:172.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:69.
535. Srmith CW, Stowater JL, Kneller SK: Ectopic ureter in the dog.A
 508. Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Letourneau JG, et al: Estimation of arcuate
review of cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1981; 17:245.
artery resistive index as a diagnostic tool for aminoglycoside-
 536. Lamb CR: Acquired ureterovaginal fistula secondary to ovariohys-
induced acute renal failure in dogs. Am I Vet Res 1996; 57:1536.
-aidoydau papinl-punosenn n Sursn sisoulep :lop e un luoiaia
470
locentesis and antegrade ureterography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
565. Holt PE, Lucke VM, Pearson H: Idiopathic renal hermorrhage in the
1994; 35:201.
dog. I S1mall Anirn Pract 1987; 28:253.
 537. Larmb CR, Gregory SP: Utrasonography of the ureterovesical junc-
 566. Jakovljevic S, Van Alstine W, Adarns LG: Ureteral diverticula in 2
tion in the dog: a prelirminary report. Vet Rec 1994; 134:36.
dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:425.
 538. Larmb CR, Gregory SP: Ultrasonographic findings in 14 dogs with
 567. Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Osborne CA: Radiographic findings in
ectopic ureters. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:218.
urinary tract infection. Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anim Pract 1979;
 539. Takiguchi M, Uasuda J, Ochiari K, et al: Utrasonographic appear-
9:749.
ance of orthotopic ureterocele in a dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound
 568. Park RD: The urinary bladder. In Thrall DE, ed: Textbook of veteri-
1997; 38:398.
 nary diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1998;
 540. Tidwell AS, Ullman SL, Schelling SH: Urinoma (para-ureteral
p 479.
pseudocyst) in a dog. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:203.
569. Johnston GR, Feeney DA: Radiographic evaluation of the urinary
 541. Yamazoe K, Ohashi F, Kadosawa T, et al: Computed tormography on
tract in dogs and cats. Cont lssues Simall Anirm Pract 1986; 4:203.
renal masses in dogs and cats. I Vet Med Sci 1994; 56:8 13.
 570. Kaufrman AC, Barsanti JA, Selcer BA: Benign essential hermaturia in
 542. Anderson HM: Giant kidney worrn infection in a dog. Mod Vet
dogs. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1994; 16:13 17.
Pract 1986; 67:153.
 571. Kirberger RM, Jacobson LS: Perinephric pseudocysts in a cat. Aust
 543. Armbrust L, Kraft SL, Cowan LA, et al: Radiographic diagnosis
Vet Pract 1992; 22:160.
canine ureteral calculus. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1997; 38:360.
 572. Kleine LJ: An unusual case of pyelonephritis in a cat. Vet Radiol
 544. Balasubrarmanian NN, David WPA, Thilagar S, et al: Hydronephrosis
1964; 5:54.
with osseous metaplasia of the renal pelvis in a young Alsatian dog.
573. Lewis DA, Adamson DRT, Jacobs KA, et al: Pyelonephritis,
Ind Vet I 1990; 67:765.
nephrolithiasis and perinephric abscessation in a dog. Aust Vet J
 545. Barber DL, Hill BL: The radiographic evaluation of a focal, inflarm-
1988; 65:195.
matory renal lesion. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1976; 12:451.
p e o u u  aa d  i oma  osd s
 546. Barber DL, Rowland GN: Radiographically detectable soft-tissue
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1972; 161:293.
calcification in chronic renal failure. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:117.
 575. Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Walter PA, et al: Feline idiopathic polycystic
 547. Baskin GB, DePaoli A: Prirmary renal neoplasrms of the dog. Vet
kidney disease. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1988; 10: 1030.
Pathol 1977; 14:591.
 576. Miles KG, Jergens AE: Unilateral perinephric pseudocyst of unde-
548. Biju P, Ramachandran KM: Conjoined kidney in a cat Ind J Vet
termined origin in a dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:277.
Pathol 1996; 20:60.
 577. Moon ML, Dallrman MA: Calciurm oxalate ureterolith in a cat. Vet
 549. Blackwood L, Sullivan M, Thormpson H: Ureteral leiormyoma caus-
Radiol 1991; 32:261.
ing post renal failure in a bitch. Vet Rec 1992; 131:416.
 578. Nafe LA, Herron AJ, Burk RL: Hypertrophic osteopathy in a cat
 550. Bosje IT, VanDenlngh TSGAM, VanDerLinde-Sipman IS: Polycystic
associated with renal papillary adenoma. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc
kidney and liver disease in cats. Vet Q 1998; 20:136.
1981; 17:659.
551. Breitschwerdt EB, Oliver NB, King GK,et al: Bilateral hydronephro-
 579. Odendal JSJ: Diagnosis of a third kidney. Canine Pract 1992; 17:17.
sis and hydroureter in a dog associated with congenital urethral
580. O'Handley P, Carrig CB, Walshaw R: Renal and ureteral duplication
structure. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1982; 18:799.
in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1979; 174:484.
 552. Burton CA, Day MJ, Hotston-Moore A, et al: Ureteric fibroepithe-
 581. Osborne CA, Quast JF, Barnes DM: Renal pelvic carcinoma in a cat.
lial polyps in 2 dogs. I Small Anim Pract 1994; 35:593.
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1971; 159:1238.
 553. Bush M, Montali, Jarmes AE: Subcapsular hermatormas associated
 582. Osborne CA, Quast JR, Barnes DM, et al: Congenital fusion of kid-
with renal lymphoma in a cat: a radiographic study. Vet Radiol
neys in a dog. Vet Med Simall Anirm Clin 1972; 67:39.
1973; 14:27.
 583. Pollock S: Ureteral carcinoma in the dog: a case report. Vet Radiol
 554. Celerin AJ, McMullen ME: Giant kidney worm in a dog. I Am Vet
1968; 9:95.
Med Assoc 1981; 179:245.
 584. Rishniw M, Weidrman J, Hornof WJ: Hydrothorax secondary to a
 555. Chastain CB, Grier RL: Bilateral retroperitoneal perirenal cysts in a
 perinephric pseudocyst in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998;
cat. Feline Pract 1975; 5:51.
39: 193.
 556. Crow SE, Bell TG, Wortrman JA: Hermaturia associated with renal
 585. Rendano VT, Taylor MJ, Robinette JD: Nephrocalcinosis in a dog.
hermangiosarcorma. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176:531.
 J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1976; 169:319.
   e  i s  s   s
 586. Robotharn GR: What is your diagnosis? Bilateral retroperitoneal
and cats: differential diagnosis. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1997;
perirenal cysts in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182:73.
19:1019.
587. Splitter GA, Rawlings CA, Casey HW: Renal hamartorma in a dog.
 558 DaSilva-Curiel KMA, Pope ER, O'Brien DP, et al: Amrmonium
Am J Vet Res 1972; 33:273.
urate urolith resulting in hydronephrosis and hydroureter in a
 588. Stowater IL: Congenital, solitary renal cyst in a dog. I Am Anirn
dog with a congenital portosystermic shunt. Can Vet J 1990;
Hosp Assoc 1975; 11:199.
31:116.
 589. Sukhiani HR, Hjolmberg DL, Atilola MAO: What is your diagnosis?
 559. DiBartola SP, Myer CW, Boudrieau RJ, et al: Chronic hermaturia
Nephroblastorma in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:221.
associated with renal pelvic blood clots in two dogs. J Arm Vet Med
 590. Vilafranca M, Fondevila D, Marlasca MJ, et al: Chrormophilic-
Assoc 1983; 183:1102.
eosinophilic renal cell carcinorma in a dog with nodular dermatofi-
 560. Dixon RT, Hyne RHJ: Congenital megalo-ureter and hydronephro-
brosis. Vet Pathol 1994; 31:713.
sis in a Keeshond. Aust Vet J 1972; 48:410.
 591. Widmer WR, Carlton WW: Persistent hermaturia in a dog with renal
 561. Feeney DA, Johnston GR: The kidneys and ureters. In Thrall DE, ed:
hemangiorma. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:237.
Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders,
 592. Zhao D, Yarmaguchi R, Tateyarma S, et al: Bilateral renal lymphosar-
Philadelphia, 1998; p 466.
corma in a dog. I Vet Med Sci 1993; 55:657.
 562. Fox LE, Ackerman N, Buergelt CD: Urinary obstruction secondary
 593. Aldrich J, Ling GV, Ruby AL, et al: Silica-containing urinary calculi
to a retroperitoneal carcinoma in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
in dogs (1981-1993). I Vet Intern Med 1997; 11:288.
1993; 34:181.
594. Brown NO, Parks IL, Greene RW: Canine urolithiasis; retrospective
 563. Goldschrmid SE, Bellinger CR, Watson ACH,et al: Renal transitional
analysis of 438 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1977; 170:4 19-422.
cell carcinorma in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:241.
 595. Carter WO, Hawkins EC, Morrison WB: Feline nephrolithiasis: 8
564. Hawe RS: What is your diagnosis? Bilateral perirenal cysts in a
cases {1984-1989). I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:247.
Siarmese cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:471.
 596. Franti CE, Ling GV, Ruby AL, et al: Urolithiasis V: regional cormpar-
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
471
isons of breed, age, sex, anatormic location and mineral type of cal-
622. DiBartola SP, Chew DJ, Boyce JT: Juvenile renal disease in related
culus. A1m J Vet Res 1999; 160:29.
 Standard Poodles. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 1093; 183:693.
597. Hess RS, Kass PH, Ward CR: Association between hyperadrenocor-
623. DiBartola SP, Tarr MJ, Webb DM, et al: Familial renal amyloidosis
ticisrmn and developrment of calcium-containing uroliths in dogs
in Chinese Shar-Pei dogs. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:483.
with urolithiasis. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212:1889.
624. Edney ATB: Heredity and renal disease in dogs and cats. J Srmall
598. Jones BR, Kirkman JH, Hogan J, et al: Analysis of uroliths
Anim Pract 1989; 30: 126.
frorm cats and dogs in New Zealand, 1993-96. N Z Vet I 1998;
625. Eriksen K, Grondalen J: Farmilial renal disease in soft-coated
46:233.
Wheaten Terriers. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1984; 25:489.
599. Ling GV, Franti CE, Johnson DL, et al: Urolithiasis in dogs IV: sur-
626. Falkai C, Voros K, Vrabely T, et al: Ultrasonographic findings of
vey of interrelationships among breed, mineral cormposition and
renal dysplasia in Cocker Spaniels: eight cases. Acta Vet Hung 1997;
45:397.
Res 1998; 59:650.
627. Finco DR: Familial renal disease in Norwegian Elkhound dogs:
600. Ling GV, Franti CE, Ruby AL, et al: Urolithiasis in dogs l: mineral
 physiologic and biochermical exarminations. Arm J Vet Res 1976;
prevalence and interrelations of mineral cormposition, age and sex.
37:87.
Arm J Vet Res 1998; 59:624.
 628. Finco DR: Congenital and inherited renal disease. J Am Anim Hosp
601. Ling GV, Ruby AL,Johnson DL, et al: Renal calculi in dogs and cats:
Assoc 1973; 9:301.
 prevalence, mineral type, breed, age, and gender interrelationships.
629. Finco DR, Duncan JR, Crowell WA: Farmilial renal disease in
 J Vet lntern Med 1998; 12:11.
Norwegian Elkhound dogs: morphologic exarminations. Aim J Vet
602. Ling GV, Franti CE, Ruby AL, et al: Epizootiologic evaluation and
Res 1977; 38:941.
quantitative analysis of urinary calculi frorm 150 cats. J Am Vet Med
 630. Ford RB: Congenital diseases of puppies: an overview. Vet Tech
Assoc 1990; 196:1459.
1991; 12:155.
 603. Marretta SM, Pask AH, Greene RW, et al: Urinary calculi associated
631. Grodecki KM, Gains MI, Baurmal R, et al: Treatment of X-linked
with portosystermic shunts in 6 dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1981;
hereditary nephritis in Samoyed dogs with angiotensin converting
178:133.
enzyrme (ACE) inhibitor. J Cormp Pathol 1997; 117:209.
604. Osborne CA, Harmmer RF, Klausner IS: Canine silica urolithiasis. J
632. Grunbaum EG, Jerzog A, Rascher W, et al: Hereditary nephro-
Am Vet Med Assoc 1981; 178:809.
genic diabetes insipidus renalis in the dog. Kleinterpraxis 1995;
605. Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Polzin DJ: Analysis of 77,000 canine
40:447.
uroliths; perspectives from the Minnesota Urolith Center. Vet Clin
 633. Hayes HM: Breed associations of canine ectopic ureter: a study of
North Arm 1999; 29:17.
 217 female cases. J Small Anirm Pract 1984; 25:501.
 634. Hood JC, Robinson WF, Huxtable CR, et al: Hereditary nephritis in 
a cat. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1988; 193:972.
the Bull Terrier: evidence for inheritance by autosomal dominant
607. Thumchai R, Lulich J, Osborne CA, et al: Epizootiologic evaluation
gene.Vet Radiol 1990; 126:456.
of urolithiases in cats: 3498 cases (1982-1992). J Arm Vet Med Assoc
635. Hood JC, Savige I, Hendtlass A,et al: Bull Terrier hereditary nephri-
1996; 208:547.
tis: a rmodel for autosormal dominant Alport syndrome. Kidney Int
608. Bernard MA, Valli VE: Familial renal disease in Samoyed dogs. Can
1995; 47:758.
Vet J 1977; 18:181.
636. Hoppe A, Swenson L, Jonsson L, et al: Progressive nephropathy due
609. Bloedow AG: Farmilial renal disease in Sarmoyed dogs. Vet Rec 1981;
to renal dysplasia in Shih Tzu dogs in Sweden. J Simall Anirm Pract
108:167.
1990; 31:83.
610. Booth K: A case of juvenile nephropathy in a Newfoundland dog.
637. Jones BR, Gething MA, Badcoe LM, et al: Farmilial progressive
Vet Rec 1990; 127:596.
nephropathy in young Bull Terriers. N Z Vet J 1989; 37:79.
611. Breitschwerdt EB, Ochoa R, Waltrman C: Multiple endocrine abnor-
638. Jones BR, Jones JM, Chen W, et al: Chronic renal failure in young
 rmalities in Basenji dogs with renal tubular dysfunction. J Am Vet
Old English Sheepdogs. N Z Vet I 1990; 38:118.
Med Assoc 1983; 182: 1348.
 639. Kelly DF: Farmiliar renal disease in the Wheaten Terrier. Vet Annual
612. Brown CA, Crowell WA, Brown SA, et al: Suspected farmilial renal
1986; 26:305.
disease in Chow Chows. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1279.
 640. Kerlin RL, VanWinkle TI: Renal dysplasia in Golden Retrievers. Vet
613. Brownie CF, Tess MW, Prasad RD: Bilateral renal agenesis in two lit-
Pathol 1995; 32:327.
ters of Shetland Sheepdogs. Vet Hum Toxicol 1988; 30:483.
641. Klopfer U, Neurmann F, Trainin R: Renal cortical hypoplasia in a
614. Burrows AK, Malik R, Hunt GE, et al: Familial polycystic kidney
 Keeshond litter. Vet Med Srmall Anim Clin 1975; 70:108 1.
disease in bull Terriers. JI Small Anirm Pract 1994; 35:364.
642. Koerman JP, Biewenga WJ, Gruys E: Proteinuria associated with
615. Carpenter JL, Andelman NC, Moore FM,etal: Idiopathiccutaneous
glomerulosclerosis and glomerular collagen formation in 3
 and renal glormerular vasculopathy in Greyhounds. Vet Pathol 1988;
Newfoundland dog littermates. Vet Pathol 1884; 31:188.
25:401.
 643. Koerman JP, Ezilius JW, Biewenga WJ, et al: Farmilial nephropathy in
616. Casal ML, Giger Y, Bovee KC, et al: Inheritance of cystinuria and
Cocker Spaniels. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochensch 1989; 96: 174.
renal defects in Newfoundlands. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1995;
 644. Lees GE, Helrman RG, Hormco LD, et al: Early diagnosis of farmilial
207:1585.
nephropathy in English Cocker Spaniels. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
617. Chew DJ, DiBartola SP, Boyce IT, et al: Renal aryloidosis in related
1998; 34:189.
Abyssinian cats. J A1n Vet Med Assoc 1982; 181:139-142.
 645. Lobetti RG, Pearson J, Jirmenez M: Renal dysplasia in a Rhodesian
618. Chew DJ, DiBartola SP, Boyce JT, et al: Juvenile renal disease in
Ridgeback dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1996; 37:552.
Doberrman Pinscher dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182:481.
 646. Marks SL, Farrman CA, Peaston A: Nodular dermatofibrosis and renal
619. Cook SM, Dean DF, Golden DL, et al: Renal failure attributable to
cystadenomas in a Golden Retriever. Vet Derrmatol 1993; 4:133.
atrophic glormerulopathy in four related Rottweilers. J Am Vet Med
647. Mason NJ, Dan MJ: Renal armyloidosis in related English
Assoc 1993; 202:107.
Foxhounds. J Small Anirm Pract 1996; 37:255.
620. Cosenza SF, Seely JC: Generalized nodular derrmatofbrosis and
 648. McNarmara PD, Rea CT, Bovee KC, et al: Cystinuria in dogs: corm-
renal cystadenocarcinormas in a Gerrman Shepherd dog. J Arm Vet 
 parison of the cystinuric component of the Fanconi syndrome in
Med Assoc 1986; 189: 1587.
Basenji dogs to isolated cystinuria. Met Clin Exp 1989; 38:8.
621. Davenport DI, DiBartola SP, Chew DJ: Farmilial renal disease in the
649. Meyer-Ziehm D: Juvenile nephropathies in dogs, a retrospective
dog and cat. Cont lssues Small Anirm Pract (Nephrol Urol)
study. Fachbereich Veterinarrmedizin, Justus-Liebig-Universitat,
1986:137.
Giessen, Germany, 1995.
472
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
650. Miles CA, Ferer RC, Cohen RD: Juvenile onset renal disease in
680. Zuilen CD, Nickel RF, VanDijk TH, et al: Xanthinuria in a family of
 Doberrman Pinschers. Vet Med 1986; 8 1:1110.
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. Vet Q 1997; 19:172.
651. Minkus G, Breuer W, Wanke R, et al: Farmilial nephropathy in
681. Lekcharoensuk C, Lulich NP, Osborne CA, et al: Association
Bernese Mountain Dogs. Vet Pathol 1994; 31:421.
between patient-related factors and risk of calciurm oxalate and
 652. Moe L, Lium B: Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinormas
 Imagnesium armmoniurm phophate urolithiasis in cats. J Am Vet
and nodular fibrosis in 51 Gerrman Shepherd dogs. J Small Anin
Med Assoc 2000; 217:520.
Pract 1997; 38:498.
 682. Davies NL, Williarms JH: Emphysermatous cystitis in a non-diabetic
 653. Morton LD: Farmilial nephropathy in Miniature Schnauzers. Can
cat. J S Afr Vet Assoc 1993; 64: 162.
Vet I 1991; 32:389.
683. Lobetti RG, Goldin JP: Emphysermatous cystitis and bladder trigone
 654. Morton LD, Sanecki RK, Gordon DE, et al: Juvenile renal disease in 
diverticulurm in a dog. I Srmall Anim Pract 1998; 39:144.
 Miniature Schnauzer dogs. Vet Pathol 1990; 27:455.
684. Root CR, Scott RC: Emphysermatous cystitis and other radiographic
 655. Murphy MG: Renal dysplasia in a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. lr
rmanifestations of diabetes rmellitus in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Vet J 1989; 42:96.
Assoc 1971; 158:721.
 656. Nash AS: Familial renal disease in dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1989;
 685. Scherding RG, Chew DJ: Nondiabetic emphysermatous cystitis in
30:178.
two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 174:1105.
657. Nash AS, Creswick JA: Farmilial nephropathy in Soft-Coated
 686. Adarms WM, DiBartola SP: Radiographic and clinical features of
Wheaten Terriers. Vet Rec 1988; 123:654.
pelvic bladder in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182:1212.
658. Nash AS, Kelly DF, Gaskell CJ: Progressive renal disease in Soft-
 687. Mahaffey MB, Barsanti JA, Barber DL, et al: Pelvic bladder in dogs
Coated Wheaten Terriers: possible farmiliar nephropathy. I Srmall
without urinary incontinence. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:1477.
Anirm Pract 1984; 25:479.
688. Johnston GR, Osborne CA, Jessen CR, et al: Effects of urinary blad-
659. Noonan CHB, Kay JM: Prevalence and geographic distribution of
 der distention on location of the urinary bladder and urethra of
Fanconi syndrorme in Basenjis in the United States. J Am Vet Med
healthy dogs and cats. Arm I Vet Res 1986; 47:404.
Assoc 1990; 197:345.
 689. Berry SE: What is your diagnosis? Avulsion of the urethra frorm the
660. O'Brien TD, Osborne CA, Yano BL, et al: Clinicopathologic rmani-
urinary bladder. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:1 143.
festations of progressive renal disease in Lhasa Apso and Shih Tzu
690. Goldrman Al, Beckman SL: Traurmatic urethral avulsion at the
dogs. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180:658.
preputial fornix in a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:88.
 661. Perry W: Generalized nodular dermatofibrosis and renal cystade-
691. Love NE, Greenfield C, DeCarmp C: What is your diagnosis?
noma in a series of 10 closely related German Shepherd dogs. Aust
Bilateral fermoral fractures and avulsion of the urinary bladder.
Vet Pract 1995; 25:90.
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:137.
 692. Osborne CA, Johnston GR, Kruger JM, et al: Etiopathogenesis and
 nephropathies: an interpretive review. Vet Res Cormm 1987; 11:561.
biological behavior of feline vesicourachal diverticula. Vet Clin
663. Picut CA, Lewis RM: Hereditary nephritis in the Doberrman
North Am Small Anirm Pract 1987; 17:697.
Pinscher. Lab lnvest 1986; 54:50.
693. Crow SE, Theilen GH, Madewell BR, et al: Cyclophospharmide-
664. Reusch C, Hoerauf A, Lechner J, et al: A new familial glormeru-
induced cystitis in the dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1977; 171:259.
lonephropathy in Bernese Mountain Dogs. Vet Rec 1994; 134:411.
694. Stanton ME, Legendre AM: Effects of cyclophospharmide in dogs
665. Rha JY, Labato MA, Ross LA, et al: Familial glomerulonephropathy
and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 188:1319.
in a litter of Beagles. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 2 16:46.
695. Laing EJ, Miller CW, Cochrane SM: Treatrment of cyclophos-
666. Robinson AVF, Shaw SE, Stanley B, et al: Chronic renal disease in
 pharmide-induced hermorrhagic cystitis in five dogs. J Ain Vet Med
Bull Terriers. Aust Vet J 1989; 66:193.
Assoc 1988; 193:233.
 667. Robinson WF, Huxtable CR, Gooding IP: Familiar nephropathy in
696. ltkin RJ, Krawiec DR, Cloran JA,et al: Ulcerative urocystitis in a dog
Cocker Spaniels. Aust Vet J 1985; 62: 109.
associated with a Nocardia-like organism. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
668. Roels S, Schoffs S, Ducatelle R: Juvenile nephropathy in a
1994; 30:296.
Weimaraner dog. I Srmall Anirm Pract 1997; 38:115.
697. Kramer M, Weiss R, Gerwing M, et al: Encrusted cystitis in dog and
 669. Scherrmerhorn T, Center SA, Dykes NL, et al: Characterization of
cat. Kleinterpraxis 1997; 42:82.
 hepatoportal microvascular dysplasia in a kindred of Cairn Terriers.
698. Littrman MP, Niebauer GW, Hendrick MJ: Macrohermaturia and
JVet lntern Med 1996; 10:219.
life-threatening anemia attributable to subepithelial vascular ectasia
670. Schulze C, Meyer HP, Blok AL, et al: Renal dysplasia in 3 Dutch
 of the urinary bladder in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1487.
Kooiker dogs. Vet Q 1998; 20:146.
699. Halliwell WH, Ackerrman N: Botryoid rhabdormyosarcorma of the
 671. Steward AP, Macdougall DF: Farmilial nephropathy in the Cocker
urinary bladder and hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in a young dog.
Spaniel. J Small Anirm Pract 1984; 25:15.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974; 165:911.
672. Stockrman M, Boden E: Inheritable defects. Canine Pract 199 1; 261.
 700. Johnston SD, Osborne CA, Stevens JB: Canine polypoid cystitis.
 673. Suter M, Lott-Stolz G, Wild P: Generalized nodular dermatofibrosis
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:1155.
in six Alsatians. Vet Pathol 1983; 20:632.
701. Selcer BA: Urinary tract trauma associated with pelvic trauma. J Am
 674. Tarr MJ, DiBartola SP: Farmilial armyloidosis in Abyssinian cats: A
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1982; 18:785.
possible model for farmiliar Mediterranean fever and pathogenesis 
702. Barrett RJ, Pope E: What is your diagnosis? Metallic foreign body in
of secondary armyloidosis. Lab Invest 1985; 52:67.
the urethra of a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:1093.
675. Tuch J, Matthiesen T: Agenesis, dysgenesis and partial polycystic
 703. Dorn AS, Olmstead Ml: Herniation of the urinary bladder through
dysgenesis of kidneys in Beagles. Berliner-und Minchener-
the pubic syrmphysis in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1976; 168:688.
Tierarzliche-Wochenschrift 1987; 91:365.
704. Bargai U, Bark H: Multiple congenital urinary tract abnormalities
676. Vannevel J: Farmilial renal disease in Shih-Tzu puppies. Can Vet
in a bitch. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:10-12.
I 1995; 36:44.
 705. Duffey MH, Barnhard MD, Barthez PY, et al: lIncormplete urethral
677. Vilafranca M, Ferrer L: Juvenile nephropathy in Alaskan Malarmute
duplication with cyst formation in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998;
littermates. Vet Pathol 1994; 31:375.
213:1287.
678. White SD, Rosychuk RAW, Schultheiss P, et al: Nodular dermatofi-
 706. Hoskins JD, Abdelbaki YZ, Root CR: Urinary bladder duplication in 
brosis and cystic renal disease in three mixed breed dogs and a
a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 181:603.
boxer dog. Vet Dermatol 1998; 9:119.
707. Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al: lnherited and congenital
679. Wilcock BP, Patterson JM: Familial glomerulonephritis in
diseases of the feline lower urinary tract. Vet Clin North Arm Small
Doberman Pinscher dogs. Can Vet J 1979; 20:244.
Anirm Pract 1996; 26:265.
CHapTeR THRee THe ABDOmeN
473
 708. Atalan G, Holt PE, Barr FJ: Ultrasonographic assessrment of bladder
735. Pechrman RD: The urethra. In ThrallDE, ed: Textbook of veterinary
 neck 1mobility in continent bitches and bitches with incontinence
diagnostic radiology, ed 3. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1998; p 494.
atributable to urethral sphincter mechanisrm incormpetence. Am J
736. Poogird W, Wood AKW: Radiologic study of the canine urethra. Am
Vet Res 1998; 59:673.
I Vet Res 1986; 47:2491.
709. Barsanti JA, Coates JR, Bartges IW, et al: Detrusor-sphincter dyssyn-
737. Moroff SD, Brown BA, Matthiesen DT, et al: lnfiltrative urethral
ergia. Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anim Pract 1996; 26:327.
disease in female dogs: 41 cases (1980-1987). I Am Vet Med Assoc
710. Hinge AJ: lncontinence in Giant Schmauzers. Vet Rec 1993; 132:144.
1991; 199:247.
711. Holt PE, Thrusfield MV: Association in bitches between size, neu-
738. Tarvin G, Patnaik A, Greene R: Primary urethral tumors in dogs.
tering and docking, and acquired urinary incontinence due to
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:931.
incormpetence of the urethral sphincter rmechanism. Vet Rec 1993;
739. Ticer TW, Spencer CP, Ackerman N: Transitional cell carcinorma of
133:177.
the urethra in four fermale dogs: its urethrographic appearance. Vet
712. Power SC, Eggleton KE, Aaron AJ, et al: Urethral sphincter rmecha-
Radiol 1980; 21:12.
nisim incormpetence in the rmale dog: irmportance of the bladder
 740. Banks SE, Flerming JR, Browning TN: Urinary incontinence in a
neck position, proximal urethral length and position. J Srmall Anim
bitch caused by vaginoureteral fistulation. Vet Rec 1991; 128:108.
Pract 1998; 39:69.
741. Osborne CA, Engen MH, Yano BL, et al: Congenital urethrorectal
713. Woodard DC: Urinary bladder atony secondary to spinal traurma in
fistula in two dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:999.
a dog. Mod Vet Pract 1980; 61:527.
 742. Osuna DJ, Stone EA, Metcalf MR: A urethrorectal fistula with con-
714.Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE: Estimation of bladder volume using
current urolithiasis in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:35.
ultrasonographic determination of cross-sectional area in linear
 743. VanSchouwenburg SJEM, Louw GJ: A case of dysuria as a result of
Imeasure1ments in dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:446.
 a communication between the urinary bladder and the corpus uteri
715. Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE: Assessrment of urinary bladder volurme
in a Cairn Terrier. J S Afr Vet Assoc 1982; 53:65.
in dogs by use of a linear ultrasonographic measurerments. Am J Vet
744. Adams WM, Biery DN, Millar HC: Pneurmovaginography in the 
Res 1998; 59:10.
dog: a case report. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1978; 19:80.
716. Hanson JA, Tidwell AS: Ultrasonographic appearance of urethral
745. Allen WE, France C: A contrast radiographic study of the vagina
transitional cel carcinoma in ten dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1996;
and uterus of the norrmal bitch. J Srmall Anim Pract 1985; 26:153.
37:293.
746. Gibbs PEC, Latharm J: An evaluation of positive contrast vaginogra-
717. Johnston GR, Walter PA, Feeney DA: Radiographic and ultrasono-
phy as a diagnostic aid in the bitch. J Small Anim Pract 1984; 24:531.
graphic features of uroliths and other urinary tract flling defects.
747. Holt PE, Gibbs C, Latham J: An evaluation of positive contrast
Vet Clin North Arm Srmall Anirm Pract 1986; 16:261.
vagino-urethrography as a diagnostic aid in the bitch. J Srmall Anin
718. Leveille R, Biller DS, Partington BP, et al: Sonographic investigation
Pract 1984; 25:531.
 of transitional cell carcinorma of the urinary bladder in simall ani-
748. Levelle R, Atilola MAO: Retrograde vaginocystography: a contrast
mals. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1992; 33:103.
 study for evaluation of bitches with urinary incontinence. Cormp
719. Prufer A: Ultrasonic diagnosis of diseases of the urinary bladder
Cont Educ Pract Vet 1991; 13:934.
and the kidneys in dogs and cats. Kleinterpraxis 1994; 39:83.
749. Holt PE, Sayle B: Congenital vestibulo-vaginal stenosis in the bitch.
720. Berry CR: Utrasound corner—differentiating cystic calculi from
J Srmall Anirm Practice 1981; 22:67.
the colon. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:283.
750. Jackson DA, Osborne CA, Brasrmer TH, et al: Nonneurogenic uri-
721. Voros K: Utrasonographic examination of the urinary bladder in
nary incontinence in a canine female pseudohermaphrodite. J A1m
the dog. Vet Ann 1994; 35:211.
Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:926.
722. Voros K, Wadar S, Marsi A,et al: Ultrasonographic study of feline
751. Kyles AR, Vaden S, Hardie E, et al: Vestibulovaginal stenosis in dogs.
lower urinary tract diseases in 32 cats. Acta Vet Hung 1997; 45:387.
18 cases (1987-1999). I Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209:1889.
723. Voros K, Wladar S, Vrabely T, et al: Utrasonographic diagnosis of
 752. McConnell DA: Correction of vagino-vestibular strictures in the
urinary bladder calculi in dogs. Canine Pract 1993; 18:29.
bitch. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1977; 13:92.
724. O'Brien RT, Wood EF: Urinary bladder hermorrhage associated with
753. Nomura K, Koreeda T, Kawata M, et al: Vaginal atresia with trans-
systermic bleeding disorders in 3 dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998;
verse septurm in a cat. J Vet Med Sci 1997; 59:1045.
39:354.
 754. Pineda MH, Kainer RA, Faulkner LC: Dorsal median postcervical
725. Larmb CR, Trower ND, Gregory SP: Utrasound-guided catheter
fold in the canine vagina. A1n J Vet Res 1973; 34:1487.
biopsy of the lower urinary tract: technique and results in 12 dogs,
755. Root MV, Johnston SD, Johnston GR: Vaginal septa in dogs: 15 cases
 J Small Anim Pract 1996; 37:413.
{1983-1992). I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206:56.
726. Berry SE: What is your diagnosis? Foreign body in urethra of a dog.
756. Wykes PM, Soderberg SF: Congenital abnorrmalities of the canine
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 7:857.
vagina and vulva. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1983; 19:995.
727. Bradley Rl: Complete urethral obstruction secondary to fracture of
757. Cobb LM, Archibald J: The radiographic appearance of certain
the os penis. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1985; 7:759.
 pathological conditions of the canine uterus. J Am Vet Med Assoc
728. Bradshaw JM, Brown PJ, Pearson GR, et al: Dysuria associated with
1959; 134:393.
urethral caruncle in the dog. I Cormp Pathol 1996; 115:77.
758. Biller Ds, Haibel GK: Torsion of the uterus in a cat. J Arm Vet Med
729. Burk RL, Schaubhut CW: Obstructive urethritis in the fermale dog.
Assoc 1987; 191:1128.
Vet Med Srmall Anim Clin 1976; 71:898.
759. Brown AJ: Torsion of the gravid uterus in a bitch. Vet Rec 1974;
730. Davies IV, Read HM: Urethral turmors in dogs. J Small Anirm Pract
94:202.
1990; 31:131.
760. Freeman LJ: Feline uterine torsion. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet
731. Elkins AD, Pechman R, Brignac M: Urinary obstruction resulting
1988; 10:1078.
from a massin the caudal os penis of a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
761. Herbert CR: Prolapsed uterus in the cat. Vet Rec 1979; 104:42.
1990; 26:133.
762. Montgomery RD, Saidka JE, Milton JL: Feline uterine horn torsion: a
732. Fucci V: What is your diagnosis? Feline urethral strictures. J Arm Vet 
case report and literature review. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:189.
Med Assoc 1989; 195:999.
 763. Rendano VT, Juck FA, Binnington AG: Hermatometra associated
733. Healy BE: Radiographic diagnosis—transitional cell carcinoma and
with pseudocyesis and uterine torsion in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp
squamous cellcarcinoma of the urethra of 2 dogs. Vet Radiol 1987;
Assoc 1974; 10:577.
28:213.
764. Shull RM, Johnston SD, Johnston GR, et al: Bilateral torsion of the
734. Kelly SE, Clark WT: Surgical repair of fracture of the os penis in the
uterine horns in a nongravid bitch. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978;
dog. I S1mall Anirm Pract 1995; 36:507.
172:601.
474
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
765. Ueland K: Uterine torsion in a non-pregnant queen. J Small Anim
798. England GCW, Verstegen JP: Radiographic contrast rmediurm for
Pract 1989; 30:319.
uterine insemination in the bitch, and its effect upon the quality
766. Vanderhurst SR: Bicornuate uterine prolapse in a cat. Vet Med Small
and fertility of fresh dog semen. Theriogenology 1996; 46:1233.
Anirm Clin 1975; 70:70.
799. Funkquist B,Lagerstedt AS, Linde C, et al: Hysterography in the
767. Vaughan L, McGuckin S: Uterine prolapse in a cat. Vet Rec 1993;
bitch. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:12.
132:568.
800. Feretti LM, Newell SM, Graharm JP, et al: Radiographic and ultra-
768. Webb Al: Ventral hernia and ruptured uterus in a cat. Aust Vet
sonographic evaluation of the normal feline postpartum uterus. Vet
J 1972; 48:212.
Radiol Utrasound 2000; 41:287.
769. Abel Dl: Endormetrial cysts and polyps in a cat with hydrormetra.
801. Pharr IW, Post K: Ultrasonography and radiography of the canine
Feline Pract 1990; 18:19.
postpartum uterus. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:35.
770. Arnold S, Hubler M, Jauser B, et al: Uterine serosal inclusion cysts
802.Bondestam S,Karkkainen M,Alitalo 1,et al: Evaluating the accuracy
in a bitch. JI Srmall Anim Pract 1996; 37:235.
of canine pregnancy diagnosis and litter size using real-time ultra-
771. Charan K, Celly CS, Singh GR: Uterine and ovarian dysgerrminoma
sound. Acta Vet Scand 1984; 25:327.
in a bitch. lnd J Vet Surg 1994; 15:102.
803. Toal RL, Walker MA, Henry GA: A comparison of real-time ultra-
sound, palpation and radiography in pregnancy detection and litter
J Small Anirm Pract 1995; 36:77.
size deterrmination in the bitch. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:102.
773. DeGeer T: Uterine rupture in a cat. Can Vet J 1987; 28:489.
804. Bartels JE: Radiology Of the genital tract. In O'Brien TR, ed:
774. Dillon AR, Henderson RA: Brucella canisin a uterine stump abscess
Radiographic diagnosis of abdorminal disorders in the dog and cat.
in a bitch. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 198 1; 178:987.
Covell Park Vet Co, Davis, Calif, 1981; 615.
 775. Dunn TJ, Foster RC: Perforated uterus in a bitch. Mod Vet Pract
 805. Farrow CS, Morgan JP, Story EC: Late terrm fetal death in the dog:
1977; 58:240.
early radiographic diagnosis. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1976; 17:11.
776. Gaertner DJ, Schoeb TR: An unusual case of endometrial hyperpla-
 806. Bark H, Sekeles E, Marcus R: Extra-uterine murmmified fetus in the
sia in the bitch. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:251.
cat. Feline Pract 1980; 10:44.
777. Gelberg HB, McEntee K: Hyperplastic endometrial polyps in the
807. DeHaan JI, Ellison GW, Ackerman N: What is your diagnosis?
dog and cat. Vet Pathol 1984; 21:570.
Murmrmified fetus in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:1 199.
778. Godfrey DR, Silkstone MA: Uterine serosal inclusion cysts in a cat.
808. Farrow CS: Radiographic characterization of fetal death and uter-
Vet Rec 1998; 142:673.
ine rupture in a bitch. Mod Vet Pract 1985; 66:985.
779. lwasaki M, Oliveira CA: Uterine lithiasis in a dog. Aust Vet J 1991;
 809. Reens J: What is your diagnosis? Murmrmified fetus in a cat. J Am Vet
68:73.
Med Assoc 1988; 193:581.
780. Johnson ME: Hydrometra in the dog. JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1984;
810. Riedesel EA: What is your diagnosis? Macerated fetus in the uterus
20:243.
of a dog. lowa State Univ Vet 1989; 51:28.
781. Kenney KJ, Matthiesen DT, Brown NO, et al: Pyormetra in cats; 183
811. Eneroth A, Linde-Forsbeerg C, Uhlhorn M, et al: Radiographic
cases (1979-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191:1130.
 pelvirmetry for assessment of dystocia in bitches: a clinical study in
782. Murphy ST, Kruger JM, Watson GL: Uterine adenocarcinorma in the
two terrier breeds. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1999; 40:257.
dog: a case report and review. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:440.
812. Boyd JS, Renton JP, Harvey MJ, et al: Problerms associated with
783. Pack FD: Feline uterine adenormyosis. Feline Pract 1980; 10:47.
ultrasonography of the canine ovary around the time of ovulation.
784. Potter K, Hancock DH, Gallina AM: Clinical and pathologic fea-
J Reprod Fertil 1993; 47:101.
tures of endormetrial hyperplasia, pyometra and endometritis in
 yo  r      i
cats: 79 cases ( 1980-1985). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:1427.
ovary and uterus of the dog. I Reprod Fertil 1989; 39:91.
785. Schlafer DA, Yeager AE, Concannon PW: Theriogenology question
 814. Hayer P, Gunzel-Apel AR, Luerssen D, et al: Ultrasonographic rmon-
of the rmonth. Endormetrial polyp in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc
itoring of follicular development, ovulation and early luteal phase
1997; 210:759.
in the bitch. I Reprod Fertil 1993; 47:93.
786. Sevelius E, Tidholrn A, Thoren-Tolling K: Pyormetra in the dog.
 815. McDougall K, Hay MA, Goodrowe KL, et al: Changes in number of
J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:33.
follicles and oocytes in ovaries of prepubertal, peripubertal and
787. Spackrman CJA, Caywood DD, Johnston GR, et al: Granulomas of
mature bitches. J Reprod Fertil 1997; 5 1:25.
the uterine and ovarian sturmps: a case report. J Am Anim Hosp
816. Silva LDM, Onclin K, Verstegen JP: Assessrment of ovarian changes
Assoc 1984; 20:449.
around ovulation in bitches by ultrasonography, laparoscopy and
788. Suresh-Jurmar RV, Ramakrishna O, Sreerarman PK: Leiomyorma uteri
hormonal changes. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1996; 37:313.
in a bitch. Can Vet I 1995; 36:185.
 817. Wallace SS, Mahaffey MB, Miller DM, et al: Ultrasonographic
789. VanBree H, Schepper J, DeCapiau E: The significance of radiology
appearance of the ovaries of dogs during the follicular and luteal
in the diagnosis of canine pyometra in dogs: an evaluation of the
phases of the estrous cycle. Arm I Vet Res 1992; 53:209.
correlation between radiographic and laboratory findings in 131
 818. Goodwin JK, Hager DA, Philips L, et al: Bilateral ovarian adenocar-
cases. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 1988; 35:200.
cinorma in a dog: ultrasonographic-aided diagnosis. Vet Radiol
790. Walker CE: Foreign body in Pekinese uterus. Vet Rec 1978; 103:567.
1990; 31:265.
791. Wolff A: Intrauterine foreign body in a dog. Vet Med Small Anin
819. Diez-Bru N, Garcia-Real I, Martinez EM, et al: Ultrasonographic
Clin 1978; 73:478.
appearance of ovarian tumors in 10 dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound
792. Franklin RT, Prescott IVB: Tenesimus and stranguria from a cystic
1998; 39:226.
uterine remnant. Vet Radiol 1983; 24:139.
 820. Wrigley RH, Finn ST: Utrasonography of the canine uterus and
793. Mermon MA, Schelling SH: Non-patent left uterine horn and seg-
ovary. In Kirk RW, ed: Current veterinary therapy X. WB Saunders,
mental aplasia of the right uterine horn in an infertile cat. Vet Rec
Philadelphia, 1989.
1992; 131:266.
 821. Poffenbarger EM, Feeney DA: Use of gray-scale ultrasonography in
794. Pinegger H: Uterus masculinus in a male dog. Kleinterpraxis 1975;
the diagnosis of reproductive disease in the bitch: 18 cases (198 1-
20:231.
1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:90.
795. Schulman J, Levine SH: Pyometra involving uterus masculinus in a
 822. Fayrer-Hoskin RA, Mahaffey M, Miller-Liebl D, et al: Early diagno-
cat. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1989; 191:690.
sis of canine pyormetra using ultrasonography. Vet Radiol 1991;
796. Starke R: Uterus unicornis in a cat. Can Vet J 1987; 28:204.
32:287.
797. Utpal-Das DK, Das KK, Das BB: Uterus unicornis in a cat. Ind J Vet
 823. Voges A, Neuwirth L: Utrasound diagnosis—cystic uterine hyper.
Surg 1997; 18:109.
 plasia. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1996; 37:131.
CHAPTER THREE THE ABDOMEN
475
824. Barr FJ: Pregnancy diagnosis and assessiment of fetal viability in the
tic enlargerment of the prostate in a dog. Vet Rec 1986; 118:694.
dog: a review. J Small Anim Pract 1988; 29:647.
852. Berg OA: Parenchyrmatous hypertrophy of the canine prostate
825. Bondestam S, Alitalo 1, Karkkainen M: Real-tirme ultrasound preg-
gland. Acta Endocrinol 1958; 27:140.
nancy diagnosis in the bitch. J Small Anim Pract 1983; 24:145.
83. Read HA,Bryden S: Urethralbleding as a presenting sign ofbenign
826. Davidson AP, Nyland TG, Tsutsui T: Pregnancy diagnosis with
prostatic hyperplasia in the dog: a retrospective study ( 1979-1993).
ultrasound in the domestic cat. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:109.
JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1995; 31:261.
827. England GCW, Allen WE: Studies of canine pregnancy using B-
 854. Weiger G: Urethral obstruction caused by prostatic hyperplasia in a
mode ultrasound: diagnosis of early pregnancy and the number of
German Shepherd. Kleinter praxis 1979; 24:202.
conceptuses. I Small Anirm Pract 1990; 31:321.
855. Berg OA: Effect of stilbestrol on the prostate gland in norrmal pup-
828. England GCW, Allen WE: Studies of canine pregnancy using B-
 pies and adult dogs. Acta Endocrinol 1958; 27:155.
rmode ultrasound: development of the conceptus and determina-
 856. Atilola MAO, Pennock PW: Cystic uterus masculinus in the dog: six
tion of gestational age. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1990; 31:324.
case history reports. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:8.
829. Estil CT: Theriogenology question of the month.Confirmation of
857. Marshall LS, Oehlert ML, Haskins ME, et al: Persistent millerian
fetal vitality via ultrasonography. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1998;
 duct syndrome in Miniature Schnauzers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982;
212:817.
181:798.
830. G-de-Bulnes A, Herreros MA, G-Botey C, et al: Echographic study
 858. Myerscough N: Pyormetra and torsion of the uterus in a rmale dog.
Of pregnancy in dogs. Med Vet 1993; 10:345.
Vet Rec 1993; 133:252.
831. Jackson PGG, Nicholson JM: The use of ultrasound to monitor fetal
859. Olson PN, Wrigley RH, Thrall AM, et al: Disorders of the canine
life in a pregnant bitch. Vet Rec 1979; 104:36.
 prostate gland: pathogenesis, diagnosis and medical therapy. Comp
 832. Schille VM, Gontarek J: The use of ultrasound for pregnancy diag-
Cont Educ Pract Vet 1987; 9:613.
nosis in the bitch. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:1021.
860. Girard C, Despots IL: Mineralized paraprostatic cysts in a dog Can
833. Cartee RE, Rowles T: Preliminary study of the ultrasonographic
Vet J 1995; 36:573.
diagnosis of pregnancy and fetal development in the dog. Am IVet
 861. Sisson DD, Hoffer RE: Osteocartilaginous prostatic retention cyst.
Res 1984; 45:1259.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 1977; 13:61.
834. Lamm AM: Ultrasound diagnosis of pregnancy in the dog. Acta
862. Weaver AD: Discrete prostatic (paraprostatic) cysts in the dog. Vet
Radiol 1972; 319:293.
Rec 1978; 102:435.
835. Rivers B, Johnston GR: Diagnostic irmaging of the reproductive
 863. Leav 1, Ling GV: Adenocarcinorma of the canine prostate. Cancer
organs of the bitch—methods and limitations. Vet Clin North Am
1968; 22:1329.
 Srmall Anirm Pract 1991; 21:437.
864. Lee-Parritz DE, Larmb CR: Prostatic adenocarcinorma with osseous
836. Taverne MA, Okkens AC, van Oord R: Pregnancy diagnosis in the
 Ietastasis in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:1569.
dog; a cormparison between abdorminal palpation and linear-array
865. Evans JE, Zontine W, Grain E: Prostatic adenocarcinoma in a cas-
real-time echography. Vet Q 1985; 7:249.
trated dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 186:78.
837. Yeager AE, Concannon PW: Serial ultrasonographic appearance of
 866. Obradovich J, Walshaw R, Goullaud E: The influence of castration
 postpartum uterine involution in Beagle dogs. Theriogenology
 On the developrment of prostatic carcinorma in the dog 43 cases
1990; 34:523.
(1978-1985). I Vet Intern Med 1987; 1:183.
838. Yeager AE,
Mohamrmed HO, Meyers-Wallen V, et al:
 867. Rendano VT, Slauson DO: Hypertrophic osteopathy in a dog with
Utrasonographic appearance of the uterus, placenta, fetus and fetal
 prostatic adenocarcinorma and without thoracic metastases. J Am
 rmembranes throughout accurately tirmed pregnancy in Beagles. Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 1982; 18:905.
I Vet Res 1992; 53:342.
868. Caney SMA, Holt PE, Day MJ, et al: Prostatic carcinorma in 2 cats.
839. Nautrup CP: Doppler ultrasonography of the canine maternal and
J Srmall Anirm Pract 1998; 39:140.
fetal arteries during norrmal gestation. J Reprod Fertil 1998;
 869. Mainwaring CJ: Primary lyrmphorma of the prostate in a dog. JI Srmall
112:301.
Anirm Pract 1990; 31:617.
 840. Paulson-Mautrup C: Doppler ultrasonography of the rmaternal and
 870. Aughey E, Weaver AD: Calcification of the prostate gland in the
fetal arteries during normal gestation. J Reprod Fertil 1998; 112:301.
dog. Zentralb] Veterinarrmed [C] 1997; 24:772.
841. Johnston SD, Srmith FO, Bailie NC, et al: Prenatal indicators of
 871. Latirmer JC: The prostate gland. In Thrall DE, ed: Textbook of vet-
puppy viability at term. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet 1983; 5:1013.
erinary diagnostic radiology, ed 2. WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
842. Verstegen JP, Silva LDM, Onchin K, et al: Echocardiographic study
1994; p 479.
of heart rate in dog and cat fetuses in utero. J Reprod Fertil 1993;
872. Shull RM, Hayden DW, Johnston GR: Urogenital blastomyeosis in a
47(Suppl):175.
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1977; 171:730.
843. Beck KA, Baldwin CI, Bosu WTK: Ultrasound prediction of partu-
873. Stowater JL, Lamb CR: Utrasonographic features of paraprostatic
rition in queens. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:32.
cysts in nine dogs. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:232.
844. Tsutsui T, Amano T, Shirmizu, et al: Evidence of transuterine
 874. Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE: Comparison of ultrasonographic and
Imigration of embryos in the dormestic cat. Jap I Vet Sci 1989;
radiographic measurerments of canine prostate dirmensions. Vet
5 1:6 13.
Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:408.
 845. Allen WE, England GCW, White KB: Hydrops fetalis diagnosed by
875. Chang SC, Anthony S, Koder PC, et al: Transrectal ultrasound-
real-time ultrasonography in a Bichon Frise bitch. J Small Anim
guided rmanipulation of the canine prostate with minirmurm inter-
Pract 1989; 30:465.
vention. Lab Anim 1997; 31:219.
 846. Saunders HM: The role of ultrasound in canine reproduction. Prob
876. Cooney JC, Cartee RE, Gray BW, et al: Utrasonography of the
Vet Med 1992; 4:499.
 canine prostate with histologic correlation. Theriogenology 1992;
 847. O'Shea JD: Studies on the canine prostate gland. 1. Factors influ-
38:877.
encing its size and weight. I Cormp Pathol 1962; 72:321.
877. Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Klausner JS, et al: Canine prostatic dis-
848. O'Shea JD: Studies on the canine prostate gland. ll. Prostatic neo-
 ease—comparison of ultrasonographic appearance with rmorpho-
plasrms. I Comp Pathol 1963; 73:244.
logical and microbiological findings: 30 cases ( 1981-1985). J Am Vet
849. O'Shea ID: Squarmous rmetaplasia of the canine prostate gland. Res
Med Assoc 1987; 190:1027.
Vet Sci 1963; 4:43 1.
 878. Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Klausner JS, et al: Canine prostatic ultra-
850. Berg OA: The norrmal prostate gland of the dog. Acta Endocrinol
sonography—1989. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1989; 25:385.
1958; 27:129.
 879. Naylor RW, Thormpson SMR: lntra-abdominal testicular torsion: a
851. Akpavie SO, Sullivan M: Constipation associated with calcified cys-
report of two cases. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1979; 15:763.
476
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
 880. Laing EJ, Harari J, Smith CW: Spermatic cord torsion and Sertoli-
908. Lamb CR: Abdorminal ultrasonography in small animals: exami-
cell tumor in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 183:879.
nation of the liver, spleen and pancreas. J Small Anirn Pract 1990;
 881. Pearson H, Kelly DF: Testicular torsion in the dog: a review of 13
31:5.
cases. Vet Rec 1975; 97:200.
882. Verdet JF: Arteriovenous fistula of thetesticle:a case reportin a dog.
sis of splenic hermatorma in dogs: 10 cases (1980-1987). J Am Anirm
Anat Histol Ermbryol 1980; 9:178.
Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:371.
 883. Howard PE, Bjorling DE: The intersexual anirmal: associated prob-
910. Hanson JA, Penminck DG: Utrasonographic evaluation of a trau-
Jerms. Prob Vet Med 1989; 1:74.
Imatic splenic hermatorma and literature review. Vet Radiol
 884. Kipperman BS, Wong VJ, Plopper CG: Primary ciliary dyskinesia in
Utrasound 1994; 35:463.
a Gordon Setter. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:375.
 911. Wrigley RH, Park RD, Konde LJ, et al: Utrasonographic features of
 885. Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Johnston SD, et al: Utrasonographic fea-
splenic hermangiosarcoma in dogs: 18 cases (1980-1986). J Am Vet
tures of testicular neoplasrms in dogs: 16 cases (1980-1988). J Arm
Med Assoc 1988; 192:1113.
Vet Med Assoc 199 1; 198:1770.
912. Stockhaus C, Teske E: Clinical experiences with fine needle biopsies
886. Johnston GR,Feeney DA, Rivers BJ, et al: Diagnostic imaging of the
of the spleen in the diagnosis of canine splenormegaly. Kleinterpraxis
 Imale canine reproductive organs: methods and lirmitations. Vet Clin
1998; 43:325.
North Am Srmall Anirm Pract 199 1; 21:553.
 913. Waters DJ, Caywood DD, Hayden DW, et al: Metastatic pattern in
 887. Pugh CR, Konde LI: Sonographic evaluation of canine testicular
dogs with splenic hemangiosarcoma: clinical implications. J Small
and scrotal abnorrmalities: a review of 26 case histories. Vet Radiol
Anirm Pract 1988; 12:805.
Ultrasound 1991; 32:243.
 914. Huntley K, Frazer J, Gibbs C, et al: The radiological features of
 888. Miyabayashi T, Biller DS, Cooler AJ: Ultrasonographic appearance
 canine Cushing's syndrorme: a review of 48 cases. J Srmall Anin
of torsion of the testicular seminoma in a cryptorchid dog. I Srmall
Pract 1982; 23:369.
Anirm Pract 1990; 31:401.
915. Mahaffey MB, Barber DL: The adrenal glands. In Thrall DE, ed:
 889. Abdullahi SU, Moharmmed AA, Trimnell AR, et al: Clinical and
Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology, ed 2. WB Saunders,
hermatological findings in 70 naturally occurring cases of canine
Philadelphia, 1994; p 439.
babesiosis. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1990; 31:145.
 916. Penninck DP, Feldiman EC, Nyland TG: Radiographic features of
890. Johnson KA, Powers BE, Withrow SJ, et al: Splenomegaly in dogs.
canine hyperadrenocorticism caused by autonormously functioning
J Vet Intern Med 1989; 3:160.
adrenal turmors. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192: 1604.
 891. Kontos VJ, Koutinas AF: Clinical observations in 15 spontaneous
917. Widrmer WR, Guptill L: Irmaging techniques for facilitating diagno-
cases of canine babesiosis. Canine Pract 1997; 22:30.
sis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
   s  a oss   
1995; 206: 1857.
inguinal hernia with splenic entrapment. Aust Vet Pract 1993; 23:207.
 918. Horauf A, Reusch C: Visualization of the adrenal glands by ultra-
893. Shackelford CC, Reed WM: Disserminated Mycobacterium avium
 sound: examination of healthy dogs, in dogs with non-endocrine
infection in a dog. I Vet Diagn Invest 1989; 1:273.
 894. Weinstein MJ, Carpenter JL, Schunk CJM: Nonangiogenic and non-
1995; 40:351.
lyrmphormatous sarcormas of the canine spleen: 57 cases (1975-
 919. Besso JG, Penninck DG, Gliatto JM: Retrospective ultrasonographic
1987). I Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:784.
evaluation of adrenal lesions in 26 dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound
 895. Kipnis RM: Torsion of the splenic pedicle and gastric volvulus in a
1997; 38:448.
dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1974; 164:1202.
920. Bouayad H, Feeney DA, Caywood DD, et al: Pheochrormocytorma
 896. Neath PJ, Brockrman DJ, Saunders HM: Retrospective analysis of 19
in dogs: 13 cases (1980-1985). J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1987;
cases of isolated torsion of the splenic pedicle in dogs. J Small Anirn
191:1610.
Pract 1997; 38:387.
 921. Grooters AM, Biller DS, Miyabayashi T, et al: Evaluation of routine
 897. Navej ML, Tellhelm B, Haasper A: Splenic ermphyserma and torsion
abdorminal ultrasonography as a technique for irmaging the canine
in a dog. Kleinterpraxis 1988; 33:136.
adrenal glands. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:457.
 898. Stevenson S, Chew DJ, Kociba GJ: Torsion of the splenic pedicle in 
 922. Maher ER: Pheochrormocytorma in the dog and cat: diagnosis and
the dog: a review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 198 1; 17:239.
 Imanagerment. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1994; 9:158.
 899. Stead AC, Frankland AC, Borthwick R: Splenic torsion in dogs.
923. Moore LE, Biller DS, Smith TA: Use of abdominal ultrasonography
J Srmall Anirm Pract 1983; 24:549.
in the diagnosis of prirmary hyperaldosteronism in a cat. J Am Vet
900. Stickle R: Radiographic signs of isolated splenic torsion in dogs:
Med Assoc 2000; 217:213.
eight cases (1980-1987). J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194: 103.
 924. Poffenbarger EM, Feeney DA, Hayden DW: Gray-scale ultrasonog-
 901. Konde LJ, Wrigley RH, Lebel JL, et al: Sonographic and radi-
raphy in the diagnosis of adrenal neoplasia in dogs: six cases 198 1-
ographic changes associated with splenic torsion in the dog. Vet
1986). JI Arm Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:228.
Radiol 1989; 30:41.
 925. VonDehn BJ, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al: Pheochrormocytorma
902. Schelling CG, Wortrman JA, Saunders HM: Ultrasonic detection of
and hyperadrenocorticisrm in dogs: 6 cases (1982-1992). J Arm Vet 
splenic necrosis in the dog. Three case reports of splenic necrosis
Med Assoc 1995; 207:322.
secondary to infarction. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:277.
 926. Voorhout G, Rijnberk A, Sjollerma BE, et al: Nephrotomography and
 903. Saunders HM, Neath PJ, Brockrman DJ: B-1mode and Doppler ultra-
ultrasonography for the localization of hyperfunctioning adreno-
sound irmaging of the spleen with canine splenic torsion. Vet Radiol
cortical turmors in dogs. Arm J Vet Res 1990; 51:1280.
Ultrasound 1998; 39:349.
927. Voorhout G, Stolp R, Rijnberk A, et al: Assessrment of survey radi-
904. Thormas WB, Hudson JA, Cartee RE: Utrasound diagnosis-
ography and comparison with x-ray computed tomography for
splenic torsion. Vet Radiol 199 1; 32:227.
detection of hyperfunctioning adrenocortical turmors in dogs. J Am
905. Wong PL: Pneurmoperitoneurm associated with splenic necrosis and
Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1799.
clostridial peritonitis in a dog. JI Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1981; 17:463.
928. Hayden DW, Johnston SD, Kaing DT,et al: Feline rmarmmary hyper-
906. Schulrman A: Splenic mastocytosis in a cat. Cal Vet 1987; 41:17.
 trophy/fibroadenoma cormplex: clinical and horrmonal aspects. Am
907. Wrigley RH, Konde LJ, Park RD, et al: Utrasonographic features of
J Vet Res 1981; 42:1699.
splenic lyrmphosarcorma in dogs: 12 cases (1980-1986). J A1m Vet
Med Assoc 1988; 193: 1565.
CHAPTER FOUR
TheAppendicular Skeleton
 HE radiographic diagnosis of bone and joint disease is composed of two processes:
description and interpretation of the lesion. Description of a lesion usually requires
 at least two radiographs that are centered on the region of interest, carefully posi-
tioned, properly exposed, and at right angles to each other. The radiographs should include
the joints that are proximal and distal to the lesion. For joint lesions, the radiograph should
be centered on the joint.
san weaq Aei-x a e qd au Aq paqosp ae aen sudenaoe
Commonly used views include ventrodorsal, dorsoventral, dorsopalmar, dorsoplantar,
mediolateral, and lateromedial.l Several other views to evaluate specific areas of patient
anatomy have been described including some with joints under various stresses, which aids
Knowledge of normal musculoskeletal anatomy, especially with regard to the immature
animal, is essential for lesion recognition.12-30 The location and dates of closure for the
growth plates can be very important in evaluating the radiograph (Table 4-1).12
    q     p sa 
Knowledge of specific sites of sesamoid bones that are not present in every individual and
other anatomical details is also important.13-30
A
B
FIG. 4-1 A 9-month-old male German Shepherd dog that has been lame in the right forelimb for 2
months. The dog resented manipulation of the elbow. A lateral radiograph of the right elbow (A) and
a comparison lateral radiograph of the left elbow (B) were obtained. A, There is increased density
is flattened and indistinct (large open arrow). There is a slight amount of bony proliferation with
remodeling of the proximal aspect of the anconeal process and irregularity involving the proximal
aspect of the radius (solid arrows). These changes in this elbow are more apparent when compared
with the normal left elbow. Diagnosis: Fragmented coronoid process
477
478
the Immature Canine
AGE AT AFPEARANCE OF
ANATOMICAL SITE
OssiFiCatION CenTER
AgE WHen FusIOn OccuRs
Scapula
Body
Birth
Tuber scapulae
7 wk
4-7 mo
Humerus
Diaphysis
Birth
Proximal epiphysis
1-2 wk
10-13 wk
 Distal epiphysis
yeus 0i ol 8-9
 Medial condyle
2-3 wk
6 wk to lateral condyle
Lateral condyle
2-3 wk
 Medial epicondyle
6-8 wk 
6 mo to condyles
Radius
Diaphysis
Birth
 Proximal epiphysis
3-5 wk
6-11 mo
Distal epiphysis
2-4 wk
8-12 wk
Ulna
Diaphysis
Birth
Olecranon
8 wk
6-10 mo
Distal epiphysis
8 wk
8-12 mo
Anconeal process
12 wk
4-5 mo
Carpus
Ulnar
4 wk
Radial
3-4 wk
Central
4-5 wk
Intermediate
3-4 wk
Accessory
Body
2 wk
Epiphysis
7 wk
4 mo
First
3 wk
Second
4 wk
Third
4 wk
Fourth
3 wk
Sesamoid bone
4 mo
Metacarpus
Diaphysis
Birth
Distal epiphysis (2-5)*
4 wk
6 mo
 Proximal epiphysis (1)*
5 wk
6 mo
Phalanges
First phalanx
Diaphysis (1-5)*
Birth
Distal epiphysis (2-5)*
4 wk
6 mo
Distal epiphysis (1)*
6 wk
6 mo
Second phalanx
Diaphysis (2-5)*
Birth
Proximal epiphysis (2-5)*
5 wk
6 mo
 Second phalanx absent or
fused with first in frst digit.
Third phalanx
Diaphysis
Birth
Volar sesamoids
2 mo
Dorsal sesamoids
4 mo
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
479
TABLE 4-1 Age at Appearance of Ossification Centers and of Bony Fusion in
the Immature Canine-
—cont'd
AGE AT APPEARANCE OF
ANATOMICAL SITE
OSSIFICATION CENTER
AGE WHEN FUS1ON OCCURS
Pelvis
Pubis
Birth
4-6 mo
Ilium
Birth
4-6 mo
Ischium
Birth
4-6 mo
Os acetabulum
7wk
5 m0
Iliac crest
4 mo
1-2 yr
Tuber ischii
3 mo
8-10 mo
 Ischial arch
6 mo
12 mo
 Caudal symphysis pubis
7 mo
L S
Symphysis pubis
5 yr
Femur
Diaphysis
Birth
 Proximal epiphysis (head)
2 wk
7-11 mo
Trochanter major
8wk
6-10 mo
Trochanter minor
8 wk
8-13 mo
Distal epiphysis
8-1l mo to shaft
Trochlea
2 wk
3 mo condyle to trochlea
 Medial condyle
3 wk
Lateral condyle
3 wk
 Patella
9wk
Tibia
Diaphysis
Birth
Condyles
 Medial
3 wk
6 wk to lateral
Lateral
3wk
6-12 mo to shaft
Tuberosity
8wk
6-8 mo to condyles
6-12 mo to shaft
Distal epiphysis
3 wk
8-1l mo
Medial malleolus
3 mo
5 mo
Fibula
Diaphysis
Birth
 Proximal epiphysis
9 wk
8-12 mo
Distal epiphysis
2-7 wk
 7-11 mo
Tarsust
Tibial
Birth-l wk
Fibular
Birth-1l wk
Tuber calcis
6 wk
3-8 mo
Central
3 wk
First
4 wk
Second
4 wk
Third
3 wk
Fourth
2 wk
Sesamoids
 Fabellar
3 mo
 Popliteal
3 mo
 Plantar phalangeal
2 mo
Dorsal phalangeal
5 mo
*Digit numbers.
tMetatarsus and pelvic limb phalanges are approximatdy the same as the metacarpus and pectoral limb phalanges.
From Ticer IW: Radiographic technique in small animal practice. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1975; 101.
Reproduced courtesy of publisher.
480
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-z A 6-year-old spayed Great Dane with a chronic soft-tissue
infection of the right front foot. There is extensive bony proliferation
involving the cranial medial aspect of the distal radius; radial carpal
bone; frst, second, and third metacarpal bones, and frst and second
pue yous si uoiand Auoq au ap puoss aul go sauid
well mineralized, and possesses an organized trabecular pattern.
Diagnosis: Benign or chronic inflammation. In this case, the reaction
is secondary to chronic soft-tissue infection.
Radiographs must be evaluated systematically. One approach involves sequentially
examining the soft tissues surrounding the bone, the periosteal and endosteal surfaces,
the cortical thickness and density, the medullary density and trabecular pattern, the
articular surfaces, the subchondral bone density and thickness, and the joint space
width.
Interpretation of a bone lesion requires knowledge of the age, breed, and species
involved, the usual site or sites of involvement (i.e., specific joint, bone, or location within
the bone), the number of bones or joints involved (i.e., monostotic or polyostotic, monoar-
Bone can respond to stress or injury only by removal of existing bone via destruction or
osteolysis, or by adding new bone via bony proliferation or sclerosis. A loss of 30% to 50% of
 the bone density is required before the loss can be detected radiographically. When bony
destruction is present, (1) alteration of the trabecular pattern or loss of the normal bone den-
sity within the medullary canal or subchondral bone or (2) a decrease in cortical thickness or
break in cortical continuity may be seen. Bone loss within the cortex may be detected more
easily than bone los within the medullary canal. Bony proliferation may originate from the
periosteum (outer cortical margins) or endosteum (inner cortical margin) or within the
medullary canal.
The aggressiveness, activity or rate of change of a bony lesion can be estimated by evaluat-
ing the amount and nature of the bony destruction and proliferation that is present and the
margin between the normal and abnormal bone. Slowly progressive, inactive, nonaggressive, or
benign bone or joint lesions are characterized by well-mineralized, uniformly dense, smooth
margins on periosteal and endosteal surfaces; well-defined lines of transition; and an organized
 se e asd aid (- )  e   d rea
malignant bone lesions have poorly defined, irregular, unevenly mineralized margins and a
 gradual,ill-defined transition between the normal, uninvolved bone and the lesion (Fig. 4-3).
Special radiographic procedures have been described for evaluating both bones and joints.
Contrast arthrography (i.e., positive, negative, or double-contrast techniques) has been used
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
481
FIG. 4-3 A 9-year-old female Great Dane with a 5-week history of
swelling and lameness in the leff front leg. There is localized soft-tissue
swelling around the distal radius and ulna, and poorly mineralized,
poorly defined bony proliferation on the cranial and medial surfaces
ofthe distal radius.Extensive bony destruction is present. The irru-
lar, poorly mineralized bony proliferation indicates an aggressive
process. The location of the lesion and its destructive nature as well as
the localized soft-tissue swelling are indicative of a primary bone neo-
plasm. Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma.
to evaluate the status of interarticular structures, such as articular cartilage and menisci, and
been performed to assessfor the possibility of nonunion of fractures.43
method has its own specific strengths and weaknesses.
 Scintigraphy is particularly useful in identifying the location of a lesion, because
increased uptake of radionuclide frequently occurs in lesions that may not be radiograph-
icaly apparent.4,45 CT is useful because it is more sensitive than standard radiographs in
detecting decalcification and evaluating a cross-sectional image,46,48 MRI provides supe-
rior soft-tissue resolution and may be particularly useful in evaluating cartilage and other
soft-tissue structures.4748 Utrasonography can be used when skeletal structure are not
calcified, such as in neonates, or to evaluate associated soft-tissue structures, such as ten-
 dons, ligaments, and the joint capsule.49-64
 Bone and joint lesions may be classified as traumatic, neoplastic, infectious, nutritional,
metabolic or hormonal, toxic, anatomical, developmental, congenital, and idiopathic. Each
time a bone lesion is identified these disease categories should be reviewed.
FRACTURE, FRACTURE HEALING, COMPLICATIONS
DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
A fracture is a complete or incomplete discontinuity or break in a bone. Two radiographs
exposed at right angles, which include the joints proximal and distal to the fracture site,
must be obtained to define the fracture appropriately. Fractures are classified according to
the bone involved; the location within the bone; the path of discontinuity; the position of
the distal relative to the proximal fragment, including any rotational distraction; involve-
ment of the joint or physis; evidence of underlying or preexisting disease; and damage to
surrounding soft tissues.65,66
Various reference points have been designated to describe fracture location. These ref-
erence points include anatomical sites (i.e., epiphyseal, physeal, metaphyseal, diaphyseal) or
arbitrary points (ie., proximal, middle, distal thirds of the bone, or the junctions between
these points). The path or direction of the fracture must be described also according to the
fracture's relation to the bone's long axis or cortical margins. The proper description of
many fractures will require more than one descriptor from the following list:
482
1. Transverse: The fracture line is perpendicular to the long axis or both cortices of
the bone (Fig. 4-4).
 2. Oblique: The fracture line strikes the long axis or cortex at an angle other than 90
degrees (Fig. 4-5).
 3. Spiral: The fracture line encircles the shaft and forms a spiral relative to the long
axis of the bone (Fig. 4-6).
4. Comminuted (butterfly fragment, segmental): Multiple fracture lines within the
same bony segment divide the fracture into more than two fragments (Fig. 4-7).
 5. Impaction (depression, compression): Displacement of one fragment forcibly into
another.
 6. Incomplete (including greenstick fractures, which involve all cortices with minimal
to no displacement); plastic bowing fractures, which involve the trabeculae and
microscopic fractures in the cortex resulting in bending with no apparent fracture
line; and torus fractures, which result in bone expansion that combines plastic
 deformity and a complete fracture of a cortex (Figs. 4-8 and 4-9).
 7. Multiple (segmental): Two or more separate fractures within the same bone with
no communication of fracture lines (Fig. 4-10).
8. Fissure (incomplete fracture): A crack in the cortex (Fig. 4-11).
 9. Avulsion: Displacement of fragment at the site of muscle or tendinous insertion
(Fig. 4-12).
10. Pathologic: Fracture that results from underlying disease that decreases bone
strength (Figs. 4-13 and 4-14).
11. Fatigue (stress): Discontinuity due to repetitive stress with gradual interruption of
 the bone structure at a greater rate than can be offset by the reparative process.
The position of the major distal fragment relative to the major proximal fragment must
be described according to its location on both views. Displacement may be cranial and
Text continued on p. 488
FIG. 4-4 A 2-year-old female Greyhound unable to bear weight
foreleg. Transverse fractures of the radius and ulna involve the
middle and distal thirds. There is lateral and cranial displacement
of the distal fragments with overriding. Diagnosis: Transverse
fracture.
Chapter Four The Appendicular Skeleton
483
FIG. 4-5 A 3-month-old male Australian
Shepherd that became acutely lame in the
right rear leg after playing with a big dog.
There is an oblique fracture of the middle
portion of the right tibia with only slight
displacement of the fracture fragments
and slight soft-tissue swelling. The fibula
 is intact. Diagnosis: Oblique fracture.
FIG.4-6 A 2-month-old male Rhodesian Ridgeback that fell
off the porch and is not bearing weight on the left rear leg.
There is a spiral fracture of the left tibia involving the proxi-
mal and middle thirds. There is caudal medial displacement 
of the distal fragment with overriding. The fbula is intact,
and this most likely explains the minimal displacement that
has occurred. Diagnosis: Spiral fracture. The widened joint
spaces both proximal and distal to the fracture are due to the
dog's young age.
484
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 4-7 A 2-year-old female Australian Shepherd was
hit by a car and unable to bear weight on the right rear
limb. There is a comminuted fracture involving the mid-
portion of the right tibia. A large butterfly fragment is
separated from the lateral cortex of the tibia. There is
 Cranial and lateral displacement of the distal tibia frag-
ment with slight overriding of the fracture fragments. A
thin fissure fracture extends distally in the distal tibia
(arrows). Fractures of this sort should be noted carefully
on preoperative radiographs. There are multiple frac-
tures of the fibula with fracture lines at three sites.
Diagnosis: Comminuted tibial fracture and multiple
fibular fractures.
FIG. 4-8 A 3-month-old female mixed breed dog was stepped
 on bythe owner and has not been bearing weight on the left hind
limb since that time. There is an incomplete fracture involving
the proximal one third of the left tibia. There is also a folding
fracture involving the proximal fibula (arrows). The overall bone
density appears decreased and the cortices are thin.The thin cor-
tices, poor bone density, and folding-type fracture are indicative
of pathologic fractures due to secondary hyperparathyroidism.
This dog's diet was predominantly meat, and therefore a diagno-
' sem usiiouieedida Aruos iuu jo sis
Diagnosis: Greenstick and folding fractures. The dog had an
additional greenstick fracture of the left femur.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
485
FIG. 4-9 A 14-week-old Miniature Schnauzer was stepped on by the
owner and became acutely lame in the left hind limb. There is a frac-
ture of the tibia with a cortical disruption at the junction of the prox-
imal and distal thirds, with the distal fragment angled cranially The
fibula is bent (arrows) at this site but no cortical disruption is noted.
Diagnosis: Transverse fracture of the left tibia and plastic bowing frac-
ture of the left fibula.
 FIG. 4-10 A 7-month-old male Doberman Pinscher that was
 hit by a car and was not bearing weight on the right rear leg.
There are multiple fractures of the right tibia and fbula. The
distal tibial fracture is comminuted. There is cranial and lateral
displacement of the distal fragment and cranial medial dis-
placement of the middle fragment of the tibia. Diagnosis:
Multiple fractures.
486
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-1l A 7-month-old male Labrador Retriever with an acute
ameness in the right rear leg. There was no history of trauma;
however, the dog had been running free. Soft-tissue swelling is
 present involving the midshaftright tibia. An incomplete fracture
involves the middle and distal thirds of the right tibia. The fibula
is intact and displacement is minimal. Diagnosis: Fissure frac-
ture.
FIG. 4-12 A 5-month-old male Greyhound with a left rear lameness of 10
days duration. There is an avulsion fracture involving the tibial tuberosity.
There are multiple fragments of bone noted at the fracture site. There is
proximal displacement of the tibial tuberosity. Diagnosis: Avulsion
fracture.
CHAPTERFOUR
THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
487
FIG. 4-13 A 9-month-old male Doberman Pinscher with an acute onset
of left rear leg lameness. There was no evidence of trauma. There is a large
radiolucent lesion in the middle and distal portions of the left femur. The
lesion's margins are smooth, the cortex is thin, and there is no evidence of
 periosteal proliferation. There is a comminuted fracture through this area
with cranial displacement of the distal fragment. Diagnosis: Pathologic
fracture. This fracture has occurred through a primary bone cyst.
FIG. 4-14 A 9-year-old neutered male Boxer brought in for evaluation
of chronic lameness of the left hind limb that had worsened acutely.
Examination of the anteroposterior view reveals a poorly delimited,
diffuse lytic lesion of the tibia that is focused on the midshaff. There is 
a pathologic fracture (arrows) through the tibia. Diagnosis: Pathologic
fracture through the tibia secondary to primary hemangiosarcoma.
488
lateral or caudal and medial. In addition, the degree of proximal displacement, or over-
riding, of fragments; displacement of one fragment into another, or impaction; axial
alignment, varus or valgus; and joint or physeal involvement should be noted
(Fig. 4-15).
Avulsion fractures may result in severe clinical signs by interrupting the function of the
tendons or ligaments that attach to the fracture fragments (Figs. 4-16 to 4-18).
Physeal lines, secondary ossification centers, and irregular ossification patterns may be
mistaken for fractures. Comparison radiographs of the uninjured opposite extremity may
be extremely helpful in evaluating immature patients.
Fractures in immature patients frequently involve the growth plate, or physis. The com-
 mon patterns of physeal fractures are classified according to the direction and extent of the
fracture line as described in the following list.
CLASSIFICATION OF PHYSEAL FRACTURES
Type II: Fracture extending through the physis into the metaphysis with a triangular
segment of metaphysis accompanying the displaced epiphysis (Fig. 4-20).
Type Il: Fracture extending from the joint through the epiphysis, to the physis, and
then along the physis, with displacement of a portion of the epiphysis.
e pe sd sia  n    xa a i a
metaphysis (Fig. 4-21).
 Type V: Impaction, or crushing injury to physis without displacement (Fig. 4-22).
Any fracture that involves a physis may result in a growth disturbance. The probability
 of a growth disturbance increases from type I to type V fractures.67,68
The growth disturbance that results from physeal trauma varies depending upon the
 trauma site, severity of the injury and the animal's remaining growth potential at the time
of the injury.69-76 Lateral deviation of the foot is observed most often in association with
altered distal ulnar and radial growth (see Fig. 4-22). Subluxation of the humeroradial or
humeroulnar articulation or anconeal fracture may occur also (Figs. 4-23 and 4-24).
Because the angular deformity may be corrected more easily if diagnosed early, all animals
with known or suspected physeal trauma, especially radial or ulnar, should be examined
frequently, and radiographs of the affected and unaffected limbs should be compared.
Text continued on p. 494
FIG. 4-15 A 16-month-old female
Irish Setter that was hit by a car and
had left front leg lameness. There is a
 fracture involving the proximal ulna
that extends into the joint. There is
only slight displacement of the frac-
ture fragments. The margins of the
fracture are smooth, and there is a
faint periosteal response on the cau-
dal aspect of the ulna (arrows). This
is because the fracture was 12 days
old. Diagnosis: Intraarticular trans-
verse fracture.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
489
 FIG. 4-16 A 10-year-old mixed breed dog that had been stepped on by
a horse and was lame, with a swollen left hind leg. There is a small avul-
sion fracture fragment from the calcaneus (smallarow) and thickening
of the gastrocnemius muscle (long arrow). The Achillestendon is not as
readily identifiable as usual. Diagnosis: Avulsion of the insertion of the
 Achilles tendon due to avulsion fracture of the calcaneus.
FIG. 4-17 A 2-year-old male
Rottweiler with an acute onset of
lameness affer roughhousing with
 other dogs in the park.A, Examination
 ofthe lateral view reveals proximal dis-
placement (white arrow with round
base) of the patella, given the hyper-
flexed view. A small avulsion fragment
from the tibia (white arrow) is present.
B, The anteroposterior view reveals
proximal displacement of the patella
(arrows). Diagnosis: Avulsion frac-
ture and partial rupture of the
straight patellar tendon.
490
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-18 A 5-month-old male Akita
was hit by a car and was lame in the
right hind limb. A, The lateral view
reveals a mild cranial displacement
of the distal aspect of the tibial crest
(white arraw with round base). There
are a few small avulsion fragments
from the tibia (smaller white arrow).
There is a loss of the normal fat pad
(black arrow), indicating edema or
hemorrhage in the synovial joint
space. B, The opposite stifle was nor-
mal.
A
B
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
491
FIG. 4-19 A 3-month-old domestic
short-haired cat with a right rear
limb lameness, which occurred after
 a tape recorder fell on the cat. Pain
was elicited on palpation of the right
hip. On the initial radiographs
obtained at the time of evaluation (A
and B), there is slight malalignment
of the right femoral capital epiphysis
(arrow). Radiographs were obtained
3 days later (C and D). The fracture
line and fracture displacement are
obvious. Diagnosis: Femoral capital
A
B
epiphyseal fracture (Salter type I).
D
FIG. 4-20 A 6-month-old female
mixed breed that was hit by a car and
was not bearing weight on the right
rear leg. There is a Salter type II frac-
ture of the distal femur. A medial
metaphyseal fragment can be seen
(arrows). There is caudal and medial
displacement of the distal fragment
with overriding. Diagnosis: Salter
type II fracture.
492
FIG. 4-21 A 6-month-old male Great Dane was brought for treatment
after falling from a moving truck and was not bearing weight on the
left rear leg. Lateral and posteroanterior radiographs were obtained,
although only the posteroanterior is illustrated. There is a Salter type
IV fracture of the distal left femur. The fracture line extends through
the distal femoral metaphysis and epiphysis. The articular surface is
involved. The medial condyle and medial portion of the distal femoral
metaphysis are displaced medially. The fracture line also extends
through the physeal plate tothe lateral side ofthe distal femur. This has
resulted in medial displacement of the lateral femoral condyle.
Diagnosis: Salter type IV fracture.
FIG. 4-22 A 6-month-old female Labrador Retriever was brought in
after being hit by a car. The dog was lame in the lef front leg and pain
was elicited upon palpation of the carpus. A, In the initial radiograph
there is minimal lateral displacerment of the distal radial epiphysis.
Close scrutiny of the distal ulna reveals that the cranial and medial
aspects of the physis, or growth cartilage,are narrower than the caudal
and lateral aspects. This represents a Salter type V fracture. The limb was
immobilized in a cast at the owner's request. Later, the owner removed
the splint and did not return with the dog for 6 months. At that time
there was marked cranial bowing and lateral angulation of the distal
limb (B). Diagnosis: Salter type V fracture of the distal ulnar physis
with resultant premature closure of the distal ulnar physis with angu-
lation deformity.
A
B
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
493
FIG. 4-23 A 7-month-old male Miniature Poodle was dropped by an
owner at 2 months of age and experienced pain for 2 weeks following the
injury. The dog was lame and the right elbow was painful on palpation.
There is subluxation of the radial humeral articulation with a large gap
between the radial head and the distal humeral condyle. The coronoid
 process of the ulna is irregular and there is sclerosis of the subchondral
bone of the ulna. The humeral ulnar articulation is widened (arrow).
The cranial cortex of the radius and the ulna are thickened. There is a
slight bowing deformity of the radius. The proximal radial and distal
ad ym ien is aun iq uado uan sd ym 
appears to be closed. Diagnosis: Premature closure of the distal radial
luxation with remodeling and secondary degenerative joint disease.
FIG. 4-24 A 6-month-old female
Basset Hound was injured at 4
 months of age. The injury was mild
 and was not treated at that time. The 
right foreleg became deviated laterally.
 There is subluxation of the humeral
unar articulation (open arrow). The 
radius and ulna are curved. The prox-
imal and distal radial growth plates
 remain open. The distal ulnar growth
 plate is closed except for a small rem-
 nant that remains open on the caudal
and lateral aspects (closed arrows).
 Diagnosis: Premature closure of the
 distal ulnar physis. This has resulted in
 growth deformity, with the upward
pressure of the radius on the distal
humerus causing the elbow subluxa-
tion. If this continues, fracture of the
anconeal process could
result.
 Although some degree of limb cur-
vature is considered normal in a dog
of this breed, the changes noted here
were more severe than in the oppo-
site limb.
494
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Growth disturbances also may result from metaphyseal infection, epiphysiolysis, or alter-
ations in normal endochondral ossification (i.e., hypertrophic osteodystrophy, retained endo-
chondral cartilage).7778 Infection may cause retarded growth if growth cartilage is damaged;
however, accelerated growth in response to local inflammation also has been observed.
Nondisplaced physeal fractures secondary to trauma or epiphysiolysis, or incomplete
or fissure fractures may not be visible on radiographs that are obtained immediately after
 an injury.778 If a suspected fracture is not obvious on initial radiographs, a repeated
examination 3 to 7 days afterward usually will demonstrate the fracture, because the
 resorption of bone along the fracture edges and early periosteal reaction will make the dis-
continuity more apparent (see Fig. 4-19).
A closed, or simple, fracture has intact overlying skin. An open, or compound, fracture
has a break in the overlying skin and soft tissues allowing communication between the
 bone and the environment. The presence of air within the surrounding sof tissue suggests
- si ie pom do ue po ton s au aq  si (-t  a uado ue
den by the animal's coat of hair.
 Bone density and trabecular pattern should be examined carefully in all fractures, par-
ticularly those that occur with minimal trauma. A loss of bone density, evidence of
periosteal proliferation, or disturbance of the normal trabecular pattern at the time of the
initial injury indicates an underlying pathologic process. A pathologic fracture is due in
part to the weakness caused by the underlying disease.79 The bone may bend, producing an
incomplete rather than complete fracture. Tumors, infections, and primary and secondary
hyperparathyroidism may be associated with pathologic fractures.
A special cause of fracture and joint injury is extreme stress. This has been well docu-
 mented in the racing Greyhound.80-85
 Involvement of joints should be described also. Joint derangements can include dislo-
cation, which is complete loss of contact between the usual articular surface components;
subluxation, or partial loss of contact between the usual articular surface components; or
diastasis, frank separation of a slightly moveable joint such as the pubic symphysis or dis-
tal tibial and fibular syndesmosis.65
FIG. 4-25 A 9-month-old female Labrador Retriever was hit
by a car. There is a comminuted fracture involving the distal
one-third of the left femur and caudal and medial displacement
of the distal fragment. There are multiple butterfly fragments at
the fracture site. Gas in the soft tissues both at the fracture site
and on the cranial surface of the limb indicates that the frac-
ture is open. There is a comminuted fracture involving the
 proximaltibia. The fbula isintact. The tibial articular surface
is involved and the fracture fragments are impacted.
 Diagnosis: Open comminuted femoral and tibial fractures.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
495
Other fracture classifications may describe an avulsion fracture, a fracture caused by
 detachment of the fragment from the bone by the attachment of a ligament or tendon, or
may note syndromes of damage to specific tendons, ligaments, or bones caused by specific
POSTOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Postoperative radiographs are mandatory after attempted reduction of fracture fragments,
whether the fracture is open or closed. Alignment and apposition of the fracture fragments
paa aq Pous sanend no sud suniun 'snedde qeiains e jo uosod pe
(Fig. 4-26). Specific attention should be paid to the number and types of appliances as well
as their relationship to the fracture, the regional joints, and to each other Postoperative radi-
u a jo sos au  u osed  sisq e s aas ose so
The rate at which a fracture heals depends upon the animal's age, general health and
nutrition, the blood supply to the bone, and the stability of fragments. Fractures in young,
growing animals, in areas with a rich blood supply, and those that are rigidly immobilized
 heal more rapidly. Clinical union usually precedes radiographic healing.
 a  no a n e se n a s s 
endochondral healing leads to fracture repair. In this method of healing, the fracture mar-
 gins will become less distinct due to absorption of bone within 2 to 3 days during the
inflammatory phase. Periosteal proliferation usually becomes evident within 10 to 14 days
after the injury; however, in growing animals, periosteal proliferation may be evident as
early as 3 to 5 days later (Fig. 4-27). Callus, an unorganized meshwork of loosely woven
bone developed on the pattern of the original fibrin clot that is formed immediately fol-
lowing the fracture, may develop from the stem cells from the periosteum, endosteum, or
 Haversian canal lining This is the reparative phase.l10 The amount of callus varies consid-
erably depending upon the animal's age, the fracture site, the method of fixation, and the
relative stability of the fracture fragments (Figs. 4-28 to 4-31). As time passes,the callus will
mature by laying down new bone along the lines of stress and resorbing trabeculae that are
dss pd
Membranous healing may occur if the fracture fragments are rigidly affixed in intimate
contact. With this method of healing, callus is kept to a minimum and the fracture gap is
filled with periosteal and endosteal new bone.
FIG. 4-26 Postoperative radiographs of the same dog
A n a s ai a t  i 
means of two intramedullary pins. The caudal lateral
 pin does not engage the proximal fragment. Thisilus-
trates the importance of postoperative radiographs to
 check not only for alignment and apposition of frac-
ture fragments, but also for stability of the repair.
496
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-27 A4-month-old female mixed breed dog that was hit
by a car and had a fracture of the right elbow repaired 6 weeks
 previously. The dog was again not bearing weight on the right
front leg. There is a transverse fracture of the right humerus.
The fracture fragment margins are indistinct. There is a faint
periosteal response on the medial and lateral aspects of the dis-
tal fragment (arrows) and medial displacement of the fragment.
There is an old malunion fracture of the distal right humerus.
 a s ad  si a ieii as
healed, with callus bridging the old fracture site and consider-
able elbow deformity. Sclerosis of the ulnar articular surface
indicates the presence of degenerative joint disease. The indis
tinct margins and bony proliferation in the midshaft humerus
are compatible with a l-week-old fracture. There is no evidence
of underlying bone disease. The cortical thickness and
medullary density are normal. This represents early healing and
humeral fracture.
The nature of the fracture, the type of repair and its adherence to proper fixation prin-
ciples, and the patient's clinical signs determine the frequency with which follow-up
radiographs should be obtained. A change in the patient's status (i.e., reluctance to use the
limb, sudden onset of swelling, pain, or discharge) is an indication for immediate reevalu-
ation. Follow-up radiographs should be examined carefuilly for the progression of healing
or for the presence of complications.
COMPLICATIONS OF FRACTURE HEALING
Complications that may be detected radiographically include the following:
1. Infection.112-114
 2. Fracture fragment movement.
 3. Orthopedic device movement or failure.
4. Delayed union or nonunion of fracture, 12,11,15
5. New injury.
 6. Joint disease, related or unrelated.
 7. Soft-tissue abnormality, such as swelling, contracture, subcutaneous emphysema,
 atrophy, or mineralization.l16
 8. Premature physeal closure, partial or complete.
9. Fracture-induced sarcoma, usuallylong afe fracture healing.17
Identifying osteomyelitis at the site of a healing fracture can be difficult, because the radi-
ographic changes indicative of osteomyelitis are similar to those observed with normal
eration or bone lysis, especially when located away from the actual fracture site, suggests
sxa so psn ae d ys, no sd Ae adn m sop s
periosteal stripping occurs. This may resemble infection; however, the absence of bony
destruction is helpful in recognizing this reaction.
Text continued on p. 503
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
497
A
B
FIG. 4-28 A 6-month-old male mixed breed dog was hit by a car and had
a non-weight-bearing lameness of the right front leg. A, There are trans-
verse fractures of the radius and ulna involving the junction of the middle
and distal thirds. There is slight lateral and caudal displacement of the dis-
tal fragments. There is mild soft-tissue swelling of the area. B, Follow-up
radiographs were obtained 2 weeks following the initial injury The leg had
been placed in a cast. There is no change in position of the fracture frag-
ments when compared with the initial radiographs. The fracture lines
appear slightlywider, with indistinct margins due to resorption at the frac-
 ses appear normal without evidence of growth plate trauma. C, Follow-up
radiographs were obtained 1 month after the initial injury. The fracture has
healed completely and the fracture lines are no longer visible. There is slight
malalignment at the fracture site. The distal radial and ulnar physes remain
open without evidence of growth deformity. There is demineralization of
the bones distal to the fracture site. This is due to disuse from immobiliza-
 tion of the limb in a cast. Diagnosis: Healed transverse fracture.
C
498
B
FIG. 4-29 An 18-month-old male mixed breed dog was hit by a car.
A, There are midshaft comminuted fractures of the radius and ulna.
Linear fissure fractures extend both proximal and distal to the major
fracture. There is caudal displacement of the distal fragment. The
d n u   s an uq a 
thirds is the site of normal interosseous muscle attachment. The lon-
gitudinal fissure fractures both proximal and distal to the fracture
site are of great importance and should be evaluated carefully in a
fracture of this type. B, Postoperative radiographs of the right radius 
Ejo suu Aq ada uaq su a au  eaa u u
 Kirschner-Ehmer device. Alignment and apposition are good. The
 pins are well placed in the proximal and distal fragments. C,
Radiographs were obtained 5 weeks after surgical repair. The
Kirschner-Ehmer device has been removed. There is extensive callus,
which bridges the fracture completely. A radiolucent line is still evi-
dent at the fracture site. There is an increase in bony density within
the proximal radius and ulna. A similar area is in the distal radius at
the site from which the pins were removed. Diagnosis: Healing frac-
q a s an a go  s ym a
response seen at the site of pin placement is normal and there is no
evidence of infection.
CHapTer FOuR THe ApPenDiCulaR SkelETON
499
FIG. 4-30 A 2-year-old male mixed breed dog was hit by a car. A,
Postoperative radiographs of the right tibia reveal an oblique fracture
of the distal right tibia and a comminuted fracture of the right fibula
at the junction of the middle and distal thirds. The fracture has been
repaired by means of an intramedullary pin and two cerclage wires.
The intramedullary pin does not extend fully into the distal fragment
(i.e.,it is within 0.5 cm of the distal articular surface and only approx-
 imately 1 cm into the distal fracture fragment). Alignment and appo-
sition of the fracture fragments are excellent. There is marked
soft-tissue swelling. B, On radiographs obtained 5 weeks following the
repair, there is no change in position of the orthopedic devices. The 
fracture line is no longer visible except for a smallinear radiolucency
 proximal to the most proximal cerclage wire (black arrow). There is lit-
tle periosteal callus with only a small amount on the lateral aspect of
the middle one-third of the tibia. Diagnosis: Healing fracture. The
 minimal callus formation and rapid healing are the result of the solid 
fixation and fracture stability.
A
B
500
FIG.4-31 A, Postoperative radiographs of the left radius and ulna of a 2-
 as) aey pe id a pu ay po-rea
4-4) has been repaired by means of a seven-hole dynamic-compression 
bone plate. There is excellent alignment and apposition of the radial frac-
ture fragments. There is slight malalignment of the distal ulna. All screws
except the most proximal one appear to engage the caudal radial cortex.
B, Follow-up radiographs obtained 6 weeks after the surgical repair show 
exuberant callus formation around the distal ulna. There is minimal cal-
lus formation around the radius. Increased bony density is present
between the screws. This represents normal healing. Note that the radius,
which is rigidly stabilized, has a minimal amount of callus with disap-
pearance of the fracture line while the ulna, which was less wellstabilized,
exhibits a greater amount of callus. The absence of soft-tissue swelling
and bony destruction indicates that the ulna is healing normally without 
infection.
Contirued
B
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
501
 FIG. 4-31 cont'd C, Postoperative radiographs 10 weeks after initial
surgical repair show healed fractures, and the fracture lines are not vis-
ible. The bony callus is smooth and contains a normal trabecular pat-
tern. The margins of the ulnar fragments are smooth and a dense
cortical shadow is forming. There is a small amount of bony callus
around the proximal end of the bone plate. The bone plate and screws
are intact. D, The bone plate has been removed and the healing of the
au ynauq asap aq jo ssi s si arau edde s a
bone plate; however, this is minimal. The radius has healed without
deformation and with minimal callus due to the rigid immobilization
provided by the bone plate. The ulna has also healed but with a larger
amount of callus. The changes in the radius represent the usual pattern 
of bone healing associated with rigid fixation. Diagnosis: Healed frac-
ture.
D
502
FIG. 4-32 An 8-month-old female Collie had transverse fractures of
the radius and ulna repaired 5 weeks previously. There are two
 intramedullary pins in the radius and ulna that extend into the distal
fragments for a short distance. There is cranial and medial angulation
of the distal fragments and diffuse mild soff-tissue swelling. Marked,
active, irregular periosteal reaction extends both proximal and distal to
the fracture site. There is increased density within the medullary canal
of both the radius and ulna. Areas of irregular bony reabsorption are
present around the distal aspect of the radial intramedulary pin, and
areas of radiolucency with slightly increased density are visible within
the proximal and distal radial metaphyses (arrows). There is extensive
bony destruction at the fracture site. Diagnosis: Osteomyelitis at the
site of fracture repair. The extensive bony proliferation distant to the
fracture site and the areas of bony destruction within the radial meta-
physis and the fracture site suggest the diagnosis of infection. The irreg-
ular, mottled periosteal response should be contrasted with the more
uniform and evenly mineralized callus usually associated with a healing
fracture.
FIG. 4-33 A 4-year-old male Siberian 
Husky whose left front foot was
traumatized 4 months previously. A
fractured ffth metacarpal bone was
pinned at that time. The fracture is
 still visible and an intramedullary pin
 is present within the fth metacarpal
 bone. There is no evidence of callus at
the fracture site. There is an irregular
radiolucency around the intramedul-
lary pin and extensive bony prolifera-
tion around both the proximal and
 distal fragments, as well as on the first
phalanx of the fth digit. Diagnosis:
Nonunion of fracture secondary to
 infection and instability.
CHAPTER FOUR
THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
503
Motion or infection, or both, will result in absorption of bone around orthopedic
devices (Fig. 4-34).120,121 Motion usually results in a smoothly marginated, uniform loss of
bony density around the device. When infection is present a more uneven pattern of bone
density loss occurs. Soft-tissue swelling also is frequently associated with infection. The
changes lag behind clinical signs, it is best to treat for infection based on clinical signs
rather than waiting for the radiographic diagnosis to become evident.
 Loss of a bone fragment's blood supply due to the original trauma or subsequent infec-
tion may result in sequestrum formation.124 A sequestrum cannot be identified radi-
ographicall at the time of the injury; however, as the fracture heals, the sequestered
fragment will remain dense and its edges will remain distinct. An area of relative radiolu-
cency, or involucrum, wil form around the sequestrum while other fracture fragments show
evidence of bony proliferation or absorption (Fig. 4-35). A large sequestrum willinterfere
with fracture healing, while smaller sequestra may be revascularized eventually. A persistent
sequestrum recognition is important, because its removal usually is necessary.
 Delayed union, which is the failure of a fracture to heal in the normally expected time, is
difficult to define precisely because of the many factors that normally affect the rate of heal-
ing. However, this diagnosis may be apparent in some situations. A nonunion occurs when
the fracture remains and there is cessation of bone healing. The diagnosis of nonunion
should not be tendered as long as there is continued evidence of healing progress (i.e.,
additional callus present at the fracture site when sequential radiographs are compared).
A nonunion is identified by a persistent fracture line and smooth, rounded, and dense
fracture fragment margins with obliteration of the marrow cavity by callus (Figs. 4-37 and
FIG. 4-34 A 13-month-old male Golden Retriever had transverse frac-
tures of the distal one third of the radius and ulna that were repaired by
means of a Kirschner-Ehmer device 1 month previously. Callus is pres-
ent bridging the fracture. There are areas of radiolucency around the
Kirschner-Ehmer pins (arrows). There is bony proliferation on the cau-
dal aspect of the ulna at the site of proximal pin penetration and on the
cranial surface of the radius in association with the Kirschner-Ehmer
 indicates that infection rather than motion is responsible for the loss of
bone.
504
Small Animal Radiology And Uitrasonography
FIG. 4-35 A 14-month-old male mixed breed dog had an open
comminuted fracture of the right tibia repaired 1 month previ-
ously. An intramedullary pin is present, and extensive bony pro-
liferation involves the proximal and distal fragments. There is a
very dense, sharply marginated fragment in the midportion of
the tibia. The bony proliferation surounds but does not contact
or involve this bony fragment. There is irregular reabsorption of
bone surrounding the intramedullary pin and diffuse extensive 
soft-tissue swelling. Diagnosis: Osteomyelitis and lack of bone
healing (delayed union) due to infection and a sequestrum. This
fracture was successfully treated by removal of the sequestrum and
intramedullary pin and administration of systemic antibiotics.
FIG. 4-36 A 3-year-old neutered male mixed breed dog had
s aey au ay iu s paiiey pue ien e aq i ua
repaired with an intramedullary pin. Eight weeks after surgery
the dog's leg became painful and developed a draining tract. A,
The anteroposterior view reveals a great deal of callus formation,
especially on the medial aspect, that is mostly remodeled. A
small,radiodense structure (sequestrum) immediately medial to
the intramedullary pin is surrounded by a small zone of lucency
(involucrum, arrows) that contains a very dense, well-defined
small bony structure (sequestrum). B, The lateral view reveals
the clearly defined, sharp-edged and angular, increased-density
fragment (sequestrum) surrounded by the relatively radiolucent
involucrum (arrows). Diagnosis: Sequestrum formation.
A
B
CHAPTeR FOUR THE AＰＰENDICUlAR SKelETON
505
FIG. 4-37 A 2-year-old spayed
 domestic short-haired cat was hit by
a car 9 months previously, and a
fracture of the right humerus was
immobilized in a coaptation splint.
There is a fracture of the right
humerus at the junction of the mid-
dle and distal thirds. The fracture
fragments are smooth: their margins
and medullary canals are sclerotic.
There is no callus crossing the frac-
ture site. Diagnosis: Nonunion
humeral fracture. There is remodel-
ing of the distal scapular glenoid and
 proximal humeral head, which most
likely resulted from previous trauma
with malarticulation and degenera-
tive joint disease.
4-38).116,12,126 with time, a nonunion may develop a pseudoarthrosis. This is characterized
by the development of a joint space and joint capsule, which is lined by synovium, between
 the two bone fragments. Radiographical, a pseudoarthrosis may appear as two adjacent
fragments with smooth, sclerotic ends that have remodeled to form congruent surfaces,
which resemble a false ball and socket joint between the bone fragments.
Osteomedullography, injection of contrast media into the medullary canal of the distal frag-
ment, can be performed in fractures that are older than 4 weeks to confirm the suspicion of
a delayed union or nonunion. Failure of the contrast to cross the fracture line confirms the
 -e e se psp si su se pue ym ru  se ctsis
union.126
Stress protection may result in osteopenia beneath a bone plate or other rigid fixator
fracture after the fixator is removed. Thin cortices and coarse trabeculation beneath or
around the bone plate are radiographic evidence of stress protection-induced osteope-
nia.
Disuse osteopenia, a more generalized form of stress protection-induced osteopenia,
 can result from immobilization of a limb. The loss of bone density usually is more appar-
ent distal to the fracture (Fig. 4-40). Severe disuse osteopenia predisposes to a pathologic
fracture. This usually occurs if the animal exercises vigorously soon after the immobiliza-
tion device is removed. A gradual return to normal weight bearing should be prescribed
when disuse osteopenia is evident.
TUMORS
PRimARY BONE TuMORS
Most neoplasms of the appendicular skeleton are malignant and may be categorized as
primary bone tumors, tumors metastatic to bone, or primary soft-tissue tumors with
tion of the neoplasm. The age, breed, and clinical history must be considered also. The
following lists several specific radiographic features to be considered when evaluating the
radiograph:
1. The soft tissues around the bone lesion.
 2 The anatomical location of the lesion within the bone (e.g., metaphyseal, diaphyseal).
506
FIG. 4-38 An 18-month-old male Toy Poodle suffered a fractured leff
radius and ulna 8 months previously. The leg has been immobilized in
an external splint since that time. There is little evidence of callus. The
fracture margins are smooth and sclerotic. There is a marked loss of
there is sclerosis of the radial cortex. There is marked demineralization
of the carpal bones as well as of the proximal and distal aspects of the
metacarpal bones and phalanges. These changes are due to disuse from
immobilization in a cast. Diagnosis: Nonunion of fracture with
marked bone atrophy. This type of disuse atrophy frequently occurs in
small-breed dogs with fractures that are immobilized.
 3. The presence or absence of local joint involvement.
 4. The number of bones involved.
 5. The density of the bone in and around the lesion.
 6. The margination of the lesion.
 7. Any change since previous radiographs.
 8. The presence of lesions in other parts of the animal.
 Osteosarcoma is the most frequent primary bone tumor in dogs.129-135 It accounts for
approximately 85% of primary bone tumors. Chondrosarcomas account for about 10%.
Hemangiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, lymphoma, liposar-
coma, myeloma, giant cell tumor, and chondroma together account for the remaining 5%.
 as  rs e a r "ia) s -  a-
Bernard) account for 90% of the osteosarcoma occurrences. Two peak occurrence rates
are seen in dogs. One occurs at approximately 18 months of age and the other occurs in
older individuals (those over 6 years of age). The incidence is decreased between these
ages.132
 Primary bone tumors are uncommon in cats. The radiographic features of feline pri-
 lower in the cat than it is in the dog.
Primary bone tumors are frequently osteolytic; however, both osteoblastic and mixed
lesions are also common. The cortex may be destroyed at several points and the normal tra-
becular pattern destroyed or distorted.i36 There is irregular, poorly defined, and mineral-
ized periosteal and endosteal proliferation. The affected area will blend gradually with the
normal bone, resulting in what has been termed a long transition zone. As a general rule,
they do not cross joint spaces or involve adjacent bones. In a few advanced cases there may
be involvement of adjacent long bones. Most primary bone tumors are highly aggressive,
and rapid expansion of the lesion will be evident if the tumor is reevaluated after 1 to 2
weeks. Malignant tumors may appear radiographically to be benign in their early stages.
This appearance usually changes with time. In some cases the first sign of a tumor will be
 a pathologic fracture due to the weakening of the bone by the tumor.137-139
The presence of a suspected primary bone tumor raises the question about metastasis
to other sites. Scintigraphic and radiographic surveillance of other bony structures have
been discussed and may be appropriate in selected situations. However, because bone
FIG.4-39 Al-year-old female English Pointer was hit by a car 8 weeks
 previously. A comminuted fracture was repaired with a bone plate and
interfragmentary screws. A, In the radiographs obtained 8 weeks after
fracture repair,the fracture has apparently healed with minimal callus,
and the fracture lines are barely visible in the distal and middle por-
tions of the tibia. The findings are indicative of a healing fracture.
There is a slight loss of bony density beneath the distal portion of the 
bone plate. The fbula has not healed. The plate was removed and the
'g ap mo au a ae aaq so au a e u iday so
Additional radiographs were obtained. One interfragmentary bone
o  e      s s
 the middle and distal thirds. There is lateral displacement of the distal
 fragment with medial angulation and slight overriding. The fracture
has occurred through an area of decreased bone density. This
 decreased density was the result of stress protection provided by the
bone plate. Diagnosis: Pathologic fracture.
B
508
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-40 A 6-month-old male mixed breed dog had a trans-
verse, midshaft radius and ulna fracture immobilized in a cast 4
    s   s
malalignment. There is a loss of bone density distal to the frac-
ture. This is due to immobilization of the limb. Diagnosis: Healed
fracture with malunion and bone atrophy. The malalignment and
bone atrophy did not affect this dog's return to normal limb use.
FIG. 4-41 A 6-year-old female Great Dane with an acute onset of right
foreleg lameness. The carpus was swollen. There is soff-tissue swelling
surrounding the radial metaphysis. There is extensive bony destruction 
with the cortex eroded at several sites. Mild periosteal reaction is pres-
ent. There is poor demarcation between the involved and normal bone.
Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma.
509
FIG. 4-42 A 5-year-old female Irish
Setter with an acute onset of left
foreleg lameness that had become
more severe and painful over 3 days.
Left shoulder muscle atrophy was
present. There is bony proliferation
noted involving the proximal humeral
metaphysis, with bony destruction
involving the medullary canal and
cortex in this area. There is increased
density within the medullary canal,
with poor demarcation between the
involved metaphysis and normal
appearing diaphyseal areas. Diagnosis:
Osteosarcoma.
metastasis with osteosarcoma is relatively uncommon, neither scintigraphy nor radi-
should be obtained when a bone tumor is suspected. The presence of pulmonary metasta-
sis may aid in establishing the diagnosis of tumor.
Osteosarcoma. Osteosarcoma usually produces a localized soft-tissue swelling, which may
 o  s    s     
totally osteoblastic, although a mixed, predominately osteolytic, pattern is seen most
often.117,130,132,140-15s Osteosarcomas are observed most frequently in the metaphyseal por-
tion of the proximal humerus, distal radius and ulna, distal femur, and proximal tibia (Figs.
4-3 and 4-41 to 4-43). However, they have been reported distal to the antebrachiocarpal
 and tarsocrural joints.151 when they become large they can expand into an adjacent bone.
This occurs most often in the distal radius and ulna and in the tibia and fibula. It is evident
radiographically as periosteal proliferation or destruction of the adjacent bone (Fig. 4-44).
Osteosarcoma has been reported as a late sequela of complicated fracture repair and the
long-term presence of metallic orthopedic implants. 131,14-is5 In these cases, the tumor has
occurred at the previous fracture site (Fig. 4-45).
 Multicentric and metastatic osteosarcomas have been reported.156,157 Simultaneous
involvement of several bones on the initial examination suggests either a multicentric
tumor or metastases from an unknown primary tumor. Multiple bone involvement some
time after identification of a solitary bone lesion suggests metastasis (Figs. 4-46 and 4-47).
Another possibility is the presence of opacities in the medullary cavity of the affected or
adjacent bones. These usually are considered to be bone infarcts.158
 Parosteal Osteosarcoma. Parosteal osteosarcoma has been reported, but its incidence is
however, the lesion is centered on the periosteum rather than the medullary canal and
extends into the soft tissue of the limb. Extensive, poorly organized, and poorly mineral-
ized patterns of bone density occur within the soft-tissue mass (Fig. 4-48). Bony destruction
is present within the medullary canal. Discrimination between osteosarcoma and parosteal
osteosarcoma may be important. In humans, parosteal osteosarcoma metastasizes less
frequently than does osteosarcoma.
510
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG.4-43 A 7-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with a
l-month lameness of the left rear leg. There is focal bony
destruction involving the proximal one-third of the left femur.
There is extensive soft-tissue calcification. The margins of the
bony lesion are poorly defned. The radiographic findings are
indicative of an expansile neoplasm arising within the
medullary cavity and extending into the soft tissues. Diagnosis:
Osteosarcoma.
FIG. 4-44 An 8-year-old male mixed breed dog was lame on the
left foreleg for 3 weeks. The swelling had increased gradually
and the dog was not bearing weight. There is a localized soft-tis-
 sue swelling centered over the distal radius and ulna. There is
massive bony destruction involving the middle and distal por-
tions of the radius and the medial and cranial aspects of the dis-
tal ulna. Irregular, amorphous soft-tissue mineralization
surrounds these bones, with poorly defined areas of periosteal
proliferation. There are multiple metallic shotgun pellets
throughout the soft tissues, with fragmentation of these metalic 
fragments in the carpal joint area. Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma. The
spread of this lesion to the ulna is unusual; however, the size of
this lesion and close relationship between the radius and ulna at
this point contributed to the extension of the tumor into the ulna.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
511
B
E pue Aisnid siea g en e Aq u uaa peq iauem aiey i-rea-g u 'a pue y St- 
aq peu sp au pasisad peu in sup y dis padau sem iy uai pay
acutely lame during the last 2 weeks. There is a destructive lesion involving the middle portion of the
right femur. Poorly organized and mineralized periosteal proliferation surrounds this area of bony
thin, somewhat linear bone density on the caudal lateral aspect of the midshaft femur (arrows). This
represents a sequestrum. Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma at the site of previous surgical repair and chronic
osteomyelitis. The site ofthis lesion within the femoral diaphysis is unusual for primary bone tumors.
A chronic infection may have contributed to its occurrence at this site.
512
Small Animal RaDiOlogy And UltrasonOgraphy
FIG. 4-46 A and B, A 7-year-old
female Rottweiler had a right rear leg
lameness for 6 weeks. Swelling was
noted in the area of the right stifle.
There is an expansile bony lesion
involving the entire femoral diaph-
ysis, extending into the proximal and
distal metaphyses. Endosteal scallop-
ing is present. There is smooth
periosteal proliferation on  the
medial and cranial aspect ofthe right
femur. There is irregular, poorly
 mineralized bony proliferation on
the caudal aspect of the distal femur.
Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma.
B
FIG. 4-47 An 8-year-old female Rottweiler whose right rear leg was amputated 1
year previously because of an osteosarcoma in the right femur (see Fig. 4-46). The
dog later developed a mass on the left rear leg. There is a marked amount of bony
 proliferation noted involving the middle and distal portions of the left femur. The
 periosteal proliferation is poorly defined and irregularly mineralized. Several areas
of bony destruction are present within the medullary canal. There is a large soft-tis-
sue swelling associated with this bony lesion. Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma. This may
represent a metastatic lesion of the previous right femoral osteosarcoma. Although
o ss sn sis a  u  i
rence of the bone tumors. There was no evidence of pulmonary metastasis in this
dog. The difrence in appearance of the right femoral and let femoral lesions
reflects the wide variation observed in osteosarcomas.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
513
A
B
FIG. 4-48 A and B, A 9-year-old male Golden Retriever with a right rear limb lameness. There was
o iads ipau au uo ss auoq e s aau ss aqedied e pue as aujo umde uo ud
the proximal tibia. The margins of the mass are well defined with a thick cortical shadow. The bony
lesion appears to be contiguous with the medullary canal. Diagnosis: Parosteal osteosarcoma.
Chondrosarcoma. Although chondrosarcomas may affect long bones, they most
frequently arise from flat bones such as the pelvic bones, scapulae, or ribs (Figs. 4-49 and
450).130,162-164 This tumor occurs more ofen in older, medium-breed, and large-breed
 destructive masses. Mineralizations in the soft-tissue mass frequently appear as multi-
lobulated globules called popcorn mineralization, but they may also appear less organ-
ized. Chondrosarcoma may arise at the site of an osteochondroma or cartilaginous
exostosis.166
It typically produces an osteolytic lesion in the metaphysis of the long bones (Fig. 4-51). A
large soft-tissue mass without mineralization may be present. Periosteal new bone forma-
tion is rare.
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma is thought to be a
tumor of histiocytic origin. Radiographically the lesion is similar to that seen with fibrosar-
coma. Bony changes are predominately lytic. Minimal periosteal reaction may be present.
The lesions tend tobe poorly defined and may have associated sof-tissue swelling.173-177
Hemangiosarcoma. Hemangiosarcoma is a highly destructive lesion that usually involves
the metaphysis or diaphysis of a long bone (Fig. 4-52). The pattern of destruction typi-
cally manifests as an overall osteopenia with a superimposed pattern of numerous, small,
Text contimued on p. 517
514
FIG. 4-49 A and B, A 12-year-old female
Labrador Retriever that had a 6-month
history of left forelimb lameness. A frm
mass was detected in the area of the prox-
imal left scapula 1 month previously.
There is an expansile bony lesion involv-
ing the proximal two-thirds of the left
scapula. There are irregular, amorphous
areas of calcification within this mass.
Diagnosis: Chondrosarcoma.
A
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
515
FIG. 4-50 A 6-year-old male
Wirehaired Fox Terrier with a frm
swelling over the left scapula. There
was no pain or lameness. There is
soft-tissue swelling medial, proxi-
mal, and cranial to the left scapula.
 There is bony destruction involving
the cranial medial aspect of the
scapula with irregular bony densities
within the area of bony destruction.
There is no evidence of bony prolif-
eration. Diagnosis: Chondrosar-
coma.
FIG. 4-51 A 12-year-old male Labrador Retriever with lef hind limb
lameness for 6 weeks. There was a mild degree of swelling in the area of the
 proximal tibia, which was painful. The lateral radiograph reveals a lytic
lesion of the proximal tibia. The margins of the lesion are not clearly demar-
cated. No periosteal reaction is noted. The cortex has been breached and mild
soft-tissue swelling is present. Diagnosis: Fibrosarcoma.
516
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG.4-52 A 6-year-old male Golden
Retriever with an acute onset of left
foreleg lameness The leg was painful
when it was manipulated. There is a
pathologic fracture involving the
 proximal humerus. The bone density
is decreased, with a pattern of
radiolucency extending into the
middiaphysis. There is no evidence
of bony proliferation or sof-tissue
calcification. The scapula is not
involved despite the extensive
humeral destruction. Diagnosis:
 Hemangiosarcoma. The radiographic
changes indicate a pathologic frac-
ture secondary to a primary bone
tumor. The fnal diagnosis was based 
 on the histology of the lesion.
FIG. 4-53 A 12-year-old male Welsh
Corgi with anorexia, depression, and
weight loss of l month duration.
Radiographs of the long bones were
obtained affer abnormalities were
 noted on the thoracic and abdomi-
nal radiographs. There are multiple
semicircular lytic lesions within the
femur and humerus that do not have 
sclerotic margins. There is no evi-
dence of periosteal proliferation.
Diagnosis: Multiple myeloma.
Chapter Four The Appendicular Skeleton
517
FIG. 4-54 A 9-year-old mixed breed dog with a right hind limb lame-
 a u as a a p i u s s
week. Soft-tissue swelling was present. Examination of the anteropos-
terior view of the distal right femur reveals a lytic, expansile lesion of
 d   e si    
Diagnosis: Giant cell tumor.
well-defined lytic foci. 120,178,179 Minimal amounts of periosteal proliferation may be pres
ent.l80,18l Soft-tissue mineralization has been observed occasionally. The tumor has a ten-
dency to remain confined to the medullary cavity while expanding proximally and distally.
Pathologic fractures may occur.
Myeloma. Plasma cell myeloma occurs occasionally as a solitary lesion but more com-
monly as multiple lesions.182-188 The lesions may involve any long or flat bones. The bony
changes usually are well-defined, discrete areas of cortical lysis that lack sclerotic margins
(Fig453)Occaall, themashsm plifeativchange8Rae a 
alized loss of bone density may be all that is observed (see Fig. 6-42).
Liposarcoma. A few liposarcomas of bone have been reported. 135 Multiple areas of meta-
 physeal bony lysis and reactive periosteal proliferation were described.
terized by a lytic, expansile lesion of the metaphysis and epiphysis (Fig. 4-54). The appear-
ance can be very similar to a bone cyst, but the zone of transition usually is longer and less
distinct with giant cell tumor.
Lymphoma of Bone. Primary lymphoma of bone is an unusual manifestation of
lymphoma.13,194-202 It is characterized radiographically by multiple focal to confluent
areas of osteolysis, which do not have sclerotic margins (Fig. 4-55). Multiple bones usu-
ally are involved. Periosteal reaction is rare except in cases with concomitant pathologic
fractures.
518
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-55 A5-year-old male Golden
Retriever with an ill-defined lame-
ness and weight loss. The lateral view
of the right elbow reveals an ill-
defined, lytic lesion that lacks clearly
defined margins and involves the
proximal radius. No periosteal reac-
tion is evident. Similar lesions were
present in the pelvis and left tibia.
Diagnosis: Lymphoma.
FIG. 4-56 A 10-year-old male German Shepherd dog with
ameness in the left foreleg of l month duration. A periprosta-
tic cyst had been removed 5 months previously. There is a
destructive lesion involving the central portion of the radial
diaphysis. A faint periosteal proliferation is evident cranial to
this area of bony destruction (arrows). There is poor demarca-
tion of the lesion from the surrounding normal bone.
Increased density surrounds this area of bony destruction,
especially on the caudal proximal aspect of the ulna.
Diagnosis: Metastatic neoplasm. This was a metastatic prosta-
tic adenocarcinoma.
METASTATIC TUMORS
 Tumor metastases to bone may occur with tumors arising from parenchymatous organs or
physeal but occasionally may be diaphyseal. The commonly reported sites include the
femur, humerus, and tibia, although any bone may be involved and the lesion is frequently
polyostotic. The radiographic appearance of metastatic lesions varies. Metastatic lesions
may be osteolytic, osteoblastic, or mixed (Figs. 4-56 to 4-58). Soft-tissue swelling usually is
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICUlAR SKELETON
519
FIG. 4-57 A 10-year-old female Doberman Pinscher with a
right limb lameness and generalized stiffness with difficulty
geting up and down. Multiple cutaneous nodules were
present. Both right and left rear limbs were radiographed.
The right stifle is illustrated. There are multiple areas of
increased medullary density involving the distal right femur
and proximal and middle portions of the right tibia. Similar 
densities were noted within the diaphysis and metaphysis of
the leff femur and tibia. These intramedullary densities with
no evidence of periosteal proliferation are suggestive of dis-
seminated bony metastasis. Diagnosis: Metastatic carci-
noma.
FIG. 4-58 A 6-year-old male English Pointer had been lame in the
right hind limb for l week. There isa focal lytic lesion in the lateral epi-
condyle of the femur (arrows). Diagnosis: Metastatic bronchogenic
carcinoma.
FIG. 4-59 A 9-year-old female Russian Blue cat with a right hind limb lame-
ness of 4 days duration. Examination reveals swelling of the digits. The dorso-
plantar radiograph reveals osteolysis of the ungual process of the third
phalanx of the third and fourth digits (arrows). Soft-tissue swelling of the area
is also present. Radiographs of the thorax revealed a large, solitary mass in the
right caudal lung lobe. Diagnosis: Metastatic bronchogenic adenocarcinoma.
A
B
-p sa z go ssa a iy su  a i a -r 4 'a e y o- 5
tion. There was pain on flexion and deep palpation ofthe shoulder. There are periarticular osteophytes
on the caudal aspect of the scapular glenoid and the caudal aspect of the proximal humeral head. The
articular surface of the humerus is uneven. A small bone density lies proximal to the greater tubercle.
There are areas of bony lysis within the bicipital groove and within the metaphysis of the proximal
humerus. These are most severe on the cranial and medial aspect of the humerus (arrows). Similar
bony destructive lesions are seen in the cranial medial aspect of the scapula (arrows). Diagnosis: Sof-
-uadns s uosa su 'endes iesp ue saun ieixoid au auau si yum 'usdu anss
posed upon degenerative joint disease. The lesion was a leiomyosarcoma.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
521
minimal unless cortical penetration has occurred. Soft-tissue mineralization and marked
periosteal responses are rare. The margins of the lesion usually are poorly defined. If a
metastatic tumor is suspected, the patient should be evaluated for a primary soft-tissue
neoplasm, which often is carcinoma of the lung, mammary gland, or prostate. Bony metas-
tasis may be present with or without pulmonary metastasis.
A particular syndrome in cats of metastasis of lung tumors to multiple toes, especially
in the front feet, has been described. It is associated with soft-tissue swelling, bony lysis, and
minimal periosteal response (Fig. 4-59).214-217
SOFT-TISSUE TUMORS
Soft-tissue tumors arise from the soft tissues adjacent to bones and joints and affect them
 by direct extension. These tumors may involve adjacent bones. The pattern of destruction
usually is centered on one aspect of the cortex (Fig. 4-60).
  q    s   a  n 
joint. Although any joint may be involved, it is observed most often in the elbow and stifle
(Fig. 4-61).
This tumor usually crosses the joint space to involve the adjacent epiphyseal and meta
physeal areas. The lesion is predominantly osteolytic, periosteal proliferation is minimal,
and sof-tissue mineralization is rare.218-223 A differential consideration with these lesions
 must be excessive synovial hypertrophy or hyperplasia secondary to chronic joint condi-
tions.
A
B
FIG. 4-61 A and B,A 7-year-old male Standard Poodle with a 1-month history of a mass on the leff
arpus. The size of the mass appeared to increase rapidly There is marked local soft-tissue swelling
centered over the carpal-metacarpal joint. There is marked bony destruction involvingthe distal ulna,
distal radius, accessory carpal bone, radial carpal bone, and metacarpal bones. A small amount of
bony proliferation is seen caudal to the ulna (arrow). There is a small amount of soff-tissue mineral-
ization on the caudal aspect of the carpus (arrowhead). Diagnosis: Soft-tissue neoplasm invading the
carpal joint. This neoplasm was identified as a synovial cell sarcoma.
522
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
 FIG. 4-62 A 13-year-old neutered male mixed breed dog had swelling
of the leftstifle and lameness of the left hind limb. The swelling had been
present for 3 weeks. The lateral radiograph revealed a large soft
tissue-density mass around the stifle. There are lytic lesions in the tibia,
femur, and patella (arrows), which appear to arise on the periphery and
intrude into and through the cortex. Diagnosis: Fibrosarcoma arising
from the joint capsule.
Fibrosarcoma. Fibrosarcoma arising from the fibrous connective tissue capsule of a joint
usually has an appearance similar to synovial ell sarcoma (Fig. 4-62). However, fibrosarcoma
of the joint occurs less frequently than synovial cell tumor. Histology is required to distin-
guish between these two possibilities.
Myxoma. Myxoma arising from the joint capsule has been described as a soft tissue-density
mass with local periosteal reaction.224
Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Nail Bed. Squamous cell carcinoma of the nail bed
is highly malignant and often locally invasive. Squamous cell carcinoma produces a
localized soft-tissue swelling that may involve the adjacent bones, producing an oste-
olytic lesion with minimal bony proliferation (Fig. 4-63),130,22-227 Disorganized or
punctate areas of mineralization may be present within this soft-tissue mass. Local
recurrence with tumor extension to adjacent bones affer amputation is frequent.
Metastasis to the lung or other bones rarely occurs. The tumors may be multicentric,
are not pathognomonic and inflammatory lesions of the toe may have a similar
appearance.229
FAT-ORIGIN TumORS
There have been rare reports of tumors of fat origin, or liposarcoma, arising in or invading
into bony structures (Fig. 4-64),230,231 Liposarcomas will vary in density from purely fat to
mixed fat and tissue density to purely tissue density. Benign fatty tumors, lipomas, may be
seen in multiple sites.232
BENIGN BONE TUMORS
Osteochondroma. Multiple or solitary osteochondroma, or cartilaginous exostosis, typ-
ically affects young animals by producing lesions at the metaphysis of long bones, the
ChApTeR FOuR The AppenDICulaR SKElETON
523
FIG. 4-63 An adult female
Doberman Pinscher with a growth
on her left rear foot that had been
 present for 2 months. A local soft-
tissue swelling involves the fifth digit
of the left rear foot. There is marked
destruction of the third phalanx of
this digit. There is a small amount of
soft-tissue calcification  cranially and
laterally. There is no evidence of
 periosteal proliferation. Diagnosis:
Squamous cell carcinoma of the digit.
B
FIG. 4-64 A 9-year-old neutered female mixed breed dog had swelling of the stifle and lameness for
6 weeks. A and B, A very large soft tissue-density mass involves tissues from the hip to the midshaft
of the tibia. There are lytic lesions of the femur, patella, and tibia, the involvement of multiple bones
suggesting a soft-tissue mass invading bone. Minimal periosteal response is present. Diagnosis:
Liposarcoma.
524
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-65 A 2-year-old male English Pointer with an acute lameness of
the left forelimb that developed during a field trial. The lateral radi-
ograph of the distal left radius and ulna reveals a small, broad-based
bony projection extending from the distal ulnar metaphysis (arrow).
The projection tapers to a smalltip and is oriented at a 90-degree angle
to the long axis of the ulna. Diagnosis: Osteochondroma. This appar-
 ently was not significant, because the dog recovered completely with 48
hours of rest.
Growth of the lesions usually stops at the time of physeal plate closure. Radiographically,
 osteochondromas are typified in dogs by one of two radiographic appearances. One form
has a wide base attached to the metaphysis of a long bone, which projects to a nar-
rower tip. The osteochondroma usually is at right angles to the axis of the host bone (Fig.
4-65). The other form has an eccentric expansile lesion of the bone, usually metaphyseal,
with smooth cortex, a trabecular pattern, and no periosteal reaction. These usually are
asymptomatic unless they cause a mechanical interference with locomotion. Another
 unusual form may involve the pelvis or vertebrae. These can impinge upon nervous
structures and result in neurologic signs. In dogs, osteochondroma is thought to be a
hereditary disease.
-i sse s u pss uaqs so o 
ographic appearance of the viral-associated disease in the cat is that of polyostotic, poorly
defined, variably sized, and irregularly mineralized lesions with large, radiolucent areas
interspersed within mature trabecular bone. These occur in both diaphyseal and
 gressively, and often increase in number.
 Some osteochondromas may undergo transformation to chondrosarcoma at a later
time. Malignant transformation is reportedly more frequent in multiple osteochondroma
a pe a iesd re s a go m pie es res e
 presence of an irregularly mineralized mass suggest malignant transformation.
 Enchondroma. Enchondroma is an extremely rare, benign neoplasm that may produce
radiolucent defects with cortical thinning in the metaphysis or diaphysis of a long bone.243
These lesions may be the result of a failure of normal endochondral ossification with reten-
pue Suu ims mois Au uos au suu u ee moi desud yo uo
expanding the cortex, and resulting in a pathologic fracture.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
525
FIG. 4-66 A 7-year-old male domestic short-haired cat with right
forelimb lameness. A swelling was noted in the distal radial area.
The distal radius is widened. The cortex is smooth. The lucent
lesion is well demarcated from the normal bone. No fractures are
identified. Diagnosis: Bone cyst.
CAVITATING BONE LESIONS
 Primary Bone Cysts. Bone cysts may be monostotic or polyostotic and usually are located
 in the metaphysis and diaphysis (Figs. 4-13 and 4-66).245-251 The condition is seen most
often in young dogs, 5 to 24 months old, although bone cysts may be asymptomatic, and
therefore an animal of any age may be affected. Bone cysts also occur in cats.
 Radiographically, the bone is expanded, with thin cortical margins. In multicameral cysts,
thin bony partitions within the medullary canal divide the lesion into compartments. If a
pathologic fracture occurs, periosteal proliferation and callus may be observed. Recurrence
 or malignant transformation has not been observed after curetage.
Aneurysmal Bone Cyst. Aneurysmal bone cyst is a rare lesion. It usually is located eccen-
trically within the metaphysis and produces bony lysis with minimal cortical or periosteal
reaction (Fig. 4-67),130,252-255
Epidermoid Cyst. Epidermoid cysts of bone are rare neoplasms. They consist of an island
 of squamous cel embedded in a bone.178 Reported cases involved vertebral bodies and
 terminal phalanges.256-258 All were characterized by localized radiolucent areas with scle-
rotic margins.
Subperiosteal Cortical Defect. Subperiosteal cortical defect, or fibrous cortical defect,
metaphyseal lesions arising close to the growth plate (Fig. 4-68). In humans they usu-
ally arise from the posterior wall of a tubular bone and affect the medial osseous sur-
face, producing focal, shallow, radiolucent areas in the cortex with normal or sclerotic
adjacent bone.260 Their exact cause is unknown.
Osteoid Osteoma. Osteoid osteoma is a very uncommon lesion that has been reported to
consist of a focal radiodensity, surrounded by a small lucent area that is bordered by a fine
line of sclerosis (Fig. 4-69).261
526
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-67 An ll-year-old spayed Dalmatian with a 6-week history of
ameness and inability to bear weight on the right hind limb. The right
hock was swollen. The lateral radiograph of the right tibia reveals a sep-
tated, mildly expansile, lytic lesion involving the distal one-third of the
tibia. Minimal periosteal reaction is present. Diagnosis: Aneurysmal bone
cyst.
 FIG. 4-68 A 9-month-old male Doberman Pinscher that had a pathologic
fracture of the left femur (see Fig. 4-13). The right tibia was evaluated by
 radiograph as part of a bone survey. An eccentric lytic lesion is noted in the
proximal tibial metaphysis with a sclerotic cortex deep to it. The lesion is
dearly demarcated from the normal bone and is eccentrically placed.
Diagnosis: Subperiosteal cortical defect.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
527
FIG. 4-69 A 6-year-old neutered female mixed breed dog with a
6-month history of left forelimb lameness that worsened with exercise.
The lateral view of the left humerus reveals a small area of very radio-
dense bone (N, nidus). There is a small zone of relative lucency and a
fne line of sclerosis surrounding it (arrows). The nidus was surgically
removed and the dog made a full recovery. Diagnosis: Osteoid
osteoma.
N
OSTEOMYELITIS
Osteomyelitis, or infection of bone, can be caused by bacterial, fungal, or protozoal organisms.
Viral organisms also have been reported rarely,262 Pathogens may gain access toboneby direct
inoculation, extension from an adjacent soft-tissue infection, or hematogenous spread. The
most common cause of osteomyelitis is complication of fracture healing or repair.
The radiographic changes caused by infection share many characteristics with
[soad pue sisl auoq suams snss-os kidal si'eisedou Aq pasns aso
reaction are seen. In some specific infections, one or more of these signs tend to pre-
domina te.
BACTERIAL OSTEOMYELITIS
 Bacterial osteomyelitis may ocur anywhere within a bone.263,264 One (monostotic) or
multiple (polyostotic) bones may be affected.26s-269 Monostotic lesions usually are due to
direct inoculation or extension of infections, whereas polyostotic disease usually is due to
 Anaerobes may be involved in up to 70% of osteomyelitis cases.262
Radiographic findings center on bone destruction associated with extensive periosteal
mimic those seen with neoplasia. In rare cases both neoplasia and infection may occur
together.278
 Bacterial osteomyelitis associated with a fracture can lead to other complications. It
may cause the formation of a sequestrum, which is an avascular piece of bone that appears
abnormally radiodense and has distinct margins. If the sequestrum is within the bone, a
radiolucent area (involucrum) may be seen surrounding it. If the process breaches the cor-
 tex, a defect (cloaca) may be seen, which may extend to the skin with a draining fistulous 
tract (Figs. 4-70 to 4-72).
528
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-70 A 1-year-old male
English Bulldog was in a dog fight 3
weeks previously and has had inter-
mittent lameness since that time.
Soft-tissue swelling extended from
the stifle to the hock. There is bony
proliferation with increased density
within the medullary canal involving
the proximal one-third of the right 
tibia. A dense bony fragment is pres-
ent in the medial cortex of the prox-
imal tibia(arrows). This is
surrounded by an area of radiolu-
cency. There is extensive periosteal
proliferation medial to this dense
fragment. This fragment repre-
sents a sequestrum. Diagnosis:
Osteomyelitis.
FIG. 4-71 A 5-year-old male German Shepherd dog
was in a fight with another dog 3 weeks earlier.
Clinically, there is swelling involving the left forelimb.
Diffuse soft-tissue swelling is evident radiographically.
 There is periosteal proliferation involving the middle
portions of the radius and ulna. The endosteal surfaces of
both the radius and ulna are sclerotic. Diagnosis:
Osteomyelitis.
 Hematogenous osteomyelitis in young dogs may involve the metaphyses. Irregular
 s  n s s aa  d sd  i s
osteodystrophy; however, unlike hypertrophic osteodystrophy, the involvement is asym-
metric, involving different areas to a greater or lesser extent. This type of infection may be
 seen in Weimaraners with immune deficiency states.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPeNDICULAR SKELETON
529
FIG. 4-72 A 2-year-old male Rottweiler had a bite wound on
his right foreleg 5 months previously. The wound had been
treated with antibiotics but the swelling recurred. On physical
examination the limb was swollen at the carpus and forearm,
and a draining tract was present. There is diffuse soft-tissue
swelling involving the right forelimb. There is bony proliferation
involving the distal one-third of the ulna. A central area of radi-
olucency extends through the caudal ulnar cortex, or cloaca. The
bone proximal and distal to the area of radiolucency is dense.
Diagnosis: Chronic osteomyelitis. A sequestrum is not observed
 in this case. This lesion responded to surgical curettage.
 In young dogs, the entire diaphyseal cortex may develop into a large sequestrum.
Extensive, reactive periosteal proliferation will surround the dense cortical sequestrum.
 Fortunately this lesion will respond to antibiotics, because removal of the sequestrum is
not possible.
An unusual sequestrum may be seen when a bone is penetrated by a pin used as a fix
ator. The radiographic appearance of concentric zones of osteosclerosis and osteolucency
surrounding thebone defect caused by a pin hasbeen called a rng sequestrum279 Although
infection is a likely cause in this situation, bone necrosis from the heat related to inserting
the pin must be considered also.
An unusual outcome of bacterial osteomyelitis is the formation of a chronic bone
(Brodie's) abscess28,281 Thisis a chronic abscess of bone that is incarcerated by a wall of
granulation tissue and a fibrous capsule. The abscess becomes static and sterile.
Radiographically, a chronic bone abscess appears as a focal lucency surrounded by a zone
of mild to moderate sclerosis.281
MYCOTIC AND HIGHER BACTERIAL OSTEOMYELITIS
Coccidioidomycosis and blastomycosis account for the majority of cases of mycotic
osteomyelitis; however, infections due to histoplasmosis, aspergillosis, cryptococcosis, pae-
cilomycosis, nocardiosis, actinomycosis, and sporotrichosis have been reported (Figs. 4-73
endosteal bony proliferation in mycotic infection usually is denser and more extensive than
that seen with bacterial osteomyelitis. However, some lesions associated with histoplasmo-
sis and other systemic mycoses have been predominately lytic (Fig. 4-78).284,288
Sequestrum formation is uncommon. The differentiation between mycotic osteomyelitis
and neoplasia is aided by knowing the geographic distribution of mycotic diseases and that
 young animals are affected more often than older animals.
 FIG. 4-73 A 2-year-old female Saint Bernard with lameness of the left
Se ie iediea ue iedien a ai ums si aau qn
well as the fourth and ffth digits and extensive bony destruction and
 proliferation involving the fifth metacarpal bone. The changes are more
severe proximally, however, the entire shaft of this metacarpal bone is
involved. There is a radiolucent area within the midportion of the third
metacarpal bone (arrow). There is destruction involving the distal end
of the second phalanx of the fourth digit and areas of bony destruction
involving the distal end of the first phalanx of the fifth digit. The mul-
tifocal nature of this lesion and proliferative response are suggestive of
mycotic infection. Diagnosis: Blastomycosis.
A
B
FIG. 4-74 An 8-month-old female Doberman Pinscher with an elevated temperature and reluctance
to walk. Swelling was noted around both carpi and the right tibia. A, Radiographs of the right carpus
demonstrate a swelling in the area of the carpal joint. There is an increase in bony density within the
midportion and distal portion of the right radius. A laminar periosteal response is noted on the cau-
dal cortex of the radius (arrow). There is a small amount of bony proliferation on the ulna adjacent
metacarpal bone. B, A marked increase in medullary density is present within the midshaft tibia.
There is a laminar periosteal proliferation on the cranial and medial cortex of the tibia and a less reg-
ular area of periosteal proliferation on the caudal lateral aspect of the tibia. Multifocal areas of
increased density with periosteal proliferation in a dog of this age are indicative of an infection. The
dog lived in the lower Sonoran Desert. Diagnosis: Coccidioidomycosis.
Chapter Four The Appendicular Skeleton
531
FIG. 4-75 A 4-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with a
chronic right foreleg lameness with swelling. There is soft-tissue
swelling involving the right forelimb. An area of bony destruction
involves the proximal one half of the right radius. There is a small
amount of bony proliferation cranially and medially. The localized 
 nature of this lesion with massive bony destruction and little bony pro-
liferation suggested a primary neoplasm. A biopsy was not performed.
The leg was amputated. Diagmosis: Cryptococcosis. A destructive pat-
tern may occur with infections that mimic the patterns seen with a pri-
 mary neoplasm. This case exemplifies the critical role of a bone biopsy.
FIG. 4-76 A 3-year-old male
 Labrador Retriever with left rear leg
lameness, a draining tract medial to
the leff stifle, and a distended and
painful joint. There is soft-tissue
swelling involving the stifle joint.
 There is bony destruction within the
left femur in the distal metaphysis. A
small amount of periosteal new bone
formation is present on the medial
aspect of the left femur (arrow).
 There is some loss of bone density
within the patella. The diffuse soff-
tissue swelling and involvement of
both the distal femur and patella are
suggestive of infection. Diagnosis:
Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis.
This was due to Nocardia infection.
532
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
FIG. 4-77 A and B, A 4-year-old male Coonhound had been lame for 1 month in the right rear leg.
The dog was normothermic. Soft-tissue swelling extends into the stifle joint. There is extensive bony
 proliferation involving the distal right femur. The medullary canal density is increased. There is no
evidence of bony destruction. Diagnosis: Actinomycosis. This lesion has many features of a primary
bone tumor and indicates the need for bone biopsy.
FIG. 4-78 A 2-year-old mixed breed
male dog with diarrhea, weight loss,
and intermittent right hind limb
ameness of 6 months duration. The
ateral radiograph of the right fermur
reveals an osteolytic, minimally
 expansile lesion of the midshaft. The
cortex is thinned in this region.
Diagnosis: Histopla smosis.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
533
PARASITIC INFESTATI0N
Periosteal proliferation has been observed in association with a protozoan parasite infesta-
tion (Hepatozoon sp.).306-309 Protozoan-like elements have been identified in the neutrophils
within bone marrow. Smooth periosteal proliferation involved the vertebral bodies, ribs,
and diaphyses of all long bones proximal to the tarsus and carpus. The bony proliferation
was reduced 1 year after diagnosis despite the continued presence of protozoan parasites.
Therefore the relationship between the organism and the bone lesion is not clear.
Leishmanial organisms were observed in synovial biopsies and within the bone. Periosteal
 proliferation, cortical destruction, and increased medullary density were reported in the 
diaphysis of long bones. Osteolytic lesions were seen around the joints. The site of involve-
 ment and degree of bony response were variable, but there was a tendency for the lesions 
to be symmetric.
SOFT-TISSUE INFECTI0N
 Periosteal proliferation may result from chronic soft-tissue infections, chronic inflam-
mation, or repeated low-grade trauma (Fig. 4-79). The periosteal proliferation often is
well defined, evenly mineralized, and may extend along the diaphysis or metaphysis.
Endosteal or medullary changes may occur late in the disease process if an infection
progresses.
PARONYCHIA
Chronic infection or inflammation around the nail bed, or paronychia, can affect the dis-
 tal phalanges. Paronychia will result in lysis of the third phalanx and stimulate bony pro-
liferation around the second or first phalanges. It may be difficult to distinguish infection
from the changes caused by tumors such as squamous cell carcinoma of the nail bed.229 A
 diffuse soft-tissue swelling, rather than a localized mass, and an extensive amount of 
periosteal proliferation along the diaphysis of the second phalanx are important clues to
the diagnosis of infection.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF INFECTION AND NEOPLASIA
Both infection and neoplasia produce a wide spectrum of destructive and productive bony
 jo  jo dea jo p es    a s
features. This is particularly true early in the pathogenesis of the diseases. For that reason,
a diagnosis based solely on the radiographic findings may be erroneous. All radiographic
changes must be evaluated in light of the clinical and historical information. Biopsy, cul-
ture, and serology usually are required to reach a final diagnosis. The histology should be
evaluated in conjunction with the radiographic changes and with knowledge of the site
from which the biopsy was obtained.
TABLE 4-2 Differential Diagnosis of Bone Neoplasia and Infection
SIGNALMENT
LOCATION
SOFT TISSUE
AGE
SEX
D1A-
META-
DISTR1-
(YRs)
BREED
(M:F)
PHYSEAL
PHYSEAL
BUTION
SWELLING
AIISNAI
 Primary*
1.5 & >6t
Giant
1.2:1
+
+++
Monostotic
Focal
Bone
D>P
Metastatic Old
Any
+++
++
 Polyostotic
Focal
Fluid
D=P
Infection
Bacterial
Any
Any
++
++
Polyostotic
Diffuse
Fluid
D<P
Mycotic
Young
Any
++
++
 Polyostotic
Diffuse
Fluid
D<P
*Osteosarcoma.
18 months and then a larger peak at greater than 6 years).
+, Occurs rarely; +++, most often occurs; D, bone destruction; P, bone production; ++, may occur.
534
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-79 A and B, A 9-month-old
female Doberman Pinscher with a
swollen left hock. The swelling had
been present for 3 months. There is
irregular soft-tissue swelling sur-
rounding the tarsus. The swelling
extends beyond the joint margins.
 There is minimal smooth bony pro-
iferation on the lateral and cau-
dolateral aspects of the joint
(arrows). This is secondary to the
chronic soft-tissue infection and
does not indicate bone infection.
Diagnosis: Chronic soft-tissue
infection.
A
B
NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC
GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY
Pituitary dwarfism results from inadequate growth hormone during the growth phase
dogs are proportionate dwarfs and have delayed closure of their growth plates, incom-
plete calcification of the epiphyses, and delayed appearance of some centers of
ossification.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
535
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM AND
PSEUDOHYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Primary hyperparathyroidism, due to a functional parathyroid tumor, occurs infre-
cium-phosphorus imbalance, or a deficiency in calcium or vitamin D), occurs more
frequently than primary hyperparathyroidism. Secondary hyperparathyroidism more fre-
is associated with various neoplastic diseases such as lymphosarcoma and perianal apo-
crine adenocarcinoma, usually does not cause radiographically apparent bone loss.
 The radiographic findings of hyperparathyroidism of any form may include decreased
lines, loss of the lamina dura dentes, physeal aberrations, pathologic fractures, expansile
lesions such as Brown's tumor, and soft-tissue mineralization.
 Secondary renal hyperparathyroidism may cause extensive demineralization of the
skull, vertebral column, and long bones. The lesions usually are more severe in juvenile ani-
mals. Occasionally renal secondary hyperparathyroidism may cause osteopetrosis rather
than osteopenia.
Loss of the lamina dura dentes has been described as an early change. This loss also may
occur due to periodontal disease or may be associated with advanced aging. Generalized
loss of bone from the skull accentuates the difference between the density of the teeth and
that of the mandible and maxilla, which creates an appearance described as floating teeth.
Diffuse soft-tissue swelling may be present around the mandible and maxilla due to
replacement of bone by fibrous tissue. Pathologic fractures, including folding or torus frac-
tures, may result from the extensive loss of mineral in the bones. Collapse of the pelvis with
abnormal curvature of the ilium and ischium and narrowing of the pelvic canal may be
present. Before physeal plate closure occurs, limb growth and physeal appearance are nor-
mal despite the generalized loss of bone density and pathologic fractures. Cortices usually
are thin and may show cortical resorption tunnels and subperiosteal resorption322
 Diaphyseal and metaphyseal trabeculation frequently is accentuated. Pathologic fractures
usually heal rapidly at the expense of additional loss of cortical and medullary bone,
although permanent bony deformity frequently remains.
 Severe secondary nutritional hyperparathyroidism usually results in marked, general-
ized loss of bone density. Pathologic bowing and folding fractures are most common, but
complete fractures may be present (Figs. 4-8 and 4-80). Physeal growth usually is normal,
and fracture healing is at the expense of bone loss in other areas. Reversal of the bony
changes is rapid once the dietary imbalance is corrected.
Soft-tissue mineralization may be present at many different sites with either secondary
or other forms of hyperparathyroidism. Bronchial and pulmonary, renal parenchymal, gas-
tric mucosal, vascular calcifications, and extensive foot pad mineralization may be seen.327
HYPOTHYROIDISM
Hypothyroidism usually affects middle-aged or older dogs and does not produce radi-
ographic changes. Congenital hypothyroidism may result in disproportionate
dwarfism.328-3s Radiographic findings include absence or delayed appearance and
retarded development of epiphyseal growth centers (Fig 4-81). Thickening of the radial
and ulnar cortices as wellas radial bowing may be seen. Facial bone and mandibular short-
ening combined with a full complement of deciduous and permanent teeth may result in
pda   aoq a do   ss r an a o 
to early hormone replacement.
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
Hyperadrenocorticism may result in demineralization of the skeleton. Although this is
that may be seen include subtle loss of bone density,336,337 This is most often observed in
the vertebral bodies.
536
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-80 A 6-month-old female domestic short-haired cat
with a history of generalized weakness,pain, and reluctance to
walk. A lateral radiograph of the tibia (A) and a follow-up
radiograph 3 months later (B) are illustrated. There is a
decrease in bony density in the radiograph obtained at the
time of admission. The cortices are thin and the leg is bowed.
A pathologic fracture is present in the distal femur, and the
proximal tibia and fibula. On the follow-up radiograph the
normal bone density has returned. The pathologic fractures
have healed; however, a residual bony deformity, a tibial cur-
vature, is present. Diagnosis: Nutritional secondary hyper-
parathyroidism.
A
B
HYPERVITAMINOSIS A
Hypervitaminosis A produces fusion of cervical vertebrae due to bony proliferation along
thedora nusprceadisadatilsidingxt
also may occur across articulations of the appendicular skeleton (Fig. 4-82). Coarse
medullary trabeculation, medullary sclerosis, decreased bony density, thin cortices, and
 soft-tissue mineralization have all been described (Fig. 4-83) In affected young growing
dogs, a decrease in long bone length and width, premature physeal closure, transverse
 metaphyseal widening periarticular osteophytes, metaphyseal periosteal proliferation, and
spontaneous fractures have been described.244 Permanent retardation of growth may
result.
LEAD INTOXICATI0N
An uncommon finding in lead intoxication in the juvenile animal is metaphyseal sclerosis,
or lead lines. Radiographically, bands of increased density adjacent to the physeal growth
plate are identified.244 A similar finding may be seen in normal individuals. These lines are
 referred to as growth-arrest lines and they are usually very thin and further from the physis
than lead lines.
HERITABLE AND BREED-RELATED DISORDERS
Several abnormalities have been identified. Many of those that have been reported are listed
 below. Some rare disorders are only referenced 340-344
ERYTHROCYTE PYRUVATE KINASE DEFICIENCY IN BASENJIS
 An anemia associated with erythrocyte pyruvate kinase deficiency has been described in
Basenjis345 A progressive, diffuse steoslerosis has been associated with this sydrome
(Fig. 4-84).
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPeNDICULAR SKELETON
537
A
B
FIG. 4-81 A 3-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with a history
of poor hair coat and shortened stature. The cat was reluctant to walk.
aam auds au pue saad aui squ heai pue ju au go sdo
obtained. Radiographs of the right carpus (A), right tarsus (B), and
pelvis (C) are illustrated. The distal radial and ulnar physes remain open
although the cat is 3 years old. Open physes are noted also in the proxi-
mal and distal femur, proximal tibia, and acetabulum. The distal ulnar
epiphysis is mineralized irregularly. There is subluxation of both cox-
ofemoral joints; however, the apparent lateral patellar dislocation is a
positional artifact. The retarded epiphyseal closure and irregular miner-
alization of the distal ulnar epiphysis are indicative of an epiphyseal dys-
plasia with retarded bone growth. Diagnosis: Hypothyroidism.
Mucopolysaccharidosis could also be considered; however, delayed epi-
physeal closure would not be expected in that disease.
C
538
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-82 A 9-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with a 3-
month history of reluctance to walk. The joints appeared stiff and the
tissue mineralization around the elbow. Similar changes were present
in the other limbs. Diagnosis: Hypervitaminosis A.
FIG. 4-83 An ll-year-old male
domestic short-haired cat with a 9-
month history of anorexia and
depression. The cat was reluctant to
walk. All four limbs were radi-
ographed. Radiographs of the left
(A) and right (B) forelimbs are pre-
sented. There is increased density
within the diaphyses of all bones.
The cortex is thickened and the
medullary trabeculation is coarse.
The joints were not affected.
Diagnosis: Hypervitaminosis A.
B
Chapter Four The Appendicular Skeleton
539
FIG. 4-84 A 4-year-old male Basenji with moderate anemia. The lat-
eral radiographs of the forelimbs reveal a generalized increase in den-
sity (osteosclerosis) in all bones. Similar changes were present in the
hind limbs and ribs. Diagnosis: Erythrocyte pyruvate kinase defi-
ciency of Basenjis.
ANATOMICAL, CONGENITAL, DEVELOPMENTAL, IDI0PATHIC
CHONDRODYSPLASIA
Several inherited chondrodysplasias, conditions due to abnormal cartilage development,
have been described. These include dwarfisms of Alaskan Malamutes, English Pointers, and
 Irish Setters as well as cats; chondrodysplasia of Great Pyrenees and Norwegian elkhounds;
endochondrodystrophy of English Pointers; osteochondrodysplasia in Bull Terriers and
Scottish Deerhounds; skeletal and retinal dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers and Samoyed
dogs; chondrodysplasia in a cat; pseudoachondroplasia in Poodles; and congenital epiphy-
seal dysplasia in Beagles and Poodles.346-366 In some breeds (e.g., English Bulldogs, Welsh
Corgis, Skye Terriers, and Basset Hounds) the deformity resulting from chondrodysplasia
is considered to be normal and desirable. However, in some individuals this can result in
such asymmetric growth between the radius and ulna that there is subluxation of the
radioulnar joints and resultant clinical signs (Fig. 4-85).
Alaskan Malamute Dwarfism. A mendelian recessive short-limbed dwarfism has been
 described in Alaskan Malamute dogs.353,354 The skeletal lesion was generalized and sym-
metric and best demonstrated in the carpus of 4- to 12-week-old dogs (Fig. 4-86). The dis-
tal ulnar and radial metaphyses were widened and irregular. The time of appearance and
the ossification of epiphyseal growth centers were delayed compared with normal Alaskan
Malamutes. Lateral deviation of the paw and stunted growth were observed.
540
SmAll ANimAl RADlolOGY AND UlTRASoNOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-85 A 2-year-old spayed
female Basset Hound was brought in
for left forelimb lameness.
A,
Radiographic findings in the left
elbow include subluxation (arrows),
with the coronoid process of the
ulna failing to align with the
condyles of the distal humerus. B,
The right elbow is within normal
limits (arrow), and the radiograph
shows a normal relationship of the
coronoid process with the distal
humerus. Diagnosis: Asymmetric
ulnar versus radial growth with open
physes.
A
R
B
Skeletal and Retinal Dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers. A skeletal dysplasia of Labrador
 Retrievers has been described. The radiographic changes have included delayed epiphyseal
development with retarded radial, ulnar, and tibial growth; ununited and hypoplastic
anconeal processes; and coxofemoral joint deformities combined with retinal dysplasia,
larities with retained cartilaginous cores and delayed development of the anconeus,
coronoid, and medial humeral epicondyle may be seen.361 The radius and ulna were short-
ened and curved. Shallow acetabula, thickened femoral necks, and periarticular osteo-
 phytes were described. Stifle osteoarthrosis and shortened femurs also occurred.
Pseudoachondroplasia in Poodles. Pseudoachondroplastic dysplasia becomes evident at
3 weeks of age in affected Miniature Poodles.356 Joint enlargement:; short, bent limbs; flat-
tened rib cages; and abnormal locomotion with hind limb abduction have been described.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
541
FIG. 4-86 A4-week-old female Malamute from a litter of puppies was
evaluated for dwarfism. A, Anteroposterior radiographs of both carpi
were obtained. The distal radial and ulnar metaphyses are widened and
irregular. The distal ulnar metaphysis does not have the expected cone
shape. B, On radiographs obtained at 9 months of age,an angular limb
deformity is apparent, especially when compared with a normal litter-
mate. The distal ulnar metaphysis is irregular and an area of cartilage
remains uncalcifed. The proximal radioulnar joint is misaligned and
the radius is bowed. Diagnosis: Malamute dwarfism.
A
B
542
A
B
C
D
FIG. 4-87 A 4-month-old female Labrador Retriever with a history of apparent blindness. The dog
managed well at home but seemed lost in new surroundings. The dog appeared smaller than antici-
pated. A and B, There is a bowing deformity of the radius with irregularity of the distal ulnar meta-
physis. The foot is slightly laterally deviated. C and D, At 9 months of age the angular limb deformity
 Ad s siud a pe ia s si i i au s s
Diagnosis: Skeletal dysplasia of Labrador Retrievers.
Retarded epiphyseal ossification results in stippled, patchy densities in the epiphyses. The
skull is not affected.
 Epiphyseal Dysplasia. Epiphyseal dysplasia has been reported in Beagles and Poodles.35
The dogs showed hind limb dysfunction at birth and osteoarthrosis as adults. Punctate cal-
cifications with irregularly stippled epiphyses were described in the humerus, femur,
metacarpals, metatarsals, carpal and tarsal bones, and vertebral bodies (Fig. 4-88). The dis-
 r a  e e jo s  on d po aq  a
become incorporated in the ossified bone. Nonspecific osteoarthritic changes persist in
the adult. These cannot be distinguished from other causes of secondary degenerative joint
disease.
ECTRODACTYLY
Ectrodactyly, or split-hand deformity, is an abnormal limb development with separa-
 In dogs,there is equal involvement of left and right limbs and no breed or sex predis-
position. In the cat, ectrodactyly is caused by a dominant gene with variable expres-
sion.
HEMIMELIA
Hemimelia is a rare disease in which one bone in a paired set is partially or completely
absent. This usually affects the radius of the radius and ulna, or occasionally affects the tibia
of the tibia and fbula370-372 The bone of the affected pair that is present usually is
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
543
FIG. 4-88 A 2-month-old male Miniature Poodle was
mates. Forelimb and pelvic (A) and spinal (B) radi-
  sa  e
ossified and delayed in appearance for a dog of this
age. Diagnosis: Epiphyseal dysplasia.
A
B
somewhat larger in diameter than normal. The joints proximal and distal to the bone may
be subluxated or luxated.
SCOTTISH FOLD OSTEODYSTROPHY
The Scottish Fold cat may be affected with an osteodystrophy characterized by a thickened
 tail base (vertebral distortion) and exostoses and shortening of the carpal-metacarpal joint
 and interphalangeal joints.373-375
SESAMOID BONE ABNORMALITIES IN ROTTWEILERS
ally involve the medial sesamoids of the metacarpal phalangeal joints of the second and
fifth digits. Lesions range from a single radiodensity separated from an otherwise normal
sesamoid to replacement with multiple, small, radiodense bones (Fig. 4-90). This finding
may or may not be associated with clinical signs.
OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA
Osteogenesis imperfecta is related to a defect in collagen production and is typified by
fragile bone that fractures spontaneously or with minimal trauma. It has been reported in
544
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-89 A 6-month-old male Shetland Sheepdog with a con-
 genital anomaly of the right front limb. There were no clinical
 signs associated with this deformity. There is a marked defor-
mity of the metacarpal and carpal bones. The distal row of
marpal bones is deformed. The third and fourth digits are sepa-
rated, with articulation of the fourth and fifth digits with the
ulnar and accessory carpal bones, and articulation of the frst,
second,and third digits with the radial, second, and third carpal
bones. The lateral carpal bones appear to articulate with the
ulna and the medial carpal bones with the radius. Diagnosis:
Ectrodactyly. The left forelimb was normal.
a kitten and three dogs.379-381 Radiographicaly, the bone density was normal. Multiple
 healing fractures with active callus formation were noted.
OSTEOPETROSIS
Osteopetrosis is a rare, hereditary, familial, and congenital bone abnormality manifested by
a generalized increase in bone density, especially in subchondral bone, that involves the
axial and appendicular skeleton (Fig. 4-91). Cortical thickening and increased medullary
densities, or marble bone, will partialy or completelyobliterate the medullary canal. 382-384
 may be related to the fractures or to an anemia that results from obliteration of the bone
marrow.383-385
EOSINOPHILIC PANOSTEITIS AND ENOSTOSIS
Panosteitis is a self-limiting bone disorder that causes lameness due to an acute onset of
long bone pain.386-394 It most frequently affects large-breed dogs. Although mainly a
disease of the young, having been reported in dogs as young as 2 months, it does occa-
sionally affect older individuals up to 7 years of age. The acute lameness may undergo
spontaneous remission and may recur in the same limb or reappear in another limb.
 Evidence of pain frequently can be elicited by applying direct pressure to the affected
bone.
The radiographic findings in panosteitis center on the nutrient foramina and involve
thediaphysis andmetaphsisof thelngone86uradigraphcallistint hase
have been described. The earliest phase reveals a zone of radiolucency at the nutrient fora-
men. This is rarely identified clinically and usually requires a retrospective analysis. The
second phase begins with an increase in endosteal and medullary density; there is bluring
of the normal trabecular pattern. Contrast between the medulla and cortex is reduced
(Figs. 4-92 and 4-93). In the third phase, the radiodense areas tend to coalesce, become
Chapter Four The Appendicular Skeleton
545
FIG. 4-90 A, S-year-old male Rottweiler had several months of
lameness of the left forelimb. Radiographic findings revealed that the
seventh palmar metacarpophalangeal sesamoid (arrow) was in mul-
tiple pieces. Diagnosis: Fragmented palmar sesamoid.
patchy and mottled, and expand to fill the medullary canal. The endosteal surface may
become irregular and mild periosteal proliferation may be present (Fig. 4-94). These
e pe ny a na pu aa ua p sm g on t rg isisid s
phase, the medullary canal regains a normal or decreased density and cortical thickening
 posed. Comparison radiographs of the unaffected limb may be extremely helpful. Theradi-
ographic lesion may not be visible at the time the lameness is first observed.
 Differential diagnosis of these lesions should include panosteitis as well as neoplasia
and hematogenous osteomyelitis. The history and clinical signs are important in deter-
mining a final diagnosis.
HYPERTROPHIC OSTEODYSTROPHY
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy usually is seen in rapidly growing large-breed dogs between
3 and 8 months of age.395-397 The cause is unknown, although infectious and nutritional
 anorectic,febrile, and reluctant to walk or stand. Often there are obvious distal metaphy-
seal swellings, which may feel warm on palpation. Spontaneous remission may occur; how-
ever, recurrent episodes are common. Severe disease may result in angular limb deformity
and retarded growth.
Initial radiographic changes include transverse radiolucent bands within the metaphysis
adjacent to the physeal plate and soft-tissue swelling. All long bones may be affected, and
lesions also may be seen at the costochondral junctions. The abnormalities are most obvi-
ous in the distal radius, ulna, and tibia due to the rapid rate of bone growth in these areas.
With time, the metaphyses will appear widened and their opacity will increase. A cuff of
periosteal proliferation may be seen that is separated from the metaphysis by a thin linear
radiolucency, but it gradually blends with the diaphyseal cortex. The bony changes appear
546
Small ANimal RadiOloGy And UitrasonoGraphy
A
B
FIG. 4-91 An ll-month-old female Collie with a history of recur-
rent shifting leg lameness. A, The density and cortical thickness of
          
medullary and cortical density involving right and left radi. The
medullary canal is obliterated. There is no soft-tissue swelling. A lin-
ear radiolucency is noted crossing the radius at the junction at the
proximal and middle thirds (arrow). There is slight deformity of the
radial outline at this point. This is a pathologic fracture. The growth
plates are open and are unaffected. The density of the metacarpal
bones appears increased although the carpal bones are spared. C,
There is thickening of the right femoral and tibial cortices with an
increased bony density in the medullary canal of these bones. The
ums sss yo auaaous au ssp sdde ose 
Diagnosis: Osteopetrosis with a pathologic fracture of the radius.
C
A
B
FIG. 4-92 A and B, An 8-month-old male Great Dane had a recurrent shifting leg lameness.
Radiographs of both front and rear limbs were obtained. The lef femur and right humerus are illus-
trated. There is a localized area of increased medullary density within the proximal and middiaphysis 
of the left femur (arrows). There is a less well-defined area of increased medullary density involving
the distal one third of the right humeral diaphysis (arrows). Diagnosis: Panosteitis.
FIG. 4-93 A 1-year-old male Great Dane that had been lame
for 1 week and exhibited pain upon palpation of the right
forelimb and elbow. An increase in medullary density involves
the middiaphyseal portion of the radius. These densities
appear poorly defined (arrows). There is increased density
within the proximal ulnar diaphysis (arrows). Diagnosis:
Panosteitis.
548
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
FIG. 4-94 A 9-month-old male German Shepherd dog with a right foreleg lameness and pain on
palpation of the right humerus. Pain was also noted on extension and flexion of the right shoulder.
Initial (A) and 4-month follow-up (B) radiographs of the right humerus are illustrated. There is an
increase in medullary density within the entire diaphysis of the right humerus, with mild periosteal
proliferation on the cranial and caudal surfaces of the humeral diaphysis. Flattening of the proximal
humeral head (arrow) with sclerosis in the subchondral bone is present. This is indicative of panos-
teitis and osteochondrosis. In the follow-up radiograph, the increased right humeral diaphyseal den-
sity has resolved. Several fine linear densities are present in the middle and distal portions of the
humeral diaphysis. The cortical density and thickness are normal. There isa slight residual flattening
in the proximal humeral head (arrows). Diagnosis: Panosteitis and osteochondrosis.
to progress toward the diaphysis as the dog grows. The physis and epiphysis usually are not
 involved (Figs. 4-95 and 4-96). Although the condition disappears with maturity, a residual
bowing deformity of the forelimbs may result and mild thickening of the metaphysis may
Many normal, rapidly growing, young, large-breed dogs have mild irregularities and scle-
rosis of the proximal and distal ulnar, radial, and tibial metaphyses. This must be considered
when evaluating a dog suspected of having hypertrophic osteodystrophy.397 The line of
demarcation between normal and mild hypertrophic osteodystrophy is indistinct.
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy and craniomandibular osteopathy have been reported
simultaneously in a few large-breed dogs. Some Terriers affected with craniomandibu-
lar osteopathy have had long bone changes resembling hypertrophic osteodystrophy.403
HYPERTROPHIC OSTEOPATHY
Hypertrophic osteopathy produces a generalized, symmetric, palisading periosteal prolif-
eration that involves the diaphyses of the long bones (Figs. 4-97 and 4-98). The condition
most often is associated with either infectious or neoplastic intrathoracic lesions (i.e.,
pleural, pulmonary, cardiac, and mediastinal); however, hypertrophic osteopathy has
A
B
FIG. 4-95 A 5-month-old female Great Dane had been nonambulatory for 3 days at the time of
arrival. Swelling was present in the distal metaphyseal area of the radius and ulna and in the distaltib-
ial metaphyses bilaterally. Radiographs of these areas were obtained. Radiographs of the right carpus
(A) and follow-up radiographs obtained 2 months later (B) are illustrated. There is soft-tissue swelling
in the area proximal to the carpal joint. The metaphyseal regions of the distal radius and ulna are
widened and the periosteal margins are irregular. A radiolucent line is present in the distal radial and
ulnar metaphyses immediately proximal to the physeal growth plate (arrows). There is a zone of scle-
rosis proximal to this radiolucent line. The distal ulnar metaphysis has lost its normal conical shape.
In the radiographs obtained 2 months after the initial visit, the distal radial and ulnar metaphyses
remained widened. The ossification pattern within the medullary canal is iregular. The distal ulnar
metaphysis has regainedits conical shape. Periosteal proliferation surroundsthe distal radial and ulnar
metaphyses. The distal radial and ulnar physes appear normal; however, a mild bowing and valgus
FIG. 4-96 A 5-month-old female Weimaraner that had been
lame, reluctant to walk, and had an intermittent fever for 5 weeks.
 Radiographs of both forelimbs were obtained. The left forelimb
radiographs are illustrated. There are areas of increased density
within the proximal and distal radial and ulnar metaphyses. An
 area of radiolucency is noted within the distal radial and ulnar
 metaphyses (arrows). Periosteal proliferation is noted along the
 medial surface of the distal radius and caudal aspect of the distal
ulna. Similar periosteal proliferation is present on the cranial sur-
face of the proximal radius and on the medial aspect of the distal
humeral metaphysis. Diagnosis: Hypertrophic osteodystrophy.
The radiolucent band has been referred to as a double epiphyseal
 line. Similar lesions were present in the right forelimb.
 FIG. 4-97 A 10-year-old male mixed breed dog that had a renal car-
cinoma removed 2 months previously returned with limb swelling
 and lethargy Radiographs of allfour extremities were obtained. The
anteroposterior radiograph of the leff forelimb is illustrated. Soft-tis-
sd si ar q   sa is ums an
proliferation involving the radius,ulna, and both axial and abaxial
surfaces of the metacarpal bones and phalanges. The bony prolifera-
tion is more severe on the lateral and medial surfaces of the foot;
however, all surfaces are involved. The periosteal proliferation
appears to be perpendicular to the long axis ofthe limb. Diagnosis:
Hypertrophic osteopathy. Similar findings were present in the other
limbs. Pulmonary metastases were present.
A
B
FIG.4-98 A and B, A 7-year-old male Pit Bull with progressive rear limb ataxia and weakness,as well
as muscle atrophy and swollen distal extremities. Radiographs of allfour limbs were obtained. Lateral
radiographs of the leff femur and right radius are illustrated. There is a smooth bony proliferation on
the cranial and caudal surfaces of the left femur. Irregular periosteal proliferation is present along the
radial and ulnar diaphyses and along the metacarpal bones. Diagnosis: Hypertrophic osteopathy sec-
s my au luoe uoad Auoq jo uand au ieul aon yrou bu Aied e o Aiepuo
smoother than that occurring along the radius and ulna.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
551
FIG. 4-99 A 10-year-old mixed breed female dog was brought in for
treatment of mammary gland tumors. Bone lesions were noted on
the thoracic radiographs and survey radiographs of the limbs
obtained. A lateral radiograph of the left humerus isillustrated; how-
ever, similar lesions were present in the front and rear limbs. Multiple
punctate densities are present through the humeral diaphysis and
metaphysis. Diagnosis: Bone infarcts. Although these are often asso-
ciated with sarcomas of bone, none was identified in this dog.
been reported in association with bladder, liver, and ovarian tumors without thoracic
disease.404-419
 The periosteal proliferation becomes more extensive as the disease progresses. The
bony proliferation usually affects the distal portions of the limbs more severely; however,
involvement of the proximal portion also may be observed. The tarsal and carpal bones and
abaxial surfaces of the second and fifth metatarsal and metacarpal bones are involved most
often. The periosteal proliferation usually is irregular and oriented perpendicular to the
cortex, but it may also be smooth and oriented parallel to the cortex.
The limb swelling and periosteal proliferation may be the earliest sign of an asympto-
 p n  so d q a no snr s  
primary disease, but the bones remain abnormal for a long time.
BONE INFARCTS
Bone infarcts are areas of necrosis within the medulla. Bone infarcts appear radiographi-
cally as multiple, irregularly demarcated, distinct intramedullary densities in one or several
bones (Fig. 4-99). Usually there are no clinical signs directly associated with the infarcts.
Bone infarcts may be seen in conjunction with sarcomas. However, whether or not they
represent a case or effect is unclear8,49,158,423
JOINT DISEASE
Radiography aids in diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring the response to therapy in
category of joint disease (e.g., degenerative, infectious, neoplastic, immune mediated) and
not a specific entity.
552
Primary degenerative joint disease results from apparently normal wear and tear. No
specific or predisposing cause can be identified. Secondary degenerative joint disease
results from a specific or predisposing condition or event such as those listed below.
· Trauma (injury to adjacent bone, ligament, tendon, articular cartilage, joint capsule)
 Conformational or developmental abnormality (abnormal stress or use of the limb
that results from congenital, inherited, or acquired limb deformities)
 Metabolic, nutritional, and idiopathic disorders (e.g., hemophilia, mucopolysaccha
ridosis, hypervitaminosis A, hyperparathyroidism, or congenital hypothyroidism)
Neoplastic arthropathy (tumors arising from the periarticular soft tissues)
 Infectious arthritis (bacterial, mycotic, viral, protozoal, and mycoplasmal arthritis)
·
Immune-mediated arthritis (erosive and nonerosive)
·
Crystal-induced arthritis (includes gout and pseudogout, or calcium pyrophos-
phate dihydrate [CPPD] deposition disease)
Villonodular synovitis
DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE
 Degenerative joint disease, also known as osteoarthritis and osteoarthrosis, is a common 
arthropathy with many diverse causes. The radiographic features of degenerative joint dis-
ease are similar regardless of the underlying etiology (Figs. 4-100 and 4101).425-429 Soff-
tissue swelling usually is minimal. Periarticular periosteal proliferation occurs at the sites
of joint capsule and ligamentous attachment and at the margins of the articular cartilage.
This proliferation usually is smooth and uniformly mineralized with well-defined margins.
The subchondral bone may become thinned, thickened, dense, or irregular. Intraarticular
 Or periarticular bony densities may be seen. These densities may be due to avulsion frac-
tures, joint capsule or tendinous mineralizations, or mineralization of detached articular
cartilage fragments, known as joint mice or synovial osteochondromatosis.431,436-467
Narrowing of the joint space and subchondral bone cysts may be observed. Malalignment
of articular surfaces or joint subluxation may be seen with some specific conditions; how-
ever, weight-bearing or stress radiographs may be required to demonstrate joint instability
(Fig. 4-102).ll In most cases, the radiographic findings are less extensive than those
observed at surgery or necropsy. The more severe the radiographic findings, the poorer the
prognosis despite the correction of any underlying disease. With severe degenerative
changes, the underlying cause may be obscured. The progression of the radiographic
changes usually is slow, with little difference observed over several months.
Primary degenerative joint disease, resulting from normal wear and tear on a joint, is
uncommon in small animals but may be observed as an incidental finding. It typically
FIG. 4-100 A 4-year-old male
mixed breed dog had a right rear
limb lameness for 5 months. Soff-tis-
sue swelling is noted in the stifle
joint (open arrows). There are areas
of irregular bony proliferation on
the proximal and distal margins of
the patella and on the proximal
 aspect of the distal femoral articular
surface (closed arrows). Diagnosis:
Mild degenerative joint disease. This
was secondary to rupture of the cra-
 nial cruciate ligament.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKElETON
553
FIG. 4-101 A 3-year-old male Doberman Pinscher exhibited pain in both rear limbs. The lameness
had been present in the right rear limb for 1 year and in the left rear limb for 3 months. There is soft-
tissue swelling involving the right stifle. There are areas of bony proliferation involving the distal
femoral articular surface,both femoral epicondyles, fabellae, and the proximal and distal margins of
the patella (arrows). There are areas of bony proliferation on the medial and lateral aspects of the
proximal tibia (arrows) and irregularity of the distal femoral articular surface. Diagnosis: Severe
degenerative joint disease. This dog was found to have bilateral cranial cruciate ligament ruptures.
FIG. 4-102 A 10-year-old female
Keeshond was lame in the right rear
limb for 4 months. There was no his-
tory of trauma; however, palpation of
 the right stifle revealed ligamentous
instability. There is mild soft-tissue
swelling of the stifle joint and
malalignment of the proximal tibia
and distal femur, with the proximal
tibia displaced cranially relative to the
distal femur. The popliteal sesamoid
bone is displaced distally. Two small
bone densities are associated with the
distal aspect of the medial fabella and
 proximal aspect of the lateral fabella.
Secondary degenerative joint disease
 is not evident at this time. Diagnosis:
 Ruptured cranial cruciate ligament.
The small bone densities associated
with the fabellae may be due to
 trauma to the gastrocnemius muscle
attachments. This degree of malalign-
ment is unusualin dogs with ruptured
cranial cruciate ligament. The pres-
ence of obvious bony malalignment
 on a nonstressed lateral radiograph
indicates severe ligamentous damage.
554
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-103 A 5-year-old neutered female mixed breed dog had been hit by a
car and was lame in the right hind limb. A, The ventrodorsal view reveals a
luxation of the right coxofemoral joint with cranial displacement of the
femoral head. Both acetabula are shallow (arrow), which predisposed to lux-
ation. B, The lateral view reveals that the femoral head is displaced dorsally
(arrow). Diagnosis: Craniodorsal luxation of the right coxofemoral joint.
occurs in older, large-breed dogs, and is most often observed in the shoulder but may be
seen in any joint.424
 Secondary degenerative joint disease is a great deal more common. Many different con-
ditions may cause secondary degenerative joint disease.*
*References 426, 430, 434, 435, 437-467.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
555
FIG. 4-104 A 3-year-old neutered male Labrador Retriever had been hit by a
ar and was lame in the left hind limb. A, The ventrodorsal view reveals a lux-
ation of the right coxofemoral joint with cranial displacement of the femoral
head. B, The lateral view reveals that the femoral head is ventrally displaced.
 Diagnosis: Cranioventral luxation of the left coxofemoral joint.
A
B
Trauma. Trauma to any of the tendinous or ligamentous structures around the joint may
cause minor or major joint instability and ultimately lead to luxation or subluxation and
secondary joint disease (Figs. 4-103 to 4-105). Fractures involving the articular surface or
that change the way that stress is loaded on a joint also may result in degenerative joint dis-
556
SMAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-105 A4-year-old Cocker Spaniel was hit by a car and became
acutely lame in the right forelimb. There is a complete disruption of
the elbow with the radius and ulna displaced laterally. No fractures
are noted. Diagnosis: Lateral luxation of the right elbow.
tendon attachments; joint space collapse; or malalignment of bones are indicative of soff-
tissue injury (Figs. 4-106 to 4-108). Weight-bearing or stress radiographs may be required
to demonstrate the extent of the joint instability. In most cases of joint trauma, secondary
degenerative joint disease will occur despite treatment.
Complete or partial tearing of the cranial cruciate ligament is the classic model for sec-
Occurs in phases.
 In the early phase (e.g., first 2 to 3 weeks), the primary change is joint capsule disten-
tion and thickening, typified by anterior and distal displacement of the infrapatellar fat pad
as seen on the lateral projection of the stifle (see Fig. 4-100). The second phase reveals the
emergence of periarticular osteophytes on the femoral epicondyles, the trochlear ridges,
and the medial and lateral tibial plateau regions (see Fig. 4-101). During this phase the
medial collateral ligament will become thickened, so-called medial buttressing, which is best
seen in the anteroposterior or posteroanterior views (see Fig. 4-101). An enthesiophyte,
mineralization of the origin or insertion of a ligament or tendon, will develop cranial to the
4-101). This enthesiophyte is at the location where the cranial cruciate ligament and the
 anterior meniscal ligaments attach. Proliferation at that site indicates stress on the liga-
mentous attachments.
Most joint luxations are accompanied by ligamentous injury. Small avulsion fractures
may be evident. These fragments should be identified because they reflect the extent of the
soft-tissue injury and affect the patient's prognosis. With coxofemoral dislocations, avul-
sion fractures may occur at the fovea capitis due to ligamentum teres rupture. These frag-
ments and the associated soft-tissue injury can complicate reduction of the dislocation.
hip dysplasia) should be recognized because they may complicate reduction of the
dislocation.
 Sacroiliac luxations may accompany pelvic trauma. The width of the sacroiliac joint is
 a poor sign of sacroiliac luxation. Alignment between the ilium and sacrum is best judged
by tracing the medial aspect of the ilium from the acetabulum cranially to the point at
which it joins the sacrum. The margins should be continuous (Fig. 4-109). Deviation or
malalignment at the junction point indicates sacroiliac luxation. Fractures of the sacrum
 or ilium may be present; however, luxation without fracture is more common.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
557
A
一
FIG. 4-106 A 3-year-old male mixed breed dog was hit by a car and became lame immediately in the
left hind limb. A, There is a luxation of the proximal intertarsal joint (black arrows) and moderate
soft-tissue swelling in the area. B, The dorsoplantar view reveals the soff-tissue swelling but the lux-
ation is obscured. Diagnosis: Partial luxation of the proximal intertarsal joint.
Conformational or Developmental Hip Dysplasia. Hip dysplasia is a multifactorial, clin-
ically complex arthropathy with structural alterations of the coxofemoral joints. Although
dogs are affited most commonly,cats may alsohave hip dysplasia468-471 The anatomical
alterations of hip dysplasia include shallow acetabula, swelling or tearing of the round lig-
ament, joint subluxation, erosion of articular cartilage, and remodeling of the acetabulum
aswllas thefmoralhead and neck surface.472Oneorbothhipsmaybeinvolved76
ner and degree in which these pathologies cause radiographic changes are not consistent.
Any or all of the radiographic changes of canine hip dysplasia, including shallow acetabula,
coxofemoral subluxation, remodeling of the acetabulum, femoral head, or femoral neck, or
periarticular osteophytosis, may be present (Figs. 4-110 to 4-114). The degree of radi-
ographic change does not necessarily correlate with the clinical signs.
FIG. 4-107 A 4-year-old male Chow Chow jumped from a bed and
immediately became lame in the left rear leg. The patella (arrows) is
proximally displaced. Diagnosis: Ruptured straight patellar ligament.
FIG. 4-108 A 6-year-old neutered female Persian cat had been out-
side and came home lame in the right hind limb. Physical examina-
tion revealed a very unstable stifle. A, The anteroposterior view
reveals severe subluxation of the stifle with lateral displacement of
the tibia. B, The lateral view reveals mild cranial displacement of the
femur relative to the tibia. Diagnosis: Rupture of the cruciate liga-
ments and medial collateral ligament.
A
B
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
559
FIG. 4-109 A 2-year-old male mixed breed dog was evaluated after
being hit by a car. The dog was reluctant to walk and experienced
pain in the pelvic area. There isa bilateral sacroiliac luxation. The ilial
shafts are displaced cranially from their normal junction with the
scrum (open arrows). There is an incomplete, nondisplaced left
pubic fracture (closed arrows) and a minimally displaced right
acetabular fracture. Diagnosis: Bilateral sacroiliac luxation with
pubic fracture.
FIG. 4-l10 A 2-year-old female Labrador Retriever was evaluated
radiographically for hip dysplasia. Both femoral heads are well seated
is good congruity between the femoral head and acetabular rim. The
conformation of this dog is excellent. The small radiopaque densities
noted in the soft tissues are shotgun pellets. Diagnosis: Normal
pelvis.
560
FIG. 4-il1 A 4-year-old male German Shepherd dog with bilateral
rear limb weakness. There is severe subluxation of both coxofemoral
joints and extensive remodeling changes involving both femoral
heads and necks. There is bony proliferation on the cranial and cau-
dal surfaces of the acetabular margins bilaterally. The medial aspect
of the acetabulum has been flled in with bone, making it very shal-
low. Diagnosis: Severe bilateral canine hip dysplasia with extensive
degenerative joint disease.
The acetabulum is considered shallow when its depth is less than one-half the width of the
femoral head. Acetabular remodeling results in a semi-elliptical or egg-shaped appearance
rather than a normal semicircular shape. The medial bony margin of the acetabulum may
become thickened. Femoral head remodeling results in the loss of the head's rounded, weight-
 bearing, articular surface. Instead, the femoral head appears flatened and less distinct at its
junction with the femoral neck. Lateral displacement or femoral head subluxation changes the
joint space from a normal, even crescent to a wedge shape. When secondary degenerative joint
  a  ai a  d sd d a sd i 
femoral or acetabular articular cartilage or at the sites of joint capsule attachment. Decreased
 or increased density or irregularity of the subchondral bone may be observed.
Although multiple radiographic techniques have been recommended, the standard
ventrodorsal projection has been accepted generally since 1961.483 This positioning stan-
dard calls for the dog to be in dorsal recumbency with its rear limbs pulled back until the
stifle and hock are fully extended. The rear limbs are then adducted until the femurs par-
allel each other. The femurs also are rotated medially (i.e., inwardly) until the patellas are
centered dorsally. Although not specifically stated in the standard, it is generally assumed
that the femurs should be as parallel as possible with the spine, table, or film.484 The pelvis
must not be rotated. The entire pelvis and enough of the femurs to show the patellas should
be included on the radiograph.
 Sedation or anesthesia is recommended routinely because malpositioning can create
diffculty or errors in diagnosis, especially in dogs with borderline pelvic conformation.
positioned ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph, the size and shape of the obturator foramina
and iliac wings are identical and the pelvic canal is smoothly oval. The femoral shafts are
parallel and the patellas are centered over the femoral trochlea.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPeNDICULAR SKELETON
561
A
B
FIG. 4-11z A male German Shepherd dog that had pelvic radiographs taken at 9 months (A) and 4
years (B) of age. Subluxation of both coxofemoral joints is evident in the radiographs obtained at 9
months of age. Less than 50% of the femoral head is in the acetabular cavity. The density of the sub-
chondral bone in the acetabulum is uneven—it is thinner medially. The acetabular rim is straight and
does not have the normal semicircular shape. In the ventrodorsal pelvic radiographs obtained at 4
years of age, the progress of the degenerative joint disease is readily apparent. The acetabular cups
have flled with bone. There are periarticular osteophytes on the acetabular margins. There is exten-
sive remodeling of the femoral head and neck. Diagnosis: Severe osteoarthritis secondary to bilateral
canine hip dysplasia.
 Positioning errors can be identified by certain radiographic changes. Pelvic rotation
will result in a difference in size of the obturator foramina and iliac wings-the smaller
 foramen and wider iliac wing wil appear on the same side as the apparently shallower
acetabulum. Divergence of the femoral shafts distally will increase the apparent congruity
of the femoral head and acetabulum. External rotation of the stifle, with the patella placed
over the lateral femoral condyle, will make the femoral neck appear shorter and thicker and
will accentuate any subluxation that is present. Internal rotation of the stifle with the
patella placed over the medial femoral condyle will minimize the degree of subluxation.
Slight malpositioning does not interfere with the diagnosis in a dog that has excellent or
 good pelvic conformation or moderate or severe dysplastic pelvic conformation. However,
in those dogs with fair or mild dysplastic conformation, a well-positioned, properly
exposed radiograph is essential.
Another consideration for radiography for hip dysplasia has been whether there is an effect
of oestrus on the radiographic appearance. Although the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals
562
A
B
FIG. 4-i13 A l-year-old female Rottweiler was brought in for routine pelvic evaluation. A, In the
pelvic radiographs obtained at l year of age, there is mild subluxation of both coxofemoral joints.
on the right femoral neck (open arrow). This is indicative of mild degenerative joint disease with bony
proliferation at the site of joint capsule attachment. B, The pelvic radiographs were repeated when
the dog was 2 years of age. The degree of subluxation of the coxofemoral joint remains unchanged.
acetabular margins are flattened. The bony proliferation on the right femoral neck has increased.
 Diagnosis: Progressive osteoarthritis secondary to mild bilateral canine hip dysplasia.
(OFA) has recommended that bitches not be radiographed for evaluation during oestrus, a
 p ss p n ni d se  an  ss
demonstrate diference in appearance during the various stages of oestrus.490
The OFA has served as a referral service for certification of the pelvic conformation of
dogs since 1966.491 The OFAs minimal age requirement for certification is 24 months,
because examination prior to that age has a significant chance of producing false-negative
results. In one study, only 10% of dogs with hip dysplasia had radiographic signs at 4
months of age, 15% to 30% at 6 months of age, approximately 70% at 12 months of age.
and approximately 95% at 24 months of age.492 The same study showed that waiting until
36 months of age increased the diagnostic rate to only 97%. Therefore an evaluation before
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
563
A
B
FIG. 4-114 A 2-year-old female Chesapeake Bay Retriever was brought in for routine hip evalua-
Adaap ieadde speau eu yq au s i siea z puo aiam sudeip dn-m
seated within their respective acetabula. Joint surfaces are smooth. There is no evidence of degener-
e au an ae s ie ieu seade u siad au s  a
appeared tohave dysplastichips at 2years of age,the follow-upradiographs indicate that the pevis
is normal. This is an unusual occurrence; however,i emphasizes the need for follow-up radiographs
in animals in which the radiographic evidence of hip dysplasia is minimal. Diagnosis: Normal
pelvis.
24 months of age should be considered provisional. A repeat study at 2/2 or 3 years of age
may be required in dogs with borderline pelvic conformation.
Another study has shown that preliminary readings (i.e., before 24 months of age) are
generally reliable. The correlations with the final diagnoses were best at the extremes of the
range (excellent hip joint conformation had 100% correlation, moderate hip dysplasia had
94.7% correlation). Correlations were weaker in the less definitive ends of the range of
 diagnoses (76.9% for fair hip joint conformation and 84.4% with mild hip dysplasia).493
The OFA has defined standards of hip joint conformation ranging from excellent hip
joint conformation (superior hip joint conformation as compared with other individuals
of the same breed and age) to severe hip dysplasia (radiographic evidence of marked dys-
564
SMALLANIMALRADIOLOGY
plastic changes of the hip joints). Radiographically, these depend upon the depth of the
acetabulum, the degree of subluxation, and the presence of any degenerative changes (see
Figs. 4-110 to 4-114).475 Repeated radiographic examinations may be necessary for an
accurate diagnosis.493-496
A new method of radiography using a distraction method (PennHip) has been reported
for the purpose of diagnsing canine hip dysplasia in dogs younger than 2 years49-503This
method uses an adjustable distraction device to determine the degree of joint laxity present in
the dog. The degree of laxity derived using this method is referred to as the distraction index
(DI). Although the data are still developing, results suggest that (1) a DI of >0.7 was associated
with a high probability of developing dysplasia, (2) a DI of <0.4 was associated with a high
degree of probability of normal hip joint conformation (88%), and (3) a DI within the range
of 0.4 to 0.7 was not clinically reliable in predicting whether an individual's hips were likely to
be normal or dysplastic. Further research in the application of this technique is ongoing.
In addition to the OFA and PennHip positioning protocols, other methods have been
reported to evaluate the status of canine hip joint conformation. These include assessment
of hip angles (anteversion), rate of femoral head ossification, and alternative stress tech-
niques.504-511
Osteochondrosis. Osteochondrosis is a failure of normal endochondral ossification,
Which results in thickening of the articular epiphyseal complex 12 This may lead to a dis-
secting intracartilaginous separation between the calcified and noncalcified layers, which
may occur at articulations, epiphyses, or apophyses. 513 when this occurs at articular surfaces,
the separation may result in the formation of a flap of articular cartilage or a complete frac-
ture with a free, separate piece of cartilage. This is referred to as osteochondritis dissecans
(OCD). If the process occurs at an apophysis (e.g., the coronoid or anconeal processes of the
ulna), it may result in an apophyseal separation from the body of the parent bone.
Osteochondrosis most often is seen in large-breed dogs that are less than 1 year old. It
usually involves the caudal aspect of the proximal humeral head, the medial humeral
condyle, the coronoid or anconeal process of the ulna, the lateral or medial femoral
condyle, or the medial or the lateral trochlear ridge of the talus.
OSTEOCHONDRITIs DIssECANS OF ARTICULAR SURFACEs. The radiographic changes asSo-
ciated with OCD of articular surfaces are similar whether in the humeral head, humeral
Bilateral disease is common.523,532,536 Radiographic findings include an area of radiolu-
cency or a flatening within the subchondral bone immediately beneath an articular sur-
face. Subchondral bone sclerosis may be present adjacent to the lucency or flattening.
although it is difficult to identify this condition in many cases (Figs. 4-115 to 4-120).
Osteophytes usually are seen at the margins of the articular cartilage.S37 A joint mouse (i.e.,
a piece of cartilage that is loose within the joint space) or calcified cartilage fragment may
be identified. In the shoulder, a cartilage fragment may migrate into the joint space under
cially in the elbow and hock, may be the only radiographic sign of OCD. However, even in
that case a suspicion of an underlying OCD may arise based upon the distribution of the
osteophytes. With OCD, typically the side opposite of the lesion, usually lateral in the elbow
and tibiotarsal joint, has much less osteophytosis, or it may not be affected at all. A CT scan,
MRI scan, arthrotomy, arthroscopy, or arthrogram may be required to confirm the diag-
nosis.532,539,540 Untreated, or even in many cases with treatment, varying degrees of degen-
erative joint disease will develop.
 Smallesions may heal spontaneously. Other lesions may not cause clinical signs yet are
radiographically apparent.
OSTEOCHONDROSIS OF APOPHYSEs. Osteochondrosis of apophyses may result in
ununited anconeal process or fragmented (or ununited) coronoid process. In this manifes-
tation of osteochondrosis, the apophysis either fails to unite or fractures while it is still in
the cartilage state.
An ununited anconeal process is identified as a bone fragment with a clear line of sep-
aration between the anconeal process and the ulna.542-548 The ununited anconeal process
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
565
FIG. 4-115 A 15-month-old male Chesapeake Bay Retriever presented
with an 8-month history of lameness in the right front leg. A, A lateral
view of the shoulder reveals an area of flattening that involves the cau-
Sas is si aau ( pe i i a jo ioase i
surrounding this area of radiolucency. B, The limb was supinated and an
additional radiograph was obtained. A large calcified cartilaginous flap
is identified readily. The osteochondral defect and fattening of the
humeral head are observed more readily with this positioning.
Diagnosis: Osteochondritis dissecans. A similar lesion was present in
the left shoulder.
A
B
566
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-116 An 8-month-old male Greyhound with a left foreleg
ameness of 3 months duration. A radiograph of the shoulder (not 
 shown) revealed an osteochondritis dissecans lesion. A radiograph of
the right shoulder was obtained for comparison and to rule out the
possibility of bilateral disease. There is irregular mineralization ofthe
maudal aspect of the glenoid (arrow). This appears to be a separate
 fragment; however, it is a normal pattern of ossification. Diagnosis:
Normal right shoulder.
FIG. 4-117 A 10-year-old male English Setter with a 3-month lame-
ness of the right forelimb. There are multiple calcified densities
within the right shoulder. These can be seen cranial to the scapular
spine and in the bicipital bursa area (arrows). Periarticular osteo-
phytes are present on the caudal distal margin of the humeral artic-
ular surface and on the caudal margin of the scapular glenoid.
Diagnosis: Severe degenerative joint disease secondary to osteo-
chondritis dissecans.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPeNDICULAR SKELETON
567
FIG. 4-118 A 6-month-old female
Golden Retriever with a right foreleg
lameness of 3 months duration.
Muscle atrophy and some limitation
of flexion and extension of both
elbows were noted. Both elbows were
radiographed. Lateral and antero-
posterior (A) and oblique (B) radi-
ographs of the left elbow are
illustrated. There is a lucent defect in
the medial humeral condyle (open
arrow) and slight irregularity of the
coronoid process There is bony pro-
liferation on the caudal aspect of the
humeral epicondyle (closed arrow).
Diagnosis: Osteochondritis disse-
cans of the left elbow. Similar
changes were present in the right
elbow.
A
568
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
FIG. 4-119 A and B, A 6-month-old male Bullmastiff with forelimb lameness and muscle atrophy of
all four limbs. On physical examination some pain was noted with manipulation of the stifles. Both
shoulders and stifles were radiographed. The left stifle is illustrated. There is soft-tissue swelling of
the left stifle joint and an area of flattening involving the lateral condyle of the distal left femur
(arrows). There is no evidence of a free fragment. Diagnosis: Osteochondritis dissecans of the leff
femur. A similar lesion was present in the right stifle.
the medial humeral epicondyle (Figs. 4-121 and 4-122). The anconeal apophysis usually
fuses with the remainder of the ulna around 4 months of age. A definitive diagnosis should
not be made until 4l/2 to 5 months of age, because there is a certain amount of normal
variation in the time of fusion between the anconeal process and the ulna. The prognosis
is poor when secondary degenerative joint disease is present. Regardless of therapy
attempted, affected joints usually will develop significant degenerative joint disease. Both
elbows should be evaluated routinely despite the absence of clinical signs in one of the
 elbows, because the condition frequently is bilateral.
Fracture or dislocation of the anconeal process may occur due to trauma or second-
ary to distal ulnar physeal injury and the resultant altered growth of the radius and ulna
(see Fig. 4-122). Subluxation of the humeral-ulnar articulation will be evident in these
cases and radiographs of the entire radius and ulna will confirm the diagnosis. A theory
argues that some ununited anconeal processes are due to the asymmetric longitudinal
growth of the radius versus the ulna, resulting in stress and subluxation of the
elbow.546,547 A counter argument is made because most cases of asymmetric growth in
breeds prone to this (e.g., Basset Hounds, Welsh Corgis) are not prone to ununited
anconeal processes. 548
 FRAGMENTED CoRONOID PROCEss. Fragmented coronoid process, involving usually the
 medial process but sometimes involving the lateral or both processes, is difficult to diag-
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
569
A
B
FIG. 4-120 An 8-month-old male Saint Bernard with intermittent
left rear leg lameness Lateral (A),flexed lateral (B),and anteroposte-
rior (C) radiographs of the right tarsus were obtained. There is a
slight amount of swelling around the hock. The medial aspect of the
tibiotarsal articulation is widened and a small bone density is noted
within that joint space (open arrow). The medial trochlea of the talus
appears small and the proximal aspect is flattened. Although this is
evident on both the lateral and flexed lateral views (arrows), flexion
of the leg demonstrates the lesion more clearly. Small calcifed frag-
 ments can be seen caudal to the trochlea of the talus in the flexed lat-
eral view. Diagnosis: Osteochondritis dissecans of the hock.
C
570
SmAll ANimAl RADlOlOGY AND ULTRaSONOGRaPHY
A
B
FIG. 4-121 A 5-month-old female German Shepherd dog with a lef foreleg lameness of 2 weeks dura-
tion. Lateral (A) and flexed lateral (B) radiographs of the left foreleg were obtained. A radiolucent line
xssds
eral radiograph. The radiolucent line is hiden by the medial epicondyle ofthe humerusin the straight
lateral view. Diagnosis: Ununited anconeal process. Flexion of the elbow is extremely important in
evaluating an animal for ununited anconeal process, because the lesion is more apparent when the
joint is flexed. The ununited anconeal process is visible on the straight lateral projection.
nose definitively on survey radiographs.549-566 Fragmented coronoid process often affects
both ulnas, although clinical signs may be unilateral. The flexed lateral view of the elbow is
the most commonly used view in attempting to make the diagnosis. The medial coronoid
process usually is viewed most clearly on a slightly supinated anteroposterior view. It also
may be seen when viewed through the radial head on the lateral view. Frequently, the coro-
noid fragment will not be identified specifically. Compared with other radiographic tech-
niques, CT has shown the highest accuracy, sensitivity, and negative predictive values in
making the diagnosis.564
Among the earliest radiographic signs that will be seen is mild osteophytosis on the
horizontal, or proximal, aspect of the anconeal process. As the condition progresses,
endosteal sclerosis of the ulna immediately deep to the coronoid processes just caudal
and distal to the semilunar notch and a widened humeroulnar joint space may be seen.
Finally, signs of degenerative joint disease may be seen, including osteophytes on the
cranial proximal radius, medial humeral epicondyle, proximal margin of the anconeal
process, or coronoid process, but typically not affecting the lateral surfaces. The
degenerative changes, including the specific pattern of osteophytosis noted above, may
be highly suggestive of the diagnosis and may be the only radiographic findings noted
s  ss msssdi )
rate coronoid fragment rarely is identified by radiography, because it usually occurs on
the lateral aspect of the medial coronoid process (Fig. 4-124). The medial humeral
condylar lesion of osteochondrosis may be observed concomitantly with fragmented
coronoid process.
RETAINED CARTILAGE CoRE. Retention of endochondral cartilage occurs in young.
distal ulna is affected most frequently. An inverted radiolucent cone is seen extending prox-
 i  i s) s  o sd   an  a
metaphyseal radiolucencies and physeal widening may be observed in other bones.
Although the lesion usually is without clinical significance and disappears as normal bone
modeling occurs, growth retardation and angular limb deformities may result. Irregular
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICUlAR SKELETON
571
FIG. 4-122 A 2-year-old female
Basset Hound with a 9-month his-
tory of left forelimb lameness, which
had become progressively more
severe. There was some restriction on
extension and flexion of the left
elbow. A, A radiolucent line separates
the anconeal process from the proxi-
mal ulna (closed arrows). B, This is
most obvious in the flexed lateral
radiograph. There is subluxation of
 the humeral ulnar articulation. The
anteroposterior and lateral radi-
 ographs of the entire limb demon-
strate a shortened ulna. The ulnar
styloid process does not extend as far
distal as the distal radius (open
arrows). There is a bony irregularity
associated with the cranial medial
surface of the distal one-third of the
ulna. This may be the site of a previ-
ous disturbance in endochondral
ossification. The radius is bowed.
Diagnosis:
Ununited 
anconeal
process. This maybe secondaryto the
altered growth rate in the ulna and
subsequent bowing deformity of the
forelimb. The subluxation of the
humeral ulnar articulation suggests
that the ununited anconeal process
resulted from abnormal growth
A
 rather than being a primary ununited
anconeal process.
B
572
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
C
D
FIG. 4-123 A 9-month-old male German Shepherd dog has been lame in the right foreleg for 2
months. There was mild restriction to flexion and extension of the right elbow. Lateral (A and D),
flexed lateral (B and E), and anteroposterior (C and F) radiographs were obtained of both the right
and left elbows. The left elbow (D to F) is normal and the radiographs were obtained for compari-
son. C, In the right elbow, there is irregularity of the bony margin of the medial coronoid process
noted in the anteroposterior radiograph (arrow). This is more obvious when compared with the nor-
 mal left limb. The subchondral bone density of the ulna appears increased when the right ulna is
compared with the leff. New bone production is present on the proximal aspect of the anconeal
process (straight arrow). This is most obvious when comparison is made between the right and left
elbows in the flexed lateral views. Bony proliferation is present along the cranial proximal aspect of
margins of the coronoid process as well as the increased subchondral bone density, bony prolifera-
tion on the proximal radius, and bony proliferation on the anconeal process are the result of sec-
ondary degenerative joint disease. These bony changes also may be seen with osteochondrosis of the
elbow and ununited anconeal process, and are therefore not specifc for the diagnosis of fragmented
coronoid process. Although the coronoid fragment cannot be identifed in these radiographs, the
 absence of radiographic signs of osteochondrosis or ununited anconeal process permits a diagnosis
of fragmented coronoid process.
Continued
ChApTeR FOuR The AppenDICulaR SKElETON
573
E
F
FIG. 4-123 cont'd For legend see previous page.
A
B
FIG. 4-124 A and B, A 10-month-old female Golden Retriever was lame in the right forelimb for 5
months. There was restriction to flexion and extension of the right elbow. Mild soft-tissue swelling is
imal aspect of the radius, proximal aspect of the anconeal process, medial epicondyle,and around the
coronoid process (solid arrows). There is increased density in the subchondral bone of the proximal
ulna. The area of the coronoid process on the lateral radiograph appears flattened (open arrow). A
small,smooth, somewhat round bone density is present proximal and medial to the proximal radial
articular surface (curved arrow). This is a normal sesamoid bone and has no clinical significance.
Diagnosis: Fragmented coronoid process.
574
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-125 A 6-month-old male Alaskan Malamute with mild
intermittent lameness and slight lateral angulation of the foot.
There is an inverted radiolucent core in the distal ulna (arrows).
Slight lateral angulation of the fot is present. Diagnosis:
 Retained cartilage core.
FIG. 4-126 Retained cartilage cores.
A and B, A 9-month-old male
Mastiff with left front limb lameness
of 2 weeks duration. Radiographic
findings include radiolucent cone-
like areas in the radial and ulnar
 metaphyses and granular bony pro-
liferation in the distal left humeral
 metaphysis. Diagnosis: Retained
 cartilage cores and panosteitis.
Comtinued
A
patterns of metaphyseal bone density may persist after maturity. The condition usually
affects both limbs in a similar manner.
Miscellaneous Elbow Conditions. In addition to the conditions described above, there are
a few other conditions that occur occasionally. These include incomplete ossification of the
 humeral condyles (seen in spaniel breeds); congenital elbow luxation; dysplasia, avulsion,
The incomplete ossification of the humeral condyles predisposes to intercondylar fracture
 in adult dogs (Fig. 4-127). The dysplastic, avulsed, and ununited medial epicondyle of the
Chapter Four The Appendicular SkeletOn
575
FIG. 4-126 cont'd For legend see opposite page.
FIG. 4-127 A 7-year-old female Cocker Spaniel was brought in for acute
right forelimb lameness that localized to the elbow. A, Radiographic findings
include an intercondylar to lateral supracondylar fracture of the distal right
humerus. B, The same dog was evaluated for a similar lameness in the left leg
7 months later. Radiographic findings include a separation of the lateral
humeral condyle from the rest of the humerus that led to a distortion of the
articular surface. Fragment displacement is proximal and lateral and there are
B
 Diagnosis: Incomplete humeral condyle fusion resulting in intercondylar
fracture(s).
B
576
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND UiTRaSONOGraPHY
FIG. 4-128 A 6-year-old female
Labrador Retriever was brought in
for acute right forelimb lameness and
elbow pain. A and B, Radiographic
 fndings include fragmented medial
coronoid process (arrow) with sec-
ondary degenerative joint disease 
and an extraarticular mineralized
body associated with the medial
humeral epicondyle (arrowhead).
Diagnosis: Chronic fragmented and
 ununited medial humeral epicondyle
 and chronic fragmented medial coro-
noid process.
A
B
humerus (Fig. 4-128) gives rise to massive enthesiophytes and periarticular mineralization
around the medial aspect of the elbow.
Patellar Luxation. Medial patellar luxation is a congenital lesion seen most frequently
 in miniature and small-breed dogs and rarely in cats. 82-5s8 The medial patella displace-
ment is recognized easily; however, when the limb is extended during positioning for radi-
ographs, the patella may resume a normal position. Varying degrees of severity may be
observed (Fig. 4-129). The distal femur and proximal tibia may present an S-shaped (sig-
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
577
FIG. 4-129 A 10-month-old female Chihuahua with an
intermittent lameness involving both rear limbs. Patella
luxation was identifed clinically. Radiographs of both sti-
fles were taken. A, In the right stifle the patella is located
medially in the posteroanterior radiograph. It appears to
be in its normal position in the lateral radiograph. The
right femoral condyles appear larger than the left. The
tibial crest is somewhat medially displaced; however, the
degree of displacement and severity of the bowing defor-
mity are much less than that seen in the left stifle. B, In
the left stifle the patella is displaced medially, is located
medial to the femur on the posteroanterior radiograph,
and is superimposed upon the distal femur in the lateral
radiograph (arrow). The tibial crest is rotated medially.
and the femoral condyles are hypoplastic. There is a bow-
ing deformity of the proximal tibia. Diagnosis: Bilateral
medial patella dislocation. The changes are severe on the
left and moderate on the right. There is no evidence of
degenerative joint disease at this time.
A
B
moid) deformity with a hypoplastic medial femoral condyle, shallow trochlear groove, and
medially positioned tibial crest. In severe cases, especially in larger dogs, secondary degen-
erative joint disease may be present.
 Lateral patellar luxation is uncommon but may be observed in large-breed dogs. It
is observed in some breeds as a conformational deformity but also may occur second-
ary to stifle trauma. Radiography is essential for evaluating the severity of the limb
 deformity and identifying the presence of fractures or secondary degenerative joint
disease.
Osteonecrosis of the Femoral Head. Osteonecrosis of the femoral head, or Legg-Calve-
Perthes disease, may occur spontaneously in young toy and small-breed dogs (4 to 11
months old), or may be secondary to intracapsular femoral neck or capital physeal frac-
tures. 589-594 The condition has been shown tobe inherited in Yorkshire and West Highland
White Terriers.593 Early radiographic signs include increased density in the femoral head
578
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
and neck that usually is poorly defined. Later, joint space widening followed by a subchon-
dral radiolucency within the femoral head is seen. Collapse of the cranial dorsal articular
surface with a flattened femoral head and secondary degenerative joint disease ultimately
will occur (Figs. 4-130 to 4-132). The spontaneous disease frequently is bilateral, but the
lesions may not be radiographically apparent at the same time.
A variant of osteonecrosis, which has been described in cats, manifests as unilateral or
bilateral aseptic necrosis and remodeling of the femoral necks (Fig. 4-133).9s-597 Also usu-
ally noted are capital physeal fractures.
Intracapsular femoral neck and capital physeal fractures may result in loss of the majority
 or all of the blood supply to the femoral neck or head. Subsequent revascularization willresult
 in a loss of bone from the intracapsular and extracapsular portions of the femoral neck. Very
little bone production is evident radiographically, because the necrotic bone is reabsorbed
gradually and replaced This reestablishes the femoral architecture. If a capital epiphyseal frac-
ture is not reduced surgically, the capital epiphyseal fragment may remain intact within the
acetabulum, with neither bony absorption nor proliferation. Bony proliferation will be
 observed on the femoral neck. Secondary degenerative joint disease may result in either case.
Osteonecrosis of the Humeral Head. Osteonecrosis of the proximal humeral head is a
rare finding in small dogs. Radiographically the humeral head collapses and becomes flat-
tened, and secondary degenerative joint disease results. The scapular glenoid cavity remod-
els to conform to the altered shape of the humeral head.598
Miscellaneous Coxofemoral Conditions. Other coxofemoral conditions that have been
described include luxation, septic arthritis, fracture (including stress fractures), and
Ese sieadde Aeudeaoen Audondu leous cog-6esudondu eous aisea
lytic lesion (Fig. 4-134).
Metabolic, Nutritional, and Idiopathic Disorders 
Hemophilia. Soft-tissue swelling may be the only evidence of an acute hemophilic
arthropathy. Chronic hemarthrosis will result in secondary degenerative joint disease.
 Periarticular periosteal proliferation eventually will develop along with subchondral scle-
rosis. The shoulders and elbows are involved more often than are the hips and stifles. In a
study of a group of hemophilic dogs, a narrowed joint space and subchondral cysts were
by 6 months of age.
FIG. 4-130 An 8-month-old male Miniature Pinscher with
right rear limb muscle atrophy and weakness of 6 weeks dura-
tion. There is mild subluxation of the right coxofemoral joint.
There is increased density involving the femoral neck and prox-
imal femoral metaphysis, with slight irregularity at the junction
between the femoral head and neck (arrows). Diagnosis:
 Osteonecrosis of the right femoral head. These changes are early
 in the disease course. The left coxofemoral joint is normal at this 
time.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
579
FIG. 4-131 A 10-month-old male Yorkshire Terrier had been lame
since 4 months of age. It was reluctant to bear weight on the right rear
imb and had muscle atrophy. There is marked collapse of the cranial
dorsal aspect of the right femoral head, with a decreased density in the 
subchondral bone beneath this flattened area. There is a loss of bone
density in the right acetabulum and subluxation of the right cox-
ofemoral joint. Diagnosis: Osteonecrosis of the right femoral head.
The severity of the radiographic changes is indicative of a long-stand-
 ing condition. The left coxofemoral joint is normal at this time.
FIG. 4-13z A 5-month-old male Pekingese was evaluated for a left
rear leg lameness that had been present for 4 weeks. Both femoral
heads are deformed and there is decreased density involving the ven-
trocaudal aspect of the left femoral head and neck. There is subluxa-
tion of the left coxofemoral joint with fragmentation of the left
femoral head. Areas of decreased density involve the cranial dorsal
aspect of the right femoral head. Small bone densities are present in
  a go us i aau s re   ea a
slight increased density involves the proximal metaphysis of the right
 a   a sn ai  
side appear to be more recent.
580
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 4-133 A 7-month-old female domestic cat was brought in for
left hind limb lameness of 1 week duration. Radiographic fndings
include loss of bone opacity in left femoral neck (arrow) with a
change in neck angle and some fragmentation typical of an acute
fracture. Diagnosis: Feline ischemic femoral neck necrosis. (Figure
courtesy St. Francis Animal and Bird Hospital, St. Paul, Minn.)
FIG. 4-134 A 15-month-old neutered male mixed breed dog was
evaluated for difficulty getting up for several months. A and B,
Radiographic findings include coxofemoral degenerative joint dis-
ease complicated by an invasive, osteodestructive process in the leff
and to a lesser degree the right femoral necks. Diagnosis: Invasive
synovial hypertrophy.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
581
Mucopolysaccharidosis. Bilateral subluxation of the coxofemoral joints with valgus
deformity of the femoral heads and shallow acetabula has been described in association
with mucopolysaccharidosis VI in cats. Other skeletal deformities may include epiphyseal
dysplasia, fusion of cervical vertebrae, flaring of the ribs at the costochondral junctions,
are an aid in distinguishing this disease from other causes of secondary degenerative joint
disease. Mucopolysaccharidosis I also has been described, and it appears similar to
Mucopolysaccharidosis II (Hunters disease) has been reported in a Labrador Retriever.607
Hypervitaminosis A. Ankylosis of joints associated with extensive periarticular soft-
tissue mineralization has been associated with hypervitaminosis A in cats.33833,608 Lesions
occur at points of ligamentous and tendinous attachment to the bone, especially in the
periarticular areas (see Fig. 4-82). Periarticular osteophytes are observed most often
around the elbow and shoulder, while involvement of the stifle, hip, and carpal and tarsal
joints is rare. The periarticular osteophytes are smooth and evenly mineralized and tend to
coalesce and bridge the affected joint. The dietary history and presence of lesions in the
vertebral column will help to confirm the diagnosis.
Hypothyroidism. Congenital hypothyroidism has been described in dogs and cats.
Although the retarded bone development that has been observed could result in limb defor-
mity and subsequent secondary degenerative joint disease, this has not been described.
Hyperparathyroidism. Hyperparathyroidism, either primary or secondary, may pro-
duce secondary degenerative joint disease as a result of limb deformity. Degenerative joint
disease has not been reported as a direct result of hyperparathyroidism.
Neoplastic Arthropathy. Although rare, tumors may originate from the periarticular
soft tissues and invade the joint. Synovial sarcoma is the most common tumor of this type,
although chondrosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, lymphosarcoma, undifferentiated sarcomas, and
others are observed.219-223 The stifle or elbow is involved more frequently, although any
joint may be affected. Soft-tissue swelling will be identified in all cases. This frequently
extends beyond the anatomical limits of the joint. Soft- tissue mineralization is uncommon.
A smallamount of periosteal proliferation may be present at the margins of the lesion. The
predominant radiographic finding usually is destruction of the bones of the affected joint.
Bony destruction begins at the sites of periosteal and ligamentous attachment, but eventu-
ally the subchondral bone will be involved also.
Because joint neoplasms occur in older dogs, they may be superimposed on preexist-
ing degenerative joint disease and some difficulty may be encountered in recognizing the
presence of a tumor. The irregularly shaped, localized soft-tissue swelling and bony
destruction should not be overlooked if the joint is evaluated carefully, despite the presence
of degenerative joint disease (see Figs. 4-60 and 4-61).
Infectious Arthritis. Joint infection is uncommon in dogs and cats. It may result from
hematogenous spread to the synovial membrane or synovial fluid or direct joint penetra-
tion from a contiguous soft-tissue or bone infection, external wound, surgical procedure,
fungal, viral, mycoplasmal, and protozoal infections have been described.615-633
 Infectious arthritis is characterized radiographically by soft-tissue swelling, subchon-
dral bone destruction and sclerosis, and periarticular periosteal proliferation (see Figs.
4-73 and 4-76). The radiographic changes are minimal early in the disease, usually limited
to soft-tissue swelling. By the time bony changes become evident there will be considerable
cartilage destruction. The soft-tissue swelling with infectious arthritis is usually more
extensive than that seen with other joint diseases. Poorly defined or faintly mineralized
bony proliferation may be observed at the points of ligamentous or joint capsule attach-
ment. Subchondral bone destruction and sclerosis will occur later in the disease and indi-
cates extensive destruction of articular cartilage (Fig. 4-135). Although the radiographic
changes observed with infectious arthritis are similar to those of secondary degenerative
joint disease or some immune joint diseases, the radiographic changes generally are more
severe and extensive in infectious arthritis when compared with other arthritides.
582
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-135 A 3-year-old spayed
female Labrador Retriever was
brought in for left hind limb lame-
ness l month after a femoral head
and neck resection. A, Radiographic
fndings include a mixture of de-
mineralization and surface irregular-
ity in the left acetabulum. B,
Progression of the left acetabular
changes is apparent on the follow-up
view performed l month later.
Diagnosis: Septic arthritis.
4
B
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
583
Joint space widening, described as an early radiographic change, and joint space col-
lapse, as a late change, have been reported in infectious arthritis. Recognition of these
changes is difficult because of the variation resulting from patient restraint and position-
ing during radiography.
Bacterial and fungal infectious arthritis produce similar radiographic changes. Only
soft-tissue swelling has been described in mycoplasma and viral arthritis. 626,627 In vis-
ceral leishmaniasis, the joint changes described were similar to those of degenerative
ses and joints and is referred to as puppy strangles.631-633 Typically multiple sites are
affected.
Immune-Mediated Arthritis. Numerous systemic disorders have been associated with
immune-mediated arthritis in dogs and cats. These conditions may be classified radi-
ographically into two major categories: erosive and nonerosive.
Erosive Arthritis
CANINE RHEUMATOID-LIKE ARTHRITIs. Canine rheumatoid-like arthritis is the most fre-
frequently, although any joint may be involved (Fig. 4-136). The condition may be
monoarticular, although polyarticular involvement is more common and joint involve-
ment usually is symmetric. Soft-tissue swelling and loss of bone density around the joint
are evident early in the disease. The trabecular pattern of the distal radius, ulna, tibia,
fibula, and carpal and tarsal bones becomes coarse due to a loss of the finer secondary tra-
beculae. That portion of the distal radius and distal tibia within the joint capsule area will
be affected. Round, cystlike lucencies may develop within the subchondral bone.
Progressive subchondral bone destruction occurs, especially at the articular margins. The
joint space width becomes irregular and joint deformity and subluxation may occur.
GREYHOUND PoLYARTHRITIs. A specific erosive polyarthritis has been described in
Greyhound dogs 3 to30months of age426427,64Theradiographic and pathologic changes
FELINe PROGREsSIVE POLYARTHRITIs. A progressive polyarthritis has been described in
mature cats, predominately in males, and has been linked to feline leukemia and feline syn-
cytial virus.642-644 The disease is characterized radiographically by joint swelling, periartic-
ular and subchondral erosions, and joint deformity In most cases, bony proliferation is
observed adjacent to the affected joints (Figs. 4-137 and 4-138).
Nonerosive. Nonerosive immune arthritis is characterized radiographically by soft-
tissue swelling without erosive bony changes despite long-standing disease. Some loss of
bone density may be observed; however, the subchondral bone and periarticular margins
appear normal (Fig. 4-139). This form of immune arthritis has been associated with idio-
pathic causes; systemic lupus erythematosus; chronic inflammatory, infectious, or parasitic
the joint. A juvenile onset nonerosive polyarthritis has been reported in Akitas. The condi-
tion is thought to be inherited.652
Crystal-Induced Arthritis. Crystal-induced arthritis is extremely rare. Both gout urate
crystal deposition in the joints and calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) deposition
diseasgoutr
CPPD deposition disease usually is associated with the deposition of amorphous aggre-
 gates of radiodense mineralizations in the soft tissues of the joint.654-656 CPPD deposition
disease in Great Danes can result in the deposition of mineral deposits in the synovial joints
of the appendicular and axial skeleton.653 Amorphous mineral opacities have been
reported in the diarthrodial joints of the cervical vertebral column in puppies and in the
diarthrodial joints of the cervical spine and extremities in a 1-year-old dog.653 Abnormal
bone curvature, cortical thinning, increased medullary trabeculation, and shortening of
the long bones were noted also in the older dog.
Soft-tissue swelling with periarticular mineralization (punctate or fine linear patterns)
has been described. Extensive nodular soft-tissue mineralization was demonstrated around
584
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGy AND UlTRaSONOGRaPhY
A
B
C
D
 FIG. 4-136 A 4-year-old male Cocker Spaniel had a 3-year history of lameness thought to be the
sot esien pue iedie aulgo uams suaieionnn iue pa pue eiidsap d jo nsn
was noted. A and C, Lef carpal and left tarsal radiographs were obtained. A, There is soft-tissue
swelling of the left carpus and malalignment of the carpal bones, especially in the carpal metacarpal
joint. The accessory carpal bone is displaced proximally. Small erosions in the carpal bones are shown 
(arrows). There is a loss of bone density in the distal radius and in the distal metaphyseal regions of
the metacarpal bones. C, There is soft-tissue swelling of the left tarsus. There is subluxation of the
tibial tarsal joint, with widening of the lateral aspect of this joint space. In the tarsal bones a general-
ized loss of bone density is seen. There are bony erosions, especially on the cranial surface of the talus
(arrow). B and D, Follow-up radiographs were obtained 7 months later. B, In the left carpus the soft-
tissue swelling has increased dramatically. There is marked subluxation of the carpal metacarpal
joint. There are extensive erosive changes in the radiocarpal bone and in the proximal portion of the
metacarpal bones as well as in the distal radius (arrows). The accessory carpal bone is markedly dis-
placed proximally. There is an overall loss of bone density, especially in the periarticular regions. D,
In the left tarsus is subluxation and malalignment ofthe tarsal bones, especially at the proximal inter-
tarsal joint. There are erosive changes in the distal tibia and in the talus (arrows). Diagnosis:
Immune-mediated erosive arthritis.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
585
A
B
 FIG. 4-137 A 4-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with sweling of the right carpus, which
had been present for 3 months. Mild swelling was identifed also in the left carpus. Other joints
appeared normal. Radiographs of both carpi were obtained. A, There is soft-tissue sweling in the
right carpus. Extensive bony destruction is visible, involving the distal radius and ulna and carpal
bones as well as the proximal metacarpal bones. B, There is minor soft-tissue swelling of the left car-
pus. Extensive demineralization is seen in the distal radius, ulna, carpal bones, and proximal
metacarpal bones. Diagnosis: Feline progressive polyarthritis.
FIG. 4-138 A 2-year-old female Persian cat with a
fever and joint swellings. There is soft-tissue swelling
of the right tarsus. Bony proliferation involving the
distal tibia, calcaneus, tarsal bones, and proximal
metatarsal bones is shown. There is a loss of bone den-
sity in the tarsal bones. Diagnosis: Feline progressive
polyarthritis.
586
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 4-139 A 3-year-old female Toy Fox Terrier had been lame
for 6 months. The carpal, tarsal, and both stifle joints were
swollen. There is soft-tisue swelling around the left carpal joint.
There is a loss of bone density involving the distal radius, distal
ulna,and the carpal bones. A loss of bone density is also present
in the distal metacarpal bones and in the proximal ends
of the proximal phalanges. Diagnosis: Nonerosive immune
polyarthritis.
one interphalangeal joint in a dog. Calcium pyrophosphate crystals were identified after the
digit was removed.
Villonodular Synovitis. The etiology of villonodular synovitis is unknown. Few cases have
been reported in small animals ,s8-61 soft-tissue swelling and cystlike cortical erosions
with marginal sclerosis have been described. The destructive bony changes were similar to,
 although less extensive than, those observed with joint neoplasms.
SOFT-TISSUE ABNORMALITIES
SOFT-TISSUE SwELLINGS AND MASSES
The soft tissues always should be evaluated when the appendicular skeleton is evaluated
radiographically. Swelling of the soft tissues should be categorized as local or diffuse. The
location of the swelling, relative to normal anatomical structures, should be considered.
Local swellings are more likely neoplastic or granulomatous, while diffuse swellings are
more likely secondary to edema, hemorrhage, or inflammation (see Fig. 4-2). A localized
i po siso e sisasns snssn os ns an l ssp ssan si e smss
(Figs. 4-140 and 4-141).232 Local swellings that involve joints should be centered on the
 affected joint and should conform to the joint's anatomical limits. If otherwise, the proba-
bility is that the process is extraarticular. Identifying an area of soft-tissue swelling on the
radiograph may indicate that a lesion is present in the underlying bone and the bone
should be examined carefully.
COMPARTMENTAl SYNDROME
An unusual variant of extraarticular soft-tissue sweling is the compartment syndrome.
This is a postraumatic swelling, often due to hemorrhage, into a soft-tissue area that is
 limited by a restrictive circumferential fascia, resulting in a marked increase in pressure
within the compartment and restricted perfusion. This can lead to muscle death and
 progressive fibrosis and contracture.62-668 Unexplained regional swelling should be
investigated.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
587
FIG. 4-140 A 12-year-old female Labrador
Retriever with a soff, somewhat fluctuant mass
in the area of the right carpus. The dog was not
lame. An area of swelling is present on the cau-
dal medial aspect of the right carpus. This
swelling has a fat-dense center and a tissue-
dense border. Diagnosis: Lipoma.
 FIG.4-141 A7-year-old neutered male Miniature Schnauzer with a swelling in the right
hind limb distal to the stifle. The lateral radiograph of the area reveals a well-mar-
ginated, fat-dense structure (arrows) between the gastrocnemius muscles and the deper
muscles of the tibia. Diagnosis: Lipoma.
588
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
SUBCUTANEOUS AND INTRAARTICULAR GAS
The most common cause of gas or air accumulation within the soft tissues is an external
wound. In rare cases, gas may accumulate in the subcutaneous tissues secondary to infec-
tion. Regardless of cause, gas usually accumulates or dissects along fascial planes and
 Intraarticular gas accumulation may occur with laceration from compound fracture.
Its presence suggests the possibility of septic inflammation. Another cause of intraarticular
tioning stresses or joint instability.
SOFT-TISSUE MINERALIZATI0N
 Soft-tissue mineralization or calcification may result from dystrophic or metastatic miner-
alization.326,673,674 Tumors, chronic infections, and hematomas may calcify and produce
discrete areas ofmineral ensity675,6 Ossifying mysitis, which is progressive osificatin
of muscle and connective tissue, may be seen also.677-681 The pattern of mineralization is
not specific, and the size, shape, and location of the entire lesion, including its soft-tissue
 component, are important in determining a radiographic diagnosis. Endocrinopathies,
FIG. 4-142 A 9-year-old neutered male Shar Pei was evaluated for an
acute larmeness of the left hind limb. The lateral radiograph of the
to the metatarsal bones (arrows) as well as lateral to the fbula and cau-
dal to the tibia. Serum analysis revealed significant hypothyroidism.
Diagnosis: Vascular calcification secondary to hypothyroidism. The
lameness was due to a stifle injury.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPeNDICULAR SKELETON
589
such as Cushing's disease or hyperparathyroidism, may result in cutaneous or subcuta-
neous mineralization. Mineralization of the footpads and vascular mineralizations have
been described occasionally in association with renal failure, hyperadrenocorticism,
hypothyroidism, and atherosclerosis (Fig. 4-142). Soft-tissue mineralization has been
noted in association with hypervitaminosis A.
ognized, because they conform to the shape and anatomical location of the ligament or
viduals, other causes of lameness must be excluded before the lesion is blamed as the cause
of a specific lameness.
Calcinosis circumscripta is a condition that results in localized areas of subcutaneous
soft-tissue calcification (Fig. 4-144).692-695 These well-defined mineralized masses usually
are observed in the extremities and often at pressure points.
Disseminated Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis. Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyper-
ostosis is an infrequently recognized problem. The majority of the lesions affect the spine
and pelvis. Appendicular skeletal changes described include periarticular osteophytes and
calcification and ossification of soft-tissue attachments enthesiophytes)696
alized soft-tissue swelling. When these foreign objects are radiodense, they are identified
easily (Fig. 4-145). Some foreign objects are tissue dense (radiolucent) and, therefore, will
not be detected on survey radiographs. A chronic nonhealing wound and periosteal prolif-
aoq uia i e jo aussad au isans auoq ueie au u un
Fistulography (ie., injection of draining tracts with iodinated contrast media) has been
used to outline radiolucent foreign objects. However, when contrast is injected subcuta-
neously in dogs and cats it may dissect along fascial planes and may not follow the drain-
ing tract.697
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF APPENDICULAR SKELETON
CANINE HIP DYSPLASIA
 Ultrasonography has limited value in the evaluation of the appendicular skeleton. It has
been used to evaluate to the coxofemoral joints of puppies. Satisfactory images of the joint
were obtained in puppies up to 8 weeks of age. The coxofemoral joint space, femoral head,
and acetabulum could be evaluated in longitudinal, transverse, and dorsolateral oblique
 planes. The predictive value of this technique for the diagnosis of canine hip dysplasia has
not been determined.54,62,698
TenDON INjuRY
Ultrasonography also may be used for evaluation of soft tissues in the limbs.
Tendinopathies may be imaged.57,58,64 Tendon injury, rupture, and peritendinous fluid
can be observed (Fig. 4-146). Hypoechoic lesions may be observed with acute injury,
of the healing tendon will reveal a hyperechoic lesion with distal shadowing.
 Peritendinous fluid appears as a hypoechoic or anechoic region surrounding and paral-
leling the tendon.
SOFT-TISSUE MASSES
Ultrasonography has been used also for the evaluation of sof-tissue masses. Lymph node
enlargement may be documented. Criteria for discriminating between reactive and neo-
plastic enlargement have not been established (Fig. 4-147). Hematomas vary in echogenic-
hypoechoic. Discrimination between hematoma and abscess is difficult, because both
usually are hypoechoic or anechoic with a distinct capsule. An ultrasonographically guided
aspirate will yield a definitive diagnosis in these cases. Tumors usually are identified as iso-
echoic masses in the soft tissues.
590
Small Animal Radiology And UltrasonOgraphy
B
FIG. 4-143 An 8-year-old spayed female Golden Retriever was brought in for
shoulder pain. A, Radiographic findings include aggregate mineral density
along the course of the biceps tendon and its sheath (white arrows) as well as
osteophytes on the caudal glenoid rim and the caudodistal humeral head
(black arrows). B, "Skyline” view down the biceps tendon groove of a differ-
ent dog with the same condition in which the mineralization can be seen
medial to the greater humeral tubercle in the biceps tendon groove (arrow).
  n n as a   i  g  
() uuan sdanq a ym inuon si u ieai si yeaus uu sda
and there is shoulder joint synovial hypertrophy. D, Sagittal ultrasonogram
of a dog with biceps tendonitis. Note the linear anechoic area paralling the
tendon on the superficial aspect (<) of the tendon (between < and >).
Compare with E, which is a sagittal ultrasonogram of the unaffected side of
the same dog. Diagnosis: Biceps tenosynovitis with degenerative joint dis-
ease of the shoulder. (Figs. D and E from Rivers B, Wallace L, Johnston G:
Biceps tenosynovitis in the dog: radiographic and sonographic findings. Vet
Comp Orthop Trauma 1992; 5:51-57.)
Continued
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICULAR SKELETON
591
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronicmedla.
Rights werenot granted toinclude tnisfigurein electronicmedia.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Pleaserefer to the printed publication.
D
FIG. 4-143 For legend see opposite page.
E
FIG. 4-144 A 7-year-old male German Shepherd dog with a 3-
month history of pain when jumping. A hard mass was present on
the lateral aspect of the right rear foot. There is an area of soft-tissue
swelling lateral to the metatarsal phalangeal joint of the fth digit,
which contains multiple well-defined mineralized densities. These
 densities have a poorly organized internal architecture. There is a
slight erosion noted in the proximal end of the digit adjacent to the
 mineralized densities (arrow). Diagnosis: Calcinosis circumscripta.
592
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 4-145 A 2-year-old female mixed breed dog with a swollen left
along the limb. A small triangular density is visible in the sof tissues 
(arrows). There are no bony abnormalities. Diagnosis: Foreign body
(tooth fragment) in the sof tissues.
FIG. 4-146 A l-year-old female
Bullmastiff with a right tarsal swelling
 of 3 weeks duration. Transverse (A
and B) and longitudinal (C) sono-
 grams of the right common cal-
mnean tendon and comparison
transverse and longitudinal sono-
 grams of the left (D) reveal an ane-
choic, peritendinous fluid that
extends distally to the level of the cal-
 maneus. In C, the tendon is disrupted
at its point of attachment to the calca-
A
neus (arrows). Diagnosis: Rupture of
the right common calcanean tendon.
CHAPTeR FOuR THe AＰＰenDICulAR SKelETON
593
FIG. 4-147 A 4-year-old male
 Rottweiler with chronic,intermittent
fever and swelling in the left axilla.
 Longitudinal sonograms reveal an
oval, hypoechoic mass (lymph node)
in the left axilla. This lym-
 phadenopathy could be neoplastic or
inflammatory. Diagnosis: Axillary
lymphadenopathy secondary  to
chronic infection.
FOREIGN MATTER
Utrasonography has been used extensively for localization of soft-tissue foreign objects in
 large animals. It has been used occasionally in small animals.700 Most foreign bodies will
 be hyperechoic and will exhibit distal shadowing.
VASCULAR AND LYMPHATIC ABNORMALITIES
Vascular abnormalities in the limbs can result in both swelling and lameness. Although
aneurysms are possible, they are very uncommon. However, arteriovenous fistulas do occur
occasionall,701-703 Abnormal communications between arteries and veins may be identified
sonographically. Doppler studies may identify turbulent flow. The fistulas can be congenital
 or acquired and usually require angiographic evaluation to clarify their origin and extent.
Arterial occlusion is a problem that is seen most often in cats with cardiomyopathy.An
obstruction to flow may be seen with either two-dimensional or color-flow studies. The
most common site of occlusion is at the iliac bifurcation, but other sites may be affected
including the subclavian arteries.704 Arterial occlusion has also been reported in Cavalier
 King Charles Spaniels at the level of the femoral artery.705
 Lymphedema, the accumulation of tissue fluid,is a lymphatic venous problem that may
beidentihamexdiffnldansis7Thnineaareafanech
may be identified sonographically between structures such as muscles and tendons.
REFERENCES
1. Simallwood JE, Shively MJ, Rendano VT, et al: A standardized normen-
7. Flo GL, Middleton D: Mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon in
clature for radiographic projections used in veterinary practice. Vet
dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:95.
Radiol 1985; 26:2.
8. Beck KA: Caudocranial horizontal bearm radiographic projection for
 2. Callahan TF, Ackerman N: The supinated rmediolateral radiograph for
evaluation of femoral fracture and osteotorny repair in dogs and cats.
 detection of hurmeral head osteochondrosis in the dog. Vet Radiol
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:1751.
1985; 26:144.
9. Beck KA: Caudocranial horizontal beam radiographic projection for
3. Roush JK, Lord PF: Clinical applications of a distoproximal (axial) radi-
evaluation of femoral fracture and osteotomy repair in dogs and cats.
ographic view of the scapula. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:129.
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:1751.
4. Slocum B, Devine TM: Dorsal acetabular rirn radiographic view for 
10. Murphy ST, Lewis DD, Shiroma JT, et al: Effect of radiographic posi-
evaluation of the canine hip. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:289.
 5. Miyabayashi T, Biller DS, Manley PA, et al: Use of a fixed dorsoplantar
Res 1998; 59:1351.
radiographic view of the talocrural joint to evaluate larmeness in two
11. Farrow CS: Stress radiography: J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1982; 181:777.
dogs. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 199 1; 199:598.
12. Ticer IW: Radiographic technique in srmall animal practice. WB
6. Beck KA: Caudocranial horizontal bearn radiographic projection for
 Saunders, Philadelphia, 1975; p 101.
 evaluation of femoral fracture and osteotomy repair in dogs and cats.
13. Arnbjerg I, Jeje Ni: Fabellae and popliteal sesarmoid bones in cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:1751.
J Small Anim Pract 1993; 34:95.
594
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
14. Aron DN, Purinton PT: Collateral ligarments in the tarsocrural joint.
40. Van Bree H, VanRyssen B, Desimidt M: Osteochondrosis lesions of
An anatomic and functional study. Vet Surg 1985; 14:173.
the canine shoulder joint: correlation of positive contrast arthrogra-
15.BreitS,KzeWnK,t aRaiograhifres ofte 
phy and arthroscopy. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:342.
ligarment of the radius in cats. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 1998; 140:231.
41. VanBree H, VanRyssen B: Positive contrast shoulder arthrography
16. Carlisle CH, Reynolds KM: Radiographic anatormy of the tarsocrural
with iopromide and diatrizoate in dogs with osteochondrosis. Vet
joint of the dog. I Small Anim Pract 1990; 31:273.
Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:203-206.
17. Fagin BD, Aronson E, Gutzrmer MA: Closure of the iliac crest ossf-
42. VanBree H, VanRyssen B, Perermans K, et al: A cormparison of diatri-
cation center in dogs: 750 cases (1980-1987). J A1m Vet Med Assoc
 zoate and ioxaglate for positive contrast arthrography and
1992; 200:1709.
arthroscopy. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:342.
18. Fitch RB, Montgormery RD, Milton JL, et al: The intercondylar fossa
43. Surmner-Srmith G: Delayed unions and nonunions. Vet Clin North
 of the norrmal canine stifle; an anatormic and radiographic study. Vet
Am 199 1; 21:745.
Surg 1995; 24:148.
44. Kim EE, Haynie TP: Musculoskeletal neoplasms. In Current practice
19. Jojic D, Blagojevic Z: Nutrient forarmina on the bones of the front
 in nuclear medicine: nuclear imaging in oncology. Appleton Century
extrermities in dogs. Acta Vet Yugosl 1983; 33:331.
Crofts, Norwalk, Conn, 1984; p 155.
 20. McCarthy PH, Wood AK: Anatormic and radiologic observations of
45. Hahn KA, Hurd C, Cantwell HD: Single phase rmethylene diphos-
the clavicle of adult dogs. Am I Vet Res 1988; 49:956.
 phonate bone scintigraphy in the diagnostic evaluation of dogs with
 21. McCarthy PH, Wood AKW: Anatormical and radiological observa-
Osteosarcorma. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196: 1483.
tions of the sesamoid bone of the popliteus muscle in the adult dog
46. Stickle RL, Hathcock JT: lnterpretation of computed tomographic
and cat. Anat Histol Embryol 1989; 18:58.
irmages. Vet Clin North Arm 1993; 23:429.
22. Miyabayashi T, Takaguchi M, Schrader SC, et al: Radiographic
 47. Baird DK, Hathcock JT, Kincaid SA, et al: Low-field rmagnetic reso-
anatormy of the medial coronoid process of dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
nance imaging of early subchondral cyst-like lesions in induced cranial
Assoc 995; 3 1:125.
cruciate ligament deficient dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998; 39:167.
 23. Rendano VT, Dueland R: Variation in location of gastrocnermius
48. Fitch RB, Wilson ER, Hathcock JT, et al: Radiographic, computed
sesarmoid bones (fabellae) in a dog IAm Vet Med Assoc 1978; 173:200.
tomographic and rmagnetic resonance irmaging evaluation of a
 24. Tirgari M: Clinico-pathologic aspects of separated ossicles in the
chronic long digital extensor tendon avulsion in a dog. Vet Radiol
shoulder joint in dogs. Vet Rec 1974; 95:461.
Utrasound 1997; 38:177.
 25. Vasseur PB, Arnoczky SP: Collateral ligarments of the canine stifle
49. Breuer GJ, Blevins WE: Traurmatic injury of the iliopsoas muscle in 3
joint: anatormic and functional analysis. Am J Vet Res 1981; 42:1133.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210:1631.
 26. Weber NA: Apparent ossification of the menisci in a dog. J Am Vet 
 50. Engleke A, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Nolte I: Utrasonography ofthe sti-
Med Assoc 1998; 212:1892.
fle joint in dogs with rupture of the cruciate ligarments. Dtsch
 27. Whiting PG, Pool RR: Intrarmeniscal calcification and ossification in
Tierarztl Wochenschr 1997; 104:114.
the stifle joints of 3 dormestic cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1985;
 51. Gerwing M, Krarmer M: Utrasonography of the shoulder joint in
21:589-594.
dogs. B: ultrasonic diagnosis of diseases in the region of the shoulder
 28. Wood AK, McCarthy PH, Howlett CR: Anatomic and radiographic
joint. Kleinterpraxis 1994; 39:141.
appearance of a sesarmoidbonein the tendon of origin of the supina-
 52. Greshake RJ, Ackerrman N: Utrasound evaluation of the coxofermoral
tor rmuscle of dogs. Am I Vet Res 1985; 46:2043.
 joints of the canine neonate. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1993; 34:99.
 29. Kornegay IN, Sharp NJH, Schueler RO, et al: Tarsal joint contracture
 53. Krarmer M, Gerwing M: The irmportance of sonography in orthope-
in dogs with Golden Retriever rmuscular dystrophy. Lab Anirm Sci
dic problerms in dogs. Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr 1996;
1994; 44:331.
109:130.
 30. Wood AK, MeCarthy PH, Martin IC: Anatomic and radiographic
 54. Krarmer M, Gerwing M, Hach V, et al: Sonography of the muscu-
appearance of a sesarmoid bone in the tendon of origin or the supina-
loskeletal systerm in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997;
tor muscle of the cat. Am I Vet Res 1995; 56:736.
38:139.
31. Konde LJ: Diseases of the irmrmature skeleton. ln Thrall DE, ed:
 55. Krarmer M, Gerwing M: Sonography of the shoulder joint. Part A,
Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology. WB Saunders,
sonographical anatorny of the shoulder joint. Kleinterpraxis 1994;
Philadelphia, 1998; p 131.
39:71.
 32. Lewis DD, McCarthy RJ, Pechrman RD: Diagnosis of cormrmon devel-
56. Kramer M, Gerwing M: Sonography of the shoulder joint in dogs.
 opmental orthopedic conditions in canine pediatric patients. Comp
Part B,ultrasound diagnosis of diseases in the region of the shoulder
Cont Educ Pract Vet 1992; 14:287.
joint. Kleinterpraxis 1994; 39:141.
 33. Gitterle E, Schawalder P: Contrast arthrography in the dog l.
 57. Krarmer M, Gerwing M, Shimke E: Diagnosis and therapy of selected
Technique and norrmal findings. Kleinterpraxis 1981; 26:333.
tendon and rmuscular diseases in dogs. Part 1, sonography of the
 34. Gitterle E, Schawalder P: Contrast arthrography in the dog ll.
Achilles tendon in dogs. Kleinterpraxis 1993; 38:703.
Diagnostic aspects. Kleinterpraxis 1981; 26:491.
58. Kramer M, Shmke E, Schachenmayr W, et al: Diagnosis and thray
 35. Hay CW, Aron DN, Roberts R, et al: Evaluation of positive contrast 
of infraspinatus and gracilis 1muscles. Kleinterpraxis 1996; 41:889.
arthrography in canine cranial cruciate ligarment disease. Vet Comp
59. Kramer M, Stengel H, Gerwig M, et al: Sonography of the canine sti-
Orthop Trauma 1996; 9:10.
fle. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:282.
 36. Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Wallace LJ: Evaluation of rmetrizarmide
 60. Long CD, Nyland TG: Utrasonographic evaluation of the canine
arthrography for detection of surgically inducedlesionsof the canine
shoulder. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1999; 39:372.
stifle. Vet Comp Orthop Traurma 1989; 2:70.
61. Mauterer JV, Prata RG, Carberry CA, et al: Displacerment of the ten-
 37. Lowry IE, Carpenter LG, Park RD, et al: Radiographic anatormy and
don of the superficial digital flexor muscle in dogs; 10 cases (1983-
technique for arthrography of the cubital joint in clinically normal
1991). I Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:1162.
dogs. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:72.
62. O'Brien RT, Dueland RT, Adarms WC, et al: Dynamic ultrasono-
 38. Muhurmuza L, Morgan JP, Miyabayashi T, et al: Positive contrast
graphic rmeasurerments of passive coxofermoral joint laxity in puppies.
 arthrography: a study of hurmeral joints in normal Beagle dogs. Vet 
J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:275.
Radiol 1988; 29:157.
63. Reed AL, Payne JT, Constantinescu GM: Utrasonographic anatomy
 39. Van Bree K: Comparison of the diagnostic accuracy of positive-con-
 of the norrmal canine stifle. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995; 36:315.
trast arthrography and arthrotormy in evaluation of osteochondrosis
 64. Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Krarmek BA, et al: Sonographic fndings in
ss  ia w I sp ui n os s ui si
canine cormmon calcaneal tendon injury. Vet Cormp Orthop Trauma
1993; 203:84.
1997; 10:45.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICUlAR SKELETON
595
65. Renner RR, Mauler GG, Ambrose GL: The radiologist, the orthope-
93. Cook JL, Cook CR, Tomlinson JL, et al: Scapular fractures in dogs:
dist, the lawyer and the fracture. Semin Roentgenol 1978; 13:7.
epidermiology, classification, and concurrent injuries in 105 cases 
66. Lee R: Proxirmal fermoral physeal separation in the dog. I Simall Anim
(1988-1994).J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:528.
Pract 1976; 10:669.
94. Culvenor JA, Howlett CR: Avulsion of the rmedial epicondyle of the
67. O'Brien TR: Developrmental deformities due to arrested epiphyseal
hurmerus in the dog (5 cases). J Small Anim Pract 1982; 23:83.
growth. Vet Clin North Arm 1971; 1:441.
95. Eaton-Wells RE, Plurmmer GV: Avulsion of the popliteal muscle in
68. O'Brien TR, Morgan JP, Suter PF: Epiphyseal plate injury in the dog:
a Fagan Hound. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1978; 19:743.
a radiographic study of growth disturbance in the forelimb. J Srmall
 96. Huss BE, Lattirmer JC: What is your diagnosis? Intra-articular avul-
Anim Pract 1971; 12:19.
 sion fracture of the tibia in a Gerrman Shepherd dog. IAm Vet Med
69. Berg RG, Egger EL, Konde LJ, et al: Evaluation of prognostic factors
Assoc 1994; 204:1017.
for growth following distal fermoral physeal injuries in 17 dogs. Vet
97. Johnson KA: Accessory carpal bone fractures in the racing
Surg 1984; 13:172-180.
Greyhound. Vet Surg 1987; 16:60.
70. Carrig CB, Merkeley DE, Mostosky UV: Asynchronous growth of the
98. Lamrmerding JI, Noser GA, Brinker WO, et al: Avulsion fracture Of
canine radius and ulna: effects of different armounts of ulnar growth
the origin of the extensor digitorurm longus muscle in 3 dogs. J Am
retardation. Vet Radiol 1978; 19:16.
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1976; 12:764.
71. Carrig CB, Morgan JP: Asynchronous growth of the radius and ulna;
 99. Muir P, Dueland RT: Avulsion of the origin of the rmedial head of
early radiographic changes following experimental retardation of the
the gastrocnermius rmuscle in a dog. Vet Rec 1994; 135:359.
longitudinal growth of the ulna. Vet Radiol 1975; 16:121.
100. Muir P: Metacarpal and metatarsal fractures in dogs. J Small Anirn
72. Guilliard M: What is your diagnosis? Premature closure of the cau-
Pract 1997; 38:344
dal aspect of the proximal tibial growth plate. J Srmall Anirm Pract 
 101. Ness MG: Metatarsal ll fractures in the racing Greyhound. J Simall
1996; 37:489.
Anirn Pract 1993; 34:85.
73. Smith RN: The developing skeleton. Vet Radiol 1968; 9:30.
102. Newell SM, Mahaffey ME, Aron D: Fragrmentation of the rmedial
74. Houlton JEF, McGlennon NJ: Castration and physeal closure in the
malleolus of dogs with and without tarsal osteochondrosis. Vet
cat. Vet Rec 1992; 131:466.
Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:5.
75. Preston-Stubbs W, Bloormberg MS, Scruggs Sl, et al: Effects of pre-
103. Pond MJ: Avulsion of the extensor digitorurn longus rmuscle in the
 pubertal gonadectormy on physical and behavioral developrment in
dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1973; 14:785.
cats. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209:1864.
104. Power IW: Avulsion of the tibial tuberosity in the Greyhound. Aust
76. Root MV,Johnston SD, Olson PN: The effect of prepuberal and post-
Vet J 1976; 52:491.
 puberal gonadectoimy on radial physeal closure in rmale and fermale
105. Prior JE: Avulsion of the lateral head of the gastrocnermius rmuscle
dormestic cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38:42.
in a working dog. Vet Rec 1994; 134:382.
77. Dupuis J, Berton L, Drolet R: Bilateral epiphysiolysis of the fermoral
106. Reinke JD, Mughannam AJ, Owens IM: Avulsion of the gastrocne-
heads in 2 dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210:1162.
mius tendon in 11 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:410.
78. VanEe RT, Walker TL, Patton CS, et al: Bilateral calcaneal epiphysiol-
107. Tanno F, Weber U, Lang I, et al: Avulsion of the popliteus rmuscle in
ysis in a dog. Vet Surg 1986; 15:60.
a Malinois dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1996; 37:448.
79. Boulay JP, Wallace LJ, Lipowitz AJ: Pathological fracture of long
108. VanBree H: Avulsion of the insertion of the gastrocnermius tendon
bones in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1987; 23:297.
in 3 dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1986; 27:759.
 80. Anderson MA, Constantinescu GM, Dee LG, et al: Fractures and dis-
109. Weinstein MJ, Srmith GK: Partial avulsion of the tibial tuberosity
 locations of the racing Greyhound—part 1. Comp Cont Educ Pract
(Osgood-Schlatter lesion) in a litter of Greyhound pups and their 
Vet 1995; 17:779.
dams. Vet Cornp Orthop Traurma 1994; 7:48.
 81. Anderson MA, Constantinescu GM, Dee LG, et al: Fractures and dis-
110. Vaughan LC: Limb fractures in the dog and cat: ll, histological, clin-
locations of the racing Greyhound—part l. Comp Cont Educ Pract
ical, and radiographic aspects of fracture healing. I Srmall Anim
Vet 1995; 17:899.
Pract 1966; 7:141.
82. Wendelburg K, Dee JD, Kaderly R, et al: Stress fractures of the
 111. Mann FA, Payne IT: Bone healing. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1989; 4:312.
acetabulurm in 26 racing Greyhounds. Vet Surg 1988; 17:128.
112. Gibson KL, VanEe RT, Watters J: Radiographic diagnosisdelayed
 83. Guilliard MJ, Mayo AK: Tears of the palmar superficial fascia in five
union fracture of the radius and ulna with osteormyelitis in a dog.
racing Greyhounds and a Labrador Retriever. J Small Anirn Pract
Vet Radiol 1987; 28:229.
2000; 41:218.
113. Woodard JC, Riser WH: Morphology of fracture nonunion and
84. Guilliard MJ: Enthesopathy of the short radial collateralligaments in
 Osteomyelitis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anirm Pract 1991; 21:813.
racing Greyhounds. J Simall Anirm Pract 1998; 39:227.
114. Braden TD: Posttraurmatic osteormyelitis. Vet Clin North Am 1991;
 85. Dee JF, Dee J, Piermattei DL: Classification, managerment and repair 
21:781.
of central tarsal fractures in the racing Greyhound. JAm Anirm Hosp
 115. Atilola MAP, Surmner-Srmith G: Nonunion fractures in dogs. J Vet
Assoc 1976; 12:398-405.
Cormp Orthop 1984; 3:21.
86. Gordon LE, Thacher C, Kapatkin A: High-rise syndrorme in dogs: 81
116. Anderson Gl: Fracture disease and skeletal contractures. Vet Clin
cases (1985-1991). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:118.
North Arm 199 1; 21:845.
87. Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ: High-rise syndrome in cats. J Am Vet 
117. Stevenson RB, Pohler OEM, et al: Fracture associated sarcorma in a
Med Assoc 1987; 191:1399- 1403.
dog. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180: 1189.
 88. Ackerman N, Spencer CP: What is your diagnosis? Prepubic tendon
injury with avulsion fracture of the left pubis in a dog. I Am Vet Med
neoplastic bone lesions. Vet Med 1988; 83:1150.
Assoc 1992; 200:721.
 119. Braden TD: Posttraurmatic osteormyelitis. Vet Clin North Am 1991;
89. Bardet JF: Quadriceps contracture and fracture disease. Vet Clin
21:78 1.
North Am Srmall Anirm Pract 1987; 17:957.
120. Schrader SC: Cormplications associated with the use of Steinrmann
90. Berg JA: Fractures of the palmar and plantar sesarmoid bones as a
intrarmedullary pins and cerclage wires for fixation of long-bone
cause of larmeness in the dog.J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1973; 163:968-970.
 fractures. Vet Clin North Arm Small Anirm Pract 199 1; 21:687.
91. Bonneau NH, Berton L: Avulsion fracture of the origin of the exten-
 121. Olrmstead ML: Cormplication of fractures repaired with plates and
sor digitorum longus muscle in 2 Great Dane dogs. J Vet Comp
screws. Vet Clin North A1m 1991; 21:669.
 Orthop Trauma 1984; 3:15.
122. Smith MM, Vasseur PB, Saunders HM: Bacterial growth associated
 92. Bourdieau RJ, Dee JF, Dee IG: Central tarsal fractures in the racing
with rmetallic implants in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:765.
Greyhound: a review of 115 cases. JAm Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:1486.
123. Roush JK, Kirby BM, Manley PA, et al: Chronic osteomyelitis asso-
596
Small Animal Radiology Aand Ultrasonography
ciated with orthopedic irmplants and cranial cruciate repair in three
150. Frazier K, Herron AJ, Dee J, et al: Developrment of simall cell
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1123.
osteogenic sarcoma after ulnar ostectorny in a dog. I Am Vet Med
124. Seguin B, Harari J, Wood RD, et al: Bone fracture and sequestration
Assoc 1991; 198:432.
as cormplications of external skeletal fixation. J Small Anirm Pract
151. Gamblin RM, Straw RC, Powers BE: Prirmary osteosarcorma distal to
1997; 38:81.
the antebrachial and tarsocrural joints in nine dogs ( 1980-1992).
125. DeAngelis MP: Causes of delayed union and nonunion of fractures.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 1995; 31:86.
Vet Clin North Am 1975; 5:25 1.
152. Banks WC, Morris E, Herron MR, et al: Osteogenic sarcoma associ-
126. Anson LW: Malunions. Vet Clin North Am 199 1; 21:761.
ated with internal fracture fixation in 2 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
127. Brinker WO, Flo GL, Braden T: Rermoval of bone plates in small ani-
1975; 167:166.
Imals. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1975; 11:577.
153. Stevenson S: Fracture associated sarcormas. Vet Clin North Am
128. Noser GA, Brinker WO, Little RW, et al: Effect of tirme on strength
1991; 21:859.
of healing bone with bone plate fixation. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc
154. Knecht CD, Priester WA: Osteosarcorma in dogs: a study of previous
1977; 13:559.
traurma, fracture, and fracture fixation. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
129. Colley DM, Waters DI: Skeletal neoplasms of smalldogs: a retrospec-
1978; 14:82.
tive study and literature review. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:11.
155. Vasseur PB: Osteosarcoma at the site of a cortical bone allograft in
aq euos pue red  imd ' uoa s n oel
a dog. Vet Surg 1987; 16:70.
tumors in the cat. J Small Anirm Pract 1974; 15:141.
156. Owen LN: An account of rmultiple osteosarcormata of bone in
131. Turrel JM, Pool RR: Primary bone tumors in the cat: a retrospective
dogs having multicentric or rmetastatic origin. Br J Radiol 1965;
study of 15 cats and a literature review. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:152.
38:520.
132. Brodey RS, Riser WH: Canine osteosarcoma. A clinicopathologic
 157. Weller RE, Pool RR, Hornof WJ: Multiple skeletal rmetastases of
study of 194 cases. Clin Orthop Rel Res 1969; 62:54.
osteogenic sarcorma in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 56:175.
133. Ling GV, Morgan JP, Pool RR: Primary bone turmors in the dog: a
158. Prior C, Watrous BJ, Penfold D: Radial diaphyseal osteosarcoma
combined clinical, radiographic, and histologic approach to early
with associated bone infarctions in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
diagnosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974; 165:55.
1986; 22:43.
134. Liu SK, Dorfman HD, Hurvitz Al, et al: Primary and secondary
159. Banks WC: Parosteal sarcorma in a dog and a cat. J Arm Vet Med
bone turmors in the dog. I Small Anim Pract 1977; 18:313.
Assoc 1971; 158:1412.
135. Theilen GH, Madewell BR: Turmors of the skeleton. In Theilen GH,
160. Griffth JW, Dubielzig RR, Riser WH, et al: Parosteal osteosarcoma
Madewell BR, eds: Veterinary cancer Imedicine. Lea and Febiger,
with pulrmonary metastases in a cat. Vet Pathol 1984; 21:123.
Philadelphia, 1979; p 289.
161. Harrmelin A, Sjapiro M, Ben-Ziony Y, et al: Parosteal osteosarcorma 
136. Konde LJ: Aggressive vs. nonaggressive bone lesions. In Thrall DE,
 in a dog. Isr I Vet Med 1991; 46:145.
ed: Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology. WB Saunders,
162. Brodey RS, Misdorp W, Riser WH, et al: Canine skeletal chon-
Philadelphia, 1998; p 37.
drosarcorma: a clinicopathologic study of 35 cases. I Arm Vet Med
137. Feeney DA, Wallace LJ, Grindem CB, et al: A mid-diaphyseal
Assoc 1974; 165:68.
osteosarcoma of the hurmerus in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
163. Popovitch CA, Weinstein MJ, Goldschrmidt MH, et al:
1982; 18:910.
Chondrosarcorma: a retrospective study of 97 dogs (1987-1990).
138. Rendano VT, Car B, Gilrman M: Osteosarcoma in the middiaphysis
 J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:81.
of the radius in the dog; a neoplastic process that initially mimicked
 164. Morton D: Chondrosarcoma arising in a rmultilobular chondroma
a benign process. Vet Radiol 1987; 28:127.
in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 186:804.
139. Losonsky JM, Kneller SK: Misdiagnosis in norrmal radiographic
165. Davidson JR: Canine and feline chondrosarcoma. Comp Cont Educ
anatormy: eight structural configurations simulating disease entities
Pract Vet 1995; 17:1109.
in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191: 109.
166. Doige CE, Pharr IW, Withrow S: Chondrosarcoma arising in rmulti
140. Berg J, Larmb CR, O'Callaghan MW: Bone scintigraphy in the initial
ple cartilaginous exostoses in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1978;
evaluation of dogs with primary bone turmors. JI Am Vet Med Assoc
14:605.
1990; 196:917.
167. Ablin LW, Berg I, Schelling SH: Fibrosarcoma of the canine appen-
141. LaRue SM, Withrow SJ, Wrigley RH: Radiographic bone surveys in
dicular skeleton. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1991; 27:303.
the evaluation of primary bone turmors in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
168. Fox SM, Cooke MM, Beban HJ: Primary intraosseous fibrosarcoma
1986; 188:514.
in a cat. N Z Vet I 1995; 43:197-200.
142. Heyman SJ, Diefendorfer DL, Goldschimidt MH, et al: Canine axial.
169. Levitt L, Doige CE: Primary intraosseous fibrosarcoma in a cat.
skeletal osteosarcoma: a retrospective study of 116 cases {1986-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:1601.
1989). Vet Surg 1992; 21:304.
170. Gibbs C, Denny HR, Lucke VM: The radiological features of nonos-
143. Moore AS, Madewell BR, Cardinet GH, et al: Osteogenic sarcoma
teogenic malignant tumors of bone in the appendicular skeleton of
and rmyasthenia gravis in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:226.
the dog: a review of thirty-four cases. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1985;
144. Papageorges M, Sande RD, Menard M, et al: Osteosarcorma rmim-
26:537.
icking a bone cyst in a dog. Can Vet I 1989; 30:511.
171. Peiffer RL, Rebar A, Burk RL: Fibrosarcorma involving the skeleton
145. Bradney IW, Hobson HP, Hormer BL, et al: Osteosarcoma of the
of the dog. Vet Med Srmall Anirn Clin 1974; 69:1143.
fermoral head in a Golden Retriever with rmetastases to regional
172. Cook JL, Turk JR, Tomlinson JL, et al: Fibrosarcorma in the distal
lyrmph nodes, lungs and heart. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989;
radius and carpus of a four-year-old Persian. J Am Anirn Hosp
25:143.
Assoc 1998; 34:31.
146. Thacher C, Schrader SC, Liu SK: Osteosarcorma of the patella in a
173. Allen SW, Duncan JR: Malignant fibrous histiocytoma in a cat. J Am
dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:165.
Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:90.
147. Phillips L, Hager D, Parker R: Osteosarcorma with a pathologic frac-
174. Gibson KL, Blass CE, Sirmpson M, et al: Malignant fibrous histiocy-
ture in a six month old dog. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:18.
torma in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:1443.
148. Prior C, Watrous BJ, Penfold D: Radial diaphyseal osteosarcorma
175. Liu SK: Neoplasrms of bone. In Whittick WG, ed: Canine orthope-
dics, ed 2. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, 1990; p 873.
1986; 22:43.
176. Renlund RC, Pritzker KPH: Malignant fibrous histiocytorma involv-
149. Ackerrman N, Halliwell WH, Wingfield WE, et al: Bone infarction 
ing the digit in a cat. Vet Pathol 1984; 21:442.
and sequestrurm forrmation in a canine osteosarcoma. J Am Vet
177. Thormas JB: Malignant fibrous histiocytorma in a dog. Aust Vet J
Radiol Soc 1975; 16:3.
1988; 65:252.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICUlAR SKELETON
597
178. Jennings PB, Andersen GL, Mathey WS, et al: Bone haerman-
207. Lee-Parritz DE, Lamb CR: Prostatic adenocarcinoma with osseous
giosarcoma in a young Belgian Malinois. J Small Anirm Pract 1990;
Imetastases in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:1569.
3 1:349.
208. Durham SK, Dietze AE: Prostatic adenocarcinorma with and with-
179. Hosgood G: Canine hermangiosarcorma. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 
Out rmetastasis to bone in dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1986; 188:1432.
1991; 13:1065.
 209. Rendano VT, Smart ME: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma in a dog with
180. Barber DL, Thrall DE, Hil JIR, et al: Primary osseous hermangiosar-
ds w  I uoq e sio [ud on sii
corma in a dog. Vet Radiol 1973; 14:17.
Assoc 1974; 10:489.
181. Bingel SA, Brodey RS, Allen H, et al: Hermangiosarcoma of bone in
210. Anderson MA, Reed AR: What is your diagnosis? Metastatic squa-
the dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1974; 15:303.
mous cell carcinorma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 204:211.
182. Osborne CA, Perrman V, Sautter JIH, et al: Multiple rmyelorma in the
 211. Hahn KA, Matlock CL: Nasal adenocarcinoma metastatic to bone in 
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1968; 153:1300.
two dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:491.
183. Bartels JE, Cawley AJ, MeSherry BJ, et al: Multiple rmyelorma (plas-
212. Perry RE, Weller RE, Dagle GE, et al: Transitional cel carcinoma of
macytorma) in a dog. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1972; 13:36.
the bladder with skeletal metastases in a dog. I Am Anirn Hosp
184. Cayzer I, Jones BR: IgA multiple rmyelorma in a dog. N Z Vet J 1991;
Assoc 1989; 25:547.
39:139.
213. Schneider PR, Stowater JL: Pathologic fractures associated with
185. Jergens AE, Miles KB, Moore FM: Atypical lytic proliferative skele-
skeletal metastases of osteosarcorma in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc
tal lesions associated with plasma cll rmyelorma in a dog. Vet Radiol
1979; 175:61.
1990; 31:262.
214. ScottMoncrief JC, Elliot GS, Radovsky A, et al: Pulmonary squa-
186. Maeda H, Ozaki K, Abe T, et al: Bone lesions of multiple 1myeloma
 Imous cell carcinoma with rmultiple rmetastases in a cat. J Small Anim
in 3 dogs. I Vet Med 1993; 40:384.
Pract 1989; 30:696.
187. Marti J: What is your diagnosis? Multiple rmyelorma in a dog. J Small
 215. Loser C, Lawrenz B, Werner HG, et al: Primary lung tumors with
Anim Pract 1995; 36:294.
metastasis to digits in cats. Kleinterpraxis 1998; 43:425.
188. Weber NA, Tebeau CS: An unusual presentation of multiple
216. May C, Newsholme SJ: Metastasis of feline pulrmonary carcinoma
rmyelorma in two cats. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1998; 34:477.
presenting as multiple digital swelling. I Simall Anirm Pract 1989;
189. Bennett D, Duff RSl: Giant cell tumor of the ulna in a cat. J Small
302:307.
Anirm Pract 1983; 24:341.
 217. Jacobs TM, Tormlinson MJ: The lung-digit syndrorme in a cat. Feline
190. Berg J, Gliatto IM, Wallace MK: Giant cell tumor of the accessory
Pract 1997; 25:3 1.
carpal bone in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:883.
218. Bellah JR, Patton CS: Nonweightbearing larmeness secondary to a
191. Popp JA, Simpson CF: Feline malignant giant cell tumor of bone
9861 oossy P iA w 1 lop Sn0l e un Buoes [eiaouss
associated with C-type particles. Cornell Vet 1976; 66:528.
188:730.
192. Walsh, BA, Rhodes WH: Giant cell tumor of bone in a cat. J Small
 219. Lipowitz AJ, Fetter AW, Walker MA: Synovial sarcorma of the dog.
Anirm Pract 1995; 36:325.
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1979; 174:76.
193. Schnelle GB: Radiology in canine practice. The North American
220. Lowseth LA, Herbert RAQ, Muggenburg BA, et al: What is your
Veterinarian, Evanston,1l, 1945; p 75.
diagnosis? Synovial sarcoma of the stifle joint. Vet Clin Pathol 1989;
194. Carrmichael S, Lamb CR, Bjornson AP, et al: Polyostotic lymphorma
18:73.
in a young dog: a case report and literature review. J Smal Anim
 221. Mitchell M, Hurov Ll: Synovial sarcorma in a dog. I Arm Vet Med
Pract 1997; 38:412.
Assoc 1979; 175:53.
195. Dhaliwal RS, Reed AL, Kitchell BE: Multicentric lyrmphosarcorma in
 222. SilvaKrott IU, Tucker RL, Meeks IC: Synovial sarcoma in a cat. J Am
a dog with multiple-site skeletal involverment. Vet Radiol
Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:1430.
Ultrasound 2001; 42:38.
 223. McGlennon NJ, Houlton JEF, Gorman NT: Synovial sarcoma in the
196. Hosgood G, Davidson J, Blevins WE: Pathologic pelvic fractures sec-
dog—a review. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1988; 29:139.
 ondary to malignant lyrmphorma in a dog. Aust Vet Pract 1991; 21:70.
 224. Griffon DJ, Wallace LJ, Barnes DM: Myxorma arising frorm the
197. Krecic MR, Blacl SS: Epitheliotropic T-cell gastrointestinal tract
1661 sossy dsh uu u 1 p e ui nsdeo iu [edeo
lyrmnphosarcorma with metastases to lung and bone in a cat. J Am Vet
30:257.
Med Assoc 2000; 216:524.
225. Madewell BR, Pool RR, Theilin GH, et al: Multiple subungual squa-
198. Turnwald GH, Pechrman RD, Shires PK, et al: Lymphosarcoma with
 mous cell carcinormas in five dogs. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 1982;
osseous involverment in a dog. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1988; 24:351.
180:731.
199. Olgilvie GK, Brunkow CS, Daniel GB, et al: Malignant lymphoma
 226. Paradis M, Scott DW, Breton L: Squamous cell carcinoma of the nail
with cardiac and bone involverment in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 bed in 3 related Giant Schnauzers. Vet Rec 1989; 125:322.
1989; 194:793.
227. Pollack M, Martin RA, Diters RW: Metastatic squamous cell cari-
200. Rogers KS, Janovitz EB, Fooshee SK, et al: Lyrmphosarcorma with
noma in multiple digits of a cat: case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
disserminated skeletal involverment in a pup. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1984; 20:835
1989; 195:1242.
 228. Brown PJ, Hoare CM, Rochlitz l: Multiple squarmous cell carcinoma 
201. Giger U, Evans SM, Hendrick MJ, et al: Orthovoltage radiotherapy
 of the digits in two cats. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1985; 26:3223.
of prirmary lymphoma of bone in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;
229. Voges AK, Neuwirth L, Thormpson JP, et al: Radiographic changes
195:627.
associated with digital, metacarpal, and rmetatarsal turmors and
 202. Barthez PY, Davis CR, Pool RR, et al: Multiple metaphyseal involve-
 pododerrmatitis in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1996; 37:327.
 ment of a thymic lyrmphorma associated with hypercalcermia in a
230. Brodey RE, Riser WH: Liposarcorma of bone in a dog. Vet Radiol
puppy. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995; 31:82.
1966; 7:27.
203. Goedegebuure SA: Secondary bone turmors in the dog. Vet Pathol
231. Frazier KS, Herron AJ, Dee JF, et al: Infiltrative liporma of the stifle
1979; 16:520.
joint. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:81.
204. Alexander IW, Dueland R, Appel GO: Malignant rmelanoma with
 232. Thomson MJ, Withrow SJ, Dernell WS, et al: Intermuscular lipomas
skeletal metastases in a dog. Vet Radiol 1976; 17:7.
in the thigh region in dogs: 11 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999;
205. Cooley DM, Waters DJ: Skeletal metastasis as the initial clinical
35:165.
 manifestation of metastatic carcinoma in 19 dogs. J Vet Intern Med
 233. Cantwell HD: What is your diagnosis? Osteochondrormatosis in a
1998; 12:288.
dog. Vet Radiol 1986; 27:178.
 206. Kas NP, van der Heul RO, Misdorp W: Metastatic bone neoplasims
234. Gee BR, Doige CE: Multiple cartilaginous exostoses in a litter of
in dogs, cats, and a lion. Zbl Vet Med 1970; 17:59.
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1970; 156:53.
598
Small Animal Radiology Aand Ultrasonography
 235. Brown RJ, Trevethan WP, Henry VL: Multiple osteochondroma in a
266. Arnbjerg I, Bittegeko S, Hansen NH, et al: Juvenile hermatogenous
Siarmese cat. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1972; 160:433.
Osteomyelitis in the dog. Kleinterpraxis 1994; 39:255.
 236. Garmbardella PC, Osborne CA, Stevens JB: Multiple cartilaginous
 267. Ermmerson TD, Pead MJ: Pathological fracture of the fermur sec-
exostoses in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:761.
ondary to hematogenous osteormyelitis in a Weirmaraner. J Srmall
 237. Hubler M, Johnson KA, Burling RT, et al: Lesions resembling osteo-
Anim Pract 1999; 40:233.
chondromatosis in 2 cats. I Small Anirm Pract 1986; 27:181.
 268. Frame EM, Sullivan M, Norris RJ, et al: Metaphyseal osteormyelitis
in a Labrador Retriever. Vet Rec 1999; 144:562.
in small animal surgery. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, 198 1; 641.
 269. Gilson SD, Schwarz PD: Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis in a
239. Selcer BA: What is your diagnosis? Multiple cartilaginous exostoses
dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:684.
in a dog. Prog Vet Neurol 1990; 1:340.
 270. Walker RD, Richardson DC, Bryant MJ, et al: Anaerobic bacteria
 240. Ackerman N, Halliwell WH, Renzel LG, et al: Solitary osteochon-
associated with osteormyelitis in domestic anirmals. J Ain Vet Med
droma in a dog. I Am Vet Radiol Soc 1973; 14:13.
Assoc 1983; 182:814.
 241. Chester DK: Multiple cartilaginous exostoses in two generations of
 271. Dunn JK, Farrow CS, Doige CE: Disserminated osteormyelitis caused
dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1971; 159:895.
by Clostridium rovyi in a cat. Can Vet J 1983; 24:312.
 242. Jacobson LS, Kirberger RM: Canine multiple cartilaginous exos-
 272. Muir P, Johnson KA: Anaerobic bacteria isolated from osteormyelitis
toses: unusual manifestations and a review of the literature. J Am
in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 1992; 21:463.
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1996; 32:45.
 273. Hodgin EC, Michaelson F, Howerth EW, et al: Anaerobic bacterial
 243. Gillette EL, Thrall DE, Lebel IL: Carlsor's veterinary radiology. Lea
infections causing osteormyelitis/arthritis in a dog. I Am Vet Med
and Febiger, Philadelphia, 1977; p 370.
Assoc 1992; 201:886.
 244. Morgan JP: Radiology in veterinary orthopedics. Lea and Febiger,
 274. Wigney Dl, Allan GS, Hay LE, et al: Osteomyelitis associated with
Philadelphia, 1972; p 119.
Penicillium verrucosum in a Gerrman Shepherd dog. I Small Anirm
245. Schrader SC, Burk RL, Liu SK: Bone cysts in two dogs and a review
Pract 1990; 31:449.
of similarcysticbonelesionsinthedogIAmVt MedAssoc 1983;
 275. Kirpenstein J, Fingland R: Cutaneous actinormycosis and nocardiosis
182:490.
in dogs: 48 cases (1980-1990). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:917.
 246. Biery DN, Goldschrmidt M, Riser WH, et al: Bone cysts in the dog.
 276. Allan GS: Radiographic features of a typical osteormyelitis in 3 dogs.
Vet Radiol 1976; 17:202.
Aust Vet Pract 1990; 67:379.
247. Hunt GB, Malik R, Johnson KA: What is your diagnosis? Benign
 277. Walker MA, Lewis RE, Knellr SK, et al: Radiographic signs of bone
bone cyst. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 199 1; 199:1071.
infection in srmall animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:908.
 248. Stickle R, Flo G, Render J: Benign bone cyst. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 278. Franklin RT, Aronson E, Fallon RK, et al: Femoral osteormyelitis and
1999; 40:365.
osteosarco1ma in a dog. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:211.
249. Stickle R, Flo G, Render J: Radiographic diagnosisbenign bone
 279. Kantrowitz B, Srmeak D, Vannini R: Radiographic appearance of
cyst. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1999; 40:365.
ring sequestrurm with pin tract osteormyelitis in the dog. J Am Anim
 250. Carrig CB, Pool RR, et al: Polyostotic cystic bone lesions in a dog.
Hosp Assoc 1988; 24:461.
J Srmall Anirm Pract 1975; 16:495.
280. Berzon JL: Brodie's abscess: a case report in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp
 251. Huff RW, Brodey RS: Multiple bone cysts in a dog. Vet Radiol 1964;
Assoc 1979; 15:749.
5:40.
 281. Knecht CD, Slusher R, Cawley AJ: Treatrment of Brodie's abscess by
 252. Duval JM, Charmbers JN, Newell SM: Surgical treatrment of an
Imeans of bone autograft J Aim Vet Med Assoc 1971; 158:492.
aneurysimal bone cyst in a dog. Vet Cormp Orthop Traurma 1995;
282. Goad DL, Pecquet-Goad ME: Osteoarticular sporotrichosis in a
8:213.
dog. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:1326.
253. Renegar WR, Thormburg LP, Burk RL,et al: Aneurysmal bone cyst
 283. lwaski M, Hagiwara M, Gandra CRP, et al: Skeletal sporotrichosis in
in the dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1979; 15:191.
a dog. Comp Anim Pract 1988; 2:27.
 254. Walker MA, Duncan JR, Shaw JW: Aneurysimal bone cyst in a cat.
284. Burk RL, Jones BD: Disserminated histoplasmosis with osseous
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1975; 167:933.
involverment in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:1416.
 255. Pernell RT, Dunstan RW, DeCarmp CE: Aneurysmal bone cyst in a
 285. Lau RE, Kirm SN, Piruzok RP: Histoplasma capsulatum infection in
six-rmonth-old dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:1897.
a metatarsal of a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:1414.
 256. Bindseil E, Schultz M, Sorensen AKK: Report of an epiderrmoid
 286. Shelton CD, Stockham SL, Carrig CB, et al: Disserminated histoplas-
bone cyst in a phalanx of a dog. Vet Rec 1984; 114:640.
7861 sossy ds0 uuy uy I dop e ui suois[ auoq ym sisou
'shop omi ui siso pioida snossoI h uo 's niT 'ss
18:143.
Vet Pathol 1974; 11:230.
 287. Aronson E, Bendickson JC, Miles KG, et al: Disserminated histoplas-
 258. Hormer BL, Ackerrman N, Woody BJ, et al: lntraosseous epider-
mosis with osseous lesions in a cat with feline lymphosarcoma. Vet
moid cysts in the distal phalanx of two dogs. Vet Radiol 1992;
Radiol 1986; 27:50.
33:273.
 288. Clinkenbeard KD, Wold AM, Cowell RL, et al: Canine disserminated
 259. Aegerter E, Kirkpatrick JA: Orthopedic diseases. WB Saunders,
histoplasrmosis. Comp Cont Ed 1989; 11:1347.
Philadelphia, 1975; p 314.
 289. Wolf AM: Histoplasma capsulatum osteormyelitis in the cat. J Vet
 260. Resnick D, Kyriakos M, Greenway GD: Turmors and turmorlike
Intern Med 1987; 1:158.
lesions of bone: irmaging and pathology of specific lesions. ln
 290. Wolf AM: Successful treatrment of disserminated histoplasmosis with
Resnick D, ed: Bone and joint imaging. WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
 osseous involverment in two cats. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1988;
1989; p 1144.
24:511.
 261. Gora M, Burk RL, Greenlee P, et al: Osteoid osteorma in a dog. Vet 
 291. Millman TM, O'Brien TR, Suter PF, et al: Coccidioidormycosis in the
Radiol Ultrasound 2002; 43:28.
dog: its radiographic diagnosis. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:50.
 262. Johnson KA: Osteormyelitis in dogs and cats. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
292. Ackerman N, Owens J, Ticer J: Polyostotic coccidioidormycosis in a
1994; 204:1882.
dog. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:83.
 263. Dunn JK, Houlton DR: Successful treatrment of two cases of rmeta-
293. Brunnberg L, Hart S, Tobias R, et al: Disserminated coccidioidorny-
physeal osteomyelitis in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 1992; 33:85.
cosis in a dog. Kleinterpraxis 1993; 38:83.
 264. Caywood DD, Wallace LJ, Braden TD: Osteormyelitis in the dog: a
 294. Owens J, Ackerman N, Ticer J: Polyostotic coccidioidormycosis in a
review of 67 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:943.
dog. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:83.
265. Smith CW, Schiller AG, Smith AR, et al: Osteomyelitis in the dog: a
 295. Roberts RE: Osteomyelitis associated with disserminated blastormy-
retrospective study. J Ain Anirm Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:589.
cosis in nine dogs. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:124.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICUlAR SKELETON
599
296. Wood GL, Hirsh DC, Selcer RR, et al: Disseminated aspergillosis in 
ed 2. Blackwell, Oxford, 1984; p 138.
a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:704.
327. Barber DL, Rowland GN: Radiographically detectable soft tissue
297. Lomax LG, Cole JR, Padhye AA, et al: Osteolytic phaeohyphormyco-
calcification in chronic renal failure. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:117.
sis in a Gerrman Shepherd dog caused by Phialemorium obovatum.
328. Medleau L, Eigenmann JE, Saunders HM, et al: Congenital
 J Clin Microbiol 1986; 23:987.
hypothyroidism in a dog. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1985; 21:341.
298. Patnaik AK, Liu SK, Wilkins RJ, et al: Paeciloycosis in a dog. J Am
329. Saunders HM, Jzyk PK: The radiographic appearance of canine
Vet Med Assoc 1972; 161:806.
congenital hypothyroidism: skeletal changes with delayed treat-
299. Canfield PJ, Malik R, Davis PE, et al: Multifocal idiopathic pyo-
ment. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:171.
granulomatous bone disease in a dog. I Srmall Anim Pract 1994;
 330. Peterson ME: Endocrine disorders in cats: four ermerging disorders.
35:370.
Comp Cont Ed 1988; 10:1353.
 300. Moore AH, Hanna FY, Hotston-Moore A: Mycotic osteormyelitis in
 331. Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al: Acrormegaly in 14 cats. JVet
a dog following nasal aspergillosis. Vet Rec 1995; 137:349.
Intern Med 1990; 4:192.
301. Ackerrman N, Grain E, Castlerman W: Canine nocardiosis. J Am
 332. Greco DS, Feldrman EC, Peterson ME, et al: Congenital hypothyroid
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1982; 18:147.
 dwarfism in a farmily of Giant Schnauzers. J Vet Intern Med 1991; 5:57.
302. Grain E, Ackerman N, Castlerman W: Disserminated nocardiosis in a
333. Arnold U, Opitz M, Grosser l, et al: Goitrous hypothyroidisrm and
dog. Cal Vet 1978; 32:9.
dwarfisrm in a kitten. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:753.
 303. Oxenford CJ, Middleton DI: Osteomyelitis and arthritis associated
334. Chastain CB, MeNeel SV, Graham CL, et al: Congenital hypothy-
with Aspergillus fumigatus in a dog. Aust Vet J 1986; 63:59.
roidisrm in a dog due to an iodide organification defect. A1m J Vet
304. Bloormberg MS, Ackerman N, Buergelt C: Cryptococcal arthritis
Res 1983; 44:1257.
and osteormyelitis in a dog. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1983; 8:609.
 335. Saunders MA, Jezyk PK: The radiographic appearance of canine
305. Greene RT, Troy GC: Coccidioidormycosis in 48 cats: a retrospective
congenital hypothyroidism: skeletal changes with delayed treat-
study (1984-1993). I Vet lntern Med 1995; 9:86.
ment. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1994; 32:171.
306. Craig TM, Smallwood JE, Knauer KW, et al: Hepatozoon canis infec-
 336. Penninck DG, Feldman EC, Nyland TG: Radiographic features of
tion in dogs: clinical, radiographic, and hematologic findings. J Am
uuouny snououone hq psneo usnonoaeiady auen
Vet Med Assoc 1978; 173:967.
adrenocortical turmors; 23 cases (1978-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc
307. Panciera RJ, Gatto NT, Crystal MA, et al: Canine hepatozoonosis in
1988; 192:1604.
 Oklahorma. J A1m Anirm Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:221.
 337. Norrdin RW, Carpenter TR, Mailton BF,et al: Trabecular bone mor-
308. Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson N, Dillon AR, et al:
 phormetry in Beagles with hyperadrenocorticism and adrenal ade-
Hepatozoonosis in dogs: 2 cases (1989-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc
nomas. Vet Pathol 1988; 25:256.
1997; 210:916.
338. Cho DY, Frey RA, Guffy MM, et al: Hypervitarminosis A in the dog.
309. Smallwood JE: Periosteal new bone formation associated with
Arm J Vet Res 1975; 36:1597.
hepatozoon garnetocytes in two dogs. Vet Radiol 1978; 19:142.
 339. Seawright AA, English PB, Gartner RJW: Hypervitarminosis A of the
310. Buracco P, Abate O, Guglielrmina R, et al: Osteormyelitis and
cat. Adv Vet Sci Cormp Med 1970; 14:1.
arthrosynovitis associated with Leishmania donovani infection in a
 340. Ford RB: Congenital diseases of puppies: an overview. Vet Tech
dog. I Small Anim Pract 1997; 38:29.
1991; 12:155.
311. Turrel JM, Pool RR: Bone lesions in four dogs with visceral leish-
 341. May C, HarmrmillJ, Bennett D: Chinese Shar Pei fever syndrorme. Vet
maniasis. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:243.
Rec 1992; 131:586.
 312. Andresen E, Willeberg P: Pituitary dwarfism in Carelian Bear Dogs.
342. Pidduck H: A review of inherited diseases in the dog. Vet Ann 1987;
Hereditas 1976; 84:232.
293.
 313. Eigenmann IE: Diagnosis and treatment of dwarfsm in a German
 343. Robinson R: Genetic anomalies in dogs. Canine Pract 1991;
 Shepherd dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1981; 17:798.
16:29.
314. Siegel ET: Endocrine disease of the dog. Lea and Febiger,
344. Stockman M, Boden E: lnheritable defects. Canine Pract 1991;
Philadelphia, 1977; p 23.
16:26 1.
315. Muller-Peddinghaus R, Etreby MF, Siefert J, et al: Pituitary
 345. Giger U, Noble NA: Determination of erythrocyte pyruvate kinase
dwarfisrm in a German Shepherd dog. Vet Pathol 1980; 17:406.
 deficiency in Basenjis with chronic hemolytic anermia J Am Vet
316. Carill JM, Burk RL, Bode C: Primary hyperparathyroidisrm in a
Med Assoc 1991; 198:1755.
dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1979; 174:67.
346. Breur GJ, Zerbe CA, Slocombe RF, et al: Clinical, radiographic,
317. Leendre AM,Merkley DF, Carrig CB,et al: Primaryhyperparathy
pathologic, and genetic features of osteochondrodysplasia in
 roidisrm in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1976; 168:694.
Scottish Deerhounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:606.
318. Weir EC, Norrdin RW, Barthold SW, et al: Primary hyperparathy-
347. Latimer KS, Rowland GN, Mahaffey MB: Homozygous Pelger-Huet
roidisrm in a dog: biochermical, bone histormorphometric, and
 anormaly and chondrodysplasia in a stillborn kitten. Vet Pathol
pathologic findings. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:1471.
1988; 25:325.
319. Blunden AS, Wheeler SJ, Davies IV: Hyperparathyroidism in the cat
348. Hay CW, Dueland RT, Dubielzig RR, et al: ldiopathic rmultifocal
 of probable primary origin. J Srmall Anim Pract 1986; 27:791.
Osteopathy in four Scottish Terriers (1991-1996). I Arm Vet Med
 320. Riser WH, Brodey RS, Shirer IF: Osteodystrophy in mature cats: a
Assoc 1999; 35:62.
nutritional disease. Vet Radiol 1968; 9:37.
349. Hegreberg GA, Norby DE, Harmilton MJ: Lysosormal enzyrme
321. Lamb CR: The double cortical line: a sign of osteopenia. I Small
changes in an inherited dwarfisrm of cats. Fed Proceed 1974; 33:598.
Anim Pract 1990; 31:189.
350. Aroch l, Ofri R, Aizenberg l: Hermatological, ocular and skeletal
 322. Burk RL, Barton CL: Renal failure and hyperparathyroidism in an
abnorrmalities in a Sarmoyed family. J Small Anim Pract 1996;
Alaskan Malarmute pup. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:69.
37:333.
 323. Norrdin RW: Fibrous osteodystrophy and facial hyperostosis in a
351. Carrig CB, MacMillan A, Brundage S, et al: Retinal dysplasia associ-
dog with renal cortical hypoplasia. Cornell Vet 1975; 65:173.
 ated with skeletal abnorrmalities in Labrador Retrievers. J Arm Vet
324. Darmrmrich K: Calciurm rmetabolic disorders and skeletal changes in
Med Assoc 1977; 170:49.
dogs and cats. Eferm-Forschung-fur-Kleintierahrung Report 1976; 3.
 352. Meyers VN, Jezyk PF, Aguirre GD, et al: Short-limbed dwarfism and
325. Johnson KA, Church DB, Barton RJ, et al: Vitarmin D dependent 
ocular defects in the Sarmoyed dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1983;
rickets in a Saint Bernard dog. J Small Anim Pract 1988; 29:657.
183:975.
326. Carmpbell JR, Griffiths IR: Bone and muscles. ln Chandler EA,
 353. Sande RD, Alexander JE, Padgett GA: Dwarfisrn in the Alaskan 
Sutton JB, Thompson DJ, eds: Canine medicine and therapeutics,
Malarmute: its radiographic pathogenesis. Vet Radiol 1974; 15:10.
600
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
 354. Fletch SM, Smart ME, Pennock PW, et al: Clinical and pathologic
383. Krarmers P, Fluckiger MA, Rahn BA, et al: Osteopetrosis in cats.
features of chondrodysplasia (dwarfisrm) in the Alaskan Malarmute.
 J Small Anim Pract 1988; 29:153.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1973; 162:357.
384. O'Brien SE, Riedesel EA, Miller LD: Osteopetrosis in an adult dog.
 355. Rasimussen PG: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia in a litter of Beagle
JAm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1987; 23:213.
 puppies. I Small Anim Pract 1971; 12:91.
 385. Lees GE, Sautter JH: Anermia and osteopetrosis in a dog. J Am Vet
 356. Riser WH, Haskins ME, Jezyk PF, et al: Pseudoachondroplastic dys-
Med Assoc 1979; 175:820.
plasia in Miniature Poodles: clinical, radiologic, and pathologic fea-
 386. Barrett RB, Schall WD, Lewis RE: Clinical and radiologic features of
tures. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176:335.
canine eosinophilic panosteitis. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1968; 4:94.
 357. Bingel SA, Sande RD: Chondrodysplasia in five Great Pyrenees.
387. Boring RH, Suter PF, Hohn RB, et al: Clinical and radiologic survey
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205:845.
of canine panosteitis. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1970; 150:870.
 358. Bingel SA, Sande RD: Chondrodysplasia in the Norwegian
 388. King IM: Canine panosteitis. Vet Med 1999; 94:317.
E]khound. Am J Pathol 1982; 107:219.
 359. Whitbread TJ, Gill JIB, Lewis DG: An inherited endochondrodys-
Vet Tirmes 1998; 28:22.
 390. Johnson KA,Allan GS: Panosteitis in a Cocker Spaniel dog Aust Vet
Pract 1983; 24:399.
J 1982; 58:153.
360. Watson ADJ, Miller AC, Allan GS, et al: Osteochondral dysplasia in
391. Stead AC, Stead MCP, Galloway FH: Panosteitis in dogs. J Simall
Bull Terrier littermates. J Small Anirm Pract 1991; 32:312.
Anirm Pract 1983; 24:623.
 361. Carrig CB, Schrmidt GM, Tvedten HW: Growth of the radius and
 392. Sumner-Srmith G, Pennock PW: Canine panosteitis. Aust Vet Pract
ulna in Labrador Retriever dogs with ocular and skeletal dysplasia.
1981; 11:32.
Vet Radiol 1990; 31:262.
 393. Tandy J, Haywood S: A case of panosteitis (in a dog). Vet Rec 1977;
 362. Hanssen 1, Falek G, Grarmrmeltved AT, et al: Hypochondroplastic
100:287.
dwarfisrn in the lrish Setter. J Srmall Anirn Pract 1998; 39:10.
394. Muir P, Dubielzig RR, Johnson KA: Panosteitis. Comp Cont Educ
 363. Hitz D: Dysplasia of the ulna in the Bassett Hound Schweiz Arch
Pract Vet 1996; 18:29.
Tierheilkd 1974; 116:285.
 395. Olson SE: Radiology in veterinary pathology. Acta Radiol Suppl
 364. Lavelle RB: lnherited enchondrodystrophic dwarfisim in English
1972; 319:255.
Pointer. Aust Vet J 1984; 61:268.
 396. Riser WH: Growth and developrment of the norrmal canine pelvis,
 365. Rodriguez F, Herraez P, DelosMonteros AE: Collagen dysplasia in a
hip joints and fermurs frorm birth to rmaturity. Vet Radiol 1973;
litter of Garafiano Shepherd dogs. I Vet Med 1996; 43:509.
14:24.
 366. Sponenberg DP, Bowling AT: Heritable syndrorme of skeletal defects
 397. Riser WH, Shirer JH: Normal and abnormal growth of the distal
in a farmily of Australian Shepherd dogs. I Hered 1985; 76:393.
foreleg in large and giant dogs. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1964; 6:50.
 367. Carrig CB, Wortman JA, Morris EL, et al: Ectrodactyly (split-hand
 398. Hedharmmer A, Wu FM, Krook L, et al: Overnutrition and skeletal
deforrmity) in the dog. Vet Radiol 198 1; 22: 123.
diseases. An experimental study in growing Great Dane dogs.
 368. Montgormery M, Tormlinson J: Two cases of ectrodactyly and congen-
Cornell Vet 1974; 5:64.
ital elbow luxation in the dog. I Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1985; 21:781.
 399. Mee AP, Gordon MT, May C, et al: Canine distermper virus tran-
369. Pratschke K: A case of ectrodactyly in a dog. lr Vet J 1996; 49:412.
scripts detected in the bone cells of dogs with metaphyseal osteopa-
 370. Jezyk PF: Constitutional disorders of the skeleton in dogs and cats.
thy. Bone 1993; 14:59.
In Newton CD, Nunnarmaker DM, eds: Textbook of srmall anirmal 
400. Paul S, Baurnberger A, Lakatos L: Hypertrophic osteodystrophy in
orthopedics. JB Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1985; p 987.
the dog. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 1979; 121:73.
371. Freeman LE, Sponenberg DP, Schabdsach DG: Morphologic char-
401. Schulz KS, Payne IT, Aronson E: Escherichia coli bacteremia associ-
acterization of a heritable syndrome of cleft palate/ip, polydactyly
P ia ua I lop e u ros on m p
and tibial/fibular dysgenesis in Australian Shepherd dogs. Anat
Assoc 1991; 199:1170.
Histol Ermbryol 1988; 17:81.
 402. Woodward JC: Canine hypertrophic osteodystrophy, a study of the
 372. Winterbotharm EJ, Johnson KA, Francis DI: Radial agenesis in a cat.
spontaneous disease in litterrmates. Vet Pathol 1982; 19:337.
J Small Anirm Pract 1985; 26:393.
 403. Muir P, Dibielzig RR, Johnson KA: Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
 373. Mathews KG, Koblik PD, Knoeckel MJ, et al: Resolution of larmeness 
and calvarial hyperostosis. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1996; 18:143.
associated with Scottish Fold osteodystrophy following bilateral
404. Brodey RS: Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in the dog: a clinico-
Ostectormies and paratarsal arthrodesis: a case report. J Arm Anim
pathologic survey of 60 cases. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1971; 159: 1242.
Hosp Assoc 1995; 31:280.
405. Brodey RS, Riser WH, Allen H: Hypertrophic pulmonary
374. Partington BP, Williarms JF, Pechrman RD, et al: What is your diag-
 Osteoarthropathy in a dog with carcinoma of the urinary bladder.
nosis? Scottish Fold osteodystrophy in a kitten.J Am Vet Med Assoc
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1973; 162:474.
1996; 209:1235.
406. Brown NO, Thrall DD, Tuttle ME: Hypertrophic osteopathy: an
 375. Malik R, Allan GS, Howlett CR: Osteochondrodysplasia in Scottish
unusual case report. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1980; 16:501.
Fold cats. Aust Vet I 1999; 77:85.
407. Caywood DD, Osborne CA, Stevens JB, et al: Hypertrophic
 376. Read RA, Black AP, Armstrong SJ, et al: Incidence and clinical sig-
Osteoarthropathy associated with an atypical nephroblastorma in a
nificance of sesarmoid disease in Rottweilers. Vet Rec 1992; 130:533.
dog. I Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1980; 16:855.
 377. Vaughan LC, France C: Abnormalities of the volar and plantar
408. Nafe LA, Herron AJ, Burk RL: Hypertrophic osteopathy in a cat
sesarnoid bones in Rottweilers. J Small Anirm Pract 1986; 27:551.
associated with renal papillary adenoma. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
 378. Weinstein MJ, Rhodes WH, Mongil CM, et al: Orthopedic condi-
1981; 17:659.
tions of the Rottweiler. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1995; 17:925.
 409. Randolph JF, Center SA, Flanders JA, et al: Hypertrophic osteopathy
 379. Cohn LA, Meuten DJ: Bone fragility in a kitten: an osteogenesis
associated with adenocarcinorma of the esophageal glands in a dog.
irnperfecta like syndrorme. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:98.
 J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1984; 184:98.
 380. Campbell BG, Wootton JAM, Krook L, et al: Clinical signs and diag-
 410. Rendano VT, Slauson DO: Hypertrophic osteopathy in a dog with
nosis of osteogenesis irmperfecta in three dogs. JI Arm Vet Med Assoc
 prostatic adenocarcinoma and without thoracic metastases. J Am
1997; 211:183.
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1982; 18:905.
 381. Konig F: Osteogenesis irmperfection in a Gerrman Shepherd puppy:
411. Stephens LC, Gleiser CA, Jardine JH: Prirmary pulrnonary fibrosar-
Kleinterpraxis 1991; 36:583.
 382. Riser WH, Frankhauser R: Osteopetrosis in the dog. J Aim Vet
 trophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;
Radiol Soc 1970; 11:29.
182:496.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICUlAR SKELETON
601
412. Vulgarmott JC, Clark RG: Arterial hypertension and hypertrophic
 pulrnonary osteopathy associated with aortic valvular endocarditis
ture. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1991; 27:533.
in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 177:243.
439. Innes JF, Barr ARS: Clinical natural history of the postsurgical cru-
413. Madewell BR, Nyland TG, Weigel JE: Regression of hypertrophic
ciate deficient canine stifle joint; year 1. I Srmall Anirm Pract 1998;
osteopathy following pneurmonectormy in a dog. J Am Vet Med
39:325.
Assoc 1978; 172:818.
440. Bennett D, Tennant B, Lewis DG, etal: A reappraisal of anterior cru-
414. Caywood DD, Krarmek BA, Feeney DA, et al: Hypertrophic osteopa-
ciate ligarment disease in the dog. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1988; 29:275.
thy associated with a bronchial foreign body and lobar pneurnonia
 441. Harasen Gl: A retrospective study of 165 cases of rupture of the
in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 186:698.
canine cranial cruciate ligarment. Can Vet J 1995; 36:250.
415. Kelly MJ: Longterrm survival of a case of hypertrophic osteopathy with
442. Heffron LE, Campbell JR: Osteophyte formation in the canine stifle
regression of bony changes. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:439.
   n    n  
416. Hesselink JW, van den Tweel JG: Hypertrophic osteopathy in a dog
rment. J Small Anirm Pract 1979; 20:603.
with a chronic lung abscess. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:760.
443. Johnson JM, Johnson Al: Cranial cruciate rupture. Vet Clin North
417. Grarm WD, Wheaton LG, Snyder PW, et al: Feline hypertrophic
Arm Small Anim Pract 1993; 23:717.
osteopathy associated with pulrmonary carcinoma. J Am Anim
 444. Soderstrorm MI, Rochat MC, Drost WT: Radiographic diagnosis:
Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:425.
avulsion fracture of the caudal cruciate ligarment. Vet Radiol
418. Brockus CW, Hathcock JT: Hypertrophic osteopathy associated
Utrasound 1998; 39:536.
with pulmonary blastormycosis in a dog. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:184.
445. Tirgari M: Changes in the canine stifle joint following rupture of
419. Wylie KB, Lewis DD, Pechrman RD, et al: Hypertrophic osteopathy
the anterior cruciate ligament. J Small Anirm Pract 1978; 19:17.
associated with Mycobacterium fortuitum pneumonia in a dog. J Am
446. Whitehair JG, Vasseur PB, Willits NH: Epidemiology of cranial cru-
Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:1986.
ciate ligarment rupture in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:1016.
420. Ansari MM: Bone infarcts associated with malignant sarcormas.
447. Doverspike M, Vasseur PB, Harb MF, et al: Contralateral cranial
Comp Cont Ed 1991; 13:367.
421. Dubielzig RR, Biery DN, Brodey RS: Bone sarcormas associated with
Assoc 1993; 29:167.
Imultifocal rmedullary bone infarction in dogs. JI Am Vet Med Assoc
 448. Scavelli TD, Schrader SC, Matthiesen DT, et al: Partial rupture of
1981; 179:64.
the cranial cruciate ligarment of the stifle in dogs: 25 cases (1982-
422. Riser WH, Brodey RS, Biery DN: Bone infarctions associated with
1988). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196:1135.
Imalignant bone turmors in dogs. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 1972;
 449. Strorm H: Partial rupture of the cranial cruciate ligarment in dogs.
160:411.
 J Small Anirm Pract 1990; 31:137.
423. Madewell BR, Wilson DW, Hornof WJ, et al: Leukernoid blood
450. Williarms J, Fitch RB, Rose JL: Partial avulsion of the origin of the
response and bone infarcts in a dog with renal tubular adenocarci-
cranial cruciate ligarment in a 4 year old dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound
noma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:1623.
1997; 38:380.
424. Lunggren G, Olsson SE: Osteoarthrosis of the shoulder and elbow
451. DeRooster H, VanRyssen B, VanBree H: Diagnosis of cranial cruci-
joints in dogs: a pathologic and radiographic study of necropsy
ate ligarment injury in dogs by tibial cormpression radiography. Vet 
material. Vet Radiol 1975; 16:33.
Rec 1998; 142:366.
425. Olsewski IM, Lust G, Rendano VT, et al: Degenerative joint disease:
452. Dawid N, Mayrhofer E: Radiological diagnosis of insertion-
rmultiple involverment in young and rmature dogs. Am J Vet Res
tendonopathy of the stife in dogs. Weiner Tieratztliche
1983; 44:1300.
Monatsschrift 1992; 79:171.
426. Pedersen NC, Pool RR, Morgan JP: Joint diseases of dogs and cats.
453. Laing EJ: Collateral ligarment injury and stifle luxation. Vet Clin
 In Ettinger SJ, ed: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 2.
 North A1m Small Anirm Pract 1993; 23:845.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1983; p 2187.
454. Flo GL: Meniscal injuries. Vet Clin North Am Small Anirm Pract
427. Pedersen NC, Pool RR, O'Brien TR: Naturally occurring
1993; 23:831.
arthropathies of anirmals. ln Resnick D, Niwayama G, eds: Diagnosis
455. Flo GL, DeYoung D: Meniscal injuries and medial meniscectomy n
of bone and joint disease. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1981; p 221.
the canine stifle. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:683.
428. Swanton MC: Hermophilic arthropathy in dogs. Lab lnvest 1959;
 456. Harari L: Caudal cruciate ligament injury Vet Clin North Arm Srmall
8:1269.
Anirm Pract 1993; 23:821.
429. Morgan JP, Pool RR, Miyabayashi T: Prirmary degenerative joint dis-
457. Johnson KA: Posterior cruciate ligament rupture in a cat. J Am
ease in a colony of Beagles. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1987; 190:53 1.
Anirn Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:480.
430. Widmer WR, Buckwalter KA, Braunstein EM, et al: Radiographic
 458. Slocum B, Slocurm TD: Tibial plateau. Vet Clin North Am Simall 
and magnetic resonance irmaging of the stifle joint in experimental
Anim Pract 1993; 23:777.
Osteoarthritis of dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:371.
431. Gregory SP, Pearson GR: Synovial osteochondrormatosis in a
of cranial cruciate ligament rupture in the dog. Vet Clin North Am
Labrador Retriever bitch. JI Small Anirm Pract 1990; 3 1:580.
 Srmall Anirm Pract 1993; 23:777.
432. Flo GL, Stickle RL, Dunstan RW: Synovial chondrormetaplasia in 5
460. Slocum B, Devine T: Cranial tibial thrust: a primary force in the
dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191:1417.
canine stifle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 193:456.
433. Stead AC, Else RW, Stead MCP: Synovial cysts in cats. J Srmall Anirm
461. Matthiesen DT: Fibular head transposition. Vet Clin North Am
Pract 1995; 36:450.
 Srmall Anin Pract 1993; 23:755.
434. Salazar l, Rodrigues Jl, Cifuentes JM: Spavin: a proposed terrm for
462. Tacke S, Schimke E: Rupture of the cruciate ligarnents in cats.
non-fracture associated canine hock lesion. Vet Rec 1984; 115:541.
Kleinterpraxis 1995; 40:341.
435. Alexander JW, Earley TD: A carpal laxity syndrorme in young dogs.
463. Urmphlet RC: Feline stifle disease. Vet Clin North Arm Srmall Anirm
J Vet Orthop 1984; 3:22.
Pract 1993; 23:897.
436. Gathumbi PK: Lameness due to synovial osteochondromatosis in
 464. Mclaughlin R: lntra-articular stifle fractures and arthrodesis. Vet
the joint capsule in a dog. Bull Anim Health Prod Afr 1991; 39:311.
Clin North Am Srmall Anim Pract 1993; 23:877.
437. Vasseur PB, Berry CR: Progression of stifle osteoarthrosis following
 465. Paatasima S: Long-standing and traurmatic ligarment injuries and
reconstruction of the cranial cruciate ligament in 21 dogs. J Am
meniscal ruptures of the canine stifle. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:54.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:129.
466. Montgormery RD, Fitch RB, Hathcock IT, et al: Radiographic irmag-
438. Elkins AD, Pechrman R, Kearney MT, et al: A retrospective study
ing of the canine intercondylar fossa. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1995;
evaluating the degree of degenerative joint disease in the stifle joint
36:276.
602
467. Dueland R, Sisson D, Evans HE: Aberrant origin of the cranial cru-
495. Banfield CM, Bartels JE, Hudson JA, et al: A retrospective study of
ciate ligarment rmimicking an osteochondral lesion radiographically.
canine hip dysplasia in 116 rmilitary working dogs. Part l: angle
Vet Radiol 1982; 23:175.
 rmeasurerments and orthopedic foundation for anirmals grading.
468. Rabin KL, de Haan JI, Ackerrman N: Hip dysplasia in a litter of
J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1996; 32:413.
dormestic shorthair cats. Feline Pract 1994; 22:15.
496. Banfield CM, Bartels JE, Hudson JA, et al: A retrospective study of
 469. Hayes HM, Wilson GP, Burt JK: Feline hip dysplasia. J Arm Anirn
canine hip dysplasia in 116 military working dogs. Part ll: clinical
Hosp Assoc 1979; 15:447.
signs and perforrmance data. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1996; 32:423.
470. Kelle GG,eed AL, Latmr , et al: Hip dylasia a ele p
497. Smith GK, LaFond E, Heyrman SJ, et al: Biormechanical characteri-
ulation study. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1999; 40:460.
661 s iaaI uy shop u mut du al jo Aixe[ aissd jo uoz
471. Patsikas MN, Papazoglou LG, Komninou A, et al: Hip dysplasia in
58:1078.
the cat: a report of 3 cases. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1998; 39:290.
 498. Srmith GK, Popovitch CA, Gregor TP, et al: Evaluation of risk factors
472. Morgan SJ: The pathology of canine hip dysplasia. Vet Clin North
for degenerative joint disease associated with hip dysplasia in dogs.
Am 1992; 22:541.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206:642.
473. Keller GG, Corley EA: Canine hip dysplasia: investigating the sex
499. Smith GK, Gregor TP Rhodes WH,t al: Coxofemoral joint laxity
 predilection and the frequency of unilateral canine hip dysplasia.
from distraction radiography and its contermporaneous and
Vet Med 1989; 84:1162.
 prospective correlation with laxity,subjective score, and evidence of
474. Morgan IP: Radiographic diagnosis of hip dysplasia in skeletally
degenerative joint disease frorm conventional hip extended radiog-
Imature dogs. Proc Canine Hip Dysplasia Symposiurm, OFA,
raphy in dogs. Arm J Vet Res 1993; 54:1021.
Columbia, Mo, 1972; 78.
500. Srmith GK, Hill CM, Gregor TP, et al: Reliability of the hip distrac-
475. Morgan JP: Canine hip dysplasia: significance of early bony
tion index in two rmonth old Gerrman Shepherd dogs. J Am Vet Med 
spurring. Vet Radiol 1987; 28:2.
Assoc 1998; 212:1560.
476.RiserWH: The dslastichipjoint:its radiographic andhistologic
 501. Srmith GK, Biery DN, Gregor TP: New concepts of coxofermoral
development. Vet Radiol 1973; 14:35.
joint stability and the development of a clinical stress radiographic
477. Leighton EA, Linn JM, Wilharm RL, et al: A genetic study of canine
P iaa urv I lop aui u Aiixe[ uot du Suuenb ioy pouiau
hip dysplasia. Arm J Vet Res 1977; 38:241.
Assoc 1990; 196:59.
478. Kealy RD, Olsson SE, Monti KL, et al: Effects of limited food con-
 502. Lust G, Williarms AJ, BurtonWurster N, et al: Joint laxity and its
surnption on the incidence of hip dysplasia in growing dogs. J Am
 association with hip dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers. Am J Vet Res 
Vet Med Assoc 1992; 20 1:857.
1993; 54:1990.
479. Richardson DC: The role of nutrition in canine hip dysplasia. Vet
503. Puerto DA, Srmith GK, Gregor TP, et al: Relationships between
Clin North Aim 1992; 2:529.
results of the Ortolani method of hip joint palpation and distrac-
480. Alexander IW: The pathogenesis of canine hip dysplasia. Vet Clin
tion index, Norberg angle, and hip score in dogs. J Am Vet Med
North Am 1992; 22:503.
Assoc 1999; 214:497.
481. Distl O, Grussler W, Schwarz J, et al: Analysis of environmental and
 504. Hauptman J Cardinet GH, Morgan JP, et al: Angles of inclination
 u eisdsp du jo uny au uo sn s
and anteversion in hip dysplasia in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1985;
Shepherd dogs. I Vet Med 1991; 38:460.
40:2033.
482. Lust G, Farrell PW: Hip dysplasia in dogs; the interplay of genotype
 505. Montavon PM, Hohn RB, Olmstead ML, et al: lnclination and
and environrment. Cornell Vet 1977; 67:447.
anteversion angles of the fermoral head and neck in the dog.
483. Whittington K, Banks WC, Carlson WD, et al: Report of the panel
Evaluation of a stand method of rmeasurerment. Vet Surg 1985;
14:277.
484. Henry GA: Radiographic development of canine hip dysplasia. Vet
 506. Nuna1maker DM, Biery DN, Newton CD: Fermoral neck anteversion
Clin North Am 1992; 22:559.
 in the dog: its radiographic measurerment. I Srmall Anim Pract 1973;
485. Rendano VT, Ryan G: Canine hip dysplasia evaluation: a position-
14:45.
ing and labeling guide for radiographs to be subrmitted to the
 507. Madsen JS, Reirmann l, Svalastoga E: Delayed ossification of
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:170.
fermoral head in dogs with hip dysplasia. I Simall Anirm Pract 1991; 
486. Aronson E, Kraus KH, Srmith J: The effect of anesthesia on the radi-
32:351.
Ographic appearance of the coxofermoral joints. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:2.
 508. Todhunter RJ, Zachos TA, Gilbert RO, et al: Onset of epiphyseal
487. Farese JP, Todhunter RJ, Lust G, et al: Dorsolateral subluxation of
 Imineralization and growth plate closure in radiographically norrmal
hip joints in dogs measured in weight-bearing positions with radi-
and dysplastic Labrador Retrievers. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1997;
ography and computed tomography. Vet Surg 1998; 27:383.
210:1458.
488. Farrow CS, Back RT: Radiographic evaluation of nonanesthetized
 509. Adarms WM, Dueland RT, Meinen J, et al: Early detection of canine
and nonsedated dogs for canine hip dysplasia. J Am Vet Med Assoc
hip dysplasia: cormparison of two palpation and five radiographic
1989; 194:524.
methods. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1998; 34:339.
489. Riser WH, Rhodes WH: Producing diagnostic pelvic radiographs
 510. Fluckiger MA, Friedrich GA, Binder H: A radiographic stress tech-
for canine hip dysplasia exarmination. Anirm Hosp 1966; 2:167.
nique for evaluation of coxofermoral joint laxity in dogs. Vet Surg
490. Hassinger KA, Smith GK, Conzermius MG, et al: Effect of the estrous
1999; 28:1.
cycle on coxofenmoral laxity. Vet Orthop Traurma 1997; 10:69.
511. Farese IP, Lust G, Williams AJ, et al: Comparison of rmeasurements
 491. Corley EA: Role of the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals in the
of dorsolateral subluxation of the femoral head and rmaxirmal pas-
control of canine hip dysplasia. Vet Clin North A1m 1992; 22:579.
sive laxity for evaluation of the coxofermoral joint in dogs. Am J Vet
 492. Jessen CR, Spurrell FA: Radiographic detection of canine hip dys-
Res 1999; 60:1571
plasia in known age groups. Proc Canine Hip Dysplasia
 512. Paatsarma SK, Rokkanen P, Jussila J, et al: A study of osteochondri-
Syrnposium, OFA, Colurmbia, Mo, 1972; 93.
l 'o s p n a aui o sss s
493. Corley EA, Keller GG, Lattirmer JC, et al: Reliability of early radi-
bone labeling, rmicroradiographic and microangiographic methods.
ographic evaluations for canine hip dysplasia obtained frorm the
 J Srmall Anim Pract 197 1; 12:603.
standard ventrodorsal radiographic projection. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 513. Cordy DR, Wind AP: Transverse fracture of the proxirmal hurmeral
1997; 211:1142.
articular cartilage in dogs (so-called osteochondritis dissecans).
494. Kaneene JB, Mostosky UV, Padgett GA: Retrospective cohort study
Pathol Vet 1969; 6:424.
of changes in hip joint phenotype of dogs in the United States. J Am
 514. Craig PH, Riser WH: Osteochondritis dissecans in the proxirmal
Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211:1542.
humerus of the dog. Vet Radiol 1965; 2:40.
Chapter Four The Appendicular Skeleton
603
515. Knecht CD, VanSickle DC, Blevins WE, et al: Osteochondrosis of
 542. Fox SM, Bloomberg MS, Bright RM: Developimental anormalies of
the shoulder and stifle in 3 of 5 Border Collie litterrmates. J Am Vet
the canine elbow. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1983; 19:605.
Med Assoc 1977; 170:58.
543. Keller GG, Kreeger RRP, Mann FA, et al: Correlation of radi-
516. Srmith CW, Stowater JL: Osteochondritis dissecans of the canine
ographic, necropsy, and histologic findings in 8 dogs with elbow
shoulder joint: a review of 35 cases. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1975; 11:658.
dysplasia. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1997; 38:272.
517. Alexander JW, Richardson DC, Selcer BA: Osteochondritis disse-
544. Guthrie S: Sorme radiographic and clinical aspects of ununited
cans of the elbow, stifle and hock—a review. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
anconeal process. Vet Rec 1989; 124:661.
1981; 17:51.
 545. Sjostrorm L: Ununited anconeal process in the dog. Vet Clin North
518. Guthrie S, Pidduck HG: Heritability of elbow osteochondrosis
Am Srmall Anirm Pract 1998; 28:75.
within a closed population of dogs. J Small Anim Pract 1990; 31:93.
 546. Wind AP: Elbow incongruity and developrmental elbow diseases in
 519. Houlton JEF: Osteochondrosis of the shoulder and elbow joints.
the dog: part 1. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1986; 22:711.
 J Srmall Anim Pract 1984; 25:399.
547. Wind AP, Packard ME: EIbow incongruity and developmental ebow
520. Montgormery RD, Milton JL, Henderson RA, et al: Osteochondritis
diseases in the dog: part ll. JI Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1986; 22:725.
dissecans of the canine stifle. Comp Cont Ed 1989; 11:119.
548. Lau RE: lnherited prermature closure of the distal ulnar physis. J Am
521. Strorm H, Raskov H, Arnberg J: Osteochondritis dissecans on the
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1977; 13:609.
lateral femoral trochlear ridge in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 1989;
 549. Voorhout G, Hazewinkel HAW: Radiographic evaluation of the
30:43.
canineelbow joint with special reference to the rmedial humeral epi-
522. Basher AW, Doige CE, Presnell KR: Subchondral bone cysts in a dog
 condyle and the rmedial coronoid process. Vet Radiol 1987; 28: 158.
with osteochondrosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988; 24:321.
 550. Studdert VP, Lavelle RB, Beilharz RG, et al: Clinical features and
523. Montgomery RD, Milton JL, Hathcock JT, et al: Osteochondritis
heritability of osteochondrosis of the elbow in Labrador Retrievers.
 dissecans of the canine tarsal joint. Comp Cont Ed 1994; 16:835.
 J Small Anirm Pract 1991; 32:557.
524. Denny HR, Gibbs C: Osteochondritis dissecans of the canine stifle
551. Grondalen I, Lingas F: Arthrosis in the elbow joint of young rap-
 joint. J Small Anirm Pract 1980; 21:317.
idly growing dogs: a genetic investigation. J Srmall Anim Pract 1991;
32:460.
ographic study. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:79.
 552. Padgett GA, Mostosky UV, Probst CW, et al: The inheritance of osteo-
526. Johnson KA: Osteochondritis dissecans of the lateral ridge of the
 chondritis dissecans and fragrmented coronoid process of the elbow
tibial tarsal bone in a dog. Aust Vet J 1980; 56:615.
joint in Labrador Retrievers. J A1m Anirm Hosp Assoc 1995; 31:327.
 527. Johnson KA, Howlett CR, Pettit GD: Osteochondrosis in the hock
 553. DeHan, J, Goring RL, Beal BS: What is your diagnosis?
joints in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1980; 16:103.
Fragrmented rmedial coronoid process. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;
528. Mason TA, Lavelle RB: Osteochondritis dissecans of the tibial tarsal
201:927.
bone in dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1979; 20:423.
 554. Lewis DD, Parker RB, Hager DA: Fragrmented medial coronoid
529. Olson NC, Mostosky UV, Flo GL, et al: Osteochondritis dissecans of
process of the canine elbow. Comp Cont Ed 1989; 11:703.
the tarsocrural joint in three canine siblings. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 555. Guthrie S, BucklandWright JC, Vaughan LC: Microfocal radiogra-
1980; 176:635.
 phy as an aid to the diagnosis of canine elbow osteochondrosis.
530. Poulos PW: Canine osteochondrosis. Vet Clin North Am 1982;
 J Small Anirm Pract 1991; 32:503.
12:313.
 556. Berry CR: Evaluation of the canine elbow for fragrmented medial
 531. Robins GM, Read RA, Carlisle CH, et al: Osteochondritis dissecans
 coronoid process. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:243.
 of the lateral ridge of the trochlea of the tibial tarsal bone in the
 557. Mason TA, Lavelle RB, Skipper SC, et al: Osteochondrosis of the 
dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1983; 24:675.
 532. Rosenblum GP, Robins GM, Carlisle CH: Osteochondritis dissecans
 558. Berzon JL, Quick CB: Fragrmented coronoid process: anatomical,
 of the tibiotarsal joint in the dog. I Srmall Anirm Pract 1978; 19:759.
clinical, and radiographic considerations with case analyses. J Am
533. Wisner ER, Berry CR, Morgan JP, et al: Osteochondrosis of the lat-
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1980; 16:241.
eral trochlear ridge of the talus in seven Rottweiler dogs. Vet Surg
 559. Henry WB: Radiographic diagnosis and surgical managerment of
1990; 19:435.
fragrnented rmedial coronoid process in dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
534. Smith MM,Vasseur PB, Morgan IP: Clinical evaluation of dogs after
1984; 184:799.
surgical and nonsurgical managerment of osteochondritis dissecans
560. Tigari M: Clinical radiographical and pathological aspects of
of the talus. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:31.
535. van Bree H: Evaluation of the prognostic value of positive contrast
J Srmall Anirm Pract 1980; 21:595.
shoulder arthrography for bilateral osteochondrosis lesions in dogs.
 561. Read RA, Armstrong SJ, O'Keefe JD, et al: Fragrmentation of the
Am J Vet Res 1990; 5 1:1121.
medial coronoid process of the ulna in dogs: a study of 109 cases.
 536. Rudd RG, Whitehair JG, Margolis JH: Results of managerment of
J Small Anirm Pract 1990; 31:330.
Osteochondritis dissecans of the hurmeral head in dogs: 44 cases
 562. MacPherson GC, Lewis DD, Johnson KA, et al: Fragrmented coro-
(1982-1987). J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26: 173.
noid process associated with prermature distal radial closure in four
537. Riser WH, Woodard JC, Bloormberg MS, et al: Shoulder lesions in
dogs. Vet Cormp Orthop Trauma 1992; 5:93.
the Greyhound with special reference to osteochondritis dissecans
 563. Rovesti GL, Fluckiger M, Margini A, et al: Fragrmented coronoid
and chondrocalcinosis. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:449.
 process and incormplete ossification of the humeral condyle in a
538. LaHue TR, Brown SG, Roush JC, et al: Entraprment of joint mice in 
Rottweiler. Vet Surg 1998; 27:354.
 the bicipital tendon sheath as a sequela to osteochondritis dissecans
564. Carpenter LG, Schwarz PD, Lowry JE, et al: Cormparison of radio-
of the proximal hurmerus in dogs: a report of six cases. J Am Anim
 logic imaging techniques for diagnosis of fragrmented medial coro-
Hosp Assoc 1988; 24:99.
noid process of the cubital joint in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;
539. van Bree H, Drysse H, Van Ryssen B, et al: Pathological correlations
203:78.
with rmagnetic resonance irmages of osteochondrosis lesions in
 565. Bouck GR, Miller CW, Taves Cl: A cormparison of surgical and
canine shoulders. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:1099.
Imedical treatment of fragrmented coronoid process and osteochon-
 540. van Bree H: Evaluation of subchondral lesion size in osteochondro-
 dritis dissecans of the canine elbow. Vet Comp Orthop Traurma
sis of the scapulohurmeral joint in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;
1995; 8:177.
204:1472.
566. Huibregtse BA, Johnson AL, Muhlbauer MC: The effect of treat-
 541. Butcher R, Beasley K: Osteochondritis dissecans in a cat. Vet Rec
ment of fragrmented coronoid process on the developrment of
1986; 118:646.
osteoarthritis of the elbow. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:190.
604
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
 567. Wosar MA, Lewis DD, Neuwirth L,et al: Radiographic evaluation of 
necks. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206:441.
elbow joints before and after surgery in dogs with possible frag-
 596. Queen J, Bennett D, Carmichael S, et al: Fermoral neck metaphyseal
mented medial coronoid process. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1999; 214:52.
osteopathy in the cat. Vet Rec 1998; 142:159.
 568. Carrig CB, Wortrman JA: Acquired dysplasia of the canine radius
597.Steger H,RytzUSchawaler P:Bilatral idipathic slipped capit
and ulna. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1981; 3:557.
fermoral epiphyses in cats: review and a case report. Schweiz Arch
 569. Kealy IK: What is your diagnosis? Retained ulnar cartilage cores. lr
Tierheilkd 1999; 141:47.
Vet News 1990; 12:21.
 598. Gutbrod F, Langguth B: Aseptic necrosis of the head of the hurmerus
in a Toy Poodle. Kleinterpraxis 1987; 56:473.
 sop pueunmn jo ia e u so moqa au o Aip o
 599. Harari J, Tucker RL, Alexander JE, et al: What is your diagnosis?
J Simall Anim Pract 1981; 22:523.
Septic arthritis of the coxofermoral joint in a dog. J Aim Vet Med
 571. Kene ROC, Lee R, Bennett D: The radiological features of congeni-
Assoc 1994; 204:1159.
tal elbow luxation/subluxation in the dog. I Small Anim Pract 1982;
600. Thacher C, Schrader SC: Caudal ventral hip luxation in the dog: a
23:621.
review of 14 cases. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1985; 21:167.
572. Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung DJ, Ferris KK, et al: Incormplete ossi-
601. Wendelburg K, Dee J, Kaderly R, et al: Stress fractures of the acetab-
fication of the hurmeral condyle in Spaniels. Vet Surg 1994; 23:475.
ulurm in 26 racing Greyhounds. Vet Surg 1988; 17:128.
 573. Marcellin-Little DI, Roe SC, DeYoung DJ: What is your diagnosis?
602. Evers P, Johnston GR, Wallace LJ, et al: Long-term results of treat-
lncomplete ossification of the hurmeral condyle in a dog. I Am Vet
Iment of traumatic coxofermoral joint dislocation in dogs: 64 cases
Med Assoc 1996; 209:727.
{1973-1992). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210:59.
 574. Montavon PM, Savoldelli D: Clinical and radiographic evaluation
603. Konde LJ, Thrall MA, Gasper P, et al: Radiographically visualized
of the integrity of the medial and lateral collateral ligarments of the
skeletal changes associated with rmucopolysaccharidosis Vl in cats.
elbow in dogs. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 1995; 137:475.
Vet Radiol 1987; 28:223.
575. Montgomery RD, Finn S, Cooper R: What is your diagnosis?
 604. Langweiler M, Haskins ME, Jezyk PF: Mucopolysaccharidosis in a
Congenital lbow luxation. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203: 1535.
litter of cats. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:748.
576. Montgomery RD, Milton JA, Pernell RT, et al: Medial congenital
 605. Jezyk PF: Feline Maroteaux-Larny syndrorme (rmucopolysaccharido-
elbow luxation in a dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traurma 1993; 6:122.
s  s u osdd   qo u  s
 577. Murphy ST, Lewis DD, Shirorma JT, et al: Effect of radiographic
Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, 1981; p 687.
 sop uaimo u eqn yo uadrau uouisd
 606. Haskins ME, Jezyk PF, Desnick RJ, et al: Mucopolysaccharidosis in
J Vet Res 1998; 59:1351.
a dormestic shorthaired cat: a disease distinct frorm that seen in the
578. Stevens DR, Sande RD: An elbow dysplasia syndrome in the dog.
Siarmese cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175:384.
 J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1974; 165:1065.
 607. Wilkerson MJ, Lewis DC, Marks SL, et al: Clinical and rmorpholog-
 579. Vannanen M, Wikman L: Patella cubitin dogs. NordVet Med 1980;
ical features of mucopolysaccharidosis type ll in a dog. Vet Pathol
32:139.
1998; 35:230.
 580. Wong WT, Mitten RW: Bilateral olecranon avulsion in a cat. J Small
 608. Goldrman Al: Hypervitarminosis A in a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
Anirm Pract 1990; 31:353.
1992; 200:1970.
 581. Zontine WJ, Weitkarnp RA, Lippincott CL: Redefined type of elbow
609. Bennett D, Taylor DJ: Bacterial endocarditis and inflarmmatory joint
dysplasia involving calcified flexor tendons attached to the medial
disease in the dog. I Small Anim Pract 1988; 29:347.
hurmeral epicondyle in 3 dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:1082.
610. Bennett D, Taylor DI: Bacterial infective arthritis in the dog. J Small
 582. Hayes AG, Boudrieau RJ, Hungerford LL: Frequency and distribu-
Anirm Pract 1988; 29:207.
tion of medial and lateral patellar luxation in dogs: 124 cases 1982-
611. Caywood DD, Wilson IW, O'Leary TP: Septic polyarthritis associ-
1992). I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205:716.
ated with bacterial endocarditis in two dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc
1977; 171:549.
Philadelphia, 1972; p 356.
612. Hirari J, Tucker RL, Alexander JE, et al: What is your diagnosis?
 584. Houlton EF, Meynink SE: Medial patellarluxation in the cat. J Srmall 
Septic arthritis of the coxofermoral joint in a dog. I Am Vet Med
Anirm Pract 1989; 30:349.
Assoc 1994; 204:1159.
 585. Roush JK: Canine patellar luxation. Vet Clin North Am 1993; 23:855.
613. Jarari J, Tucker RL, Alexander JE, et al: What is your diagnosis?
 586. Roush JIK: Canine patellar luxation. Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anirm
Septic arthritis of the coxofermoral joint in a dog. I Am Vet Med
Pract 1993; 23:855.
Assoc 1994; 204:1159.
587. Endres B: Congenitalluxation of the patell in dogs. Treatment and
 614. Schrader SC: Septic arthritis and osteornyelitis of the hip in six
results in the period 1966-1975. Fachbereich Tiermedizin,
Imature dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1982; 181:894.
Munchen, 1977.
615. Hooper PT, lreland A, Carter A: Mycoplasma polyarthritis in a cat
 588. Gee M, Lenehan TM, Tarvin GB: Rotatory intra-articular disloca-
with probable severe irmrmune deficiency. Aust Vet J 1985; 62:352.
tion of the patell in 2 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209:2082.
616. Hodgin EC, Michaelson F, Howerth EW, et al: Anaerobic bacterial
 589. Lee R: Legg Perthes disease in the dog: the histological and associ-
 i a   e u ses n s
ated radiological changes. Vet Radiol 1974; 15:24.
Assoc 1992; 201:886.
 590. Chaudieu G: Legg-Perthes-Calve disease in a cat. Anirmal de
 617. Levy IK, Marsh A: lsolation of calicivirus frorm the joint of a kitten
Compagnie 1981; 16:221.
with arthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:753.
 591. Morgan IP: Radiology in veterinary orthopedics. Lea and Febiger,
 618. Carro T, Pedersen NC, Bearman BL, et al: Subcutaneous abscesses
Philadelphia, 1972.
 and arthritis caused by a probably bacterial L-forrm in cats. J Am Vet
 592. Piek CI, Hazelwinkel HAW, Wolvenkamp WTC, et al: Long terrm fol-
Med Assoc 1989; 194:1583.
Jow-up of avascular necrosis of the fermoral head in the dog. I Srmall
619. Huss BT, Collier LL, Collins BK, et al: Polyarthropathy and chori-
Anirm Pract 1996; 37:12.
oretinitis with retinal detachent in a dog with systermic histoplas-
 593. Robinson R: Legg-Calve-Perthes disease in dogs: genetic etiology.
rmosis. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:217.
J Small Anirm Pract 1992; 33:275.
620. Marcellin-Little DJ, Sellon RK, Kyles AE, et al: Chronic localized
 594. Roperto F, Papparella S, Crovace A: Legg-Calve-Perthes disease in
Osteormyelitis caused by atypical infection with Blastomyces der-
dogs: histological and ultrastructural investigations J Am Anirn
matitidis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209:1877.
Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:156.
621. Houlton JEF, Jeffries AR: lnfective polyarthritis and multiple dis-
 595. Kero KL, Bilbrey SA: What is your diagnosis? Bilateral fermoral cap-
cospondylitis in a dog due to Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae. J Srmall
ital physeal fractures with rermodeling of the fermoral heads and
Anirm Pract 1989; 30:35.
CHAPTER FOUR THE APPENDICUlAR SKELETON
605
622. Levitt L, Fowler JD: Septic coxofermoral arthritis and osteormyelitis
 651. Drazner FH: Systermic lupus erythermatosus in the dog. Comp Cont
in a dog. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:129.
Ed 1980; 2:243.
623. Roush JK, Manley PA, Dueland RT: Rheurmatoid arthritis subse-
652. Dougherty SA, Center SA, Shae EE, et al: Juvenile onset pol.
quent to Borrelia burgdorferi infection in two dogs. I Am Vet Med
 yarthritic syndrorme in Akitas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:849.
Assoc 1989; 195:951.
653. Woodard JC, Shields RP, Aldrich HC, et al: Calciurm phosphate dep-
624. Bellah JR, Shull RM, Schull-Selcer EV: Ehrlichia camis-related pol-
 Osition disease in Great Danes. Vet Pathol 1982; 19:464.
yarthritis in a dog. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:922.
 654. Gibson JP, Roenigk WJ: Pseudogout in a dog. J Am Vet Med AssoC
625. Levy SA, Barthold SW, Dombach DM, et al: Canine Lyme borrelio-
1972; 161:912.
sis. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1993; 15:833.
655. De Han J, Andreasen CB: Calciurm crystal-associated arthropathy
626. Lissrman BA, Bosler EM, Carma H, et al: Spirochete associated
(pseudogout) in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 200:943.
arthritis (lyrme disease) in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1984;
 656. Heiman M, Carpenter L, Halverson PB: Calciurm pyrophosphate
185:219.
deposition (chondrocalcinosis) in a dog. Vet Pathol 1990;
627. Moise NS, Crissiman JW, Fairbrother JF, et al: Mycoplasma gateae
27:122.
arthritis and tenosynovitis in cats: case report and experimental
657. Miller RM, Kind RE: A goutlike syndrome in a dog. Vet Med Small
production of the disease. A1m J Vet Res 1983; 44:16.
Anim Clin 1966; 61:236.
628. Wolschrijn CE, Meyer HP, Hazelwinkel HAW, et al: Destructive pol-
 658. Hanson JA: Radiographic diagnosiscanine carpal villonodular
 yarthritis in a dog with leishrmaniasis. JSmall Anim Pract 1996; 37:601.
 synovitis. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998; 39:15.
629. Ralphs SC, Beale B: Canine idiopathic erosive polyarthritis. Comp
659. Kusba JK, Lipowitz AJ, Wise M, et al: Suspected villonodular syn-
Cont Educ Pract Vet 2000; 22:671.
Ovitis in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182:390.
630. Snyder PW, Kazacos EA, Scott-Moncrieff JC, et al: Pathologic fea-
 660. Somer T, Sittnikow K, Henriksson K, et al: Pigmented villonodular
tures of naturally occurring juvenile polyarteritis in Beagle dogs. Vet
synovitis and plasmacytoid lyrmphorma in a dog. I Am Vet Med
Pathol 1995; 32:337.
Assoc 1990; 197:877.
631. Bittegeko SBP, Arnbjerg J, Heje Nl: lnfectious epiphysitis and
661. Marti JM: Bilateral pigmented villonodular synovitis in a dog.
 arthritis in a puppy. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1993; 34:571.
J Small Anim Pract 1997; 38:256.
632. Malik R, Dowden M, Davis PE, et al: Concurrent juvenile cellulitis
662. Olivieri M, Suter PF: Compartimental syndrorme of the front leg of
a dog due to rupture of the median artery. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
syndrorme? Aust Vet Pract 1995; 25:62.
1978; 14:210.
633. White SD, Rosychuk RAW, Stewart LJ, et al: Juvenile cellulitis in
663. de Haan JI, Beale BS: Cormpartrment syndrorme in the dog: case
dogs: 15 cases ( 1979-1988). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:1609.
report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:133.
 634. Pedersen NC, Pool RR, Castles JI, et al: Noninfectious canine arthri-
 664. Basinger RR, Aron DN, Crowe DT, et al: Osteofascial cormpartrment
tis: rheurmatoid arthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1976; 169:295.
syndrorme in the dog. Vet Surg 1987; 16:427.
635. Pedersen NC, Weisner K, Castles JI, et al: Noninfectious canine
 665. Ricci MA, Corbisiero RM, Moharmed F, et al: Replication of corm-
arthritis: the inflarmmatory, nonerosive arthritides. J Am Vet Med
partrment syndrome in a canine model: experimental evaluation of
Assoc 1976; 169:304.
treatrment. J lnvest Surg 1990; 3:129.
636. Bennett D: lmmune-based non-erosive inflammatory joint disease
 666. Tischer A, Brunnberg L: Cormpartrmental syndrorme in the dog. 1.
of the dog. 1. Canine systermic lupus erythermatosus. J Small Anin
Introduction, literature, materials and methods. Kleinterpraxis
Pract 1987; 28:871.
1998; 43:175.
637. Biery DN, Newton CD: Radiographic appearance of rheurmatoid
 667. Tischer A, Brunnberg L: Compartrmental syndrome in the dog. ll.
 arthritis in the dog. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1975; 11:607.
 Results and discussion. Kleinterpraxis 1998; 43:241.
 668. Williams J, Bailey MQ, Schertel ER, et al: Compartment syndrome
ture review and report of 42 new canine cases. J Arn Anirm Hosp
in a Labrador Retriever. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1993; 34:244.
Assoc 1983; 19:489.
669. Denny HR, Minter H, Osborme AD: Gas gangrene in the dog.
639. Schiefer B, Hurov L, Seer G: Pulrmonary ermphyserma and fibrosis
J Small Anirm Pract 1974; 15:523.
associated with polyarthritis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974;
 670. Crowe DT, Kowalski JI: Clostridial celulitis with localized gas for-
164:408.
Imation in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1976; 169:1094.
640. Ralphs SC, Beale B: Canine idiopathic erosive polyarthritis. Comp
671. Weber WJ, Berry CR, Kramer RW: Vacuurn phenormenon in 12
Cont Educ Pract Vet 2000; 22:671.
dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1995; 36:493.
641. Woodard JC, Riser WH, Bloomberg MS, et al: Erosive polyarthritis
672. VanBree H: Vacuum phenormenon associated with osteochondrosis
in two Greyhounds. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:873.
 in the scapulohurmeral joint: 100 cases ( 1985-1991). J Am Vet Med
642. Pedersen NC, Pool R, O'Brien T, et al: Chronic progressive pol-
Assoc 1994; 204:1472.
yarthritis in the cat. Feline Pract 1975; 5:42.
673. Barrett RB: Radiology in trauma of the rmusculoskeletal soft tissues
643. Pedersen NC, Pool RR, O'Brien TR: Feline progressive polyarthritis.
of dogs and cats. Vet Radiol 1971; 12:5.
Arm J Vet Res 1980; 41:522.
 674. Norris AM, Pallet L, Wilcock B: Generalized myositis ossificans in a
644. Bennett D, Nash AS: Feline irmrmune-based polyarthritis: a study of
cat. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1980; 16:659.
thirty one cases. J Small Anirm Pract 1988; 29:501.
 675. Aron DN, Rowland GN, Barber DL: Report of an unusual case of
645. Feldrman DG: Glucocorticoid-responsive, idiopathic, nonerosive
ectopic ossification and review of the literature. J Am Anim Hosp
polyarthritis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1994; 30:42.
Assoc 1985; 21:819.
646. Crawford MA, Foil CS: Vasculitis: clinical syndromes in simall ani-
676. Dueland RT, Wagner SD, Sooy TE: von Willebrand heterotopic
mals. Cormp Cont Ed 1989; 11:400.
Osteochondrofibrosis of Dobermans. Vet Surg 1989; 18:78.
647. Cribb AE: ldiosyncratic reactions to sulfonarmides. J Am Vet Med
677. Liu SK, Dorfman HD: A condition resermbling hurman localized
Assoc 1989; 195:1612.
Inyositis ossificans in 2 dogs. JI Small Anim Pract 1976; 17:371.
648. Cowell RL, Tylker RD, Clinkenbeard KD, et al: Ehrlichiosis and pol-
678. Watt PR: Posttraurmatic rmnyositis ossificans and fibrotic myopathy
yarthritis in three dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:1093.
in the rectus fermoris muscle in a dog: a case report and literature
649. Bennett D: lmrmune-based nonerosive inflarmmatory joint disease
review. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:560.
of the dog. 3. Canine idiopathic polyarthritis. J Small Anirn Pract
679. Waldron D, Pettigrew V, Turk M, et al: Progressive ossifying myosi-
1987; 28:909.
tis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:64.
650. Appel MJG: Lyrme disease in dogs and cats. Cormp Cont Ed 1990;
 680. Bradley WA: Fibrodysplasia ossificans in a Hirmalayan cat. Aust Vet
12:617.
Pract 1992; 22:154.
606
681. Valentine BA, George C, Randolph JF, et al: Fibrodysplasia ossifi-
695. Jackson HA, Berber PI: Resolution of metastatic calcification in the
cans progressiva in the cat. I Vet lntern Med 1992; 6:335.
paws of a cat with successful managerment of renal hyperparathy-
682.Kriegleder H: Mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon: clinical
roidisrm. I Small Anirm Pract 1998; 39:495.
observations in 7 dogs. Vet Cormp Orthop Traurma 1995; 8:91.
683. Lechleitner E, Mayrhofer E: Tendovaginopathies of the biceps
Ostosis (DISH) in a dog. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:65.
brachi muscle in dogs: radiological, pathological and histopatho-
697. Lamb CR, White RN, McEvoy FJ: Sinography in the investigation of
logical findings. Kleinterpraxis 1993; 38:161.
draining tracts in small anirmals: retrospective review of 25 cases.
684. Muir P, Johnson KA: Supraspinatus and biceps brachi tendinopa-
Vet Surg 1994; 23:129.
thy in dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1994; 35:239.
 698. Kresken JG, Kostlin RG: The ultrasonic exarmination of the hip joint
 685. Rivers B, Wallace L, Johnston GR: Biceps tenosynovitis in the dog:
in young dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1993; 34:99.
radiographic and sonographic findings. Vet Cormp Orthop Traurma
 699. Seirms JI, Breur GJ, Blevins WE, et al: Use of two-dimensional real-
1992; 5:51.
tirme ultrasonography for diagnosing contracture and strain of the
686. Stobie D, Walace LJ, Lipowitz AJ,et al: Chronic bicipital tenosynovitis
infraspinatus muscle in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212:77.
in dogs: 29 cases (1985-1992). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1995; 207:201.
700. Fornage BD,Nasca S, Durvil A: Sonographic detection and three
687. Barthez PY, Morgan JP: Bicipital tenosynovitis in the dog: evalua-
dimensional localization of a metalic foreign body in the soft tis-
tion with positive contrast arthrography. Vet Radiol Utrasound
sues in a dog. Br Vet J 1987; 143:278.
1988; 29:198.
 701. Ackerrman N, Ticer J: Phalangeal arteriovenous fistula in a dog. Vet
 688. Boermo CM, Eaton-Wells RD: Medial displacerment of the tendon of
Radiol 1981; 22:85.
 origin of the biceps brachi rmuscle in 10 Greyhounds. J Small Anirm
702. Bouayad H, Feeney DA, Lipowitz AJ, et al: Peripheral acquired arte-
Pract 1995; 36:69.
riovenous fistula: a report of 4 cases and literature review. J Am
689. Brunnberg L, Kostlinu R, Waib] H: Detachrment of the biceps
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1987; 23:205.
brachi rmuscle from the tuberculum supraglenoidale scapulae in
703. Hosgood G: Arteriovenous fistulas: pathophysiology diagnosis and
the dog. Kleinterpraxis 1981; 26:267.
treatrment. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1989; 11:625.
690. Skvorak JB: What is your diagnosis? Mineralization of the tendon of
704. Fox PR: Feline cardiormyopathies In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS,
insertion of supraspinatus rmuscle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;
eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology. WB Saunders,
202:319.
Philadelphia, 1999; p 658.
 691. Muir P, Goldsmid SE, Rothwell TL, et al: Calcifying tendinopathy of
 705. Buchanan IW, Beardow AW, Samrmarco CD: Fermoral artery occlu-
the biceps brachi in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:1747.
sion in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1997;
 692. Roudebush P, Maslin WR, Cooper RC: Canine turmoral calcinosis.
211:872.
Comp Cont Ed 1988; 10:1162.
706. Fossurm TW, King LA, Miller MW, et al: Lymphederma: clinical
693. Croom AL, Houston DM: Hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis
signs, diagnosis and treatment. J Vet lntern Med 1992; 6:312.
in a young dog with renal failure. Can Vet J 1994; 35:438.
 707. Griffin CE, MacCoy DM: Primary lyrmphedema: a case report and
 694. Scott DW, Buerger RG: Idiopathic calcinosis circurnscripta in the
discussion. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:373.
dog: a retrospective analysis of 130 cases. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
708.
 Patterson DF: Congenital hereditary lyrnphederma in the dog.
1988; 24:651.
Cormp Pathol Bull 1971; 3:3.
CHAPTER FIVE
The Skull
RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF THE SKULL
Skull or head radiographs are indicated for the evaluation of patients with clinical signs
that suggest involvement of the bones, sinuses, nasal passages, teeth, eyes and orbit, brain,
oral cavity, and external soft tissues. The skull is a complex structure with many overlap-
 ping shadows, and this can be intimidating when it becomes necessary to evaluate radi-
ographs of this area. Fortunately, the skull is a relatively symmetric structure and the right
and left halves can be compared directly, provided the patient is positioned carefully and
symmetrically. Artifacts created by off-axis radiographs can mimic or obscure abnormali-
ties. Special radiographic projections have been described for evaluation of specific areas.
 These are extremely valuable and should be used when clinical signs suggest an abnormal-
ity in those portions of the head.
 Ultrasonography has limited value in evaluation of the head. It is used frequently for
evaluation of the eye and orbit, for evaluation of soft-tissue masses or swelling, and for
evaluation of the brain, either through an open fontanelle or through a traumatic bony
defect in the calvarium. The use of computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is steadily increasing as the access to these modalities becomes more available
and affordable. In many cases, either of these modalities obviates the use of standard radi-
 Ographic procedures.
RADIOGRAPHIC POSITIONING
Multiple projections of the skull are necessary for full evaluation of pathologic change. The
commonly used radiographic views are the lateral, ventrodorsal, and dorsoventral. Other
views that may be helpful in evaluating specific structures include the open-mouth lateral,
lateral oblique, intraoral ventrodorsal, open-mouth ventrodorsal, intraoral dorsoventral,
intraoral dental studies with "bite" film, frontal, open-mouth frontal, and modified occipital.
To obtain the precise positioning required to evaluate the views of the skull,the radiographs
 must be taken with the patient anesthetized and the skull given the necessary support.
LATERAL V1EW
The standard lateral view of the skull is obtained by positioning the skull in true lateral
recumbency; this results in superimposition of the paired structures (e.g., mandibles,
osseous bullae) (Fig. 5-1). Positioning is accomplished by elevating the nose rostrally and
rotating the head dorsally using radiolucent supporting material, such as a wedge-shaped
 piece of radiolucent foam placed under the mandibles. Failure to do this will result in an
oblique view. The true lateral position is particularly useful in evaluating the nasal area and
calvarium.
VENTRODORSALVIEW
When making the ventrodorsal view of the skull, the animal is positioned in dorsal recum-
bency with its head and cervical spine in a straight line and the palate parallel to the film
(Fig. 5-2). There should be no obliquity to either the left or right. Radiographically, the
position of both mandibles and the shape of the frontal sinuses should be symmetric. This
view is useful for evaluating the mandibles, calvarium, zygomatic arches, and temporo-
mandibular joints.
607
608
FIG. 5-1 A, Normal lateral canine
skullradiograph. B, Normal lateral
feline skull radiograph.
B
DORSOVENTRAL VIEW
The dorsoventral view is obtained by placing the animal in sternal recumbency and extend-
ing the neck and skull in a straight line and with the plane of the hard palate parallel to that
of the x-ray film (Fig. 5-3). There must be no rotation along the linear axis of the patient.
ful when evaluating the mandibles, temporomandibular joints, zygomatic arches, and lat-
 eral walls of the calvarium.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
609
A
B
FIG. 5-z A, Normal ventrodorsal canine skull radiograph. B, Normal ventrodorsal feline skull
radiograph.
OPEN-MOUTH LATERALVIEW
 e ax m ee pis a  sd si ma ee do au
mouth is restrained in an open position (Fig. 5-4). This view aids in evaluating the rostral
 portion of the calvarium, because the coronoid processes of the mandibles move ventrally
mon ue ddn an pue suiau pd pue pi a odn ssons nou op p
dental arcades are not superimposed.
LATERAL OBLIQUE VIEW
 The lateral oblique view is obtained by placing the animal in lateral recumbency without
external support to the body or skull (Fig. 5-5). This obliquity causes the structures closest
to the x-ray tube (farthest from the film) to appear as the more ventral of the pair on the
radiograph. In some breeds in which the head is nearly round (e.g., Boston Bulldogs, Pugs),
it may be necessary to elevate the dorsal part of the skull slightly from the table to create
adequate obliquity. This view is particularly useful for evaluating the temporomandibular
joints and osseous bullae. The degree of rotation needed for the ideal evaluation varies with
the head conformation.l It may also be helpful in evaluating lesions of the temporal por-
tion of the calvarium and horizontal ramus of the mandible.
OPEN-MOUTH LATERAL OBLIQUE VIEW
The open-mouth lateral oblique view has two variations. The first is used to evaluate the
maxilla and maxillary dental arcade (Fig. 5-6, A and B). It is obtained by holding the mouth
open with a mouth gag (speculum),tape, or other device; elevating the nose slightly so the
maxilla is parallel to the film for its entire length; and rotating the skull around its long axis
610
A
B
FIG. 5-3 A, Normal dorsoventral canine skull radiograph. B, Normal dorsoventral feline skull
radiograph.
so that the uppermost mandible is rotated toward the dorsal portion of the skull. This rota-
tion causes the upside maxillary arcade (maxillary arcade farthest from the film) to be
superimposed on the nasal passages and the downside maxillary arcade (maxillary arcade
nearest to the film) to be free from superimposition. Care should be taken to ensure that
the tongue does not lie over the region of interest. The second variation of the open-mouth
lateral oblique view is obtained by rotating the maxilla in the opposite direction. This is
used to assess the mandible and mandibular dental arcade (Fig. 5-6, C and D). This view
also requires that the mouth be open,the nose slightly elevated so that the mandible is par-
allel to the film for its entire length, and the skull rotated along its linear axis so that the
downside mandible is not superimposed by the other mandible or the maxilla. The degree
of rotation varies with individuals and is best determined at the time of positioning. When
making opposite oblique views, the patient should be turned over rather than rotating the
head dorsally for one view and ventrally for the other.
INTRAORAL VENTRODORSAL AND DORSOVENTRAL VIEWS
The intraoral ventrodorsal view, used to evaluate the rostral teeth, is obtained by placing
sette or a nonscreen film into the mouth. When possible, the tongue should be positioned
below the x-ray film or cassette. The tube should be angled slightly toward the caudal part
of the animal. The degree of angulation should be estimated for each individual; the goal
is to have the x-ray beam strike the roots of the mandibular incisors at a 90-degree angle.
This view is helpful in evaluating the mandibular symphysis, lower incisors, and mandibu-
lar canine teeth. The intraoral dorsoventral view is obtained in a similar manner, except the
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
611
FIG. 5-4 A, Normal open-mouth
lateral canine skull radiograph.
B, Normal open-mouth lateral feline
skull radiograph.
A
B
animal is placed in ventral recumbency and the x-ray beam is directed through the incisive
bone. This view provides information on the incisive bone, the upper incisors, and the
maxillary canine teeth (Fig. 5-7).
OPEN-MOUTH VENTRODORSAL VIEW
The open-mouth ventrodorsal view is essential for complete evaluation of the nasal cavity
and frontal sinuses, and it is obtained by positioning the animal in dorsal recumbency in 
the same position required for the standard ventrodorsal view. The maxilla is taped down
parallel to the radiography table or cassette, and the mouth is held open as widely as
612
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
FIG. 5-5 A, Normal right lateral oblique (dog in right lateral recumbency) skull radiograph. The leff
temporomandibular joint (back arrowhead) and left osseous bulla (open white arrow) are isolated.
B, Normal lateral oblique (cat in right lateral recumbency) skull radiograph. The left temporo-
mandibular joint (black arrowhead) and left osseous bulla (open black arrow) are isolated.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKUlL
613
A
B
C
D
FIG. 5-6 A, Normal open-mouth lateral oblique canine skull radiograph isolating the maxilla.
 B, Normal open-mouth lateral oblique feline skull radiograph isolating the maxilla. C, Normal open-
mouth lateral oblique canine skull radiograph isolatingthe mandible. D, Normal open-mouth lateral
oblique feline skull radiograph isolating the mandible.
possible by a mouth gag or tape (Fig. 5-8). The tongue and endotracheal tube are secured
to the mandibles. The x-ray tube is angled in a rostroventral to caudodorsal direction, aim-
ing toward the caudal portion of the skull. The x-ray beam should strike the palate so that
the mandible does not cast a shadow upon the nasal passages. The amount of angulation
needed (approximately 20 degrees) will vary and is best determined at the time of expo-
sure. This view is most useful for evaluating the nasal cavity and the maxillary teeth. In
brachycephalic dogs, an oblique projection made with the dog in dorsal recumbency with
the mouth closed and an x-ray beam angle of 30 degrees from caudoventral to rostrodor-
sal has been recommended for evaluation of the nasal cavity.2
FRONTAL V1EW
The frontal view is obtained by placing the patient in dorsal recumbency with the head
flexed into a position perpendicular to the spine. The angle of the x-ray beam or degree to
which the head is flexed varies with the shape of the skull and prominence of the frontal
614
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
FIG. 5-7 A, Normal open-mouth view of the canine incisive bone. B, Normal open-mouth view of
the canine mandibular symphysis.
B
FIG. 5-8 A, Normal open-mouth ventrodorsal canine skull radiograph. B, Normal open-mouth
ventrodorsal feline skull radiograph.
Chapter FiVe The Skull
615
A
B
FIG. 5-9 A, Normal frontal view of the canine skull. B, Normal frontal view of the feline skull.
sinuses. Alignment of the frontal sinuses relative to the x-ray beam should not result in
their superimposition over the other structures (Fig. 5-9). This may not be possible in some
breeds (e.g, Chihuahua, Yorkshire Terrier) with very smalfrontal sinuses. This view is par-
ticularly useful in evaluating the frontal sinuses and foramen magnum. If properly posi-
tioned, this view permits comparison of the right and left sides.
OPEN-MOUTHFRONTALVIEW
The open-mouth frontal view is obtained in a manner similar to the standard frontal
view. The difference is that the mouth is held open as widely as possible and aligned so
that the central ray of the x-ray beam bisects the angle between the mandible and
maxilla (Fig. 5-10). The tongue and endotracheal tube should be secured on the midline
between the mandibles. This view is particularly useful in evaluating the osseous bullae
and odontoid process (dens) of C2.
MODIFIED OCCIPITAL V1EW
The modified occipital view is obtained by placing the animal in dorsal recumbency, tip-
ping the patient's nose 10 degrees down (toward the sternum) from the vertical, and
616
SmAll AnimAl RaDlOlOGY AnD UlTraSonOG
FIG. 5-10 A, Normal open-mouth frontal view of the canine
skull. The osseous bullae (white arrow) are easily identified.
B, Normal open-mouth frontal view of the feline skull.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
617
angling the x-ray beam at 30 degrees caudally (toward the sternum) so that it strikes the
patient just caudal to the frontal sinuses (Fig. 5-11).3 This view is helpful in evaluating the
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY
Dental radiographs are recommended any time a dental abnormality is observed at the time
of physical examination or if there is excessive bleeding during an oral examination.4
Examples include evaluation of show dogs for missing or unerupted teeth, evaluation of
older dogs with periodontal bleeding, evaluation of dogs with facial swelling or nasal dis-
charge, evaluation of gingival masses, postoperative evaluation for the presence of retained
tooth fragments or fractures, and evaluating patients for endodontics or periodontics. The
use of full-mouth studies has been advocated to try to find clinically unidentified disease.5-7
Radiographs of the teeth can be obtained either with regular radiographic equipment
or dental radiography machines. When standard radiography machines are used an entire
maxillary and mandibular arcade may be imaged in a single radiograph.8 Although detail
may be somewhat better using dental films and radiology equipment, the use of high-detail.
screen or nonscreen film with a standard machine usually provides adequate detail. Due to
the curvature of the maxilla of most cats and some breeds of dogs, distortion of the
image of the premolars and molars is present and in some cases may prevent accurate
assessment of the image. If greater detail is needed, intraoral dental flm can be used, with
either a dental or standard radiographic unit. However, six or more views are required
when nonscreen dental films are used.
 The greatest detail is achieved with the use of a dental radiographic unit and nonscreen
phy in the dog, especially when radiographs of the maxillary teeth are desired. This technique
requires directing the primary x-ray beam perpendicular to the bisection of an angle formed
by the dental x-ray film and the axis of the tooth.4,9-1l For maxilry molars and premolars in
the cat, an extraoral near-parallel technique may be used to avoid the problem of zygomatic
arch superimposition on the image. In the parallel technique, the x-ray film is parallel to the
long axis of the tooth, and the x-ray beam is perpendicular to the tooth. The technique can be
used for some of the mandibular teeth. The dental x-ray film is held in place with stainless
steel wire. The wire is secured to the teeth on either side of the tooth of interest.
The anatomy of the normal skull is complex; however, the bilateral symmetry of the skull
 is helpful when evaluating radiographs because in many instances the opposite side may be
recommended. In this manner, it is relatively easy to ensure full evaluation of the image.
sssd iesu (i eds suar o a siaisuo ssn ixan s ss as
and sinuses, (2) calvarium, (3) base of skull, middle ear, temporomandibular joints,
(4) mandible, and (5) teeth.
NASAL PASSAGES AND SINUSES
The nasal passages of the dog and cat consist of several parts. Radiographically the planum
nasale at the rostral aspect is apparent as a soft-tissue density with the air passages clearly
demarcated. Further caudally, the nasal passages are evident as air-filled structures within
the area surrounded by the maxilla and nasal bones. The fine, delicate bone densities of the
 conchae and turbinates will be seen clearly. Two fine, parallel, radiodense lines, which bisect
the nasal passages into left and right sides, will be seen on the open-mouth ventrodorsal
and intraoral views. This is the vomer, which supports the cartilaginous nasal septum.12
The nasal cavity terminates in the nasopharynx ventrally, the frontal bones of the calvar-
ium caudally, and the frontal sinuses dorsally.2 The maxillary recesses rarely are visible as
a specific structure. However, they are located immediately rostral to the frontal sinuses
dorsal and medial to the fourth upper premolar. They appear as small, vaguely triangular,
air-dense structures. These are not seen in cats and smaller breed dogs. Among dog breeds,
618
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 5-11 A, Normal modifed occipital view of the canine
skull. B, Normal modifed occipital view of the feline skull.
A
B
the frontal sinuses vary considerably in size and shape. The smaller breeds have small to
nearly nonexistent frontal sinuses that appear as small inverted pyramid-shaped, air-dense
structures just rostral to the dorsal part of the frontal bones. In cats and larger breed dogs,
the frontal sinuses are relatively large, air-filled structures that are divided by one or more
bony pillars.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
619
CALVARIUM
The calvarium comprises the frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital bones as well as the
bones of the base of the skull In dogs, the shape of the calvarium and the appearance of
the skull may be remarkably thick, up to several centimeters. In other breeds (e.g.,
Chihuahua), the dorsal part may be very thin and the entire skull appears dome shaped.
The sutures may be apparent in very young animals. In some toy breeds, these remain open
throughout the animal's life. Normally there are irregularities in the bony density of the
calvarium. These irregularities are caused by the juga, which are bony protrusions of
the skull into the spaces (sulci) between the gyri of the brain. Vascular channels, appearing
as straight or branching, relatively radiolucent lines with fine, sclerotic, radiodense borders,
may be visible on the lateral view of the calvarium.
The occipital crest is the dorsal-most portion of occipital bone and is seen on the lat-
eral view as a bony projection extending caudall, dorsal to the first cervical vertebra. The
size of this projection varies among breeds. The occipital condyles are in the midventral
 portion of the occipital bone and are seen routinely on both the ventrodorsal and lateral
views as smooth rounded projections extending caudally from the occipital bone. Their
articular surfaces should appear smooth and regular. The foramen magnum is centered
between the occipital condyles and is oval or triangular in shape, with smooth and regular
borders. The foramen magnum is seen best on the modified occipital or open-mouth
frontal views. On the modified occipital view, the impression in the skull for the vermis of
the cerebelum may be seen as a slightly les-dense part of the skull projecting dorsally from
 the dorsal aspect of the foramen magnum.
BASE OF THe SKull, M1DDle EARS, TemPoROmANDibULAR JoINTS
With the exceptions of the jugular processes, osseous bullae, and temporomandibular
joints, the remaining structures of the base of the skull are difficult to assess radiographi-
cally The jugular processes are small,smooth-bordered, triangular bony projections of the
occipital bone extending laterally and caudally from each side of the skull just caudal to the
osseous bullae. On the ventrodorsal view, the osseous bullae are normally round, thin-
walled, air-filled bony structures; the air-filled external ear canals are seen extending later-
ally from the osseous bullae. The lateral oblique views of the osseous bullae reveal smooth,
thin-walled, air-containing bony structures. Immediately dorsal, medial, and rostral to the
osseous bullae are the petrous temporal bones. These are identified easily by their extreme
bony density. The temporomandibular joints are rostral to the oseous bullae. They consist
of the condyloid processes of the mandibles and the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone
near the base of the zygomatic arch. The temporomandibular joints are seen on the
dorsoventral view as a thin radiolucent line between the wide-based triangular mandibu-
lar condyloid processes and the matching shape of the articular surface of the zygomatic
bone. The surfaces are smooth and regular. Only a small portion of the mandibular condyle
should extend rostral to the mandibular fossa. On the lateral and lateral oblique views, the
des-eao o puni a umiq ae pdeus-us e e side ue
mandibular condyloid processes and the semilunar cup shape of the articular portion of
the mandibular fossa, with the retroarticular process forming its caudal border. These
articular surfaces should be smooth and regular.
The zygomatic arches are laterally directed arches of bone that arise from the base of
the skull at the temporal bone. The zygomatic arches extend cranially to meet the zygo-
matic bones, which fuse rostrall with the maxillae. The zygomatic arches are made up of
two bones, the zygomatic bone rostraly and the zygomatic process of the temporal bone
caudally. These two bones join in the middle of the zygomatic arch, with a long, slightly
oblique suture that has the zygomatic bone extending dorsal and rostral to the zygomatic
portion of the temporal bone. This suture usually is apparent in young animals as a radi-
olucent line but it rarely is apparent in the adult.
MANDIBLE
The mandible consists of right and left portions that are united rostrally at the mandibu-
lar symphysis. Each one half of the mandible may be divided into two major portions, the
620
horizontal body and the vertical ramus. The ramus has three processes: (1) the most dor-
sal is the coronoid proces, which is a relatively large, thin piece of bone that forms the dor-
mandibular portion of the temporomandibular joint; and (3) the most ventral is the angu-
lar proces, which is a short, tubular bony protrusion directed caudally from the mandible.
The vertical ramus does not contain teeth. The body of the mandible extends from the
ramus rostrally to the mandibular symphysis. The body has a roughly tubular shape with a
curve toward the midline in the rostral portion. On the lateral view, the mandibular canal
is seen as an area of relative radiolucency ventral to the tooth roots running the length of
the mandibular body. Cortical defects at the rostral end of the canal, the mental foramina,
and at the caudal end of the canal, the mandibular foramen, may be identified. The
mandibular canal contains the mandibular artery and vein and the mandibular alveolar
nerve.
TEETH
The teeth are present in the incisive bones, mandible, and maxillae. In the adult dog, they
are present in the formula (I3/3, C1/1, PM4/4, M2/3).14 In the puppy, the dental formula
is (I3/3, C1/1, PM3/3). In the adult cat, the dental formula is (I3/3, C1/1, PM3/2, and
M1/1). In the dog, the incisors are small, each having one major tubercle and a single root.
The mandibular and maxillary canine teeth are very large, curved, and more than one half
of their length is a root. In the maxilla, the first premolar is a simple tooth with a single
small root. It erupts at approximately 4 or 5 months of age and is not replaced by a per-
manent tooth. The second and third premolars are fairly large; each has two roots. The
fourth premolar, the carnassial tooth, is the largest maxillary tooth and has three roots.
There are two rostral roots, with the larger of the two located slightly lateral to the smaller
root. There is a large single caudal root. The first and second molars are much smaller than
the fourth premolar and each has three roots. The lingual root is smaller than the labial
roots. In the mandible the first, second, and third premolars are very similar to those of the
maxilla. The fourth premolar is slightly larger than the two preceding premolars and has
two roots. The first mandibular molar is the largest tooth of the lower jaw. It has a cranial
and a caudal root. The second molar is much smaller and also has two roots. The third
molar is a relatively small tooth with a single, simple root. A number of anatomical vari-
ants have been reported in the cat.15
 Each tooth has a covering of very radiodense enamel that surrounds the dentin and
au pue eues dnd aul jo azis aui siel st jeus dind an 'sieue sunoa un ieus dind
amount of bone surrounding the roots of the tooth reduce gradually throughout the life
 of the animal as a normal aging phenomenon.16,17 The apex of each root is open. Each
tooth is embedded in a bony socket, the alveolus, and held in place by a relatively radi-
olucent dental ligament. The cortex of the alveolus, which appears radiographically as a
thin, dense line known as the lamina dura dentes, is immediately adjacent to the dental
ligament. Beyond this cortex the bone takes on the appearance of normal trabecular
bone.
SPECIAL TECHNIQUES FOR EVALUATION OF THE SKULL
Several special radiographic procedures have been described that evaluate various anatom-
ical structures of the skull. These include the cranial sinus venogram,18 sialography,19
orbital cone studies,20 selective arteriography,21 optic thecography,22 pneumoencephalog-
and positive-contrast ear canalography.30 Although some of these procedures are useful,
their applicability is limited and most have been replaced by ultrasonography, CT, or MR1.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF THE SKULL
Ultrasonography is of limited value in examining the skull. The structures most frequently
 evaluated are the eye and orbit.31-3s When an open fontanelle is present, the brain can be
examined using ultrasonography.36-39 In dogs with closed sutures, normal intracranial
anatomy has been described, with access to the brain provided by craniotomy.36
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
621
The eye is examined easily using high-frequency transducers placed directly on the
cornea31-3 Although the eye can be examined through the eyelid, direct corneal contact
results in a superior image and is not damaging to the eye. An offset, a fluid-filled or tis-
sue-dense structure positioned between the transducer and the eye, can be used if exami-
nation of the aqueous chamber is important. Electronic transducers have reduced contact
artifact that interferes with the image of the aqueous chamber, and therefore an offset may
not be needed to image the cornea and aqueous chamber. Topical anesthetic and sterile
lubricant are used for the ultrasonographic examination. Sedation is required in a few
cases, but manual restraint is sufficient for most examinations. Most animals do not resent
placement of the transducer directly on the anesthetized cornea. Although ultrasono-
graphic gel is a nonirritating substance, it is a good practice to flush the eye with sterile eye-
wash after the ocular examination.
Both longitudinal and transverse planes are used for the ultrasonographic exami-
nation. The anatomy of the aqueous chamber, lens, iris, vitreous chamber, and retina
can be demonstrated. A hyperechoic dot usually is seen on both the anterior and the
posterior surfaces of the lens capsule. The lens, aqueous, and vitreous should be an-
echoic. In older dogs, echogenic debris may be observed within the vitreous chamber.
This appears to be a normal finding. The optic disc may be identified in some dogs as
an indentation in the posterior aspect of the globe. The normal retina is not identified.
Doppler velocity measurements of various ophthalmic arteries and veins can be
measured.40,41
Color Doppler imaging has been performed. Vascular signals were observed in four
major areas and were thought to represent flow in the external ophthalmic, ethmoidal, and
 posterior ciliary arteries and external ophthalmic veins.42
 The retrobulbar structures may be examined also through the globe,34 although the
extraocular muscles cannot always be differentiated and the optic nerve cannot be
traced. In addition, retrobulbar structures may be evaluated by placing the transducer
caudal to the orbital ligament on the dorsolateral aspect of the orbit posterior to the eye,
the temporal approach.43 Some ultrasonographers prefer the corneal contact method
for examining the retrobulbar space; however, we believe that the temporal view is
superior.
The open fontanelle at the frontoparietal suture has been used as an acoustic win-
dow in dogs from birth to 3 or 4 weeks of age. Ultrasonographic examination of the
brain has been performed in older dogs with open fontanelles and in dogs with closed
sutures through a craniotomy. Both transverse and longitudinal scans may be obtained
and the detailed anatomy of the brain has been described. Dimensions of the lateral
ventricle could be measured; however, the third and fourth ventricles could not be iden-
 tified in normal neonatal dogs. A maximal height of the lateral ventricle of 0.15 cm was
0.35 cm were considered enlarged. Others have related the dorsoventral dimension of
the lateral ventricle to the overall dorsoventral dimension of the brain. The dorsoven
tral dimension of the lateral ventricle should be 14% or less than the dorsoventral diam-
eter of the brain.36-39
The lateral ventricles normally appear as slitlike anechoic areas. The third ventricle may
be identified depending on its size. It will be located on the midline and appears as an oval
           as
choroid plexus.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY AND MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Both CT and MRI have been used for evaluation of a wide variety of diseases that affect the
skull and associated soft tissues. In many cases the information derived from these studies
far surpasses that obtained by standard radiographic studies.44 However, standard radiog-
raphy may be superior in many situations (e.g., fractures, dental disease). Both CT and
MRI produce cross-sectional images of the head, and the information gained from the
studies is superior in most other situations. The major limitations are the availability of the
equipment and the expense of the examination. Most institutions or referral centers have
access to these techniques.
622
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY
ABNORMAL FINDINGS
CALVARIUM
Neoplasia. Primary bone tumors of the calvarium are uncommon and appear to be
equally distributed among the cranial vault facialbones, and mandibles45,46 Most lesions
of the facial bones and mandible are osteolytic or mixed osteolytic and osteoblastic
in nature.46-48 A notable exception is the osteoma, which is usually densely osteoblastic
(Fig. 5-12).49,50 The most common tumors are fibrosarcoma, melanoma, squamous cell 
carcinoma, and osteosarcoma in dogs and squamous cellcarcinoma in cats .5-54
Multilobular osteochondrosarcoma is a uncommon tumor that is seen most often in
older, medium- to large-breed dogs, arising from the aponeurosis adjacent to the calvar-
ium. Several names have been applied to it over time, including calcifying aponeurotic
fibroma, juvenile aponeurotic fibroma, cartilage analogue of fibromatosis, ossifying
fibroma, multilobular osteoma, multilobular chondroma, multilobular osteosarcoma, and
-ied paenqol e u payieo Aiosuap pue pauyap lm s uoiss su ss'supoi euoipuou
 tern.56 Varying degrees of destruction of the adjacent bone may be present. The tumor has
 also been reported to involve the frontal bone, mandible, maxilla, and orbit.6-59
Multiple myeloma is a specific tumor that usually becomes apparent as multifocal lytic
areas in the calvarium that lack sclerotic borders. However, in dogs and cats with myeloma,
it is more common to see these changes involving the appendicular skeleton or spine.
In cats, meningioma may cause a thickening of the calvarium adjacent to the tumor
the surface of the bone. The calvarial thickening has not been reported in dogs with menin-
gioma. Meningioma also may produce destruction of the calvarium (Fig. 5-14). Other
reported changes include mineralization of the mass and increased size of the middle
meningeal artery.60
Tumors of the base of the skull are uncommon and usually are primary bone tumors
(Fig. 5-15). These may be lytic or productive and are often difficult to perceive. Lesions
involving the osseous bullae usually are not primary bone tumors but more often arise
from the lining of the bulla. Squamous cell carcinomas and ceruminous gland carcinomas
may affect the bullae and may completely destroy the osseous bulla, petrous temporal
bone, and other bony structures that surround the external and middle ear.61,62 A stippled
pattern of soft-tissue mineralization often is seen in conjunction with squamous cell carci-
noma. This helps discriminate between destruction of the bulla secondary to tumor and
 the changes that may be present secondary to previous bulla osteotomy.
FIG. 5-12 A l-year-old male mixed breed dog had a hard
 palpable mass involving the right parietal area. The modi-
fed occipital view revealed a bone-dense mass that extends
both laterally (open white arrow) and medially (open black
arrow) from the right parietal boneThe pattern of calcif
cation is dense and laminar. Differential diagnoses nclude
osteoma, osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, other primary
 bone tumor, and metastatic tumor. Diagnosis: Osteoma.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
623
FIG. 5-13 A 6-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired
cat with lethargy and a marked change to aggressive behavior.
 There is hyperostosis, or bonythickening,of the right side ofthe
calvarium (white arrow). There is an overall increased density
Rightswerenotgranted to include thisfigure inelectronicmecla.
Please refer to the printed publication.
on the right calvarium when compared with the left calvarium.
Diagnosis: Meningioma. (From Lawson C, Burk RL, Prata RG:
Cerebral meningioma in the cat: diagnosis and surgical treat-
ment of 10 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984; 20:333.)
FIG. 5-14 A 12-year-old neutered
female domestic short-haired cat
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
with circling to the left and a behav-
ior change to increased aggression.
Please refer to the printed publication.
The frontal view revealed destruc-
tion of the left frontal bone with
expansion laterally (white arrow).
 There is a small area of hyperostosis
at the junction of the lytic process
with the less affected bone dorsally.
Differential diagnoses include pri-
mary bone tumor, invasive menin-
gioma, and metastatic 
tumor.
Diagnosis: Meningioma. (From
Lawson C, Burk RL, Prata RG:
Cerebral meningioma in the cat:
diagnosis and surgical treatment of
10 cases. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1984; 20:333.)
Tumors may occur in the soft tissues adjacent to the skull.63 Soft-tissue tumors of the
 ear canal may be evident as a soft-tissue density obliterating the normally air-filled ear
canal. The most common tumors at this site are ceruminous gland carcinoma and squa-
 mous cell carcinoma.61l,64 These also may enlarge and invade the area of the osseous bullae
(Fig. 5-16).
Tumors of the zygomatic arch are usually primary bone tumors and lytic and produc-
tive lesions may be seen (Fig. 5-17).62
The most common neoplastic lesions affecting the mandible and maxilla in dogs are
squamous cell carcinoma, epulis, fibrosarcoma, and melanoma.3,6 Squamous cell carci-
noma and lymphoma are the most common in cats. Many of these tumors arise from the
624
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 5-15 A 9-year-old male
 German Shepherd dog with appar-
ent neck pain. Meticulous physical
examination revealed that pain
could be elicited by deep palpation
of the base of the skull behind the
right ear. A, The right lateral oblique
view revealed that the left middle ear
and jugular process (white arrow)
were normal. There is minimal soft
tissue in this area. B, The left lateral
oblique view revealed a normal mid-
dle ear. The jugular process (solid
white arrow) has irregular cortical
surfaces, and irregularly round calci-
fications are seen over the process.
There is a large soft-tissue mass
(open white arrows) associated with
the area. Differential diagnoses
include primary bone tumor, soft-
tissue tumor affecting adjacent bone,
metastatic neoplasia, and infection.
Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma arising
 from the jugular process.
A
B
tissues around the teeth. Although the tumors may displace teeth, they rarely cause tooth
loss. Malignant tumors are more likely to cause irregular or poorly marginated bony
destruction, while benign tumors more often result in smooth, distinctly marginated
bony destruction.51 However, no set of radiographic findings can be considered pathogno-
sis  seu pue sopu sis ssnes ensn eusnoens gguo
of bone and frequently a pattern of punctate calcifications in the bone and associated soft
tissues (Fig. 5-18). Those melanomas that involve bone usually result in a smoothly bor-
dered lytic lesion positioned eccentrically on the bone. Epulis, a tumor arising from the
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
625
FIG. 5-16 A 13-year-old male Siamese cat with a swelling
about the base of the right ear. The ventrodorsal view
revealed obliteration of the ear canal by a tissue-dense mass
as well as destruction of the right temporal and parietal
bones. Differential diagnoses include primary bone tumor,
squamous cell carcinoma of the ear canal, mucinous gland
adenocarcinoma of the ear canal, and metastatic neoplasia.
Diagnosis: Mucinous gland adenocarcinoma.
FIG. 5-17 An 8-year-old male Collie with a swelling involv-
ing the left side of the face. The slightly oblique ventrodor-
sal view revealed destruction of the cortex of the maxilla
and production of new bone within the associated soft-
tissue mass. The periosteum has been elevated from its nor-
mal location, and a Codman's triangle is seen (white arrow).
Differential diagnoses include primary neoplasia (e.g.,
 osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, squamous cell carcinoma),
metastatic neoplasia, and infection. Diagnosis: Squamous
cell carcinoma.
626
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGy AND UlTraSOnOGraphy
FIG. 5-18 A 16-year-old male domestic short-haired cat with a
arge mass involving the rostral part of the right mandible. A,
The lateral radiograph revealed a large tissue-dense mass that
contains spicules of tumor bone (white arrow). There is some
lysis of the mandibular cortex. B, The right lateral oblique radi-
ograph revealed more evidence of mandibular lysis. Differential
diagnoses include squamous cell carcinoma, primary bone
tumor, and infection. Diagnosis: Squamous cell carcinoma.
B
FIG. 5-19 A 10-year-old male Cockapoo had been salivating
excessively for 3 weeks. Oral examination revealed a mass
involving the left mandibular gingiva. The open-mouth ven-
trodorsal view revealed a tissue-dense mass associated with the
left mandible at the level of the fourth premolar and first molar.
There were areas of calcification within the mass. No evidence
of bony destruction of the mandible was noted. Differential
diagnoses include epulis, squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma,
fbrosarcoma, and other soft-tissue tumor. Diagnosis: Epulis.
dental ligament, usually appears as a soft-tissue mass that may or may not contain dys-
trophic calcification (Fig. 5-19). Odontoma, previously referred to as adamantinoma, a
tumor arising from tooth elements, usually is cystic and appears radiographically as mul-
tiloculated radiolucent areas within the bone. Mineral densities or areas of bony prolifera-
tion may be present within the expansile lesion (Fig. 5-20).
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
627
FIG. 5-20 A 3-month-old male
 Labrador Retriever with an enlarged
left mandible. The oblique lateral
view revealed a markedly expanded
body of the mandible. The revealed
body was relatively radiolucent in its
center but contained some highly
dense toothlike structures (black
arrow) that were poorly formed.
Diagnosis: Odontoma, previously
 referred to as adamantinoma.
 An uncommon lytic lesion that may have radiographic and histologic atributes sug-
 gesting a malignant bone tumor but that is actually a benign, nonneoplastic process is cen-
 tral giant cell granuloma of bone.68
 Trauma. Trauma to the calvarium can cause permanent or transitory neurologic
ent bony damage, the most common finding is a linear defect in the bone with minimal
displacement of fracture fragments (Fig. 5-21). It is important to differentiate vascular
channels that create relatively smooth lucencies with sclerotic borders and branching
patterns from the more irregular fracture lines. Skull fracture fragments may be
depressed into the brain. This is most common with fractures of the dorsal or lateral por-
tions of the skull.
 Fractures of the base of the skull, middle ear, and temporomandibular joints may be
difficult to assess. If fractures of the osseous bullae are present, the fragments may be dis-
placed into their lumen. Fractures of the temporomandibular joints are uncommon but
may occur in association with luxations. Luxations of the temporomandibular joints may
be best noted on the lateral oblique or dorsoventral views. The luxation will be apparent
because of theloss or distortionof the normally smooth, semilunar shape of the joint space
or positioning of the condyloid process cranially or caudodorsal to the mandibular fossa of
the temporal bone (Fig. 5-22). In cats, temporomandibular joint injury should be sus-
pected when dental malocclusion is present, with or without mandibular symphyseal sep-
aration. Fractures of the retroarticular process, mandibular fossa, zygomatic portion of the
temporal bone, and condylar process of the mandible are seen in association with
temporomandibular joint luxation in cats.69 Subluxations are very diffcult to evaluate
(Fig 5-23). Although fractures affecting the temporomandibular joints usualy involve the
mandible (condyloid proces), fractures of the temporal bone may occur also. Fractures in
this region are particularly difficult to demonstrate and multiple oblique projections may
be required.
The zygomatic processes and maxillae are susceptible to fracture and are readily evalu-
ated. Zygomatic fractures usually involve the most lateral portion of the zygomatic arch but
may involve other sites as well. Maxillary fractures are usually linear with minimal dis-
placement unless the fracture lines encircle the muzzle (Fig. 5-24).
628
Small Animal Radiology And UitrasonoGraphy
FIG. 5-21 A l-year-old male
Miniature Poodle had been hit by a
car the day this was taken. The dog
was laterally recumbent and had a
rotary nystagmus. A, The lateral
radiograph revealed a fine linear
radiolucency  extending dorsally
from near the base of the ear
(white arrow). B, The ventrodorsal
view revealed a fne linear radiolu-
cency centered on the midline and
extending to the left (back arrow).
 Diagnosis: Nondisplaced fracture of
the basisphenoid and left temporal
bones.
B
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
629
A
C
FIG. 5-2z A 3-year-old domestic short-haired cat had been hit by a car 3 days prior to examina-
tion. The owner had noticed that the cat had not been eating since the accident. Physical examination
revealed the cat's strong reluctance to open its mouth. A, The right lateral oblique view revealed that
the left temporomandibular joint was normal (white arrow). B, The left lateral oblique revealed
that the right temporomandibular joint was luxated, because the condyloid process of the mandible
was not present in the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone (white arrow). C, The dorsoventral view
revealed a normal left temporomandibular joint (open white arrow). The condyloid process of the right
mandible (open black arrow) was displaced rostrally from its normal position in the mandibular fossa
of the temporal bone (smalt biack arrow). Diagnosis: Right temporomandibular joint luxation.
The mandible is quite susceptible to fracture in cases of head trauma. Usually it is easy
to assess the extent of the fracture by using the open-mouth oblique and ventrodorsal
views. Fractures most commonly affect the body or mandibular symphysis (Fig. 5-25).70,71
Malalignment of the mandible or maxillae may be the first indication of a fracture. If the
fracture occurs through the mandibular symphysis, an intraoral film may be useful in
establishing the diagnosis. Although the mandibular symphysis normally is completely
bridged with bone, in some animals the union may be fibrous. A radiographic diagnosis of
mandibular symphyseal separation or fracture should be made only when there is
 malalignment of the fragments. Fortunately, this area is examined easily and the diagnosis
can be made readily on physical examination. When assessing mandibular fractures, it is
important to look at the tooth roots to determine if they are involved. Tooth fragments may
need to be removed at the time of the fracture repair. The teeth often are used as anchors
for wires when the fracture is repaired and tooth root fractures can affect the type of repair.
Occasionally a patient will have a fracture of the mandible without a history of significant
630
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
?
A
B
FIG. 5-23 A, A 5-year-old neutered male domestic short-haired cat was hit by a car. The cat's
mandibular symphyseal fracture has been repaired with a wire suture but the mandibles did not open
smoothly. The dorsoventral view reveals a normal temporomandibular articulation on the right (long
arrows). There is a subtle misalignment of the left temporomandibular joint with the articular
process of the mandible displaced medially (short arrows). B, Close-up view of A. Diagnosis: Left
temporomandibular joint subluxation.
trauma. In these instances, pathologic fracture secondary to periapical abscesses, hyper-
 parathyroidism, or tumor may be present. The presence of bony proliferation or lysis at the
 site of an acute fracture suggests that the fracture is pathologic.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC EVALUATION OF HEAD TRAUMA
Ultrasonography may be used to evaluate the integrity of the brain when a skull fracture
has produced a bony defect. The fracture fragment may be evident as a hyperechoic struc
 ture with distant shadowing. Intracranial hemorrhage may produce hypoechoic or hyper-
echoic areas within the brain depending on the duration of the hemorrhage. Brain abscess
may develop secondary to trauma, and this may be recognized as a hypoechoic, poorly
defined lesion within the brain (Fig. 5-26). Because abscesses and hematomas have similar
appearances, a fine-needle aspirate would be required to make a definitive diagnosis.
OSTEOARTHRITIS
 Degenerative joint disease of the temporomandibular joints is seen occasionally. It may occur
as a normal aging change or may be secondary to previous fracture or subluxation. With tem-
 poromandibular degenerative joint disease, the subchondral bone will appear irregular, peri-
 articular osteophytes may be present, and the joint space appears narrowed (Fig. 5-27).
MISCELLANEOUSDISEASES
Otitis Externa and Otitis Media. The external ear canals are common sites of infection.
 The normal air-filled external ear canal may be obliterated due to sof-tissue proliferation
or exudate within the ear canal. Dystrophic calcification of the external ear canals may
Chapter Five The Skull
631
FIG. 5-24 A 12-week-old male
mixed breed dog was attacked by an
adult dog in the household and had
epistaxis and a painful face. The lat-
eral view (A) reveals a fracture line
across the maxilla (black arrow)
and gas in the sof tissues (white
arrow), and the lateral oblique view
(B) reveals that the fracture line con-
tinues across the maxilla (arrow).
 Diagnosis: Maxillary fractures.
A
B
 Occur in association with chronic otitis externa (see Fig. 5-27). This may be evident as well-
defined, evenly mineralized or patchy, irregularly mineralized structures that conform to
the shape of the external ear cartilages. Unless the radiograph is examined carefully, these
 calcifications may be misinterpreted as bony lesions arising from the skull.
Otitis externa may extend and result in otitis media (bulla osteitis), with the develop-
ment of exudate in the middle ear. This will be evident radiographically as an increased
opacity of the bulla. If only one bulla is affected, the difference between the air-dense nor-
mal bulla and the tissue-dense affected bulla will be recognized readily (Fig. 5-28). There is
a normal variation in density of the bulla among different breeds, and recognizing the radi-
ographic changes may be difficult if the condition is bilateral. The apparent density of the
bulla also is affected by positioning and radiographic technique. Malpositioned or improp-
erly exposed radiographs can create or mask the radiographic changes. Thickening of the
632
FIG. 5-25 A 1-year-old female Collie that had been hit by a car.
Physical examination revealed a fractured mandible. A, A ven-
trodorsal view revealed a fracture through the midportion of
the left mandibular body (small black arrows). There is also a
fracture through the ramus of the right mandible (large black
arrow). B, The left open-mouth oblique view, isolating the
mandible, revealed the fracture through the body just caudal to
the first molar (carnassial tooth) and involving the caudal sur-
face ofthe alveolus for the caudal root. Diagnosis: Fractured left
mandible.
B
wall of the osseous bulla, expansion of the bulla (which may be so severe as to impinge
upon the temporomandibular joint), and sclerosis of the petrous temporal bone may be
identified in cases with chronic disease. The radiographic changes usually do not persist
after surgery or clinical resolution.72 Furthermore, false-negative study results have been
ies did not reveal a statistically significant difference between modalities, but a trend
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
633
FIG. 5-26 Longitudinal and trans-
verse sonograms of the brain of a 2-
year-old male Dachshund with a
history of having been attacked by a
LRAIN
larger dog 2 weeks previously. There
was a depression in the calvarium
and a history of intermittent
seizures. A poorly defined hypo-
echoic lesion (arrows) is identified
within the brain. This represents
brain abscess. An ultrasonographi-
cally guided aspirate of the lesion
was obtained and purulent material
was removed. Diagnosis: Brain
abscess.
SRRHS
FIG. 5-27 An ll-year-old male
mixed breed dog with chronic otitis
externa and reluctance to open its
mouth. The dorsoventral
view
revealed irregularity and sclerosis of
the subchondral bone of both
 mandibular fossae and the condyloid
processes (open black arrow).
Diagnosis: Degenerative joint dis-
ease of the temporomandibular
 joints. An incidental finding of calci-
fication of the cartilage of the exter-
nal ear canals is noted (sotid black
arrow). This is probably secondary to
chronic otitis externa.
 toward better results with CT was suggested.73 Therefore radiographic changes may be
 more severe in the clinically normal, as opposed to the clinically affected, side.
 Para-aural abscesses may result from chronic external ear infections.75 These may pro-
 duce sclerosis of the petrous temporal bone and thickening of the bulla secondary to the 
soft- tissue infection.
634
FIG. 5-28 A 5-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat with
ircling and a head tilt to the right.
A, The ventrodorsal view revealed
marked sclerosis of the right middle
and internal ear. B, The open-mouth
frontal view confirmed the finding of
 increased density of the right middle
ear. There was apparent thickening
of the right osseous bulla. C, The
 oblique view that isolated the right
bulla demonstrated its thickening
 and increased density. D, The oppo-
site oblique view showed the normal
left middle and internal ear.
Diagnosis: Otitis media and interna
of the right ear.
B
D
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
635
Nasopharyngeal Polyp. In young cats an inflammatory polyp may develop in the middle
ear and extend into the pharynx through the eustachian tube (Fig. 5-29),67,76-81 This usu-
ally produces increased density and thickening of the osseous bulla. A soft-tissue mass may
infrequently be identified within the nasopharynx. The clinical signs usually are related to
upper respiratory obstruction, and the mass usually is visible within the external ear canal
or nasopharynx A similar condition has been reported in a dog.82
Hydrocephalus. In severe hydrocephalus there may be a smooth, homogenous appearance
e a jo su pue nt au jo sun au jo in e se us  oi
bones.45,83,84 The shape of the skull may be markedly domed, and the frontal bones may
bulge cranially. An open fontanelle or open sutures may be noted (Fig. 5-30). In adult-
 a si aoq so m st ls a  s  saa s
triculography, CT, ultrasonography, or MRI may be needed.
 Ultrasonography can be used to confirm the diagnosis of hydrocephalus and is per-
formed easily if an open fontanelle is present.85 The ventricles can be identified and their
size evaluated. Although there is some variation by breed in normal maximal ven tricle
size, it should not exceed 0.35 cm or 14% of the ventrodorsal dimension of the
brain.36,38,39,8s,86 Measurements between 0.15 cm and 0.35 cm are suggestive of hydro-
cephalus. 37 The ventricles are easily identified in both transverse and longitudinal planes.
They appear as anechoic crescent-shaped structures (Figs. 5-31 to 5-33). In severe hydro-
cephalus the third and fourth ventricles can be identified as an oval or linear anechoic
structure located on the ventral midline. When the fontanelle is large, the examination is
FIG. 5-29 A 3-year-old female domestic short-haired cat
with a head tilt. A, The left lateral oblique view revealed a
normal right osseous bulla that contained air. A prominent
soft-tissue mass was noted in the pharynx (white arrows).
B, The right lateral oblique view revealed a slightly thickened 
irregular left osseous bulla (white arrow) that contained tis-
sue density Diagnosis: Auralpharyngeal polyp.
A
B
636
easy. No correlation between fontanelle size and degree of hydrocephalus has been deter-
mined. There is no correlation between ventricle size and severity of clinical signs. In most
instances, the cause of the ventricular enlargement cannot be determined by ultrasono-
 graphic examination.36 Although the brain can be examined through a craniotomy, this is
not recommended because the diagnosis can be made using CT or MRI, which are non-
invasive techniques.
Lissencephaly. Lissencephaly, a rare congenital brain disorder in which the brain does not
have normal convolutions (sulci and gyri), may be detected radiographically because the
calvarium lacks the normal convolutional markings. This condition produces a radi-
s o  on rs  des
FIG. 5-30 A 3-month-old female
Poodle with depression, lateral stra-
bismus, and occasional seizures. A,
The lateral radiograph revealed a
arge bony defect (open white arraw)
dorsally (a large open fontanelle),
marked doming of the skull, and a
near-homogeneous density over the
skull indicating obliteration of the
normal juga. B, The ventrodorsal
view revealed open cranial sutures
(white arrows) and thinning of the
calvarium. Diagnosis: Severe hydro-
cephalus.
A
B
FIG. 5-31 Transverse sonograms of
the brain of a 5-month-old male
Chihuahua with a history of vomit-
ing and diarrhea of 1 week duration.
The lateral ventricles are mildly
dilated. This represents mild hydro-
cephalus, which is not unusual in a
dog of this breed. Diagnosis: Mild
hydrocephalus.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
637
FIG. 5-32 Transverse (A to C) and longi-
tudinal (D to F) sonograms of the brain
TRANST
of a l-year-old male Chihuahua with a
history of acute quadriparesis. The
lateral, third, and fourth ventricles
are moderately distended. Diagnosis:
Hydrocephalus.
A
心
D
E
FIG. 5-33 Transverse (A to C) and
longitudinal (D) sonograms of the
brain of a 6-month-old male
 Dachshund with a history of seizures
for the previous 2 days. The lateral
ventricles are dilated markedly. A
small amount of residual neural tis-
sue remains in the ventral calvarium.
Diagnosis: Severe hydrocephalus.
A
B
心
D
638
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Occipital Dysplasia. Occipital dysplasia is a morphologic variation in which the margin
of the foramen magnum is extended dorsally.87 This produces a foramen magnum that is
enlarged, elongated, or pear shaped. In severe cases, this may result in a foramen magnum
impression of the vermis in the occipital bone as evidence of occipital dysplasia. Even when
a foramen magnum malformation is present, usually there is a fibrous band covering the
be useful in demonstrating herniation of the cerebellum through a patent defect.89 The
clinical significance of occipital dysplasia is not established. In a study of 80 Pekingese
skulls, the shape of the foramen magnum varied from ovoid to rectangular, and allbut two
had a dorsal notch.88 Many dogs with occipital dysplasia are also hydrocephalic, and the
clinical signs probably are related to the hydrocephalus rather than to the foramen mag-
 num conformation. Some dogs may also have syringomyelia or hydromyelia.89
Acromegaly. Acromegaly has been reported in cats in association with diabetes mellitus
and pituitary adenoma.90 Thickening of the bony ridges of the calvarium, mandibular
prognathism, and spondylosis deformans have been described in these cats. Osteoarthritis
of the shoulder, elbow, carpus,stifle,and digits alsois present. CT scans were performed on
six cats, and the pituitary tumor was demonstrated in five. Mild to moderate cardiomegaly
was observed on thoracic radiographs, and thickening of the left ventricular free wall and
interventricular septum was demonstrated by echocardiography Pulmonary edema,
ascites, and pleural effusion were observed in those cats that progressed to heart failure. In
acromegalic dogs, no abnormalities were noted in survey radiographs of the appendicular
skeleton.91 Soft-tissue swelling was observed ventral to the pharynx. This abnormality was
reversible and disappeared posttreatment.
Mucopolysaccharidosis. An exaggerated brachycephalic appearance to the skull and a
widened maxila have been reported as features of mucopolysaccharidosis in cats.92-95 The
FIG. 5-34 A 5-year-old Maltese cat that had cervical pain. On
cervical radiographs, a suspicious appearance to the occiput
was noted. The modifed occipital view revealed a large bony
defect extending dorsally from where the normal roof of the
foramen would be expected (white arrows). Diagnosis:
Asymptomatic occipital dysplasia. A cervical disc extrusion
was responsible for the clinical signs.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
639
disease has been reported in Siamese and domestic short-haired cats. Abnormal nasal
 turbinate development and aplasia or hypoplasia of the frontal and sphenoid sinuses have 
been described. The nasal and ethmoid turbinates are short and tortuous. The vertebrae
are wide and asymmetric, with irregular epiphyses present when the cat is young. Widened
wedge-shaped disc spaces and periarticular osteophytes also are present. Coxofemoral joint
subluxation with femoral head remodeling is observed also in this disease. There is
decreased bone density with thin cortices and a coarse trabecular pattern. Degenerative
joint disease is present, with the changes being more severe in the hips and shoulders than
in the stifles or tarsi. There is hypoplasia of the hyoid bones and hypoplasia or fragmenta-
tion of the odontoid process of the second cervical vertebra. Fragmentation or abnormal
ossification of the patella was observed. The radiographic diagnosis usually is made after
examination of vertebral or pelvic radiographs rather than skull radiographs. In dogs, the
changes are similar, with facial deformity and brachygnathia. Narrowed intervertebral disc
spaces, cervical disc prolapse, vertebral articular facet irregularities, subluxation of verte-
 bral bodies, and subchondral bone lysis with narrow joint spaces have been reported.96
Craniomandibular Osteopathy. This condition affects young dogs, primarily the
 Highland Terriers (Scotish, Cairn, West Highland White). It has been reported infre-
quently in a large range of other breeds (e.g, Great Danes, Labrador Retrievers, Boston 
Terriers, Doberman Pinchers, Pyrenean mountain dogs).46,97-100 In West Highland White
Terrierstdiseasehasb w tbanomaesve tratTh prmay
radiographic change is the presence of palisading periosteal new bone involving the
mandible and increased width and density of the tympanic bulla and the frontal, parietal,
and temporal bones (Fig. 5-35). The bony proliferation is most often symmetric; however,
unilateral involvement has been observed. The bone lesions usually are self-limiting, with
regression of the lesions occurring after skeletal maturity is reached. However, some pro-
duce enough reactive new bone that they encroach upon important adjacent structures
(e.g, temporomandibular joints, orbit).102 Some dogs may not survive because they are
unable to open their mouths to eat. As the disease regresses, the new bone will remodel and
have smooth margins, with the residual change appearing as particularly thick mandibular
cortices. In some affected dogs the condition is not limited to the skull and involvement of
the appendicular skeleton has been described, which also may be associated with a defect
d sod s e yo siso sus uq al eonusue ao u 
liferation, which extends into the diaphysis. The physis is not affected, and the metaphyseal
lucencies seen in hypertrophic osteodystrophy are not observed in this disease. This per-
mits discrimination between the lesions of the appendicular skeleton that were observed
FIG. 5-35 A 6-month-old male
Scottish Terrier with swelling of both
mandibles. The lateral radiograph
revealed a large amount of palisad-
ing periosteal new bone formation
involving  the bodies  of both
mandibles.
Diagnosis: Cranio-
mandibular osteopathy.
640
SMALLANIMALRADIOLOGY
with hypertrophic osteodystrophy and those seen with craniomandibular osteopathy. The
s a q    nsn a d  s n
to that of hypertrophic osteodystrophy. The lesion of the appendicular skeleton regresses
in a manner similar to that of the skull.
Temporomandibular Subluxation and Ankylosis. Temporomandibular subluxation, or
dysplasia, has been associated with chronic intermittent open-mouth locking of the tem-
mally shaped temporomandibular joint space; flattened mandibular condyles; small, flat
s u sd piun ss o sdodu prea ue pe ss re
patients,the temporomandibular joint conformation may appear normal. When the jaw is
locked open, the abnormal temporomandibular joint subluxates and the jaw shifts to the
opposite side, becoming locked. Locking of the jaw also may occur secondary to trauma,
without evidence of preexisting joint abnormality.
Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint may occur as a primary or secondary event.
Causes may include tumors, infections, trauma, or degenerative changes. Radiographic
 Remodeling of the temporomandibular joint or obliteration of the joint space may be
noted also.107,108
Idiopathic Hyperostosis of the Calvarium. A condition has been described in young
Bullmastiff dogs in which there was cortical thickening of frontal, temporal, and occipital
 bones with an irregular bony proliferation. 109
Thickening of the Osseous Tentorium Cerebelli. The tentorium cerebelli is a thin bony
protrusion extending rostrally from the dorsal part of the occipital bone and from the dor-
sal caudal portions of the parietal bones dividing the cerebellum and brain stem from the
cerebrum (caudal fossa from the cranial fossa). On occasion radiographic changes may be
noted. With marked hydrocephalus the size of this structure may be diminished markedly.
Tumors also may affect the tentorial process, causing either destruction or production of
a  a   a no sa    ) 
in cats. The significance of this finding is not known.
Metabolic Diseases. Metabolic diseases that affect calcium metabolism, such as primary,
secondary, and tertiary hyperparathyroidism, or others, may be evaluated radiographically.
The mandible is a convenient site for this evaluation because these conditions may cause a
generalized loss of density in the lamina dura dentes, which is the cortical bone of the tooth
alveolus.0 In more advanced disease there may be a fractures, generalized demineraliza-
tion of the entire skull,enlargement of the bony structures, and soft-tissue swelling.ll-4
The enamel of the teeth is one of the last areas to be depleted of calcium; therefore the
 appearance of teeth floating in soft tissue develops (Fig. 5-37).
NASAL PASSAGES AND SINUSES
Many diseases that affect the nasal passages and sinuses can cause radiographically appar-
ent changes7 These include allergic, parasitic,bacterial, fungal, traumatic, foreign
body, and neoplastic diseases. Parasitic causes include Capillaria,ll8 Eucoleus,li9
Baylisascaris, Linguatula,120 and Pneumonyssus.12l Fungal causes include Aspergilus,
Cryptococcus Penicillum, Rhinosporidium,122 and Actinomyces. Many different neoplasms
may occur within the nasal cavity including adenocarcinoma, nonkeratinizing squamous
cell carcinoma, chondrosarcoma, lymphoma, and fibrosarcoma. Less commonly encoun-
tered tumors of the nasal cavity include mast cell tumor, meningioma, melanoma, trans-
missible venereal tumor, squamous cell carcinoma, and osteosarcoma.123-127 The
radiographic findings are never specific for a tumor type.
Radiographic evaluation of the nasal cavity is performed to identify the location and
extent of the lesion that is producing the patient's clinical signs. In most cases, a definitive
diagnosis cannot be made based on the radiographic appearance of the lesion. However,
radiography is still useful because it provides information relative to localization and extent
Chapter Five The Skull
641
FIG. 5-36 A 9-year-old female
Golden Retriever with seizures for 2
months. The lateral radiograph
revealed an irregularly round calci-
fied density replacing the normally
linear osseous tentorium cerebelli
(black arrow). This was confirmed
on the ventrodorsal view as well.
Differential diagnoses include pri-
 mary bone tumor, meningioma, and
metastatic
tumor.
Diagnosis:
Osteosarcoma.
FIG. 5-37 A 12-year-old male mixed
breed dog with polyuria and poly-
dipsia for 9 months and vomiting for
2 weeks. The lateral view of the skull
reveals a severely osteoporotic skull.
The teeth appear to be floating in
soft tissue rather than anchored in
the normal bone of the jaw.
Laboratory data revealed severe
 azotemia. Diagnosis: Renal second-
ary hyperparathyroidism.
of disease. The use of CT or MR imaging provides more detail than standard radiographs
but may not be readily available in many locations. Rhinoscopy and retroflexed endoscopy
have a higher sensitivity and specificity than radiography.128
When evaluating the nasal passages, the presence or absence of soft-tissue density, masses,
or radiopaque foreign objects should be noted. The absence or presence and extent of
turbinate destruction should be evaluated. The overlying frontal bone and maxilla should
be examined for bony destruction or overlying soft-tissue masses. The radiograph should be
evaluated for evidence of extension of the lesion into the frontal sinus or into the calvarium.
642
The teeth should be examined carefully for evidence of tooth root abscess, and bones should
be examined for fractures. Absence of the fine trabecular pattern within the nasal cavity may
be caused by accumulation of fluid or soft tissue within the nasal cavity. The fluid may be
inflammatory or hemorrhagic, and the soft tissue may be associated with rhinitis or neopla-
allel pattern of the nasal conchae.129 Loss of the larger bony turbinates usually indicates bone
destruction from tumor invasion or necrosis from fungal or chronic bacterial infection. Loss
of the turbinate pattern, especially in the ethmoid turbinates, is caused by destruction of the
conchae, which is most often associated with tumor or fungal rhinitis.
Rhinitis and Sinusitis. Rhinitis and sinusitis of bacterial origin may produce minimal,
marked, or no radiographic changes. The presence of a tissue density within the normally
air-filled nasal passages or paranasal sinuses may occur because of the presence of exudate
(Fig. 5-38). This density obscures the normally apparent fine bone pattern formed by the
turbinates. In many cases of rhinitis, the frontal sinuses also will contain exudate. This
increases their radiographic density from air to tissue dense. However, in dogs the lack of
frontal sinus involvement has been shown to have a relatively high positive predictive value
 that the associated nasal disease is inflammatory rather than neoplastic.i30 In unilateral
nasal disease, comparison with the uninvolved side facilitates detection of increased opac-
ity. In bilateral disease, detecting increased opacity is more difficult. A triad of maladies
(sinusitis, situs inversus, and bronchiectasis) known as Kartagener's syndrome has been
reported in the dog 13l,132 Rhinitis, pneumonia, and defective neutrophil function have
been reported in the Doberman.133 When rhinitis is secondary to nonmetallic foreign
material in the nasal passages, the exudate usually obscures the outline of the foreign body.
Rhinitis may result from extension of infection around a tooth root, a periapical abscess,
S ssssqe ieidd e jo uis sdeope a uos s u a'sassd peu a ou
decreased density around the tooth root and will be evident in addition to the increased
nasal passage density. In many patients with bacterial rhinitis, the nasal turbinates appear
normal because the exudate drains to the outside and does not accumulate in the nasal cav-
ity. Obstruction to drainage will result in fluid accumulation within the nasal passages and
will obliterate some of the fine turbinate pattern. In chronic cases, destruction or oblitera-
-n m jsd a s e  sq a s a a o u
ographic changes that are similar to those observed in association with bacterial rhinitis;
however, marked bone destruction with minimal exudate is more common, especially in
chronic cases. Destruction of the turbinates occurs and the vomer or nasal bones may be
destroyed partially or completely. The destroyed turbinate is not replaced with soft tissue,
resulting in a pattern that has been described as hyperlucent nasal passages (Fig. 5-39).17
The presence of lucent foci in the nasal passage has been associated strongly with rhinitis
the vomer, is more typical of fungal rhinitis than neoplasia.
 Rhinitis and sinusitis of allergic or parasitic origin rarely produce radiographic
 changes. Although turbinate destruction was reported in association with Capillaria sinusi-
tis, this amount of turbinate destruction is unusual.66
Neoplasia. Tumors of the nasal passage most frequently appear as a soft-tissue density in
one or both nasal passages or frontal sinuses or both Intranasal bone destruction, includ-
ing destruction of the vomer and nasal septum, may or may not be present. The tumor may
-s e u sunsa auaxa 'sds ieqnqonai au ou ex au yano puxa oe
tissue, subcutaneous facial mass, or it may invade through the cribriform plate and result
tion is the radiographic finding that has the highest positive predictive value for the diag-
nosis of neoplasia. Occasionally new bone formation may be present within the nasal
cavity. A pattern of punctate, stippled, or globular calcification may be observed rarely in
nasal chondrosarcoma. However, because several tumor types occur in the nasal cavity and
most have no unique radiographic characteristic, it is only rarely possible to suggest a spe-
sue density in the nasal passages strongly suggests the presence of a neoplasm (Fig. 5-40).
CHapTer FiVe The SkulL
643
a     a aii   s
from the right nostril for 3 weeks. A, The open-mouth ven-
trodorsal view revealed a homogeneous tissue density involving
the caudal one-half of the right nasal passage. The vomer was
intact and no evidence of bony destruction was present. The areas
of the right frontal sinuses that are not superimposed over the
nasal passages (blackf)alsorevealed tissue densitycompared with
the left side (white f). B, The frontal sinus view revealed the tissue
density in the right frontal sinus (black f) compared with the nor-
mal left side (white f). Differential diagnoses include rhinitis and
sinusitis or neoplasia. Diagnosis: Rhinitis and sinusitis of the
 right nasal passages and sinuses.
A
B
Destructive (fungal) rhinitis may also cause destruction of the vomer; however, when a
tumor is present the tissue density within the nasal cavity will be contiguous at the site of
vomer destruction. In destructive rhinitis, the erosion or deviation of the vomer may be
 present without an adjacent soft-tissue density or mass. Erosion or destruction of the crib-
riform plate or frontal bones suggests a probable diagnosis of nasal adenocarcinoma with
extension of tumor into the cranial vault (Fig. 5-41). Detecting the erosion may be difficult
unless it is extensive. Computed or linear tomography and MRI are more sensitive in
detecting smallerosions, and these studies can be performed in addition to the radiographs
if extension of the tumor into the cranial vault is suspected. Affected animals may have
seizures or other primary neurologic signs rather than showing signs of nasal disease.126
Nasal tumors may penetrate the nasal and maxillary bones also, resulting in a mass dorsal
to the nasal passages (Fig. 5-42). In some cases, the tumor may penetrate the maxilla and
644
extend to the retrobulbar space causing exophthalmos. This may be the clinical feature that
is first noticed by the owner.
 The most common nasal tumors are adenocarcinoma, nonkeratinizing squamous cell
ence of soft-tissue density in only one nasal passage is most commonly associated with
lymphoma.137 CT and MRI are superior to radiography for detecting invasion into the
cribriform plate. 138
FIG. 5-39 A 6-year-old female Cocker Spaniel with
nasal discharge for several months. The open-mouth
ventrodorsal radiograph revealed a moderate decrease
in the prominence of the intranasal bony structures,
which gives the appearance of hyperlucency. The
existing bony structures appear thickened and coarse.
Differential diagnoses include fungal rhinitis and neo-
plasia. Diagnosis: Nasal aspergillosis.
FIG. 5-40 A 6-year-old Havana Brown cat with bilateral nasal
discharge for 3 weeks. The open-mouth ventrodorsal view
revealed obliteration of air passages in the left planum nasale.
There is an overall increased tissue density in the left nasal pas-
sges. Allincisive and maxillary teeth are absent except for the
second incisor. The vomer, which normally is apparent to the
level of the rostral border of the incisive bones, has been
destroyed in its most rostral aspect (black arrow). Differential
diagnoses include nasal neoplasia and infection. Diagnosis: Nasal
fibrous histiocytoma.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
645
FIG. 5-41 A4-year-old male West Highland White Terrier with occa-
sional seizures for 2 months. The ventrodorsal radiograph revealed a
pe saessed ieu luai aul jo uood ieneo aul u aisuap anss
frontal sinus (f). Scrutiny, or comparison of the presence of the left
 auyo sis pan apis odo a ym () auq i
frontal bone sugesting tumor penetration into the cranial vault.
Differential diagnoses include nasal neoplasia and cranial neoplasia.
Diagnosis: Nasal adenocarcinoma with extension into the cranial
vault.
FIG. 5-42 An ll-year-old male
German Shepherd dog with a soff-
tissue mass rostral to and involving
 the right eye. The lateral radiograph
revealed a large tissue-density mass
in the area cranial to the eyes (open.
white arrow). Scrutiny revealed
some loss of bone density in the
maxillae (open black arrow) and a
fine linear periosteal response dorsal
to the maxillae (small black arrow).
 Differential diagnoses include nasal
tumor with extension, primary
bone tumor of the maxilla, and
metastatic neoplasia. Diagnosis:
Nasal adenocarcinoma with exten-
sion through the maxillae.
646
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY
Nasal Hemorrhage. Nasal hemorrhage may occur as a result of bleeding diatheses,
trauma, or vascular erosion caused by infection or neoplasia. The resulting tissue density
in the nasal passages (one or both) is indistinguishable from the radiographic pattern that
  n u  n  a  s
destruction. In most patients with nasal hemorrhage there is little accumulation of blood
within the nasal cavity and the turbinates will appear normal.
Trauma. Fractures of the maxilla are the most common sequelae to nasal cavity trauma.
Fracture fragments may be minimally displaced and may be evident as lucent lines within
the bone. Displaced fractures may overlap and produce a radiodense rather than a radi-
olucent line. If the fracture completely encircles the nasal passages there may be complete
detachment of the nose from the remainder of the skull. With fractures of the frontal
sinuses, the fragments may be depressed into the sinuses. These may form sequestra, and
removal of the fragment may become necessary. All fractures into the nasal passages and
sinuses should be considered open because they communicate with the outside. Tooth root
involvement should be identified at the time of the initial injury because periapical
abscesses could develop. Hemorrhage may accompany the fracture, producing a soft-tissue
density within the nasal cavity or frontal sinus. Complete evaluation of nasal cavity frac-
tures often requires multiple oblique views.
Foreign Bodies. Radiopaque foreign bodies, such as wires, bullets, or metal fragments, are
detected easily. Bone-dense foreign objects, such as chicken bones, may be more difficult to
detect because of the overlying shadows of the skull bones. Radiolucent foreign objects,
such as grass, straw, or plant awns, cannot be detected on noncontrast radiographs. They
may produce no radiographic changes if the exudate drains completely, may produce a
soft-tissue density if the exudate accumulates or if there is a focal granulomatous reaction
or, rarely, may cause turbinate destruction. The radiographic changes are unilateral unless
the foreign body has migrated or been displaced iatrogenically from one side to the other.
Endoscopy may be helpful in identifying the foreign object. Flushing the nasal cavity with
saline may dislodge a foreign body.
 Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance Imaging. CT is extremely valuable
for the assessment of lesions of the nasal cavity,139141 The dorsal imaging plane hasbeen
recommended as being more accurate for assessing lesions within the cribriform plate
when compared with the transverse plane.142 CT has been shown to be more sensitive and
cribriform plate.138 CT has been compared with radiography for the evaluation of nasal
tumors.143 Although CT was more accurate in delineating tumor extent and in docu-
menting tumor extension into adjacent structures, such as the palate and the cranial cav-
ity, the tumor could be identified correctly on the radiographs. CT is useful for tumor
staging and planning of radiation therapy or surgery. Destruction of ethmoid bones,
extension of soft tissue into the retrobulbar area, destruction of the maxilla or nasal bone,
 or hyperostosis of the maxilla were identified in CT scans of dogs with nasal tumors. 140
 In CT scans obtained following intravenous contrast injection, patchy areas of increased
density, possibly due to contrast enhancement, were observed. Infection resulted in cavi-
tating lesions, which thickened and distorted the turbinates. 141 No single finding or com-
bination of findings was specific for tumor. MRI produces similar information. The
soft-tisue changes are better defined with MRI, and the bony lesions are better defined
with CT. The extent of the tumor mass within the nasal cavity, the presence of exudate
within the frontal sinus, and spread of the tumor to the brain are all easily identified with
MRI.
TEETH
Developmental. A large number of developmental problems can occur. These include
missing teeth, both deciduous and permanent; retained deciduous teeth; supernumerary
Sunok Aiaa u uos aq Aeu 'nssn suasopo wo sse ieq iou e 'euooo
ChapteR Five The Skull
647
podo ssuedxa aq aeu i uosa sis ni e se sde ansn n see
odontoma may also include well-formed tooth elements.
Pn s sq ie s pe ni a ui sr are au  
be recognized in order to distinguish normal aging changes from dental disease. The size
of the pulp cavity is large in young animals and becomes small and nearly disappears in old
 dogs. Reabsorption of alveolar bone horizontaly along the axis of the mandible or maxilla
is a common finding in older dogs and may represent the effects of low-grade, chronic
F1G. 5-43 A, A 5-year-old male
Maltese had a draining tract from his
lower jaw for months. The lateral
oblique view of the mandibles
revealed an angular deformity of the
roots of both fourth premolars with
the roots angled toward each other
(arrows). B, A fistulogram in the
same case reveals that the fistula
 arises from the apex of the abnormal
tooth. Diagnosis: Dilaceration with
V-root malformation and  fistula
formation.
A
B
648
periodontal disease.146,147 Hypercementosis or deposition of excessve amounts of sec-
ondary cementum on the tooth roots, resulting in root thickening and bulbous apical
enlargement of the tooth roots is an uncommon but normal aging change.17,148 Idiopathic
dental root replacement resorption has been reported in older dogs.149 Radiographically
abnormal and or partially resorbed roots with replacement of root structures by radi-
ographically normal trabecular bone is noted. Histology reveals that the resorption is not
associated with inflammation of hypercementosis.
Periodontal Disease. The most common problems that affect teeth result from gingivitis,
 or gum inflammation. Gingivitis is more common in smaller breed and older dogs as well
as cats. 50,151 Gingivitis may be primary and associated with accumulation of plaque and
calculus or occur secondary to the presence of tooth root fragments retained from inade-
quate tooth extraction or fracturing of teeth below the gum line (Fig. 5-44). Gingivitis pro-
of the alveolus, destruction of the periodontal ligament and adjacent bone, and ultimately
results in the loosening of the tooth (Fig. 5-45). Active efforts at periodontal care are usu-
ally not successful in preventing periodontal disease, although they may lessen its sever-
ity.152 Gingivitis and periodontal disease may cause focal or generalized loss of bone. In
most instances the radiographic findings lead one to underestimate the extent of the bony
lesion, because a loss of greater than 30% to 50% of bone mineral is required before radi-
 ographic lucency can be appreciated.144
 Periodontal disease is classified in five stages based on the degree of clinical and radi-
ographic changes. Stages I and II have no radiographic changes. In stage II the alveolar
crest becomes indistinct and rounded. In stage IV there is loss of integrity of the lamina
dura, an increase in periodontal space, and destruction of bone between the tooth roots.
Further loss of bone is indicative of stage V disease.4 In some instances of chronic infec-
tion, there may be partial resorption of the tooth root and enlargement of the bony alveo-
lus (Fig. 5-46). Another manifestation is formation of a periapical lucency. This is seen
radiographically as a focal loss of bone density with variable degrees of sclerosis at the bor-
ders of the lesion (Fig. 5-47). These may be due to formation of granulomas, cysts, or
abscesses.4 In severe cases of periodontal disease there may be extension of the infection
into the nasal cavity or spread of infection diffusely into the supporting bone.
Caries and Acquired Lesions. Although uncommon in dogs and cats, dental cavities, or
( ) oi a m s  se re a a o op s
Feline odontoclastic resorption lesions, previously referred to as cervical line erosions,
 neck lesions, or feline cavities, start as defects in the tooth near the gum line.153 These
FIG. 5-44 An 8-year-old male
Cocker Spaniel with halitosis.
 Physical examination revealed active
gngivitis. The lateral oblique radi-
ograph isolated the lef maxilla and
revealed resorption of alveolar bone
from the area around the frst pre-
molar and the area of absence of the
second, third,and fourth premolars.
Close scrutiny revealed root tips
embedded in the bone where the
teeth were missing. There are indis-
tinct zones of lysis around these
roots (black arrows)indicating active
infection. Diagnosis: Gingivitis and
osteomyelitis.
Chapter Five The Skull
649
FIG. 5-45 A 6-year-old female
 Miniature Poodle with chronic gin-
givitis. The lateral oblique radi-
 ograph, isolating the right mandible,
revealed generalized resorption of
 bone from the mandible. This is par-
ticularly prominent between the
teeth and around the roots white
arrow). Diagnosis: Gingivitis and
periodontitis.
FIG. 5-46 A 7-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with a swelling
around the root of the left canine tooth. The open-mouth ventrodorsal view
revealed a large bony mass involving the maxilla in the area ofthe alveolus for
the canine tooth root. The left canine tooth is displaced cranially and the root
is shortened. These findings are consistent with chronic infection within the
alveolus. Diagnosis: Chronic infection causing lysis of the root tip and
expansion of the alveolar bone of the left canine tooth.
FIG. 5-47 A 9-year-old neutered female Cocker Spaniel with reluctance to eat and drooling for 3
weeks. The lateral oblique radiograph, isolating the right maxilla, revealed a large area of bony lysis
involving the maxilla from the canine tooth to the fourth premolar. It also revealed a focal area of
lysis around the caudal root of the fourth premolar (black arrows). Differential diagnoses for the
major lesion include squamous cell carcinoma, primary bone tumor, melanoma, and metastatic
tumor. Diagnosis: Squamous cell carcinoma of the rostral maxilla and periapical abscess of the cau-
dal root of the fourth premolar.
650
SmAll ANImAl RADlOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
lesions frequently progress to involve resorption of both internal and external tooth struc-
tures, ultimately leading to loss of the crown of the tooth and potentially the majority of
 s o s    s n   
Fractures of teeth are fairly common. The most commonly affected teeth are the
ud uon unede aen are sae au ss iso u s'sod pue su
examination. Radiographs may be useful to determine what structures are involved with
 the fracture and if any secondary lesions have occurred (Fig. 5-49).156 Fractures of the roots
 may be difficult to diagnose without radiography.
Endodontic Disease. Endodontic disease can manifest radiographic changes in both bone
and tooth structure. Endodontic lesions are most commonly found at the apex of the
FIG. 5-48 A 15-year-old neutered
male Siamese cat with severe dental
disease. The lateral oblique view of
the left mandible reveals a defect in
the enamel (short white arrow) which
extends into an enlarged pulp cham-
ber (black arrows). There is poor
bone quality in the rostral mandibles
due to chronic inflammation and
tooth loss. Significant vertical bone
loss is noted on the cranial root of
the third premolar. Diagnoses:
Chronic periodontal disease with
moderate bone recession. Caries of
the third premolar with internal
resorption.
FIG. 5-49 A 6-year-old male Cocker
Spaniel with a fractured canine tooth
was examined for consideration of
restorative dentistry. The lateral
oblique view, isolating the left max-
illa, revealed the fractured crown of
the left canine tooth (white arrow).
There was no evidence of lysis of the
root canal or periodontal or periapi-
 cal areas. Diagnosis: Fractured left
maxillary canine tooth crown with-
out complication.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
651
tooth, but lesions may also occur on the vertical surfaces due to involvement with acces-
sory canals. Radiographic changes may include widened periodontal spaces, focal
bone resorption in the periodontal space, periapical lucencies, pulp calcification, or inter-
nal resorption of tooth structure (Fig. 5-50). Necrosis of the pulp cavity may produce a
dense, bony reaction adjacent to the apex of the tooth root. This has been referred to as
 condensing osteitis.4 Therefore it may be difficult to distinguish between endodontal and
periodontal diseases. All lesions reflect inflammation of the pulp. Endodontic lesions fre-
quently are associated with tooth fractures.157
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF OCULAR ABNORMALITIES
 Ultrasonography is not needed in most animals with an ocular abnormality because the
lesion can be seen with an ophthalmoscope. However, when the cornea, lens, or anterior or
posterior chambers are opaque or when the disease isin the retrobulbar space, ultrasonog-
during an ocular examination, an ultrasonographic examination may still prove useful,
because it provides information about the structures behind the mass and will define more
 completely the posterior extent of the mass (Fig. 5-51).159
 Foreign objects within the eye can be detected despite the presence of hemorrhage or
inflammation, which would interfere with a direct examination. These objects usually are
hyperechoic and have distant shadowing. Radiopaque foreign objects can be detected radi-
ographically; however, defining their exact position within the globe is difficult. The ultra-
sonographic examination will locate the exact position of the foreign body and will
indicate whether it is in the globe or retrobulbar. Eye injury secondary to foreign body pen-
etration can be evaluated (Fig. 5-52).
Masses that arise from the iris or ciliary apparatus can be identified during an ultrasono-
echoic and fixed in position. Iris and ciliary cysts are either attached to the iris or ciliary body
FIG. 5-5o A 5-year-old female German Shepherd dog with
excessive salivation. The open-mouth ventrodorsal view
revealed an enlarged pulp canal of the left canine tooth (black
arrow) when compared with the right canine tooth. The tooth
alveolus is also slightly enlarged (white arrow). The adhesive
-ip ieai uass osie si suosod u pasn sim ieun ad
noses include infection and neoplasia. Diagnosis: Endodontic
resorption and periapical abscess. (Radiograph courtesy Dr. A.
Karmin, Bellerose Animal Hospital, Bellerose, NY.)
652
or floating in the anterior chamber and usually can be detected during an ocular examina-
 tion.l6l These cysts are filled with fluid and have a thin wall Most cysts can be differentiated
from tumors during the physical examination because the cysts can be transilluminated while
the tumors are opaque. Cysts that are associated with the posterior surface of the iris may be
more difficult to differentiate from tumors and, therefore, ultrasonography can be used to
identify the anechoic cystic nature of these lesions. Blood, pus, or cellular debris may be pres-
FIG. 5-51 Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B) sonograms of the
right eye of a 10-year-old castrated
 male Pit Bull with uveitis and glau-
coma of 1 month duration. There is
a heteroechoic mass noted dorsal (A)
and lateral (B) to the lens. This rep-
resents a tumor arising from the
ciliary body. Diagnosis: Ciliary
carcinoma.
A
FIG. 5-52 Longitudinal (A and B)
 and transverse (C and D) sonograms
 ofthe right eye of an 8-year-old male 
DEI
Cocker Spaniel with a history of per-
forating ocular injury that occurred
1 week previously. There are hyper-
echoic lesions involving the anterior
and posterior portions of the lens.
These lesions appear to touch in the
central portion of the lens. They rep-
resent scars from perforation of the
lens secondary to a penetrating ocu-
A
lar foreign body. A shotgun pellet
was identified radiographically in
the retrobulbar tissues. Diagnosis:
Scar in the lens secondary to pene-
trating foreign body.
DRSAL
C
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
653
ent also within the eye, obscuring direct visualization.162 They may be less well defined than
tumors or granulomas and may move during the ultrasonographic examination. These
lesions are often heteroechoic. They may be fixed in position, making discrimination among
 organized hematoma, granuloma, and tumor impossible.
The lens can be examined using ultrasonography Although this rarely is required for eval-
uating cataracts, it is important to examine the eye for retinal detachment prior to cataract
removal.35 A mature cataract will result in a lens that is highly echogenic, and the internal
n si a     s s a  i a  sas
lens may appear thinner than normal. Luxation of the lens may be detected also (Fig. 5-56).
 FIG. 5-53 A 7-year-old male Pit Bull
Terrier had a mass involving the iris
 at the limbus. The sonogram shows
the mass (M) involving the iris
(white arrow)、 ciliary body, and
zonules, and extending into the vit-
reous chamber (V). Also identified
is the anterior chamber (AC)
and lens (L). Diagnosis: Malignant
melanoma.
FIG. 5-54 Transverse (A and C) and
longitudinal (B and D) sonograms
of the right (A and B) and left (C
and D) eyes of a 10-year-old male
mixed breed dog with a history of
bilateral cataracts and asymmetric
electroretinograms. The lenses are
echogenic with prominent lens cap-
sules. This is indicative of bilateral
cataracts. There is no evidence of
retinal detachment. Diagnosis:
Cataracts.
C
D
654
 Retinal detachment can be detected during an ultrasonographic examination of the
eye 158 A thin, echogenic line wil be sen separated from the surface of the globe. The line
often assumes a “sea gull" or V shape, with the point of the V attached at the optic disc.
 Incomplete retinal detachment may appear as a curved echogenic line separated from the
globe. The detached retina may move slightly or float within the vitreous (Fig. 5-57). The
space behind the retina may be anechoic, hypoechoic, or filled with echogenic cells. The
major differentials for retinal detachment are the presence of a vitreous membrane or
fibrous strands within the vitreous. A vitreal membrane is a hyperechoic linear structure
that may be seen in the vitreous chamber but does not attach to the globe at the optic
disc.163-165 Fibrous strands may occur following intraocular hemorrhage. These can be dis-
tinguished from retinal detachment because they rarely attach at the optic disc. An unusual
cause of retinal detachment has been a melanoma of the choroid plexus, which appeared
as a conical mass projecting from the area of the optic disc.16
Asteroid hyalosis may produce multiple echoes within the vitreous chamber (Fig. 5-58).
Vitreous degeneration produces multiple echogenic lines or areas within the vitreous.
FIG. 5-55 Longitudinal sonograms
of the leff eye of an ll-year-old
female mixed breed dog brought for
preoperative evaluation of bilateral
cataracts. The lens capsule is thick-
ened and there is increased
echogenicity in the lens. There is
nonstructured echogenic material
within the vitreous chamber. A
curvilinear echogenic structure is
located in the caudal medial aspect 
of the vitreous (arrows). This repre-
sents a small retinal detachment.
Diagnosis: Retinal detachment, vit-
real debris or degeneration, cataract.
LON
FIG. 5-56 Transverse sonograms of
the right eye of a 3-year-old spayed
female cat with a history of glau-
coma and uveitis of 2 weeks dura-
tion. The eye is enlarged and the lens
is luxated posteriorly. Diagnosis:
Luxation of the lens, glaucoma.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
655
FIG. 5-57 Transverse sonograms of
the eyes of a 5-year-old mixed breed
male dog brought in for evaluation
of glaucoma (A), and of a 3-year-old
spayed female mixed breed dog
brought for evaluation of cataract
with poor light response (B). A
curvilinear echogenic structure is
visible in the vitreous chambers in
both dogs. This structure can be
traced caudally to the region of the
optic disc. This represents a detached
retina. Diagnosis: Retinal detach-
ment.
A
FIG. 5-58 Longitudinal (A, C, and
D) and transverse (B) sonograms of
the right eye of a 12-year-old spayed
aPSS
female mixed breed dog with a his-
tory of exophthalmos and retrobul-
bar swelling of 3 weeks duration.
There is a hypoechoic, irregularly
shaped mass in the retrobulbar space
(biack arrows). This represents a
retrobulbar tumor or abscess. There
A
is irregularly shaped echogenic
material in the vitreous chamber
(white arrows). This is indicative of
asteroid  hyalosis.
Diagnosis:
EP
 Retrobulbar carcinoma.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF THE RETROBULBAR AREA
the skull in this area may not be delineated fully by ultrasonography. 168 The examination may
be performed by placing the transducer on the cornea and imaging the retrobulbar area
through the eye. The transducer also may be positioned dorsal to the zygomatic arch and
caudal to the eye to examine the retrobulbar area directly. Both transverse and longitudinal
 planes should be used. The area behind the eye usually is well defined with structures (e.g.
optic nerve, extraocular muscles, and fat) in the orbital cone and a uniformly heteroechoic
tissue around the orbital cone. Lesions may be hyperechoic or hypoechoic and diffuse or well
656
SmAll ANimAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 5-59 Longitudinal sonograms
of the left eye of a 7-year-old male
English Springer Spaniel with a his-
tory of conjunctivitis and buphthal-
mos. There is an irregularly shaped
hypoechoic mass in the retrobulbar
space. This may represent a tumor or
abscess. Diagnosis: Retrobulbar
squamous cell carcinoma.
DISTANCE
31.5mm
defined. Distinction between tumor and inflammation is difficult.34 Aspiration of lesions can
be guidedbyultrasonography and can help in achieving a specific diagnosis.67,169-17 Both
tumors and abscesses may be well defined or poorly defined (Figs. 5-58 and 5-59). Deformity
of the globe may be identified. In addition to permitting identification of the mass, an ultra-
sonographic examination also helps guide needle aspiration or biopsy.34
 pe s are a au  q  s uir rn
 shadowing deep to them. Hypoechoic zones may be identified if there is inflammation or 
abscess formation around the foreign body.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY AND MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OF
THE ORBIT
CT has been used to evaluate the orbital structures of the dog. The infraorbital fat contrasts
with the extraocular muscles and nerves, and intracranial extension of an orbital mass can
 be detected easily,172,173 MRI also can be used for examination of the eye and orbit. Good
 anatomical detail is produced. Ultrasonography is less expensive, is more readily available,
and provides better intraocular information but inferior information about surrounding
bony structures. All of these techniques are superior to contrast orbitography.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY AND MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OF
THE BRAIN
The brain can be evaluated using either CT or MRI. Technique selection is based mainly on
availability; however, MRI usually is preferred for evaluation of the human brain. There are
many references describing both techniques and these should be consulted if imaging of
structures, are important in identifying brain structures using CT. CT is useful in identify-
 ing neoplastic and inflammatory brain diseases in dogs and cats.177 It provides information
relative to lesion size, location, and character and defines the relationship between brain
lesions and normal structures of the calvarium. Similar changes were noted in tumors and
inflammatory lesions. These changes included enlargement or asymmetry of the ventricles,
midline shift of the falx, edema, focal changes in opacity of the brain (both before and afr
contrast administration), periventricular contrast enhancement, and ringlike enhancement
of brain lesions. Only one of the inflammatory lesions described was multifocal.
 between white and gray matter is superior in MRI when compared with CT. Differentia-
tion between neoplastic and inflammatory lesions is difficult.
Radiographic contrast agents often are administered during the CT examination, and
paramagnetic contrast agents are used during MRI examinations to enhance identification
of lesions. Both radiographic contrast and paramagnetic contrast agents can cross a dis-
rupted blood-brain barrier and this will increase the visibility of many lesions.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
657
Quantitative CT, which uses radiographic contrast and quantitates the rate of contrast
accumulation and washout, has been used to differentiate between inflammatory and neo-
plastic brain lesions. The value of this technique is questionable178,179
REFERENCES
1. Dickie AM, Sullivan M: The effect of obliquity on the radiographic
28. Voorhout G, Rijnberk A: Cisternography cormbined with linear
appearance of the temporormandibular joint in dogs. Vet Radiol
d ym su s id yo uns i de
Ultrasound 2001; 42:205.
itary dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:74.
 2. Kus SP, Morgan IP: Radiography of the canine head: optirmal posi-
29. Schrmid V, Lang J, Wolf M: Dandy-Walker-like syndrorme in four
tioning with respect to skull type. Vet Radiol 1985; 26:196.
dogs: cisternography as a diagnostic aid. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
3. Burk RL, Corwin LA, Zimmerman D: Use of a modified ocipital
1992; 28:355.
view for radiographic exarmination of the skull Vet Med Small Anim
 30. Trower ND, Gregory SP, Renfrew H, et al: Evaluation of the canine
Clin 1978; 73:460.
tyrnpanic rmermbrane by positive contrast ear canalography. Vet Rec
 4. Bellows J: Radiographic signs and diagnosis of dental disease. Semin
1998; 142:78.
Vet Med Surg 1993; 8:138.
 31. Hager DA, Dziezyc J, Millicharmp NJ: Two-dirmensional real-time
 5. Lormrmer MJ, Verstraete FJM, Terpak CH: Dental radiographic tech-
 ocular ultrasonography in the dog: technique and norrmal anatormy.
nique in cats. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 2000; 22: 107.
Vet Radiol 1987; 28:60.
6. Verstraete FJM, Kass PH, Terpak CH: Diagnostic value of full-rmouth
 32. Dziezyc J, Hager DA, Millicharnp NJ: Two-dirmensional real-tirme
radiography in dogs. A1m J Vet Res 1998; 59:686.
ocular ultrasonography in the diagnosis of ocular lesions in dogs.
7. Verstraete FJM, Kass PH, Terpak CH: Diagnostic value of full-rmouth
JArm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1987; 23:501.
radiography in cats. Arm J Vet Res 1998; 59:692.
 33. Dziezyc J, Hager DA: Ocular ultrasonography in veterinary rmedi-
 8. Zontine WJ: Canine dental radiology radiographic technic, develop-
cine. Sermin Vet Med Surg 1988; 3:1.
ment and anatormy of the teeth. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1975; 16:75.
 34. Morgan R: Utrasonography of retrobulbar diseases of the dog and
9. Ermily PE: Intraoral radiology. Vet Clin North Am 1986; 2:801.
cat. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1989; 25:393.
10. San Roman F, Llorens MP, Pena MT, et al: Dental radiography in the
 35. van der Woerdt A, Wilkie DA, Myer W: Utrasonographic abnormal-
dog with a conventional x-ray device. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:235.
ities in the eyes of dogs with cataracts: 147 cases (1986-1992). J A1m
11. Eisner ER: Intraoral radiography an indispensable diagnostic aid.
Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:838.
Vet Med 1988; 83:1131.
36. HusnJA,CarteeRE,Simpson ST,etal: Utrasonographic anatmy
12. Harvey CE: The nasal septurm of the dog: Is it visible radiographi-
 of the canine brain. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:13.
cally? Vet Radiol 1979; 20:88.
37. Hudson JA, Sirmnpson ST, Buxton DF, et al: Utrasonographic diagno-
 13. Schwarz T, Sullivan M, Hartung K: Radiographic anatormy of the crib-
sis of canine hydrocephalus. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:50.
riforrm plate (Larmina cribrosa). Vet Radiol Utrasound 2000; 41:220.
 38. Spaulding KA, Sharp NJH: Ultrasonographic irmaging of the lateral
14. Evans HE, Christensen GC: Miller's anatormy of the dog, ed 2. WB
 cerebral ventricles in the dog. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:59.
 Saunders, Philadelphia, 1979.
 39. Hudson JA, Sirmpson ST, Cox NR, et al: Ultrasonographic exarmina-
15. Verstraete FIM, Terpak CH: Anatomical variations in the dentition of
tion of the normal canine neonatal brain. Vet Radiol 1991; 32:50.
the dormestic cat. J Vet Dent 1997; 14:137.
40. Gelatt-Nicholson KJ, Gelatt KN, MacKay E, et al: Doppler irmaging of
16. Zontine WI: Dental radiographic technique and interpretation. Vet
the ophthalmic vasculature of the norrmal dog: blood velocity rmeas-
Clin North Arm 1974; 4:741.
urerment and reproducibility. Vet Comp Ophthalrmol 1999; 2:87.
17. Morgan JP, Miyabayashi T: Dental radiology: aging changes in per-
 41. Gelatt-Nicholson KJ, Gelatt KN, MacKay E, et al: Doppler irmaging of
 Imanent teeth of Beagle dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1991; 32:11.
the ophthalmic vasculature in norrmal Beagles and Beagles with
18. Oliver JE: Cranial sinus venography in the dog. J Arm Vet Radiol Soc
inherited primary open-angle glaucorma. Vet Cormp Ophthalmol
1969; 10:66.
1999; 2:97.
19. Harvey CE: Sialography in the dog. I Aim Vet Radiol Soc 1969; 10:18.
42. Schrmid V, Murisier N: Color doppler imaging of the orbit in the dog.
20. Munger RJ, Ackerrman N: Retrobulbar injections in the dog: a corm-
Vet Comp Ophthalnol 1996; 6:35.
 parison of three techniques. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:490.
43. Stuhr CM, Scagliotti RH: Retrobulbar ultrasound in the rmesati-
 21. Dorn AS: A standard technique for canine cerebral angiography. J
cephalic and dolichocephalic dog using a termporal approach. Vet
Arm Vet Med Assoc 1972; 161:12.
Cormp Ophthalmol 1996; 6:91.
 22. Grevel V, Breuer EM, Lettow E, et al: Retrobulbar chondrorma rodens
44. Park RD,Beck ER, LeCouteur RA: Comparison of cormputed tomog-
in a dog: a contribution to the localization of expanding lesions by
raphy and radiography for detecting changes induced by malignant
indirect radiological demonstration of the optic nerve.
nasal neoplasia in dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:1720.
Kleinterpraxis 1988; 33:387.
 45. Banks WG, Monlux WS: Canine hydrocephalus. J Ain Vet Med Assoc
23. Gillette EL, Thrall DE, Lebel JE: Carlson's veterinary radiology.Lea &
1952; 121:453.
Febiger, Philadelphia, 1977.
46. Morgan JP: Radiology in veterinary orthopedics. Lea & Febiger,
 24. Ticer IW: Radiographic technique in veterinary practice, ed 2. WB
Philadelphia, 1972.
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1984.
 47. Carmichael S, Lamb CR,Bjornson AP,et al: Polyostotic lymphoma in
25. Goring RL, Ticer IW, Gross TL, et al: Positive contrast rhinography.
 a young dog: a case report and literature review. J Small Anim Pract
A technique for radiographic evaluation of the nasal cavity, nasal
1997; 38:4 12.
 pharynx, and paranasal sinuses in the dog. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:98.
48. Ciekot PA, Powers BE, Withrow SI: Histologically low-grade, yet bio-
26. Goring RL, Ticer IW, Ackerman N, et al: Contrast rhinography in the
logically high-grade, fibrosarcomas of the rmandible and maxilla in
radiographic evaluation of diseases affecting the nasal cavity,
dogs: 25 cases (1982-1991). J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1994; 204:610.
nasopharynx, and paranasal sinuses in the dog. Vet Radiol 1984;
49. Foley RH: Zygormatic osteoma in a cat. Feline Pract 1993; 21:26.
25:106.
 50. Gillette EL, Thrall DE, Lebel JL: Carlson's veterinary radiology. Lea &
 27. Voorhout G: Cisternography cormbined with linear tormography for
 Febiger, Philadelphia, 1977; p 232.
visualization of the pituitary gland in healthy dogs. Vet Radiol 1990;
 51. Frew DG, Dobson JM: Radiological assessment of 50 cases of incisive
31:68.
 or rmaxillary neoplasia in the dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1992; 33:11.
658
 52. Hardy WD, Brodey RS, Riser WH: Osteosarcoma of the canine skull
79. Whittaker CIG, Dill-Macky E, Hodgson DR: Nasopharyngeal polyp
 J An Vet Radiol Soc 1967; 8:5.
in a cat. Aust Vet Pract 1994; 24:8.
 53. Todoroff RJ, Brodey RS: Oral and pharyngeal neoplasia in the dog: a
80. Kapatkin AS, Matthiesen DT, Noone KE, et al: Results of surgery
retrospective study of 361 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175:567.
 54. Hendrix DVH, Gelatt KN: Diagnosis, treatrment and outcome of
Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 1990; 23:387.
orbital neoplasia in dogs: a retrospective study of 44 cases. J Srmall
 81. Elkins AD: Resolving respiratory distress created by a nasopharyn-
Anirm Pract 2000; 41:105.
geal polyp. Vet Med 1987; 82:1234.
 55. Straw RC, LeCouteur RA, Powers BE, et al: Multilobular osteochon-
 82. Fingland RG, Gratzek A, Vorhies MW, et al: Nasopharyngeal polyp
 drosarcorma of the canine skull 16 cases (1978-1988). J A1m Vet Med
in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:311.
Assoc 1989; 195:1764.
 83. Cox NR, Shores A, McCoy CP, et al: Obstructive hydrocephalus due to
 56. McCalla TL, Moore CP, Turk J, et al: Multilobular osteosarcorma of 
neoplasia in a Rottweiler puppy. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:335.
the mandible and orbit in a dog. Vet Pathol 1989; 26:92.
84. Shell LG: Seizures in cats. Vet Med 1998; 93:541.
 57. Groff JM, Murphy CJ, Pool RR, et al: Orbital multilobular turmor of
 85. Rivers WJ, Walter PA: Hydrocephalus in the dog: utility of ultra-
bone in a dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1992; 33:587.
sonography as an alternate diagnostic irmaging technique. J Am
 58. Dernell WS, Straw RC, Cooper MF, et al: Multilobular osteochon-
Anim Hosp Assoc 1992; 28:333.
drosarcorma in 39 dogs: 1979-1993. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1998;
 86. Vite CH, Insko EK, Schotland HM, et al: Quantification of cerebral
34:11.
ventricular yolurme in English Bulldogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound
n [o e na d qs  s i s 6 
1997; 38:437.
tumor of bone in a Basset Hound. Vet Cormp Ophthalrmol 1997;
87. Parker AJ, Park RD: Occipital dysplasia in the dog.J Am Anirm Hosp
7: 111.
Assoc 1974; 10:520.
60. Lawson C, Burk RL, Prata RG: Cerebral meningiorma in the cat: diag-
 88. Simoens P, Poels P, Lauwers H: Morphormetric analysis of the fora-
nosis and surgical treatrment of ten cases. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
Imen rmagnurm in Pekingese dogs. Arm J Vet Res 1994; 55:34.
1984; 20:333.
89. Bagley RS, Harrington ML, Tucker RL, et al: Occipital dysplasia and
61. London CA, Dubielzig RR, Vail DM, et al: Evaluation of dogs and
associated cranial spinal abnorimalities in two dogs. Vet Radiol
cats with turmors of the ear canal: 145 cases (1978-1992). J Am Vet
1996; 37:359.
Med Assoc 1996; 208:1413.
 90. Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al: Acrormegaly in 14 cats. JI Vet
62. Plotnick A, Brunt JE, Reitz BL: What is your diagnosis? Bone lysis of
Intern Med 1990; 4:192.
zygomatic process and termporormandibular joint due to squarmous
 91. Eigenmann JE, Venkervan Haagen AJ: Progesterone-induced and
cell carcinorma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:991.
spontaneous canine acrormegaly due a reversible growth hormone
 63. Liu SK, Dorfrman HD: The cartilage analogue of fibromatosis (juve-
over production: clinical picture and pathogenesis. J Am Anim
nile aponeurotic fibrorma) in dogs. Vet Pathol 1974; 11:60.
Hosp Assoc 1981; 17:8 13.
64. Schulte A: Neoplasms in ears of cats. Kleinterpraxis 1988; 33:407.
 92. Cowell KR, Jezyk PF, Haskins ME, et al: Mucopolysaccharidosis in a
65. Dahliwal RS, Kitchell BE, Manfra Marretta S: Oral turmors in dogs
cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1976; 169:334.
and cats. Part 1. Diagnosis and clinical signs. Cormp Cont Educ Pract
 93. Langweiler M, Haskins ME, Jezyk PF: Mucopolysaccharidosis in a
Vet 1998; 20:1011.
litter of cats. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 1978; 14:748.
 66. Eisner ER: A case of reactive bone secondary to periodontal disease
 94. Haskins ME, Jezyk PF, Desnick RJ, et al: Mucopolysaccharidosis in
in a 14-year-old cat. J Vet Dent 1990; 7:16.
a dormestic cat. A disease distinct frorm that seen in the Siarmese cat.
67. Kapatkin AS, Manfra Marretta S, Patnaik AK, et al: Mandibular
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175:384.
swellings in cats; prospective study of 24 cats. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
 95. Konde L, Thrall MA, Gasper P, et al: Radiographically visualized
1991; 27:575.
skeletal changes associated with mucopolysaccharidosis Vl in cats.
68. Johnson KA, Cooley AJ, Muir P, et al: Maxillary central giant cell
Vet Radiol 1987; 28:223.
granuloma in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 1994; 35:427.
 96. Shull RM, Walker MA: Radiographic findings in a canine model of
 69. Ticer IW, Spencer CP: Injury of the feline temporoimandibular joint:
mucopolysaccharidosis l changes associated with bone marrow
radiographic signs. Vet Radiol 1978; 19:146.
transplantation. lnvest Radiol 1988; 23:124.
70. Urmphlet RC, Johnson Al: Mandibular fractures in the cat. A retro-
97. Risr WH, Parkes L,Shirer JF: Canine craniomandibular stea
spective study. Vet Surg 1988; 17:333.
thy. I Am Vet Radiol Soc 1967; 8:23.
71. Schebtz H, Kostlin R, Matis U, et al: Fracture of the jaw in dogs-
98. Franch J, Cesari JR, Font J: Craniomandibular osteopathy in tw0
fractures of the region of the pars incisiva rmandibulae and of the
Pyrenean rmountain dogs. Vet Rec 1998; 142:455.
 proc alveolaris ossis incisivi. Kleinterpraxis 1983; 28:285.
 99. Taylor SM, Rermedios A, Myers S: Craniomandibular osteopathy in
72. Holt DE, Walker L: Radiographic appearance of the middle ear after
a Shetland Sheepdog. Can Vet I 1995; 36:437.
ventral bulla osteotormy in five dogs with otitis media. Vet Radiol
100. Watson ADJ, Adams W, Thomas CB: Craniomandibular osteopa-
Utrasound 1997; 38:182.
thy in dogs. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1995; 17:911.
73. Love NE, Krarmer RW, Spodnick GJ, et al: The radiographic and
101. Padgett GA, Mostosky UV: Anirmal model: the rmode of inheritance
 cormputed tomographic evaluation of otitis rmedia in the dog. Vet
 Of craniormandibular osteopathy in West Highland White Terrier
Radiol 1995; 36:375.
dogs. Am I Med Genet 1986; 25:9.
74. Rermedios AM, Fowler JD, Pharr JW, et al: A cormparison of radi-
102. Dennis R, Barnett KC, Sansorm J: Unilateral exophthalmos and stra-
 ographic versus surgical diagnosis of otitis media. J Am Anirm Hosp
 bisimus due to cranio-rmandibular osteopathy. J Srmall Anirn Pract
Assoc 1991; 27:183.
1993; 34:457.
75. Lane JG, Watkins PE: Paraaural abscess in the dog and cat. J Srmall
103. Trowald-Wigh G, Ekman S, Hansson K, et al: Clinical, radiological
Anirm Pract 1986; 27:521.
and pathological features of 12 lrish Setters with canine leukocyte
 76. Bradley RL: Selected oral, pharyngeal, and upper respiratory condi-
adhesion deficiency. J Small Anirm Pract 2000; 41:211.
tions in the cat: oral turmors, nasopharyngeal and middle ear polyps,
104. Robbins G, Grandage J: Termporormandibular joint dysplasia and open
and chronic rhinitis and sinusitis. Vet Clin North Am 1984; 14:1173.
rmouth jaw locking in the dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1977; 171:1072.
77. Pope ER: Feline inflarmmatory polyps. Comp Anim Pract 1989;
105. Lantz GC, Cantwell HD: Interrmittent open-mouth lower jaw lock-
19:33.
ing in five dogs.J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 188:1403.
 78. Allen HS, Broussard J, Noone K: Nasopharyngeal diseases in cats: a
106. Hazelwinkel HA, Koole R, Voorhout G: Mandibular coronoid
retrospective study of 53 cases (1991-1998). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
process displacerment: signs, causes, treatrment. Vet Comp Orthop
1999; 35:457.
Ther 1993; 6:29.
CHAPTER FIVE THE SKULL
659
107. Sullivan M: Temporormandibular ankylosis in the cat. J Small Anin
135. Sullivan M, Lee R, Skae CA: The radiological features of sixty cases
Pract 1989; 30:401.
of intra-nasal neoplasia in the dog. J Srmall Anin Pract 1987;
108. Meormartino L, Fatone G, Brunetti A, et al: Temporormandibular anky-
28:575.
losis in the cat: a review of seven cases. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1999; 40:7.
136. Knotek Z, Fichtel T, Kohout P, et al: Diseases of the nasal cavity in
109. Pastor KF, Boulay JP, Schelling SH, et al: Idiopathic hyperostosis of
the dog. Aetiology, syrmptormatology, diagnostics. Acta Vet Brno
the calvaria in five young Bullmastiffs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;
2001; 70:73.
36:439.
137. O'Brien RT, Evans SM, Wortman JA, et al: Radiographic findings in
110. McNeel SV: Radiology of the skull and cervical spine. Vet Clin
cats with intranasal neoplasia or chronic rhinitis. J Am Vet Med
North Am 1982; 12:259.
Assoc 1996; 208:385.
111. Lobetti RG, Pearson J, Jimenez M: Renal dysplasia in a Rhodesian
138. Berry CR, Koblik PD: Evaluation of survey radiography, linear
Ridgeback dog. I Small Anim Pract 1996; 37:552.
tomography, and computed tomography for detecting experimen-
112. Chastain CB, Panciera D, Waters C: Nutritional secondary hyper-
tal lesions of the cribriforrm plate in dogs. Vet Radiol 1990; 3 1:146.
parathyroidism in six cats. Sm Anirm Clin Endocrinol 2000; 10:5.
139. Burk Rl: Computed tomographic anatormy of the canine nasal pas-
113. Tomsa K, Glaus T, Hauser B, et al: Nutritional secondary hyper-
sages. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:170.
 parathyroidism in six cats. J Srmall Anirn Pract 1999; 40:533.
140. Burk Rl: Cormputed tomographic irmaging of nasal disease in 100
114. Carmichael DT, Williarms CA, Aller MS: Renal dysplasia with sec-
dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1992; 33:177.
lA I op unok e u yaai asoo pue uspiouueedady Aiepuo
141. Codner EC, Lurus AG, Miller JB, et al: Cormparison of cormputed
Dent 1995; 12:143.
tomography with radiography as a noninvasive diagnostic tech-
115. Morgan IP, Suter PF, O'Brien TR, et al: Turmors of the nasal cavity
nique for chronic nasal disease in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;
of the dog. A radiographic study. I Am Vet Radiol Soc 1972; 13:18.
202:1106.
116. Gibbs C, Lane JG, Denny HR: Radiological features of intranasal
142. Koblik PD, Berry CR: Dorsal plane computed tomographic imaging
lesions in the dog: a review of 100 cases. J Small Anirm Pract 1979;
of the ethmoid region to evaluate chronic nasal disease in the dog.
20:515.
Vet Radiol 1990; 31:92.
117. Harvey CE, Biery DN, Morell J, et al.: Chronic nasal disease in the
143. Thrall DE, Robertson ID, Mcleod DA, et al: A comparison of radi-
dog its radiographic diagnosis. Vet Radiol 1979; 20:91.
ographic and cormputed tormographic findings in 31 dogs with
118. King RR, Greiner EC, Ackerman N, et al: Nasal capillariasis in a dog.
Imalignant nasal cavity tumors. Vet Radiol 1989; 30:59.
J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1990; 26:381.
144. Mulligan TW, Aller MS, Williarns CA: Atlas of canine and feline
119. Carmpbell BG, Little MD: Identification of the eggs of a nematode
dental radiography. Veterinary Learning Systerms, Trenton, NJ, 1998.
(Eucoleus boehmi) from the nasal mucosa of North American dogs.
145. Pavlica Z, Erjavec V, Petelin M: Teeth abnorrmalities in the dog. Acta
 J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:1520.
Vet Brno 200 1; 70:65.
120. Blagburn BL, et al: Canine linguatulosis. Canine Pract 1983; 10:54.
 146. Gengler W, Dubielzig R, Ramer J: Physical exarmination and radi-
121. Bedford PG: Diseases of the nose and throat. ln Ettinger SJ, ed:
 ographic analysis to detect dental and mandibular bone resorption
Textbook of veterinary internal rmedicine. WB Saunders,
in cats: a study of 81 cases frorm necropsy. I Vet Dent 1995; 12:97.
Philadelphia, 1989.
147. Harmp SE, Olsson SE, Farso-Masden K, et al: A rmacroscopic and
122. Allison N, Willard MD, Bentinck-Srmith J, et al: Nasal rhi-
radiologic investigation of dental diseases of the dog. Vet Radiol
nosporidiosis in two dogs. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1986; 188:869.
1984; 25:86.
123. Noris AM: lntranasal neoplasms in the dog. I Am Anirn Hosp
148. Harmp SE, Hamp M, Olsson SE, et al: Radiography of spontaneous
Assoc 1979; 15:231.
periodontitis in dogs. J Periodontal Res 1997; 32:589.
124. MadewellBR, Priester WA,Gilltte EL, et al: Neoplasms of the nasal
149. Arnbjerg I: ldiopathic dental root replacerment resorption in old
 passage and paranasal sinuses in domestic animals as reported by 13
dogs. J Vet Dent 1996; 13:97.
veterinary colleges. Arm J Vet Res 1976; 37:851.
150. Harvey CE, Shofer FS, Laster L: Association of age and body weight
125. Beck ER, Withrow SJ: Turmors of the canine nasal cavity. Vet Clin
with periodontal disease in North American dogs. J Vet Dent 1994;
North A1m 1985; 15:521.
11:94.
126. Smith MO, Turrel IM, Bailey CS, et al: Neurologic abnormalities as
151. Lormmer MJ, Verstraete FJM: Radiographic patterns of periodonti-
the predorminant signs of neoplasia of the nasal cavity in dogs and
tis in cats: 147 cases (1998-1999). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2001;
cats: seven cases (1973-1986). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:242.
218:230.
127. Cox NR, Brawner WR, Powers RD, et al: Turmors of the nose and
152. Inghanrm KE, Gorrel C: Effect of long-term intermittent periodon-
paranasal sinuses in cats: 32 cases with comparison to a national
tal care on canine periodontal disease. J Small Anim Pract 2001;
database ( 1977-1987). I A1m Anirm Hosp Assoc 1991; 27:339.
42:67.
128. Tasker S, Knottenbelt CM, Munro EA, et al: Aetiology and diagno-
153. Tholen MA: Concepts in veterinary dentistry. Veterinary Medicine
sis of persistent nasal disease in the dog: a retrospective study of 42
 Publishing, Edwardsville, Kan, 1983.
cases. I Small Anirm Pract 1999; 40:473.
154. Lyon KF: Subgingival odontoclastic resorptive lesions. Vet Clin
129. Schrmidt M, Voorhout G: Radiography of the canine nasal cavity:
North Arm Small Anim Pract 1992; 22:1417.
significance of the presence or absence of the trabecular pattern. Vet
155. Capik l, Ledecky V, Sevcik A: Tooth fracture evaluation and
Radiol Ultrasound 1992; 33:83.
 endodontic treatrment in dogs. Acta Vet Brno 2000; 69:115.
130. Russo M, Lamb CR, Jakovljevic S: Distinguishing rhinitis and nasal
156. Pavlica Z, Petelin M: Injuries of the fourth upper prermolars in the
neoplasia by radiography. Vet Radiol Utrasound 2000; 41:118.
 dog and different treatrment possibilities. Kleinterpraxis 2001;
131. Stowater IL: Kartagener's syndrorme in a dog. J Am Vet Radiol Soc
46:17.
1976; 17:174.
157. Lormmer MJ, Verstraete FJM: Prevalence of odontoclastic resorption
132. Edwards DF, Kennedy JR, Toal RL, et al: Kartagener's syndrome in a
lesions and periapical radiographic lucencies in cats: 265 cases
Chow Chow dog with norrmal ciliary ultrastructure. Vet Pathol
(1995-1998). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217: 1866.
1989; 26:338.
 158. Nelms SR, Nasisse MP, Davidson MG, et al: Hypherma associated
133. Breitschwerdt EB, Brown TT, DeBuysscher EV, et al: Rhinitis, pneu-
with retinal disease in dogs: 17 cases (1986-1991). J Arm Vet Med
monia, and defective neutrophil function in the Doberman
Assoc 1993; 202:1289.
Pinscher. Arm I Vet Res 1987; 48:1054.
 159. Grahn BH, Szentirmrey D, Pharr W, et al: Ocular and orbital porcu-
134. Rogers KS, Walker MA, Helman RG: Squamous cell carcinoma of
 pine quill in the dog: a review and case series. Can Vet J 1995; 36:488.
the canine nasal cavity and frontal sinus: eight cases. J Am Anim
160. Read RA: Ciliary body haermangiorma in a dog with secondary glau-
Hosp Assoc 1996; 32:103.
coma. J Small Anim Pract 1993; 34:405.
660
161. Corcoran KA, Koch SA: Uveal cysts in dogs: 28 cases (1989-1991).
171. Torrance AG, Lamb CR: What is your diagnosis? Retrobulbar lyrm-
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:545.
 phosarcoma. J S1mall Anim Pract 1994; 35:516.
162. Roperto F, Restucci B, Crovace A: Bilateral ciliary body melanormas
172. Fike JR, LeCouteur RA, Cann CE: Anatormy of the canine orbital
in a dog. Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1993; 3:149.
region. Multiplanar irmaging by CT. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:32.
163. Bayon A, Tovar MC, Fernandez del Placio MJ, et al: Ocular cormpli-
173. LeCouteur RA, Fike JR, Scagliotti RH, et al: Computed tormography
cations of persistent hyperplastic prirmary vitreous in three dogs.
of orbital turmors in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180:910. 
Vet Ophthalmol 2001; 4:35.
174. Fike JR, LeCouteur RA, Cann CE: Anatormy of the brain using high
164. Ori J, Yoshikai T, Yoshimura S, et al: Persistent hyperplastic primary
resolution computed tomography. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:236.
vitreous (PHPV) in two Siberian Husky dogs. J Vet Med Sci 1998;
175. LeCouteur RA, Fike JR, Cann CE, et al: Computed tomography of
60:263.
brain tumors in the caudal fossa of the dog. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:6.
165. Boroffka SA, Verbruggen AM, Boeve MH, et al: Utrasonography
176. Fike JR, LeCouteur RA, Cann CE, et al: Computerized tormography
diagnosis of persistent hyperplastic tunical vasculosa lentis/persist-
of brain turmors of the rostral and middle fossas in the dog. Am J
 i sio omi u s rd onsd 
Vet Res 1981; 42:274.
Utrasound 1998; 39:440.
177. Plummer SB, Wheeler SJ, Thrall DE, et al: Computed tormography
166. Schoster IV, Dubielzig RR, Sullivan L: Choroidal melanorma in a
 Of prirmary infarmrmatory brain disorders in dogs and cats. Vet
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203:89.
Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:307.
167. Andrew SE: Orbital neurofibrosarcoma in a dog. Vet Comp
178. Fike JR, Cann CE, Beringer WH: Quantitative evaluation of the
Ophthalrmol 1999; 2:141.
canine brain using cormputed tomography. I Comput Assist Tomogr
168. Ramsey DT, Gerding PA, Losonsky IM,et al: Cormparative value of
1982; 6:325.
diagnostic imaging techniques in a cat with exophthalmos. Vet 
179. Fike JR, Cann CA, Turowski K, et al: Differentiation of neoplastic
Comp Ophthalmol 1994; 4:198.
from non-neoplastic lesions in dog brain using quantitative CT. Vet
169. Hormco LD, Ramirez O: Retrobulbar abscesses. Vet Radiol 1995;
Radiol 1986; 27:121.
36:240.
170. Halenda RM, Reed AL: Utrasound/cormputed tomography diagno-
sis—fungal sinusitis and retrobulbar rmyofascitis in a cat. Vet Radiol
1997; 38:208.
CHAPTER SIX
pine
SURVEY RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES
Radiography of the spine requires precise positioning; therefore the patient should be anes
thetized. However, when fracture, dislocation, or diskospondylitis is suspected, dorsoven-
tral and lateral survey radiographs may be attempted without anesthesia. In these
situations, some degree of malpositioning may be tolerated because the expected lesions
usually are not subtle.
Because the x-ray beam diverges, there will be geometric distortion of the disc spaces
that are farther away from the central x-ray beam. This change is more apparent when large
films are used, because there is greater divergence at the edge of the radiation field. Using
smaller cassettes and centering over the area of interest is important, especially when eval-
uation of disc space width is a primary concern. It is less important when surveying the
spine for a site of infection, such as diskospondylitis, or when evaluating the spine for pos-
sible fractures.
CERVICAL SPINE
Radiography of the cervical spine requires careful positioning. For a true lateral view, the
animal's nose should be slightly elevated and the mandibles should be supported so that
they are positioned parallel to the film. Because the midcervical area tends to sag toward
the film when the animal is in lateral recumbency, a radiolucent material (ie., roll cotton
or foam sponge) must be put under the neck at the level of C4 to C7. Similar material
should be placed between the forelimbs and beneath the sternum to prevent rotation. The
position of the neck should be neutral (i.e., the position it naturally assumes when the ani-
mal is anesthetized).
The ventrodorsal view should be taken when the cervical vertebrae are aligned with the
 thoracic vertebrae. The body should be in perfect ventrodorsal alignment with no tilting to
either side. When radiographing the cranial cervical vertebrae for the dorsoventral view, a
 vertical x-ray beam perpendicular to the table top is used. When radiographing the caudal
cervical vertebrae, the x-ray beam should be angled from caudoventral to craniodorsal in
order to project the intervertebral disc spaces properly. Muscle spasm may prevent proper
positioning; however, diazepam, administered intravenously at a dosage of 0.25 mg/kg, will
usually relieve the muscle spasm.
An oblique lateral view of the cervical spine sometimes is useful. For this radiographic
view, the patient is positioned midway between the ventrodorsal and lateral views, with the
skull and spine in a straight line. This may be accomplished by elevating the sternum and
skull by the means of a wedge-shaped foam sponge. The neural foramina of the "up" side,
the left neural foramen on a right recumbent oblique view, will be superimposed over the
vertebral bodies and will not be readily apparent.
Thoracic, Thoracolumbar, Lumbar, And SacrococcyGeaL
SPINES
Lateral radiographs of the thoracic, thoracolumbar, lumbar, and sacral spine require exter-
nal patient support. Because the torso tends to rotate, the ventral-most aspect of the chest
becomes closer to the table and film than does the dorsal portion of the chest. To prevent
this, a radiolucent material should be placed under the sternum to bring it up to the level
of the thoracic vertebrae. In addition, the abdomen should be supported by placing lucent
661
662
material under its ventral part, and the pelvis should be supported by placing a small
amount of radiolucent material between the stifles, causing the femurs to be parallel to the
table top.
The ventrodorsal views require the animal to be positioned so that the spine is in a
straight line and the sternum is directly over the center of the vertebral column. This is
most easily accomplished with sandbags or a Plexiglas cradle supporting the patient on
each side of its body.
On occasion, it may be difficult to assess a change on the ventrodorsal view because of
superimposed intestinal gas shadows. This may be overcome partially by using a prolonged
exposure time and allowing the patient to breathe or mechanically ventilating the patient
during the exposure. This will blur the image of the gas-containing structures and will
 allow the spine to be seen more clearly.
CONTRAST STUDIES
MYELOGRAPHY
A myelogram is performed to opacify the subarachnoid space and thereby delineate the
spinal cord. Iohexol, a nonionic contrast material, currently is the most frequently used
agent, although both iohexol and iopamidol appear to be equally effective.23 Iohexol is used
routinely at a concentration of 240 mg/ml and iopamidol is used at a concentration of 200
mg/ml, although concentrations varying from 180 to 300 mg/ml have been used. The con-
trast medium may be introduced by injection into the subarachnoid space at either the cis-
terna magna or in the caudal lumbar spine. In most cases, the site of puncture closest to the
suspected lesion is preferred. In cats, lumbar puncture was superior to cisternal puncture for
evaluation of the thoracolumbar spine, and cisternal puncture was better for evaluation of
the cervical spinal cord.4 The volume of contrast required will vary with the area of interest
and site of introduction. If a cervical puncture is used for evaluation of the cervical spinal
cord, a dosage of 0.3 ml/kg of body weight is recommended. If examination of the lumbar
spinal cord also is desired, the contrast dosage should be 0.5 ml/kg of body weight. If a lum-
bar puncture is used, the dosage is 0.35 ml/kg of body weight for the thoracolumbar region
and 0.5 ml/kg for the cervical region. If the patient is grossly underweight or overweight for
the general body size, the dosage should be based upon the ideal body weight. It is possible
to influence the distribution of the contrast, which has a specific gravity slightly higher than
normal cerebrospinal fluid (CsF),by positioning the patient so that gravity causes the con-
trast medium to move to the area of interest. This can be accomplished by tilting the patient
so that the area to which you wish the contrast to flow is dependent; however, in some cases
this may require suspending the patient vertically for at least 5 to 10 minutes. In some
instances obstruction to contrast flow cannot be overcome by gravity.
Contrast injection into the subarachnoid space produces alterations in the CsF These
alterations include increased numbers of neutrophils, red blood cells, and total protein,
 s'smou Z on dn noy saop suos u sisiad uen inq sinou tz uum readde
Because hazards and potential complications can occur, myelography must be per-
cal spinal cord injury In animals with occipital dysplasia, the cerebellum may be displaced
caudally and may be damaged as a result of the puncture. Injection of contrast medium in
the caudal lumbar subarachnoid space requires puncture of the spinal cord.6 If performed
at the L5-6 space or at spaces more caudal to L6, there usually is no neurologic sequela.
When necessary, the L4-5 space has been used without problem, but there is increasing risk
 of iatrogenic spinal cord trauma as the selected site progresses cranially from L5-6.
 During myelography, some contrast medium may be inadvertently injected into the
subdural space, extradural space, or central canal.7-9 In cervical punctures the most likely
diffculty is injection into the subdural space8-10 Injection at this site results in the radi-
ographic appearance on the lateral view of contrast localization dorsally in the vertebral
canal, deep to the dura mater but superficial to the subarachnoid space. The ventral mar-
gin of the contrast typically has a wavy or undulating edge.? The dorsal margin is usually
smooth. The ventrodorsal view is usually within normal limits.
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
663
revealed that it is virtually impossible to place the dorsal subarachnoid space without pen-
etrating the terminal bundle of nerve roots (filum terminale) and placement of the needle
bevel in the ventral subarachnoid was more likely.7 Furthermore, the length of the bevel
was frequently larger than the subarachnoid space, resulting in simultaneous injection of
the contrast medium into both the subarachnoid and the extradural spaces. Contrast
medium in this space will appear on the lateral view to arch over the intervertebral disc
space and on the ventrodorsal view will appear to displace laterally over the intervertebral
disc space.9 This appearance must be evaluated closely to prevent the errant diagnosis of a
ventral extradural mass. In many cases, close evaluation will reveal a small column of con-
trast in the subarachnoid space crossing the disc space in a normal alignment. However, a
lack of apparent normal subarachnoid opacification may be due to lack of filling, and a
 mixed extradural and subarachnoid injection may present a diagnostic dilemma.
 A less common problem with lumbar punctures is injection into the central canal. This
usually is an incidental finding; however, if the rate and quantity of contrast injected result
in distention of the central canal, a transient exacerbation of the patient's clinical signs may
 L5-6 and when the contrast is injected into the ventral rather than the dorsal subarachnoid
space.
 If CSF puncture is successful, there are other risks and complications to consider.
Bradycardia, arrhythmias, and apnea may occur during the contrast injection. These are
unrelated to the amount of contrast or site of injection and are usually transient. However,
careful monitoring of the patient during the contrast injection is essential. A major source
of morbidity is the development of seizures in the patient when awakened from anesthe-
sia. This is much less common when using nonionic contrast material. Seizures are
observed most often following cervical myelograms in large dogs and when the duration of
anesthesia that follows the myelogram is short. 3 Most of the postmyelographic seizures can
be controlled with diazepam, but deaths have occurred afer myelograms. Other postmyel-
ographic changes that can occur include hyperthermia, depression, and worsening of the
original neurologic problem. Exacerbation of the neurologic signs may be due to the mye-
logram. However, the effects of positioning for the CSF puncture and for the radiographs
have been blamed also.
 Because of the possible myelographic complications the technique should be used cau-
tiously. We recommend that it not be performed unless surgery or another definitive treat-
ment is being considered. In those cases in which a diagnosis might allow an owner to make
  m si  id a r ay a  u e
LUMBAR SINUS VENOGRAPHY
Lumbar sinus venography is performed occasionally to evaluate structures within the lum-
bosacral spinal canal in patients suspected of having cauda equina compression. Several
methods have been described.ll-14 The asiest method is performed by placing a bone mar-
row needle into the body of L7 or one of the rostral caudal vertebrae.i2-14 When a caudal
vertebra is used, a belly band may be placed tightly to occlude the caudal vena cava and to
increase filling of the venous sinus. Contrast medium injected through the needle then
flows through the ventral venous sinuses, allowing evaluation of their shape and integrity.
 This procedure requires careful technique and frequently is difficult to interpret.
Extravasation of contrast into the epidural space or into the surrounding soft tissue may
occur. This produces no adverse effect but makes interpretation of the study more
difficult.13
EPIDUROGRAPHY
 Epidurography has been advocated for evaluation of the cauda equina in animals suspected
of having cauda equina compression. Nonionic contrast is injected directly into
the epidural space, usually at the level of the caudal vertebra15,16 Irregular filling of the
epidural space occurs, which makes it difficult to evaluate the radiographs.17 Some indi-
viduals have had a lot of experience performing and interpreting these studies, and in their
hands the technique is useful. Similar information can be obtained by myelography,
664
lumbar sinus venography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI). The preference as to which technique is used often is based on availability of the
equipment, personal experience, and training.
DISCOGRAPHY
 Nonionic contrast material may be injected directly into the intervertebral disc space
(using a 20- or 22-gauge spinal needle) to demonstrate prolapse of the intervertebral
disc.15,18 This technique requires fluoroscopic control of the injection, and, although it can
be useful, it is invasive, of limited value, and not often recommended. The procedure has
been used for the evaluation of disc prolapse. Dorsal extension of the contrast material into
the spinal canal or injection of more than 0.3 ml into the disc were considered evidence of
disc prolapse.17 Discography combined with epidurography was recommended for evalu-
ation of dogs with cauda equina compression.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
  n  a go a nn s n nu si 
disc spaces can be identified during abdominal ultrasonography; however, the value of this
examination is limited. Ultrasonography has been used to examine the spinal cord intra-
operatively.19-21 Thisexamination has some value in determining the degree of spinal cord
injury that is present following disc prolapse, fracture, or dislocation. Intraoperative ultra-
sonography may be valuable also for identification and biopsy of intramedullary lesions,
for evaluation of the central canal, and for evaluation of blood flow within the spinal cord.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY AND MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Both CT and MRI can be used for evaluation of the vertebral column. The vertebral and
useful information. Anesthesia or sedation and careful positioning are mandatory. The
time required to obtain the necessary knowledge and the expense and availability of the
equipment are the major limitations at this time.
CT may be used in conjunction with a myelogram to improve delineation of the sub-
arachnoid space and spinal cord. A lower contrast concentration than that used for routine
myelography should be injected because of the artifact associated with dense materials.
 In a comparison of CT and myelography for vertebral and spinal cord tumors, CT was
superior for evaluating bony change, but myelography was better for classifying spinal cord
lesions.22
NORMAL ANATOMY OF RADIOGRAPHIC SIGNIFICANCE
GENERAL VERTEBRAL ANATOMY
All vertebrae have a basically similar structure. The ventral-most portion is the body, which
is a tubular bony structure. The body has a dense cortex and a marrow cavity consisting of
cancellous bone. The basivertebral veins run through the middle of the vertebral body, pro-
ducing a linear radiolucency. These veins connect the ventral venous sinuses on the dorsal
surface of the vertebral body to the caudal vena cava. The transverse processes, which are
bony projections that vary in size and orientation depending upon the specific vertebra,
arise on the left and right sides of the vertebral bodies. Dorsal to the body are bony struc-
tures that combine to form the vertebral arch. These structures include the lamina, pedi-
cles, and dorsal spinous process. The bony pedicles are the lateral walls of the spinal canal.
These are composed of cortical bone and arise from the most lateral part of the vertebral
body. The pedicles have semilunar defects on their cranial and caudal borders that combine
to form the intervertebral foramina through which the spinal nerves exit the spinal canal.
The laminae that form the roof of the spinal canal connect the dorsal edges of the pedicles.
tered on the midline and varies in size depending on the specific vertebra being described.
At the junction of pedicles and laminae on the cranial and caudal aspects are paired artic
ular processes, which articulate with those of the adjacent vertebra. Other bony proceses
(ie., accessory and mammillary) and the costal foveae (for articulation with rib heads) are
CHAPTER SIX THE SPiNE
665
 present on some vertebrae. All of the thoracic vertebrae have costal fovea. The mammillary
processes (small, knoblike bony projections) begin with T2 or T3 and continue caudally
through all of the lumbar vertebrae. The accessory processes (small, tubular, caudally
directed bony projections arising from the caudal aspect of the pedicles) begin with the
midthoracic vertebrae and continue to L5 or L6.
Between almost all vertebrae, the exceptions being C1-2 and the sacral vertebrae, is an
intervertebral disc. This is composed of the annulus fibrosis, a perimeter of fibrous and
fibrocartilaginous fibers arranged in concentric lamellae, and the nucleus pulposus, an
eccentrically placed sphere of embryonic hyaline cartilage. The width of each disc space
varies depending on which vertebrae it separates. The cervical disc spaces become gradu-
ally wider as they progress from C2 to C6. The thoracic disc spaces are narrower than the
cervical disc spaces and are uniform in width to the level of T10-11. The disc spaces then
widen gradually to the level of T13-L1, at which point they are fairly consistent in width to
the level of L7-S1. The width of the L7-S1 disc spaces varies, but it often may be wider than
 the other disc spaces. The normal spine of the dog and cat consists of seven cervical, thir-
teen thoracic, seven lumbar, three sacral, and a variable number of caudal vertebrae.
CERVICAL SPINE
The cervical vertebrae, except C1 and C2, have a similar shape (Fig. 6-1). C1 has a short,
ovoid, tubular shape with prominent transverse processes. On the ventrodorsal view, these
e rs a    r    a  sss
course, are readily apparent. On the lateral view, C1 is shorter than the other vertebrae. On
a well-positioned lateral radiograph the transverse processes are superimposed, obscuring
 the odontoid process of C2. If the head is placed in an oblique position, the wings of C2
will be rotated. This position is particularly helpful when subluxation between Cl and C2
is suspected or when there is a lesion within the cranial portion of C2. The axis (C2) is the
largest of the cervical vertebrae. The most cranial aspect is the odontoid process, the dens,
which projects cranially from the body of C2 into the ventral portion of the spinal canal of
C1. In the dog, the dorsal spinous process of C2 contains an area of relative radiolucency.
There are no intervertebral discs between the skull and C1 or between C1 and C2. C3 to C7
are all similarly shaped; however, the dorsal spinous processes become progressively larger
from C3 to C7. The lateral processes become progressively larger and are projected more
ventrally going from C3 to C6. C6 has large projections from the transverse process. C7 has
smaller transverse processes than the preceding cervical vertebrae. The intervertebral disc
spaces between the cervical vertebrae gradually increase in width from C2-3 to C6-7 and
become narrow again at C7-T1. The normal cervical myelogram reveals that the cord is
oval in cross-section, appearing smaller in its dorsoventral dimension on the lateral view
than it is in the left-to-right dimension on the ventrodorsal view, in the atlantooccipital
in all views, as it passes into C2. The ventral dura is tightly juxtaposed to the dorsal border
of the disc space at C2-3. The roots of the spinal nerves frequently are seen as faint linear
radiolucencies that sweep caudally to exit from the appropriate intervertebral foramen.
The spinal cord increases in diameter as it passes through the C4 and C5 area and the cer-
vical enlargement or brachial intumescence, which is that part of the cord where the nerve
roots form the brachial plexus, is formed. Beyond C6, the cord reduces slightly in diameter
as it passes into the thoracic vertebral canal.
THORACIC SPINE
The thoracic vertebrae are typified by short vertebral bodies, by absence of transverse
processes, by articulations for the rib heads, and by relatively large dorsal spinous processes
that graduall decrease in height from the cranial to the caudal thoracic vertebrae (Fig.
6-2). The intercapital ligament extends between the heads of the paired ribs and crosses
over the dorsal surface of the intervertebral discs from T2 to T11. The intervertebral disc
spaces are relatively similar in size and shape, with the exception of the disc space at the
anticlinal space. The anticlinal space is the intervertebral disc space that is between the
most caudal thoracic vertebra, with a caudally directed dorsal spinous process, and the
most cranial thoracic vertebra, with a cranially directed dorsal spinous process. This
666
A
C
   an    a   i  i  ri s
normal limits. B, The ventrodorsal myelogram of the cervical spine was within normal limits. C, The
survey lateral oblique view of the cervical spine was also normal. Diagnosis: Normal study.
B
usually is at the T10-11 intervertebral disc space but may vary by one space in different
 individuals. In the thoracic area, the spinal cord remains uniform in size and shape.
THORACOLUMBAR SPINE
Because the thoracolumbar junction is a common site for intervertebral disc problems,
and because the entire lumbar spine cannot be imaged properly on one long view due to
the divergence of the x-ray beam, the thoracolumbar spine should be radiographed sepa-
rately. The caudal thoracic vertebrae have bodies that are shaped similarly to the more cra-
nial thoracic vertebrae, but the dorsal spinous processes will be shorter. The width of the
disc spaces becomes progressively larger from the anticlinal vertebra caudally to the junc-
n n e as  sis ss an sn r sn u  rs a 'ii- jo u
 more cranial thoracic areas.
LUMBAR SPINE
The lumbar vertebrae are all similar in size and shape (Fig. 6-3). The ventral margin of the
third and fourth lumbar vertebral bodies often is poorly defined when viewed on the lat-
eral radiograph. This is associated with a cartilage ridge that is present on these bodies and
is related to the attachment of the diaphragmatic crura. Myelography of the lumbar cord
reveals little change in size and shape from the caudal thoracic area until the cord begins to
 pass into the L4 spinal canal, at which point the cord diameter enlarges somewhat over the
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
667
FIG. 6-2 A6-year-old
male
Labrador Retriever. A and B, The
spine and myelogram of the thoracic
spine are within normal limits.
 Diagnosis: Normal study.
A
B
 space of one or two vertebral segments. This is the lumbosacral enlargement or sacral intu-
mescence, which is the portion of the spinal cord from which the nerves that form the
sacral plexus arise. In the region of L5 and L6 the spinal cord diminishes in diameter, and
the nerve roots that innervate the caudal structures continue caudally within the dural tube
until they exit from the spinal canal. Caudal continuation of the nerve roots within
the dural tube is known as the cauda equina. In smaller dogs, the spinal cord ends around
L6-7, while in larger dogs it terminates at L4-5 or L5-6.
SACROCAUDAL SPINE
The three sacral vertebrae are fused and articulate laterally with the ilia. The diameter of
the spinal cord (actually the nerve roots contained within the dural tube) in this region is
very small. The dural tube adheres to the S1-2 laminae, and only individual nerve roots
extend caudal to this region. In this region, the venous anatomy may be demonstrated by
lumbar sinus venography. The dorsal vertebral sinuses will appear on the lateral view as
small tubular structures that elevate slightly from the floor of the spinal canal at the inter-
vertebral disc spaces. On the ventrodorsal view, the dorsal vertebral sinuses form arcs with
668
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
FIG. 6-3 A 6-year-old male Labrador Retriever. A and B, The spine
and myelogram of the lumbar spine are within normal limits.
Diagnosis: Normal study.
the lateral-most deviation at the disc space and the two tubular structures nearly touching
on the midline in the middle of each vertebral body.
The number of caudal vertebrae varies. The cranial-most vertebrae are complete and
similar in shape to the lumbar vertebrae, although they are smaller in size. The distal ver-
tebrae may be incomplete, missing pedicles and laminae Small mineralized structures such
as hemal arches or hemal processes may be evident ventral to the disc spaces between the
caudal vertebrae. Myelography does not demonstrate the neural structures of this area.
ABNORMAL FINDINGS
Many abnormalities of the spine and spinal cord may be evident on carefully positioned and
exposed survey radiographs. Because the survey radiograph does not demonstrate the spinal
cord,the effect of a survey radiographiclesion on the spinal cord must be surmised. In many
situations, the neurologic findings wil indicate that the survey radiographic diagnosis is
      i s    
with the radiographic findings, or the radiographic changes may indicate more than one site
of disease but may not indicate which is causing the neurologic abnormality. Additionally,
s a ann ee q u u ss u a  s a
spinal cord tumors, disc extrusions or fibrocartilaginous embolization of the spinal cord).
 Decisions concerning type and extent of surgery requre precise neurologic evaluation as
wellas radiographic support. In those cases in which correlation is inadequate orevaluation
 of the extent of the spinal cord lesion is needed, a myelogram is indicated.
METHOD OF EVALUAT10N
Evaluation of a spinal radiograph should be performed systematically. Positioning
markedly affects the appearance of the vertebral bodies and should therefore be the first
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
669
feature examined. Each vertebra should be evaluated for alteration in bony contour or den-
sity. The overall alignment of the spinal column should be assessed. The articular facets and
the dorsal and transverse processes should be examined. The pedicles and lamina should
be evaluated for density and symmetry between the left and right sides. The size and shape
of the intervertebral foramina should be compared with the adjacent vertebra. The density
of each intervertebral disc space should be evaluated and the width of the disc space should
be compared with the adjacent disc spaces. If a myelogram is performed, it must be evalu-
ated in a systematic manner. The contrast columns should be evaluated for any deviation
in position or change in width. Also, the relatively radiolucent spinal cord should be eval-
uated for changes in size, shape, and position.
CLASSIFICATION OF MYELOGRAPHIC LESIONS
Myelographic abnormalities can be divided into intramedullary, extramedullary-
 intradural, and extradural patterns.23
cord, cause circumferential expansion and widening of the spinal cord. This results in
a decreased width of the subarachnoid space on both lateral and ventrodorsal views (Fig.
6-4). This may occur as a result of spinal cord swelling due to edema or hemorrhage or may
result from spinal cord neoplasia. Spinal cord tumors (either primary or metastatic), hem-
orrhage, or edema may produce focal cord swelling. If a long segment of the spinal cord
(i.e., extending more than two or three vertebral bodies) is affected, the lesion is more likely
 due to hemorhage or edema than tumor. Cord swelling may result from extradural lesions
such as prolapsed intervertebral discs. In these cases the intramedullary swelling may mask
the extradural lesion.
A
FIG. 6-4 A 4-year-old male Doberman Pinscher with paraparesis. A and B, There is circumferential
expansion of the spinal cord with narrowing of the subarachnoid space at L3-4 (white arrows). This
fnding, confrmed on both views, indicates an intramedullary mass. Differential diagnoses include
neoplasia (ependymoma, glioma, or metastatic tumor), granuloma,hemorrhage, and disc extruded
into the spinal cord. Diagnosis: Metastatic melanoma.
670
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY
Extramedullary-Intradural. Extramedullary-intradural lesions arise within the dural
tube but external to the substance of the spinal cord and result in widening of the cord in
one view and deviation to the side on the other view (Fig. 6-5). The mass within the dural
tube will be within the subarachnoid space or will impinge upon it and may be outlined
by the contrast material. A “golf tee" appearance, caused by focal widening of the sub-
arachnoid space and contrast displacement around the mass, may be identified.
Extramedullary-intradural lesions may be due to tumors such as meningioma or neurofi-
broma. Rarely, a prolapsed intervertebral disc may penetrate the dura and produce an
extramedullary-intradural lesion, or there may be an unusual primary or metastatic
tumor in this site.24
Extradural. Extradural lesions arise external to the dural tube and usually will produce
widening of the cord on one view and displacement away from the lesion with resultant
compression of the spinal cord on the opposite view (Fig. 6-6). When extradural lesions are
not centered on the midline they may result in “elevation" of the subarachnoid space on
 one side of the spinal canal and result in a “double-line"' sign on the lateral view. In rare
instances, an extradural lesion will be contained focally on the midline and will demon-
strate a double-line sign on the lateral view, or the lesion may be distributed circumferen-
tially around the spinal cord, producing cord narrowing on both views.2-27 The most
common cause for an extradural lesion is a prolapsed intervertebral disc. Tumors arising
from the vertebral body, tumors arising from the dura, neurofibromas, abscess, foreign
bodies, hemorrhage, aberrant parasites, and metastatic tumors also may produce
extradurallesions.28-33
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES
Abnormal Numbers of Vertebrae. Numerous anomalies of the spine have been reported.
 A relatively common anomaly is an abnormal number of vertebrae for a specific region
(e.g, cervical, lumbar). This has been reported in 7% to 16% of dogs in studies. 34,35
Transitional Vertebra. Vertebral body anomalies are readily recognizable, and most
cause no clinical signs. Transitional segments frequently are seen at the lumbosacral and
thoracolumbar junctions. They are less common at the cervicothoracic junction. These
transitional vertebral segments have characteristics of one portion of the vertebral col-
umn, yet when the vertebrae are counted they belong in another segment. One of the
most common of these anomalies is referred to as sacralization of L7 or lumbarization
of S1 (Fig 6-7).36,37 In this anomaly, either L7 articulates with the ilia in a manner sim-
ilar to the sacrum, or the first sacral segment will have transverse processes and may be
separated distinctly from S2 and S3. The articulation between L7 or S1 and the ilium may
be asymmetric, with a transverse process on one side and a sacroiliac joint on the other.
This asymmetry has no clinical significance, but it may interfere with symmetric posi-
tioning of the pelvis for hip radiographs. A relationship between transitional lum-
 Incomplete or transitional ribs involving T13 or L1 also are very common and are iden-
tified most often on the ventrodorsal view. The incomplete ribs are linear bony structures
that may lack apparent rib heads but have a junction with the vertebral body similar to
 that of the lumbar transverse processes. The incomplete ribs extend beyond the normal
length of the transverse processes but usually are shorter than normal ribs and have a
greater curvature than the normal lateral process (Fig. 6-8). A transitional vertebra may
be seen at the cervicothoracic junction. This most often takes the form of ribs on C7.
These ribs often are wider than normal ribs and frequently are fused with the first tho-
racic ribs distally.
Hemivertebrae. Hemivertebrae, vertebral bodies that are the result of incomplete
formation and appear wedge shaped, and butterfly vertebrae, which are cleft in the
sagittal plane, may be seen in any breed of dog but are common in brachycephalic
CHapTeR SiX THe SpiNE
671
FIG. 6-5 An 8-year-old male Old
English
Sheepdog
with
a
non-weight-bearing lameness of the
right forelimb. The dog would not
touch the limb to the ground even at
rest. Survey radiographs were nor-
mal. A, The lateral myelogram
revealed a narrowing of the sub-
arachnoid space and enlargement of
the spinal cord shadow at the C5-6
region. There is a rim of contrast
 medium extending ventrally, which
is due to the presence of an
extra medullary-intradural
mass
(white arrow). B, The ventrodorsal
myelogram revealed displacement of
the spinal cord to the lef with nar-
rowing of the left subarachnoid
space. There is widening of the
subarachnoid space on the right at
this level with concave terminations,
or “golf tees” of this widening at
the cranial and caudal aspects
   ( a)
extramedullary-intradural
mass.
A
 Differential diagnoses include neu-
rofibroma
and
meningioma.
Diagnosis: Neurofibroma of the
right sixth cervical nerve root.
B
672
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-6 A 9-year-old male English
Pointer with a 4-week history of
stumbling, with neck pain apparent
 on physical examination. A, The lat-
eral radiograph revealed lysis of the
entire C6 vertebra, most apparent in
the pedicles and laminae. The mye-
logram revealed a ventral deflection
of the dorsal subarachnoid space
(white arrow). B, The ventrodorsal
view revealed loss of the left pedicle
and deviation of the subarachnoid
space to the right (white arrows} at
C6. These findings indicate that the
subarachnoid space is pushed in
more than one direction by mass(es)
external to the dural tube. This indi-
cates a complex extradural mass.
Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma of C6 with
tumor mass in the lef and dorsal
 portions of the extradural space.
B
 or so-called screw-tailed breeds such as the English Bulldog, Boston Terrier, or Pug (Fig.
 6-9). Hemivertebrae in the thorax may be associated with rudimentary or fused ribs.40
These vertebral abnormalities usually are without clinical significance; however, some
instances of spinal cord compression associated with hemivertebrae have been
appears identical to a hemivertebra. This can be symptomatic if cord compression
results from the abnormal growth of the vertebral body. A myelogram usually is
required to determine if cord compression has occurred secondary to the vertebral
deformity.41
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
673
FIG. 6-7 A4-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with
occasional vomiting. The ventrodorsal radiograph revealed
that the left lateral process of L7 has become incorporated
with the sacral articulation with the left ilium. The right
lateral process is not fused with the sacrum but articulates
with the right ilium. These findings are considered to have
no pathologic significance. Diagnosis: Partial sacralization
of L7.
FIG. 6-8 A 3-year-old female mixed breed dog with hema-
turia. The ventrodorsal radiograph revealed that thethirteenth
thoracic vertebra has lateral processes with broad bases more
similar to those seen in the lumbar spine than in the ribs.
These fndings are considered to have no pathologic signifi-
cance. Diagnosis: Transitional ribs of T13.
674
Block Vertebra. Block vertebra refers to the congenital fusion of two or more adjacent ver-
tebrae (Fig. 6-10). This anomaly usually has no pathologic significance, although a predis-
position to herniation of intervertebral discs adjacent to the block vertebra has been
suggested42-4 The dogs in those reports were chondrodystrophic, and therefore the rela-
tionship between the disc prolapse and the block vertebra may have been fortuitous. This
abnormality usually results in a smooth bony union between adjacent vertebral bodies. The
disc space may be completely absent or a portion of a disc space may be identified.
Articular facets usually are still present; however, joint fusion may be observed. The inter-
vertebral foramen usually is malformed and may be absent. The block vertebra usually is
equivalent in length to the two fused vertebral bodies; however, abnormal angulation and
shortening of the vertebra may be observed. Fusion of vertebral bodies also may occur as a
result of trauma or infection such as diskospondylitis. If these lesions have healed com-
pletely, differentiation of an acquired block vertebra from a congenital lesion may be
impossible.
Kyphosis, Lordosis, and Scoliosis. Kyphosis (dorsal arching), lordosis (ventral arching),
and scoliosis (lateral bowing) are observed rarely in dogs and cats. Hemivertebrae may
produce a kyphosis. Severe deformities of the vertebral bodies and articular facets may
produce a kyphosis, lordosis, or scoliosis. Severe kyphosis and scoliosis have been
reported in an Afghan Hound, a Fox Terrier, and a mixed breed dog.4445 The Afghan
Hound had an abnormal gait but no neurologic abnormalities. The Fox Terrier had
spinal cord compression.
Atlantoaxial Subluxation. Atlantoaxial luxations or subluxations may be of congenital
 or traumatic etiology.46-ss The condition is observed most commonly in small and toy
FIG. 6-9 A 6-year-old male French
Bulldog with an acute onset of left-
sided hemiplegia. The lateral tho-
racic spinal radiograph revealed
hemivertebrae (small white arrow).
These are readily apparent when
compared with the more normal
vertebrae (large white arrow). These
fndings were of no clinical signifi-
mnce. The dog's neurologic problem
was due to a cervical disc extrusion.
Diagnosis: Multiple hemivertebrae.
FIG. 6-10 A 7-year-old male Miniature Poodle with occasional back pain. The lateral radiograph
revealed absence of the intervertebral disc space between L5 and L6 (white rurmerals) as well as an
absence of the articular spaces of the dorsal components. The intervertebral disc space between Ll and
L2 (biack numerals) was narrowed,the neural foramina diminished in size, and the spaces between the
articular components dorsally are closer together than normal. Diagnosis: Block vertebrae of L5-6 and
intervertebral disc extrusion at L1 -2.
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
675
breeds; however, other breeds may be affected.54 The congenital condition results from a
hypoplastic, ununited, or absent dens, or from absence of the dorsal atlantoaxial mem-
brane, apical ligament of the dens, or transverse atlantal ligament (Fig. 6-11). Trauma may
cause disruption of the ligaments or fracture of the dens. On lateral cervical radiographs,
the distance between the dorsal arch of Cl and the spinous process of C2 wilbe greater
than normal. In normal small-breed dogs, this distance should not exceed 2 to 3 mm.
 Flexion of the head will increase this distance in affected dogs. This maneuver should be
performed cautiously, because spinal cord compression may result from aggressive
manipulation of the head and neck, especially when the dog is anesthetized and cannot
protect itself. Anesthesia is recommended when radiographing a dog suspected of having
atlantoaxial subluxation, because the patient may object to being radiographed and could
therefore exacerbate its clinical signs. Oblique or frontal-occipital views may be required
to demonstrate the lesion, especially when a fracture or ununited dens is present.
Manipulation of the head and neck in patients with atlantoaxial subluxation must be per-
formed cautiously, especially when the dens is present. Atlantoaxial subluxation has been
reported in the cat.5
Occipitoatlantoaxial  Malformation. Occipitoatlantoaxial  malformation has been
reported in dogs and cats.56,57 The atlas ismall and fused to the ocipital bones. The axis
is abnormally shaped with a dorsal spinous process, which is rounded on its cranial aspect
with an absence of the dens. Atlantoaxial subluxation was demonstrated when the head was
flexed and is responsible for the animal's clinical signs.
Cartilaginous Exostosis. Multiple cartilaginous exostosis, osteochondromatosis, is a con-
genital condition resulting in solitary or multiple benign cartilaginous tumors that may
canal and result in neurologic disorders. Malignant transformation to chondrosarcoma
and osteosarcoma has been reported in dogs.67
A
B
FIG. 6-11 A 3-year-old male Chihuahua with incoordination and neck pain. A, The survey lateral
view revealed a slightly greater-than-normal distance between the dorsal portions of caudal Cl and
cranial C2 (white arrow). B, The flexed lateral view demonstrates marked subluxation of Cl-2. Note
the increased space between Cl and C2 (white arrow) and the decreased space within the spinal canal
mused by the dorsal displacement of the odontoid process (black arrow). Fortunately, this examina-
tion did not render the patient permanently paraparetic. Studies of this area should include either an
oblique lateral or mild flexion view if confirmation of a diagnosis is needed. Diagnosis: Atlantoaxial
subluxation.
676
SMALl ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-12 A 7-year-old male Cocker
Spaniel with paresis of the hind
limbs. The myelogram revealed no
 spinal cord abnormalities in the tho-
rax,but numerous vertebrae and ribs
have large, expansile lesions that are
calcified. Diagnosis: Multiple carti-
laginous exostoses.
Spina Bifida. Spina bifida is a condition with a midline cleft in the vertebral arch, which
s ad m q  a zqa j as no  a 
processes or a complete absence of the spinous process. Paired bone densities may be seen
on either side of the midline in the ventrodorsal view. These bone densities represent the
ununited dorsal arch.68 The condition may be totally asymptomatic or may be associated
with other neurologic defects such as meningocele or meningomyelocele (Fig. 6-13).
Myelography usually is required to identify those animals in which a neural tube defect is
 present. Spina bifida may occur at any level of the vertebral column but is observed most
often in the caudal lumbar or sacral spine. Some defects are associated with specific breeds.
For example, syringomyelia and spinal dysraphism may cause gait problems in
er  psdd a sap  p si x ts
deformities ranging from multiple hemivertebrae or spina bifida or both to sacral dysgen-
esis.42,68-70 In some cases these defects will have neurologic manifestations such as poste-
rior paresis and urinary or fecal incontinence (Fig. 6-14).
CERVICAL VERTEBRAL MALFORMATION
Cervical vertebral malformation, wobbler syndrome, is seen most frequently in older
Doberman Pinschers and young Great Danes, although dogs of any age and several differ-
Great Danes when compared with those of the older Doberman Pinschers. The clinical signs
may be due to a number of anatomical abnormalities, including intervertebral disc prolapse,
ment), stenosis of the spinal canal, synovial proliferation associated with the spinal articu-
lar facets, enlargement of the articular facets, and misalignment of the vertebral bodies.76 In
young dogs, malformation and misalignment of the vertebral bodies are the most com-
monly identified abnormalities. The vertebral bodies are abnormally shaped, losing their
normal rectangular conformation and becoming narrower ventrally. The cranioventral and
caudoventral margins of the vertebral bodies become flattened. There is spondylosis defor-
mans, with bridging osteophytes forming between the adjacent vertebral bodies. The cranial
orifices of the vertebrae may become narrowed, producing a wedge-shaped spinal
canal.71,7275 The radiographic abnormalities most often affect the caudal cervical vertebrae
(C5-C7). However, in severe cases the more cranial vertebral bodies may be affected. The
joint spaces of the caudal cervical vertebrae have a more vertical orientation, which is simi-
lar to that of the thoracic vertebrae rather than the oblique orientation typical of normal
CHapTeR SiX THe SpiNE
677
FIG. 6-13 A 7-month-old male
Golden Retriever with a draining fis-
tula between the scapulae. A and C,
The survey radiographs revealed
multiple congenital vertebral anom-
alies, including a block vertebrae for-
mation of Cs, C6, and C7 as well as
spina bifida of Tl and T2. The bilat-
 sssd sods iesr ra
visible on both the lateral and ven-
trodorsal views (arrows). B and D,
The myelogram revealed that the
subarachnoid space extends dorsally
4
through the spinal defect and into
the soft tissues (white arrows). The
spinal cord also appears to be simi-
larly affected. Diagnosis: Block
vertebrae, spina bifida, and
meningomyelocele.
B
心
D
678
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-14 A 3-month-old male Manx cat
with rear limb ataxia. A and B, The survey
radiographs reveal partial agenesis of the
sacrum and dorsal components of the
proximal coccygeal vertebrae. C, The mye-
logram revealed a dilated terminal sub-
arachnoid space (meningocele) that is
located in the soft tissues. Diagnosis:
Multiple sacral anomalies associated with a
Manx cat.
A
C
cervical articulations. In older dogs, remodeling of the vertebral bodies may be present to
some extent; however, the major radiographic findings are associated with intervertebral
disc prolapse and ligamentous hypertrophy. On noncontrast radiographs, spondylosis
deformans may be evident on the ventral aspect of the vertebral bodies. The intervertebral
disc space may be narrowed or the disc may be calcified. There may be evidence of degen-
erative joint disease around the articular facets7273Myelography is required todocument
mandatory before surgery73 Myelography is very important because more than one site of
compression is common and the compression may be dorsal, lateral, ventral, or a combina-
tion of these. Compression of the cord from the ventral surface usually is related to disc pro-
lapse or hypertrophy of the dorsal longitudinal ligament. Compression from the dorsal
surface is associated with hypertrophy of the ligamentum flavum. Compression from one or
both sides may occur secondary to synovitis, with thickening of the joint capsule. After the
myelographic contrast material has been injected, radiographs of flexed, neutral, and hyper
extended positions are helpful in defining the location and number of lesions, and these
radiographs should be obtained before surgery. Some authors recommend a radiograph be
taken with the patient in a neutral position, with rostral-caudal traction applied to the head
inordertdeminfvertebral trtionwillrduce thdereeof cmpreson9ths
recommend against stress views, fearing exacerbation of the dog's clinical signs.73 All of 
these views are helpful in determining the surgical procedure that will be used to eliminate
the spinal compression. We recommend that stress views be used judiciously.
The compression of the spinal cord that results from hypertrophy of the dorsal longi-
tudinal ligament or ligamentum flavum is exacerbated by dorsiflexion of the neck and usu-
ally is minimized by ventral flexion (Fig. 6-15). Mild traction of the neck may reduce the
severity of spinal cord compression. Spondylolisthesis, subluxation of the vertebrae, has
been used as a synonym for cervical vertebral malformation. Although a mild degree of
vertebral subluxation does occur with neck flexion, especially in younger dogs with verte-
bral malformation, this term is not accurate.78,79 Flexion or extension studies should be
done with extreme caution to avoid iatrogenic spinal cord injury (Figs. 6-16 to 6-18).
CT has been recommended for evaluation of dogs suspected of having cervical vertebral
malformation.80 The dog is positioned in sternal recumbency with the forelimbs retracted
caudally. A myelogram may be performed concurrently with the CT scan; however, a reduced
dosage of contrast is recommended because of the artifact created on the CT scan due to the
 presence of the contrast material, which is known as blooming artifact.
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
679
FIG. 6-15 A l-year-old male
Doberman Pinscher with incoordi-
 nation. A, The lateral cervical myelo-
gram, taken with the neck in a
neutral position, revealed a moder-
ate-size ventral extradural mass at
C6-7 consistent with either disc pro-
trusion or hypertrophy of the dorsal
longitudinal ligament. B, The lateral
cervical myelogram, taken with the
neck extended, revealed an increase
in size of the C6-7 extradural mass
(white arrow), as well as a dorsal
extradural mass at C4-5 consistent
with hypertrophy of the ligamentum
flavum (back arrow). C, The lateral
cervical myelogram, taken with the
A
neck flexed, showed a slight decrease
in size of the C6-7 ventral extradural
mass (white arrow) and complete
resolution of the dorsal extradural
mass at C4-5 (black arrow).
Diagnosis: Wobbler syndrome.
680
Small Animal Radiology And Ultrasonography
FIG. 6-16 A 2-year-old male Great
Dane with severe incoordination.
The lateral cervical myelogram with
the neck in mild flexion revealed
sclerosis and remodeling of the bod-
ies of C6 and C7 as well as subluxa-
tion and compression of the spinal
cord at that site. Diagnosis:
Spondylolisthesis.
FIG. 6-17 A 2-year-old male Great
Dane with incoordination of all four
limbs. A and B, The ventrodorsal
myelograms reveal multiple sites of
ateral compression of the subarach-
noid space and spinal cord at C5-6
and C6-7 (white arrows). These
changes signify the presence of
extradural masses. Diagnosis:
Extradural compression of the spinal
cord at C5-6 and C6-7 due to hyper-
trophy of joint capsules and periar-
ticular  osteophytes affecting  the
 synovial joints of these areas.
A
B
OTHER SPINAL MALFORMATIONS
Numerous other malformations have been reported occasionally. Some have resulted in
 compression of the spinal cord resulting in neurologic signs (Fig. 6-19).81-86
SPINAL CORD MALFORMATIONS
 s   q sn n n n si 
refers to any intramedullary spinal cavity. Technically, hydromyelia is a dilation of the cen-
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
681
FIG.6-18 A4-year-oldmale
Miniature Poodle had a 4-month
 history of progressive lameness and
paresis of the hind limbs. A, There is
a marked subluxation at T5-6. The
T3 to Ts vertebrae are anomalous,
with abnormal curvature to their
bodies. The body of T6 is more nor-
mal and the junction of the two
 types results a misalignment with a
"stair step” (arrow). B, The myelo-
gram reveals a sharp decrease in
 spinal cord diameter at this site.
g-S ie sisausopuods sisouei
with chronic spinal cord compres-
sion and atrophy.
A
B
tral canal of the spinal cord. Syringomyelia is a cystic area within the spinal cord but out-
side the central canal. These abnormalities have been identified by myelography in both
dogs and cats.87-91 However, it is easier to identify these lesions with MR1.87,88
Arachnoid cyst is a term applied to a lesion of extramedullary expansion and spinal
ni s us  e   on l a ou si ara eg  pio
to be congenital. It may or may not result in clinical signs. It has been described in both
reveal accumulation of the contrast medium in the cavitation appearing as a focal radio-
density.
682
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGy AND UlTraSOnOGraphy
FIG. 6-19 A 4-year-old male Springer Spaniel had progressive weakness of
son sieaan na au s g od n an sql puu as
tubular structures in the ventral extramedullary-intradural space.Diagnosis:
Arteriovenous malformation.
B
DEGENERATIVE DISEASE
Spondylosis Deformans. Spondylosis deformans is the most common degenerative disease
 that affects the spinal column. This produces a partial or complete bony bridge between the
caudal aspect of one vertebral body and the cranial aspect of the adjacent vertebral body
(Fig. 6-20).101,102 The bony proliferation, although frequently present on the ventral and lat-
eral surfaces of the vertebral bodies, rarely is present on the dorsal portion and therefore
CHapTeR SiX THe SpiNE
683
rarely encroaches upon the spinal cord or on the nerve root. Thus spondylosis almost never
a sso ar u qa pq eu, u d  ndaxa su ie s
amount of spondylosis may become extensive. Bridging spondylosis involving four or more
contiguous vertebrae has been termed diffuse spinal idiopathic hyperostosis (DISH) (Fig. 6-
21). Close scrutiny of these animals will reveal stiffness in some individuals. Spondylosis
may be seen at necropsy in dogs as young as 6 months of age but is usually a disease of older
large-breed dogs.l03 The ossification may start from one vertebra and grow toward the
 other, may start on both and meet in the middle, may start in the middle and progress in
both directions, or may have any combination of these variations. Spondylosis may result in
 complete spinal fusion. Some mechanical interference with normal activity may result, but
in most cases the bony lesion does not produce clinical signs. Narrowing of the interverte-
bral disc space may occur secondary to spondylosis, but in most cases the disc is not
 prolapsed. Spondylosis may also ocur secondary to chronic disc prolapse. The distinction
between these two conditions usually is based on the amount of spondylosis that is present.
If only one disc space is affected and there is no evidence of spondylosis at other sites, then
extensive spondylosis with only one narrowed disc space, then the lesion most likely is
primarily spondylosis deformans with secondary disc degeneration. If clinical signs are
 present, a myelogram is needed to document or rule out disc prolapse.
Degenerative Joint Disease. Arthritis of the articular facets of the spine may be seen. This
may result in the production of periarticular osteophytes with irregularity of the articular
facets and loss of the normal joint space (Figs. 6-22 and 6-23). The clinical significance of this
radiographic change is unknown but may be a source of "back pain"' if severe. On rare occa-
sions the osteophytes may become so large that they impinge upon the spinal cord or nerve
roots. Another rare problem is the development of synovial cysts arising from the chronically
inflamed joint capsules. These cysts may develop in the extradural space and ultimately
impinge upon the spinal cord. Myelographic findings usually indicate a dorsal, single, or bilat-
FIG. 6-20 A 12-year-old male
mixed breed dog with occasional
vomiting. A and B, Lateral radi-
ographs revealed moderate bony
bridging at several intervertebral
 spaces. These sites are not considered
to be active sites of disease.
Diagnosis: Spondylosis.
A
B
684
Small ANimal RaDIOlOGy And UltraSonOGraphy
 Dural Ossification. Occasionally a fine linear calcified density will be noted on the edge
cance (Fig. 6-24),34,106 The thin,linear mineral opacity may extend continuously along sev-
eral vertebral bodies. Its position and length help discriminate this lesion from
mineralization of the annulus fibrosis or dorsal longitudinal ligament. On rare occasions
this may be used to define the line of the dura and indicate the site of an extradural
 uuos anou si pue shop poq-ie plo u paaasqo si Ansn uoss su zouoisl
the caudal cervical and midlumbar regions.
FIG. 6-21 A 13-year-old neutered
female mixed breed dog with vomit-
ing and constipation. There is
marked, smoothly bordered bony
bridging between more than four
lumbar vertebrae (white arrows).
Diagnosis: Diffuse idiopathic spinal
hyperostosis (DISH).
FIG. 6-22 A 9-year-old male Great
Dane with fever, rear limb ataxia,
and a palpably enlarged prostate.
There is a moderately enlarged
prostate, as well as irregular sub-
chondral bone margins and periar-
ticular osteophytosis of the articular
facets of the lumbar spine.
 Diagnosis: Lumbar spine articular
degenerative joint disease and
prostatomegaly. The dog's clinical
signs resolved after castration and
antibiotic therapy.
FIG. 6-23 A close-up view of the
L2-3 articulation of a 9-year-old
Cocker Spaniel that did not have
spinal symptoms. There is marked
periarticular osteophytosis (white
arrow) and irregularity to the articu-
lar surface (long black arrow). The
cranial articulation (small black
arrow) is normal. Diagnosis:
Degenerative joint disease of the
articular facets at L2-3.
CHapTeR SiX THe SpiNE
685
INTERVERTEBRAL DISC DISEASE
 Protrusion or extrusion of intervertebral disc material into the spinal canal or neural
foramina may impinge upon the spinal cord or the spinal nerve roots and produce pain or
 neurologic deficits.108 This occurs more commonly in dogs than in cats.109,110
Degenerative changes within the intervertebral disc predispose it to prolapse.
Narrowing of the intervertebral disc space and calcification of the intervertebral disc are
centrally or at the rim. All or a portion of the mineralized material may remain in the disc
space, may prolapse dorsally into the spinal canal, or, less frequently, may prolapse ventrally
or laterally. Prolapse of disc material is suggested radiographically by (1) narrowing of the
intervertebral disc space, in that the disc space may be uniformly narrowed or may be
asymmetrically narrowed or wedge shaped, (2) narrowing of the space between the paired
 cranial and caudal articular facets, (3) decreased size or a change in shape of the neural
foramen, (4) increased density in the area of the neural foramen, and (5) presence of cal-
cified disc material within the spinal canal (Fig. 6-26). When most of the disc spaces con-
tain mineralized disc material, the presence of an empty disc space (one without
mineralized material) may be an indication of disc prolapse. In rare cases the disc material
may extrude laterally or dorsolaterally into the area where the spinal nerve root passes
through the neural foramen.l14 In these cases the disc material is apparent radiographically
only on lateral oblique views of the spine (Fig. 6-27). l15 Herniation of disc material into a
vertebral body resulting in a relatively radiolucent defect in the vertebral body adjacent and
through the endplate (Schmorl's node) has been reported.l16 Disc material may prolapse
ventrally; however, this is extremely uncommon and usually is ignored because it does not
cause clinical signs. Also, there may be spontaneous resolution of intervertebral disc
calcification.11,113,117
Accurate determination of the site of intervertebral disc protrusion on survey radi-
Positive identification of the site of disc extrusion or protrusion in the cervical area on sur-
vey radiographs occurred in only 26%.121 When the clinical signs and the radiographic
changes are inconsistent, more than one possible site of disc prolapse is identified on the
FIG. 6-24 A 6-year-old neutered
fermale Weimaraner with tetrapare-
sis. A fine linear calcification, which
runs parallel to the spinal cord
(white arrow), is present dorsal to the
floor of the vertebrae. Differential
diagnoses include calcification of the
dura or dorsal longitudinal ligament.
Diagnosis: Dural calcification.
FIG. 6-25 A 9-year-old female
Beagle with neck pain. The lateral
cervical radiograph revealed a calci-
fied intervertebral disc at C4-5.
Scrutiny revealed that the disc
tapered dorsally and that some
material had extruded intothe spinal
canal. Diagnosis: C4-5 interverte-
bral disc calcification and extrusion.
686
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-26 A 6-year-old male mixed
breed dog with acute paraparesis and
pain over the thoracolumbar spine.
The lateral radiograph revealed nar-
rowing of the disc space as compared
with those spaces immediately cra-
nial and caudal to this site. There
appears to be a decreased space
between the articular facets at T12-
13 when compared with those adja-
cent to it. Increased density is
present in the area of the neural
foramen at this site. Diagnosis:
Acute intervertebral disc prolapse at
T12-13.
 FIG. 6-27 A 7-year-old male mixed
breed dog with right forelimb lame-
ness. The dog would hold the limb
off the ground at rest. The leff
recumbent lateral oblique view of a
cervical   myelogram
 revealed
 increased density in the neural fora-
 men at C3-4 (open black arrow). This
was best appreciated when com-
pared with the other neural foram-
ina.
 Diagnosis:  Intraforaminal
intervertebral disc extrusion at C3-4.
FIG. 6-28 A 7-year-old female
mixed breed dog with neck pain. The
ateral cervical myelogram revealed a
small ventral extradural mass at C5-
6 and a larger mass at C6-7 (black
arrow). Because only one contrast
column is seen, there is indication
that the mass is on the midline.
Diagnosis: Intervertebral disc pro-
trusion at C5-6 and C6-7.
survey radiograph, or surgery is anticipated, documentation of the site of prolapsed disc
material is required and a myelogram is indicated. Myelography can determine the site of
 the disc prolapse accurately in 97% of the patients.l19
Myelographically, the disc prolapse will produce signs of an extradural mass. If there is
spinal cord swelling or hemorrhage associated with the disc prolapse, there may be myelo-
 graphic signs of an intramedullary lesion. The disc material may be located on the ventral
 midline of the spinal canal, displacing the contrast column dorsally in a single line over the
   a a    a n (a  i  s
midineand doubleine signmaybe seen,If theismatrialisventral and slighy
off the midline of the spinal canal, the myelogram also will show a double-line sign (Fig.
6-30). In some cases, the disc material will extrude into a completely lateral position within
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
687
FIG. 6-29 An 8-year-old neutered
female mixed breed dog had pain
upon raising the tail and in the lum-
bosacral area. The myelogram
reveals an abrupt dorsal displace-
ment of the ventral subarachnoid
space at L7-S1. The degree of eleva-
tion is too abrupt to be normal.
Diagnosis: Disc extrusion at L7-S1.
FIG. 6-30 A 5-year-old male Maltese with neck pain and mild lef lateralizing tetraparesis. The dor-
al subarachnoid space is narrowed. A ventral extradural mass is at C4-5. Close examination revealed
aun ul aana ar ip iaia e s yum jo ao sun isun euaa juiedde mi ie aa
other. This results from extrusion of disc material slightly to one side of the midline but not enough
to be considered truly lateral in location. Incidental findings of slight disc protrusion at Cs-6 and C6-
7 as well as slight hypertrophy of the ligamenta flavum at C3-4 and C4-5 are noted. Diagnosis: Disc
extrusion at C4-5.
the spinal canal. This results in displacement of the spinal cord away from the disc on the
ventrodorsal myelogram and results in widening of the spinal cord on the lateral view (Fig.
6-31). Less frequently, disc material will surround the spinal cord completely (Fig. 6-32). In
rare cases, a disc extrusion occurs with such force that it penetrates the dura and either
lodges within the spinal cord or totally penetrates it.12,123 In these cases, either a swollen
spinal cord suggestive of an intramedullary lesion or an extramedullary intradural lesion 
may be observed on the myelogram (Figs. 6-33 and 6-34). Oblique radiographs are helpful
when the disc material is located ventrolateral to the spinal cord.l15,119 In some cases a disc
extrusion will cause ascending-descending myelomalacia. This may result in normal myel-
ographic findings but usually produces a swollen spinal cord with contrast medium inter-
mixed within the neural tissue (Fig. 6-35). Extruding disc material may rupture a vertebral
venous sinus and cause extradural hemorrhage. This will cause the spinal cord to be
688
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
compressed by a relatively lengthy dorsal extradural mass, which may be larger on one side
(right or left) than the other (Fig. 6-36). In cases in which disc degeneration is chronic,
there may be narrowing of the disc space and sclerosis of the adjacent vertebral body seg-
ments as well as spondylosis. The myelogram may demonstrate slight elevation of the con-
trast column over the prolapsed disc. The dorsal and lateral contrast columns may remain
 normal or may be slightly narrowed. The diameter of the spinal cord remains unchanged.
 a   a si n sis  a  -  g '
The ventrodorsal view of a lumbar myelogram revealed a right lateral extradural mass
(black arrow) that displaced the spinal cord to the left at the L4-5 disc space. Differential
diagnoses include a disc extrusion and extradural tumor. Diagmosis: Right lateral disc
extrusion at L4-5.
FIG. 6-32 A 4-year-old female
Dachshund developed acute hind
limb paresis and thoracolumbar
back pain. A, The lateral view of the
nyelogram reveals extradural mass
 both dorsal and ventral on the lateral
view (arrows).
Continued
A
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
689
FIG. 6-32 cont'd B, The ventrodorsal view reveals extradural
mass on both the left and right sides (arrows). Thus there
 appears to be a circumferential extradural mass. Diagnosis:
Disc extrusion with extension of disc material completely
around the spinal cord.
B
FIG. 6-33 A 13-year-old neutered
female Miniature Dachshund with
acute paraparesis. A, The lateral
myelogram revealed an enlargement
of the subarachnoid space immedi-
ately cranial to L2-3 (white arrow).
B, The ventrodorsal myelogram
revealed mild swelling of the spinal
cord at this site (white arrows). These
findings suggest a forceful extrusion
of disc material into the spinal cord
substance at this site. Other differen-
tial diagnoses include neoplasia and
granuloma. Diagnosis: Extrusion of
the L2-3 intervertebral disc into the
substance of the spinal cord.
A
B
690
SMAlL ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-34 A 5-year-old male
Whippet had an acute onset of hind
limb paresis. There is a small ventral
extradural mass at T13-Ll (black
arrow), the dorsal subarachnoid
space is displaced away from the
dorsal laminae (two-headed white
arrow), and there is a focal area of
contrast medium (single-headed
white arrow) streaming through the
dorsal dural mater into extradural
space. Diagnosis: Acute disc extru-
sion with penetration through the
 spinal cord into the dorsal extradural
space with extradural hematoma
formation.
FIG. 6-35 A 6-year-old Miniature
Dachshund developed acute hind
limb paresis and had no deep pain
perception. The lumbar myelogram
reveals infltration of the spinal cord
with contrast medium (arrow).
Diagnosis: Myelomalacia.
These changes are often seen with type II disc prolapse, which is more common in older
large-breed dogs. A narrowed disc space may return to its normal width after the disc pro-
lapse. The mechanism by which this occurs is unknown.
 Postfenestration, the width of the intervertebral disc space decreases. Spondylosis
 occurs 1 to 4 years after disc fenestration.124
INFECTION
Diskospondylitis. Diskospondylitis, or intradiscal osteomyelitis, is an infection of the
intervertebral disc and adjacent vertebral endplates. 15-131 The earliest radiographic change
is decreased density within the vertebral endplate with loss of the densely calcified cortical
border of the vertebral body. The disease progresses to lysis of the vertebral endplates and
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
691
FIG. 6-36 A 4-year-old male Chow Chow that
had run away was discovered by its owners as
having acute paraparesis. A, The lateral myelo-
 gram revealed narrowing of the T12-13 disc
space and facets,a decrease in size of the neural
foramina, a ventral extradural mass at T12-13,
and a dorsal extradural mass (displacement of
 the dorsal subarachnoid space ventrally) from
Tll to L2 (white arrow). B, The ventrodorsal
view revealed a right-sided extradural mass
effect from T12 to L3 that pushes the right sub-
arachnoid space to the left (white arrow). The
 dorsal lateral mass effect extending over a space
 of more than two vertebral bodies strongly sug-
gests extradural hemorrhage. Diagnosis:
 Suspected traumatic disc extrusion at T12-13
with laceration of the right lumbar dorsal ver-
 tebral venous sinus.
A
B
subsequently the bodies, with sclerosis or bony proliferation following the bony lysis. In
some lesions, the disc space becomes widened and irregular and in others collapse of the
disc space is observed. A sequestrum may be identified at the vertebral endplate. Several
 disc spaces often are involved; however, the severity of the lesion usually varies at different
sites. During the resolution phase, disc space collapse, sclerosis, spondylosis, and some-
times fusion of the vertebral bodies occurs (Fig. 6-37). Resolution of the bony lesion lags
behind the resolution of the clinical signs. The lesion may appear active radiographically
with increased bony lysis or proliferation and new lesions observed despite resolution of
the clinical signs.132 In some cases diskospondylitis has been associated with a compressive
lesion of the spinal cord 133,134
692
Some reports have stressed the role of Brucella sp. in these infections, but other bacteria
are more common.* A number of other bacteria have been reported infrequently,140-143
Aspergillus has been incriminated also in diskospondylitis, especially in German Shepherd
origin, although direct extension from a soft-tissue infection and migrating foreign bodies
have been incriminated 125,148 Diagnosis of the etiologic agent may be made by culture of
material obtained by fluoroscopically guided fine-needle aspiration of the infected disc
material. 149 If this is not possible, a bacteria identified on positive urine culture results fre-
quently correlates with the etiologic agent of the diskospondylitis.
FIG. 6-37 A 4-month-old male Irish
Wolfhound with pain over the
midthoracic spine. A, The initial lat-
eral radiograph revealed a moderate
 decrease in the density of the cranial
endplate of T8 as well as a slight
decrease in the width of the T7-8
intervertebral disc space (open white
arrow). B, Four weeks later there was
marked destruction of the vertebral
endplates at the T7-8 interspace as
well as significant collapse of the disc
space (open white arrow).
Continued
A
B
*References 126-128, 130, 132, 135-139.
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
693
Spondylitis. Spondylitis, or vertebral osteomyelitis, is infection of the vertebral body. The
radiographic changes are typified by marked periosteal new bone formation, primarily
involving the midportion of the vertebral body. Bone lysis usually is minor compared with
the proliferative response (Figs. 6-38 and 6-39). Spread to adjacent vertebral bodies is com-
mon. This may be caused by many types of organisms including bacteria, fungi, foreign
o n a e pe pn os a ni ia e sd si asn o
 the diaphragm.15 The second and third lumbar vertebrae frequently are involved in these
cases.
NEOPLASIA
 Primary and Metastatic Neoplasms. Both primary and metastatic tumors may affect the
verebral column. Primary tumors may originate in the bone or in the neural tissue 156-158
Primary bone tumors (e.g., osteosarcoma, parosteal sarcoma, chondrosarcoma, fibrosar-
multiple myeloma, lymphoma, hemangiosarcoma, angiolipoma, metastatic tumors) have
to erosion of pedicle or neural foramina.
FIG. 6-37 cont'd C, Fourteen
weeks after the first radiograph
there was complete collapse of the
disc space and marked periosteal
new bone formation around the T7-
8 interspace (open white arrow).
 This series demonstrates the pro-
gression of intradiscal osteomyelitis
(diskospondylitis) from very early
in the clinical picture to the resolu-
tion phase. Diagnosis: Intradiscal
osteomyelitis of T7-8.
C
FIG. 6-38 A l-year-old female
Doberman Pinscher with midtho-
racic pain. On the lateral radiograph
there is marked periosteal new bone
formation involving the vertebral
bodies of T2 to T8. Also seen is the
loss of definitive vertebral shape,
 decreased vertebral body density.
and possible compression fractures.
Because of the several contiguous
vertebral bodies involved, infection,
rather than neoplasia, is strongly
suggested. Diagnosis:
:Infectious
spondylitis of T2 to T8.
694
The majority of tumors that affect the vertebral column produce a lytic lesion. Some
tumors show a mixed pattern of both lysis and periosteal new bone formation (Fig. 6-40).
Rarely, increased vertebral density may be the predominant radiographic finding.17 A par-
ao o pa ane ann sno d es'dqa aq au s ans ieqnn
vertebral body; however, they may spread to adjacent vertebrae. Collapse of the vertebra or
the adjacent disc space occurs in a small number of both primary and metastatic vertebral
lesions that do not have sclerotic borders (Fig. 6-41). 179 In a few cases of multiple myeloma
a diffuse loss of bone density will be seen (Fig. 6-42). Multiple myeloma also may produce
solitary or multiple destructive and proliferative lesions similar to those observed with
 destructive vertebral lesions or extradural-intramedullary spinal cord lesions.182
 Metastatic tumors often involve more than one vertebral body. Any portion of the ver-
tebramaybeinvolved Anymalignant tumor may spread to thevertebrae (Fig6-4385
Prostatic, bladder, urethral, caudal mammary gland, and perianal neoplasias have been
FIG. 6-39 A4-year-old Beagle from
California developed pain in the tho-
racolumbar area, anorexia, and
pyrexia. There is periosteal new bone
formation with a fine linear pattern
at a right angle to the vertebral body
(arrow), as well as subtle lysis of the
ventral aspect of L2. Diagnosis:
Vertebral osteomyelitis secondary to
foxtail migration.
FIG. 6-40 An 8-year-old male
Miniature Poodle with back pain.
The lateral radiograph of the thora-
columbar spine revealed marked loss 
of bone density of Tl2 (white
arrow).
Differential
1diagnoses
include primary or metastatic neo-
plasms and an unusual infectious
process Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma of
T12.
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
695
FIG. 6-41 A 9-year-old female
mixed breed dog with polyuria and
polydipsia. There are multiple focal
lytic areas without sclerosis in the
lumbar vertebrae, particularly in the
laminae:
snouids lesiop pue
processes. Differential diagnoses
include multiple myeloma and
metastatic neoplasia. Diagnosis:
Multiple myeloma.
FIG. 6-42 A 10-year-old male
German Shepherd dog with polyuria
and polydipsia. There is diffuse
osteopenia of the cervical vertebrae.
Differential
diagnoses  include
hyperparathyroidism (primary or
secondary), hyperadrenocorticism,
multiple myeloma, and hyperthy-
roidism.
Diagnosis:
Multiple
myeloma.
FIG. 6-43 A 9-year-old neutered
male domestic short-haired cat has
pain at the thoracolumbar region.
There is a radiolucent erosion of the
endplates of Tll and Tl2. Other
structures are within normal limits.
Diskospondylitis was considered the
most likely diagnosis. The cat was
anesthetized for an aspirate of the
lesion and a mass was noted in the
frenulum of the tongue. An aspirate
of the spinal lesion and a biopsy of
the tongue mass were performed.
Diagnosis: Squamous cell carci-
noma of the tongue with metastasis
to T1l and T12.
696
SMALL ANIMAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-44 A 9-year-old male mixed
breed dog with dyschezia. The lateral
radiograph of the caudal lumbar
Mau isad uu,peaan aus
bone formation affecting the ventral
aspects ofL7,L6, and L5 (open black
arrow).Differentialdiagnoses
include metastatic neoplasia of the
prostate or other perineal organ and
infection. Diagnosis: Metastatic pro-
static adenocarcinoma.
reported to metastasize to the lumbar, sacral, or caudal vertebrae. In these cases periosteal
new bone formation or bony lysis may be observed. The ventral aspects of the fifth through
seventh lumbar vertebral bodies are affected most often (Fig. 6-44). The bony proliferation
may occur in association with tumor spread to the sublumbar (iliac) lymph nodes, with no
histologic evidence of tumor within the vertebral bodies themselves.
 Spinal cord or nerve root tumors may occur and may produce erosions of the pedicle or
arch, but they usually produce no bony changes and must be documented by myelography.
Tumors may metastasize to the spinal canal without involving the vertebral body or the
spinal cord. These tumors usually exhibit no survey radiographic changes and can be iden-
tified only by myelography. They willappear as extradural lesions (Fig. 6-45).186
Spinal Cord and Nerve Root Tumors. Neoplasia of the spinal cord or spinal nerves may
have some subtle survey radiographic changes, but most are difficult to diagnose without
myelography.187 Survey radiographs may reveal enlarged neural foramina or erosion of the
pedicles or laminae. An enlarged neural foramen may be apparent on either the ven-
trodorsal or lateral view (Fig. 6-46). Comparison with the adjacent neural foramina is help-
ful in recognizing this abnormality. Erosion of a pedicle,best seen on the ventrodorsal view,
appears as a loss of the sclerotic border medial to the pedicle, particularly as compared with
those pedicles cranial and caudal to it (Fig. 6-47). Careful positioning is essential for recog-
nition of this change. Overlying gas or ingesta may mimic or obscure this radiographic
abnormality. Erosion of the laminae is manifested as a loss of the sclerotic border of the
 q os s s t-g ) s gs  o poi a o d s-
with the appearance of those vertebrae that are cranial and caudal to the affected one.
Tumors of the spinal cord may manifest with an intramedullary myelographic pattern.
Primary tumors of the spinal cord may include ependymoma, medulloepithelioma, neu-
si ssop SunoA ui simoo Aid pue (el on ol wuoy pieool Aeoidh) Aempaenul
-d   jo s opqopmsd som s s-esq
 si asa sasi ma e u sai'ep a um pddn aq nen 
become apparent as extramedullary-intradural masses. 9,200 Metastatic tumors also have
 been described that manifeted as intramedullary lesions.201-204
Tumors of the spinal cord or nearby associated structures may appear as
extramedullary-intradural masses. These are associated most commonly with neurofi-
OSTEOCHONDROSIS
Osteochondrosis of the spine is rare. Lesions that resemble osteochondrosis have been
reported in association with cervical vertebral malformation.206 Whether these lesions are
primary and cause the clinical signs or are secondary to the cervical vertebral malforma-
tion is unknown. The lesions appear similar to osteochondrosis histologically. However,
they may be the result of degenerative joint disease and may not be the same as osteo-
CHAPTER SIX THE SPiNE
697
FIG. 6-45 An 8-year-old male Siberian Husky with a slow
onset of tetraparesis. A, The lateral myelogram revealed
ventral extradural masses centered in the bodies of C4 and
CS (large white arrows). The spinal cord at C3 appears
enlarged in the dorsoventral aspect due to a lateral
extradural mass (small white arrow). B, The ventrodorsal
view revealed a left lateral extradural mass at C3 (small
white arrow) and ventral extradural masses at C4 and C5,
causing the cord to appear widened at these sites (large
white arrow). Differential diagnoses include any of the mul-
tifocal extradural masses. The most likely is metastasis to
the internal vertebral venous plexus (dorsal venous verte-
bral sinuses). Diagnosis: Renal carcinoma metastasis to the
cervical internal vertebral venous plexus.
B
chondrosis in the appendicular skeleton. A lesion that resembles osteochondrosis has been
reported in the sacrum, predominantly in German Shepherd dogs.207 This lesion was iden-
tified in older dogs with cauda equina compression and in younger dogs without cauda
equina compression.A radiolucent defect was identified in the dorsal aspect of the cranial
endplate of S1, along with endplate sclerosis and one or more bone densities that were
identified on the ventral midline of the spinal canal In older dogs that also had other
degenerative changes, such as spondylosis and degenerative joint disease of the articular
facets, cauda equina compression was documented myelographically. The bone densities
appeared to be attached to the intervertebral disc and were identified histologically as hya-
  a si     a e   a
appeared histologically to be associated with the sacral physis.
698
FIG. 6-46 An 8-year-old male Miniature
Schnauzer holding up and refusing to use the
right hind limb. A, On the lateral view there is a
smooth-bordered enlargement of the neural
foramen of L7 (back arrow). B, The ventrodor-
sal view revealed that the right L7 neural fora-
 men is enlarged (white arrows) when compared
with the contralateral foramen (back arrows).
Differential diagnoses include neurofbroma,
 meningioma, and metastatic tumor. Diagnosis:
Neurofibroma of the right seventh lumbar
nerve.
B
CAUDA EQUINA SYNDROME
Some animals may develop the cauda equina syndrome (i.e., entrapment of one or more
of the terminal lumbar nerve roots). Numerous etiologies have been reported but degen-
 erative causes, such as dorsal or lateral disc protrusion or extrusion, ligamentous hyper-
trophy, or new bone formation, are the most common. These lesions are usually seen in
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
699
FIG. 6-47 A 9-year-old male Spitz with paraparesis that was worse
on the right. The ventrodorsal view revealed a loss of the cortical line
of the right pedicle of Ls. The left pedicle is present but less apparent
than usual (white arrows). Differential diagnoses include neoplasms
of the spine, spinal cord, or meninges. Diagnosis: Osteosarcoma of
L5.
FIG. 6-48 A 5-year-old male
Samoyed with slowly progressive
 paraparesis. The lateral view of the
caudal lumbar spine revealed
 erosion of the laminae of the arch of
L6. The normal cortical line is
seen clearly in L5 and L7 (btack
arrows).
Differentia diagnoses
include primary spinal cord tumors
and primary or metastatic neoplasia
of the vertebral body. Diagnosis:
Ependymoma.
large-breed dogs.208 There may be no radiographic changes; however, survey radiographic
findings, such as sclerosis, vertebral misalignment, sacralosteochondrosis, and spondylosis
ographs of the lumbosacral junction may be helpful in identifying misalignment or insta-
bility, but these changes may be present without cauda equina compression, because the
- n     sn i a sn n 
have not been useful in separating symptomatic from asymptomatic dogs.213 Definitive
diagnosis requires myelography, lumbar sinus venography, epidurography, discography,
CT,or MRIl1,213-22Myelography with laterl radiographs that are obtained with the
lumbosacral junction flexed and extended can be used to demonstrate cauda equina com-
pression in those dogs in which the dural sac extends beyond the lumbosacral junction.
700
This examination was successful in 80% of the dogs in one study.215 Although compression
of the cauda equina could be observed when the lumbosacral joint was flexed, the com-
 pression was demonstrated most often when the lumbosacral joint was extended. Some
 normal variation in the appearance of the dural sac was described.215 The normal vertebral
sinus venogram shows the sinuses in the sacral and caudal lumbar area. When the
venogram is abnormal, the sinus may be displaced laterally or dorsally or both.
Occasionally the sinus will be blocked and there will be a lack of opacification (Fig. 6-49).
Epidurography may demonstrate the prolapsed disc as a filling defect along the floor of the
spinal canal. In an experimental study, epidurography was better than myelography or
venography but demonstrated an injected silicon mass in only 41% of the dogs.217 Both
false-positive and falsenegative results may occur1CT and MRI will demonstrate the
soft-tissue mass and loss of the epidural fat. MRI is superior to the other techniques
 because it demonstrates the neural structures more completely.220
METABOLIC DISEASES
Metabolic disease may be reflected in the spine by overall loss of bone density and the
appearance of relatively sclerotic vertebral endplates.222 This can be due to hyperparathy-
roidism (either primary or secondary), hyperadrenocorticism, osteoporosis due to immo-
problem but rarely may predispose to spinal fracture (Fig. 6-50). The spine of apparently
results in vertebral changes is mucopolysaccharidosis in the cat. This may cause osteope-
nia, agenesis of the odontoid process, widening of the intervertebral disc spaces, and short-
ening of the vertebral bodies.230 A diet that is overly rich in vitamin A can produce
proliferative changes involing the arches and lateralbodies of the cervical vertebrae3
Lead poisoning has been reported to cause metaphyseal sclerosis of the vertebral bodies.231
Osteopetrosis may affect the vertebral bodies as well as the appendicular skeleton.
Hypothyroidism, either congenital or juvenile onset, will result in delayed closure of
growth plates, shortened vertebral bodies, and may result in intervertebral protrusions.23-235
FIG. 6-49 A 6-year-old male Labrador Retriever with
tail biting for 8 weeks. On the lateral view the lumbar
sinus venogram revealed the opacified sinuses from C3
to the lumbosacral junction. On the ventrodorsal view
the right dorsal lumbar sinus is obstructed at L7-S1
(small back arrow), and the left dorsal lumbar sinus is
blocked slightly caudal to this level (tong black arrow).
Differential diagnoses include disc extrusion, hypertro-
phy of dorsal longitudinal ligament, degenerative joint
disease with periarticular osteophytes encroaching
 upon the spinal canal, and fbrous adhesions within the
spinal canal from unknown causes. Diagnosis: L7-S1
disc extrusion.
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
701
anse pue suuou q ioy eisdpaiod pue eniod ym sop paaq paxu aieay io-ia-  os-g i
back pain. The lateral radiograph of the thoracolumbar spine revealed a decrease in length of both
the body and arch components of Tll, as well as a generalized osteopenia. Differential diagnoses for
the osteopenia include hyperadrenocorticism, primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism, and
nutritional deficiencies. Diagnosis: Pathologic impaction fracture of Tll due to primary hyper-
parathyroidism.
FIG. 6-51 A 10-year-old male domestic short-haired cat with hematuria. The spine revealed diffuse
osteopenia. Although many differential diagnoses should be considered, the most common is senile
osteopenia of unknown etiology. Diagnosis: Senile osteopenia.
 Chronic vitamin A intoxication, usually associated with diets limited to liver, has been
 documented to cause spondylosis and ankylosing spondylosis.236
TRAUMA
 Fractures. Spinal trauma may cause fractures or soft-tissue injuries. Minimal trauma may
result in fractures of abnormal vertebrae (e.g., those affected by tumor or other pathologic
 sh u aum s s  si s u n jo as sb s a zarssd
lumbar spine is affected slightly more frequently than the sacral and thoracic spine238
Fractures most frequently occur through the vertebral body. Injury to more than one ver-
tebra, especially adjacent vertebral segments, is not uncommon, particularly in the lum-
bosacral area. It is difficult to determine the extent of the spinal cord injury based solely on
the radiographic appearance of the fracture,because the nature of the fracture and the level
at which it occurs influence the neurologic signs. As a general rule, displacement of the
fragments more than one-half the diameter of the spinal canal is indicative of a severe
spinal cord injury. One categorization of spinal fractures is by the type of force that caused
the fracture (impaction, avulsion, shearing, bursting, or rotation); another method classi-
fies the fractures according to the manner in which the force is applied (rotation, hyper-
flexion, or hyperextension). The factors that are most important for treatment decisions
are the displacement and stability of the fracture fragments.
The most common cause of impaction, or compression, fractures is trauma. This usually
results in a shortened vertebral body with the pedicles and laminae unaffected (Fig. 6-52).
Comparison with adjacent vertebral bodies is helpful in recognizing a compression fracture,
because the alteration in trabecular pattern that accompanies the fracture may be subtle.
Some systemic diseases ( primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism),
infection, and neoplasia may weaken the bony structures of the vertebrae and predispose
them to compression fractures. This usually results in compression of both the vertebral body
and the more dorsal structures (pedicles and laminae) (see Fig. 6-50).
s   j rs   s a  s s  
shearing force may cause fracture through the entire vertebra (Figs. 6-53 and 6-54).
702
SMALL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-52 An 8-year-old male
Labrador Retriever that was hit by a
mar. The dog has acute paraparesis
 and hyperpathia of the thoracolum-
bar region. A, The lateral radiograph
revealed shortening of the vertebral
body and slight malalignment with
the neighboring vertebrae. The dor-
αal components of the spine are nor-
mal. B, The ventrodorsal view
revealed shortening of the vertebral
body.
Diagnosis:
 Traumatic
impaction (compression) fracture of 
T12.
B
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
703
FIG. 6-53 A 3-year-old male
Doberman Pinscher that was hit by a
car. A, The lateral view of the cervi-
cal spine revealed a fracture through
the base of the odontoid process
(white arrow) with cranial and dorsal
displacement of the caudal frag-
ment. B, The ventrodorsal view
revealed some foreshortening of C2.
The dog was treated by conservative
management and developed no
long-term
 neurologic   signs.
Diagnosis: Shearing fracture of C2.
B
704
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGy AnD UiTRaSoNOGRaphY
FIG. 6-54 A 6-month-old Labrador
Retriever was playing with its sibling
when it yelped and was noted to have
persistent neck pain. There is a mis-
alignment between Cl and C2 (white
arrow), with the dens fractured from
C2 and remaining in its normal place
in Cl (black arrow). Diagnosis:
Fractured dens.
FIG. 6-55 A l-year-old female
domestic short-haired cat that was
hit by a car.A, The lateral radiograph
revealed fractures of the pedicles and
aminae of the caudal portion of L5.
There is an avulsion fracture of the
caudal endplate of L5.
Cor tinued
Extensional trauma usually results in avulsion fractures of the ventral spinal components
and shearing fractures of dorsal spinal components (Figs. 6-55 and 6-56). In flexional
trauma, the ventral vertebral body components will experience shearing forces and the
dorsal components will experience avulsive forces (Fig. 6-57).
Bursting fractures are caused by a massive force such as that caused by a gunshot
wound to a vertebral body. This results in complete dispersion of the vertebral fragments
(Figs. 6-58 and 6-59). This type of fracture is uncommon.
 Dislocations. Trauma may bring rotational or complex forces to bear upon the spine
(Fig. 6-60). Subluxation or luxation of the spine may occur, with the dorsal facets of one
vertebra misaligned with those of the vertebra immediately cranial to it (Fig. 6-61).
Articular facet fractures may occur concurrently with luxation or subluxation, and care-
ful examination of the radiograph may be required to identify these small fragments.
When traumatic vertebral body luxation is present, concurrent vertebral body fractures
are more common than articular facet fractures.238 A widened disc space may be the only
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
705
 FIG. 6-55 cont'd B, The ventrodorsal view revealed malalignment at L5-6 and displace-
ment to the left of the dorsal fragments. Diagnosis: Extensional injury fractures of L5.
B
FIG. 6-56 A 4-year-old English
Springer Spaniel was hit by a car and
became paretic in the hind limbs.
There is an extensional fracture of
T7 with subluxation at T7-8.
Diagnosis: Fractured T7.
radiographic change identified when subluxation of the vertebral bodies has occurred. On
a ventrodorsal radiograph, an abrupt change in alignment of the dorsal spinous processes
may be observed. It is difficult to predict the severity of the neurologic injury from the
    a a sd a  s 
severe myelomalacia. Three-dimensional reconstruction of CT scans has proven to
be helpful in making this diagnosis.239
706
SmAll ANImAl RADIOlOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-57 An 8-month-old male
Cocker Spaniel that had been hit by a
car. The lateral cervical radiograph
revealed an avulsion fracture of the
dorsal part of the cranial endplate of
C3, which was displaced dorsally.
 Diagnosis: Flexion injury fracture of
C3.
A
B
FIG. 6-58 A 3-year-old Pit Bull that had been shot. A, The bullet fragments are clearly visible. The
caudal half of the arch of C2 has been shattered. B, The ventrodorsal view revealed multiple frag-
ments of C2, particularly on the left side. Diagnosis: Bursting fracture of C2 due to gunshot
wound.
Intervertebral Disc Prolapse. Intervertebral disc prolapse may occur as a result of trauma.
Approximately 10% of dogs with spinal trauma have disc herniation.238 A narrowed inter-
vertebral disc, alteration in contour and size of the intervertebral foramen, and collapse of 
the interarcuate space may be observed. Myelography may be required to evaluate the
extent of the spinal cord injury.
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
707
FIG. 6-59 A 4-year-old neutered
female mixed breed dog had pain
over the pelvis and a flaccid tail.
There is a comminuted fracture of
caudalvertebral.Diagnosis:
Fractured first caudal vertebra.
FIG. 6-6o A5-year-old neutered male cat had been hit by a car. Both sacroil-
iac joints are discontinuous (arrows). Diagnosis: Bilateral sacroiliac
luxations.
708
SmAlL ANImAL RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASONOGRAPHY
FIG. 6-61 A12-year-oldmale
 Poodle hit bya car. The dog has tetra-
 paresis and neck pain. A, On the lat-
e i  ma
subluxation at C5-6 (white arrow). B,
On the ventrodorsal view there is
rightward displacement of C6 rela-
tive to Cs. Careful examination
revealed that the left articular facet of
C6 (white arrow) is displaced toward
and locked to the right of the articu-
ar facet of Cs (black arrow). There is
incidental evidence of chronic cervi-
A
al intervertebral disc disease, with
 narrowing ofthe disc spaces and scle-
 rosis of the adjacent endplates at C3-
4 and C4-5. Diagnosis: Rotational
 injury at Cs-6 with locked facets.
B
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
709
REFERENCES
1. Ticer JW: Radiographic technique in srmall animal practice. WB
26. Rarmirez O, Thrall DE: A review of irmaging techniques for canine
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1975.
 cauda equina syndrorme. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998; 39:283.
 2. Allan GS, Wood AKW: lohexol rmyelography in the dog. Vet Radiol
27. Serivani PV, Barthez PY, Leveille R: Radiology corner—the fallibility
1988; 29:78.
of the rmyelographic “double line” sign. Vet Radiol ultrasound 1996;
 3. Widrmer WR, Blevins WE, Jakovljevic S, et al: lohexol and iopami
37:264.
dol rmyelography in the dog: clinical trial comparing adverse
 28. Applewhite AA, Wilkens BE, McDonald DE, et al: Potential central
effects and myelographic quality. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1992;
 nervous cormplications of von Willebrand's disease. J Arm Anim Hosp
33:327.
Assoc 1999; 35:423.
4. Pardo AD, Morgan JP: Myelography in the cat: a cormparison of cis-
29. Jerrarm RM, Dewey CW: Suspected spinal epidural ermpyerma and
ternal versus lurmbar puncture using metrizarmide. Vet Radiol 1988;
associated vertebral osteormyelitis (physitis) in a dog. I Vet Ermerg
29:89.
Crit Care 1998; 8:103.
5. Carakostas MC, Gossett KA, Watters JW, et al: Effects of metrizamide
 30. Blass CE, Holrmes RA, Neer TM: Recurring tetraparesis attributable
Imyelography on cerebrospinal fluid analysis in the dog. Vet Radiol
to a heartworrm in the epidural space of a dog. J Aim Vet Med Assoc
1983; 24:267.
1989; 194:787.
6. Tilmant L, Ackerrman N, Spencer CP: Mechanical aspects of sub-
 31. Stokol T, Parry BW, Mansell PD, et al: Hematorrachis associated with
arachnoid space punctures in the dog. Vet Radiol 1984; 25:227.
hernophilia A in three German Shepherd dogs. J Arn Anim Hosp
7. Kirberger RM, Wrigley RH: Myelography in the dog: review of
Assoc 1994; 30:239.
patients with contrast mediurm in the central canal. Vet Radiol
 32. Luttgen PJ, Crawley RR: Posterior paralysis causedby epidural diro-
Utrasound 1993; 34:253.
filariasis in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1981; 17:57.
8. Scrivani PV, Barthez PY, Leveille R, et al: Subdural injection of con-
33. Shires PK, Turnwald GH, Qualls CW, et al: Epidural dirofilariasis
trast rmedium during cervical rmyelography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
causing parapares in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180:1340.
1997; 38:267.
 34. Breit S, Kunzel W: Abnormalities of the spine of purebred dogs: a
9. Ticer JW, Brown SG: Water-soluble myelography in canine interver-
 radiographic and morphologic study. Wiener Tierarztl Monatsschr
tebral disc protrusion. J Arm Vet Radiol Soc 1974; 15:3.
1998; 85:340.
10. Penderis J, Sullivan M, Scharz T, et al: Subdural injection of contrast
 35. Morgan IP: Congenital anormalies of the vertebral colurmn of the dog:
rmediurm as a cormplication of myelography. J Small Anirm Pract 1999;
 a study of the incidence and significance based on a radiographic and
40:173.
Imorphologic study. I A1m Vet Radiol Soc 1968; 9:21.
11. Koper S, Mucha M: Visualization of the vertebral canal veins in the
 36. Larsen JS: Lurmbosacral transitional vertebra in the dog. J A1m Vet
dog: a radiological method. I Am Vet Radiol Soc 1977; 18:105.
Radiol Soc 1977; 18:76.
12. McNeel SV, Morgan JP: Intraosseous vertebral venography: a tech-
 37. Morgan JP, Bahr A, Franti CE, et al: Lurmbosacral transitional verte-
nique for exarmination of the canine lurmbosacral junction. J Arm Vet 
 bra as a predisposing cause of cauda equina syndrome in German
Radiol Soc 1978; 19:168.
Shepherd dogs: 161 cases (1987-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;
13. Blevins WE: Transosseous vertebral venography: a diagnostic aid in
202:1877.
lumbosacral disease. Vet Radiol 1980; 21:50.
 38. Morgan IP, Rosenblatt L: Canine hip dysplasia: significance of pelvic
14. Koblik PD, Suter PF: Lurmbosacral vertebral sinus venography via
 and sacral attachrment. Cal Vet 1987; 1:12.
transjugular catheterization in the dog. Vet Radiol 198 1; 22:69.
39. Morgan JP: Transitional lumbosacral vertebral anomaly in the dog: a
15. Barthez PY, Morgan JP, Lipsitz D: Discography and epidurography
radiographic study. J Small Anirm Pract 199,; 40:167.
for evaluation of the lurmbosacral junction in dogs with cauda
 40. Ruberte J, Anor S, Carretero A, et al: Malforrmations of the vertebral
equina syndrome. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1994; 35:152.
 bodies and the ribs associated to spinal dysraphism without spina
16. Feeney DA, Wise M: Epidurography in the normal dog: technique
bifida in a Pekingese dog. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 1995; 42:307.
and radiographic findings. Vet Radiol 1981; 22:35.
 41. Parker AJ, Park RD: Clinical signs associated with hemivertebra in
17. SissonLCouterRA,ngramJT,t al Diagnosisf caudaqa
three dogs. Canine Pract 1974; 3:34.
abnorrmalities by using electrormyography, discography, and
 42. Bailey CS: An ermbryological approach to the clinical significance of
epidurography in dogs. I Vet lntern Med 1992; 6:253.
 Congenital vertebral and spinal cord abnormalities. J Arm Anirm Hosp
18. Wrigley RH, Reuter RE: Canine cervical discography. Vet Radiol
Assoc 1975; 11:426.
1984; 25:274.
43. Knecht CD, Blevins WE, Raffe MR: Stenosis of the thoracic spinal
 19. Nakamiyarma M: Intraoperative spinal ultrasonography in dogs: nor-
 canal in English Bulldogs. JI Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1979; 15:181.
Imal findings and case history reports. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1993;
44. Bagley RS, Forrest LJ, Cauzinille L, et al: Cervical vertebral fusion and
34:264.
concurrent intervertebral disc extrusion in four dogs. Vet Radiol
 20. Galagher JG, Penninck D, Boudrieau RJ, et al: Utrasonography of
Ultrasound 1993; 34:336.
the brain and vertebral canal in dogs and cats: 15 cases (1988-1993).
45. Kirberger RM: Congenital malformation and variation of the lurmbar
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1995; 207:1320.
vertebrae in a dog. I S Afr Vet Assoc 1989; 60:111.
21. Galloway AM, Curtis NC, Sormmerland SF, et al: Correlative imaging
 46. Hurov L: Congenital atlantoaxial malformation and acute subluxa-
findings in seven dogs and one cat with spinal arachnoid cysts. Vet
tion in a mature Basset Hound: surgical treatment by wire stabiliza-
Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:445.
tion. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1979; 15:177.
 22. Drost WT, Love NE, Berry CR: Cormparison of radiography, rmyelog-
47. Cook JR, Oliver IE: Atlantoaxialluxation in the dog. Comp Cont Ed
raphy and cormputed tormography for the evaluation of canine verte-
1981; 3:242.
bral and spinal cord tumors in sixteen dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound
48. Watson AG, deLahunta A: Atlantoaxial subluxation and absence of
1996; 37:28.
    i  e  se  y  i 
 23. Prata RG: Diagnosis of spinal turmors in the dog. Vet Clin North A1m
1989; 195:235
1977; 7:165.
49. Lakatos L, Suter M, Baurmberger A, et al: Atlanto-axial subluxation in
 24. Umphlet RC, Vincini DS, Godshalk CP: Intradural-extrarmedullary
the dog. Schweiz Arch Tierhielkunde 1981; 123:455.
liporma in a dog. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1989; 11:1194.
 50. Hosgood G, Toombs J, Blevins W: Traurmatic atlanto-occipital insta-
25. Stickle R, Lowrie C, Oakley R: Radiology corner: another exarmple of
bility in a dog. Aust Vet Pract 1989; 19:88.
the rmyelographic “double line" sign. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1998;
 51. Greenwood KM, Oliver JE: Traurmatic atlanto-occipital dislocation in
39:543.
two dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1978; 173:1324.
710
SmAll ANimAl RaDIOlOGY AND UlTRaSOnOGRapHY
 52. Huibregtse BA, Srmith CS, Fagin BD: Atlantoaxial luxation in a
 80. Sharp NJH, Wheeler SJ, Cofone M: Radiological evaluation of
 Doberrman Pinscher. Canine Pract 1992; 17:7.
"wobbler" syndrorme: caudal cervical spondylormyelopathy. I Small
 53. DeCamp CE, Schirmer RG, Stickle RL: Traumatic atlantooccipital
Anirm Pract 1992; 33:491.
subluxation in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1991; 27:415.
 81. Bingel SA, Sande RD: Chondrodysplasia in five Great Pyrenees.
 54. Parker AJ, Park RD, Stowater JL: Cervical kyphosis in an Afghan
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205:845.
Hound. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1973; 162:953.
82. Breur GJ, Zerbe CA, Slocormbe RF, et al: Clinical, radiographic,
 55. Shelton SB, Bellah J, Chrisman C, et al: Hypoplasia of the odontoid
pathologic, and genetic features of osteochondrodysplasia in
process and secondary atlantoaxial luxation in a Siamee cat. Prog
Scottish Deerhounds. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:606.
Vet Neurol 1991; 2:209.
83. Kerwin SC, MeCarthy RJ, VanSteenhouse JL, et al: Cervical spinal
 56. Watson AG: Congenital occipitoatlantoaxial malforrmation (OAAM)
cord cormpression caused by cryptococosis in a dog: successful
in a dog. Anat Histol Embryol 1979; 8:187.
treatrment with surgery and fluconazole. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
 57. Watson AG: Congenital occipitoatlantoaxial malformation in a cat.
1998; 34:523.
Comp Cont Ed 1985; 7:245.
 84. Miyarmato T, Hagio M, Mwanza T, et al: Compression of spinal
58. Santen DR, Payne IT, Pace LW, et al: Thoracolurmbar vertebral osteo-
cord caused by spinal deformation in a cat. J Vet Med Sci 1995;
chondrorma in a young dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:1054.
57:1101.
 59. Bhati S, Van Ham L, Putcuyups l, et al: Atlantoaxial cartilaginous
 85. Gibson KL, lhle SL, Hogan PM: Severe spinal cord cormpression
exostosis causing spinal cord compression in a mature Bernese
caused by a dorsally angulated dens. Prog Vet Neurol 1995; 6:55.
Mountain Dog. I Srmall Anirm Pract 2001; 42:79.
 86. Wheeler SJ: Vertebral abnormalities in dogs. J Simall Anirn Pract
 60. Caporn TM, Read RA: Osteochondromatosis of the cervical spine
1991; 32:149.
causing cormpressive rmyelopathy in a dog. I Srmall Anirm Pract 1996;
87. Bagley RS, Silver GM, Kippenes H, et al: Syringomyelia and
37:133.
hydrormyelia in dogs and cats. Cormp Cont Educ Pract Vet 2000;
 61. Ness MG: Osteochondroma causing progressive posterior paresis in
22:471.
a Lakeland Terrier puppy. Vet Rec 1993; 132:608.
 88. Rusbridge C, MacSweeny JE, Davies IV, et al: Syringohydrormyelia in
62. Acton CE: Spinal cord cormpression in young dogs due to cartilagi-
cavalier King Charles Spaniels. J A1m Anirn Hosp Assoc 2000; 36:34.
nous exostosis. Cal Vet 1987; 41:7.
89. Kirberger RM, Jacobson LS, Davies IV: Hydrornyelia in the dog. Vet
63. Reidarson TH, Metz AL, Hardy RM: Thoracic vertebral osteochon-
Radiol 1997; 38:30.
droma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192:1102.
 90. Tarmke PG, Petersen MG, Dietze AE, et al: Acquired hydrocephalus
64. Bichsel P, Lang J, Vandevelde M, et al: Solitary cartilaginous exostoses
and hydrormyelia in a cat with feline infectious peritonitis: a case
assciated with spinal cord compression in three large-breed dogs.
report and brief review. Can Vet I 1988; 29:997.
J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1985; 21:619.
91. Cauzinille L, Kornegay IN: Acquired syringormyelia in a dog. I Am
65. Santen DR, Payne IT, Pace LW, et al: Thoracolumbar vertebral osteo-
Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:1225.
 chondrorma in a young dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199:1054.
92. Cambridge AJ, Bagley RS, Britt LG, et al: Radiographic diagnosis:
66. Silver GM, Bagley RS,Gavin PR, et al: Radiographic diagnosis: carti-
 arachnoid cyst in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38:434.
laginous exostoses in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 200 1; 42:231.
 93. Parker AJ, Adarms WM, Zachary JF: Spinal arachnoid cysts in the
67. Green EM, Adams WM, Steinberg H: Malignant transformation of
dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1983; 19:1001.
solitary spinal osteochondrorma in two rmature dogs. Vet Radiol
94. Hardie RJ, Linn KA, Rendano VT: Spinal meningeal cyst in a dog: a
Utrasound 1999; 40:634.
case report and literature review. J Am Anirnm Hosp Assoc 1996;
 68. Parker AJ, Park RD, Byerly CS, et al: Spina bifida and protrusion of
32:477.
spinal cord tissue in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1973; 163:158.
 95. Ness MG: Spinal arachnoid cysts in two Shih Tzu littermates. Vet
69.Kitchen H, Murray RE, Cockrell BY:Spina bifida, sacral dysgenesis
Rec 1998; 142:515.
and rmyelocele. Am J Pathol 1972; 68:203.
 96. Vignoli M, Rossi F, Sarli G: Spinal subarachnoid cyst in a cat. Vet
70. Leipold HW, Huston K, Blauch B, et al: Congenital defects of the cau-
Radiol Utrasound 1999; 40:116.
 dal vertebral colurmn and spinal cord in Manx cats. J Arm Vet Med
97. Frykman OF: Spinal arachnoid cyst in four dogs: diagnosis, surgical
Assoc 1974; 164:520.
treatrment and follow-up results. J Srmall Anin Pract 1999; 40:544.
71. Wright F, Rest JR, Palrmer AC: Ataxia of the Great Dane caused by
 98. Hashizume CT: Cervical spinal arachnoid cyst in a dog. Can Vet J
 stenosis of the cervical vertebral canal: comparison with similar con-
2000; 41:225.
ditions in the Basset Hound, Doberman Pinscher, Ridgeback and the
99. Sharmir MH, Shahar R, Aizenberg l: Subarachnoid cyst in a cat. J Am
Thoroughbred horse. Vet Rec 1973; 92:1.
Anirm Hosp Assoc 1997; 33: 123.
72. Trotter EJ, delahunta A, Geary JC, et al: Caudal cervical vertebral
100. Perez B, Rollan E, Ramiro F, et al: lIntraspinal synovial cyst in a dog.
malforrmation-malarticulation in Great Danes and Doberman
 J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000; 36:235.
Pinschers. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1976; 168:917.
101. Morgan IP: Spondylosis deformans in the dog: its radiographic
 73. Charmbers JN, Betts CW: Caudal cervical spondylopathy in the dog:
appearance. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1967; 8:17.
a review of 20 cases and the literature. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1977;
102. Morgan JP, Ljunggren GL, Read R: Spondylosis deforrmans (verte-
13:571.
 bral osteophytosis) in the dog: a radiographic study frorm England,
74. Hurov Ll: Treatrment of cervical vertebral instability in the dog. J A1m
 Sweden and USA. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1967; 8:57.
Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175:278.
103. Morgan JP, Hansson K, Miyabayashi T: Spondylosis deforrmans in
 75. Raffe MR, Knecht CD: Cervical vertebral malforimation—a review of
the female Beagle dog: a radiographic study. J Small Anirn Pract
 36 cases. I A1m Anirm Hosp Assoc 1980; 16:881.
1989; 30:457.
 76. Parker AJ, Park RD, Henry ID: Cervical vertebral instability associ-
104. Levitski RE, Chauvet AE, Lipsitz D: Cervical myelopathy associated
ated with cervical disc disease in two dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1973;
with extradural synovial cysts in 4 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1999;
163:1369.
13:18 1.
77. VanGundy TE: Disc-associated wobbler syndrome in the Doberrman
105. Perez B, Rollan E, Ramiro F, et al: Intraspinal synovial cyst in a dog.
 Pinscher. Vet Clin North A1m Small Anirm Pract 1988; 18:667.
 J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000; 36:235.
78. Ellison GW, Seim HB, Clermrmons RM: Distracted cervical spinal
 e a o a u uyss np des di u 1
tribution based on a radiographic study. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 1969;
large breed dogs. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1988; 193:447.
10:43.
79. Parker AJ, Park RD, Cusick PK, et al: Cervical vertebral instability in
107. Lamb CR, Guthrie S: A rare example of an autormyelography. Vet
the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1973; 163:71.
Radiol 1995; 36:383.
CHapTer SiX THe SpinE
711
108. Morgan PW, Parent J, Holmberg DL: Cervical pain secondary to
134. Davis MJ, Dewey CW, Walker MA, et al: Contrast radiographic
 intervertebral disc disease in dogs; radiographic findings and surgi-
findings in canine bacterial discospondylitis: a rmulticenter, retro-
cal implications. Prog Vet Neurol 1993; 4:76.
spective study of 27 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000; 36:81.
109. Bagley RS, Tucker RL, Moore MP,et al: Intervertebral disc extrusion
135. Henderson RA, Hoerlein BF, Krarmer TT, et al: Discospondylitis in
in a cat. Vet Radiol 1995; 36:380.
three dogs infected with Brucella caris J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974;
110. Munana KR, Olby NJ, Sharp NJH, et al: Intervertebral disc disease 
165:451.
in 10 cats. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 2001; 37:384.
136. Turnwald GH, Shires PK, Turk MAM, et al: Discospondylitis in a
111. Morgan JP Miyabayashhi T: Degenerative changes in the vertbal
kennel of dogs: clinicopathologic findings. I Am Vet Med Assoc
colurmn of the dog: a review of radiographic findings. Vet Radiol
1986; 188:178.
1988; 29:72.
137. Smith KR, Kerlin RM, Mitchell G: Discospondylitis attributable to
112. Stigen O: Calcification of intervertebral discs in the Dachshund: a
grarm positive filarmentous bacteria in a dog. I Am Vet Med AssoC
radiographic study of 115 dogs at 1 and 5 years of age Acta Vet
1994; 205:428.
Scand 1996; 37:229.
138. Houlton EF, Jefferies AR: lnfective polyarthritis and multiple dis-
113. Jensen VF, Arnbjerg J: Development of intervertebral disc calcifica-
cospondylitis in a dog due to Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae. J Small
tion in the Dachshund: a prospective longitudinal radiographic
Anirm Pract 1989; 30:35.
study. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 2001; 37:274.
139. Aroch 1, Sharmir M, Harmelin A: Lumbar discospondylitis and
114. Bagley RS, Pluhar GE, Alexander JE: Lateral intervertebral disc
Ieningormyelitis caused by Escherichia coli in a cat. Feline Pract
extrusion causing larmeness in a dog. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1994;
1999; 27:20.
205:181.
140. Adamo PF, Cherubini GB: Discospondylitis associated with three
115. Felts JF, Prata RG: Cervical disc disease in the dog: intraforarminal
unreported bacteria in the dog. JI Small Anirm Pract 2001; 42:352.
 and lateral extrusions. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1983; 19:755.
141. Malik R, Latter M, Love D: Bacterial discospondylis in a cat.
116. Gaschen L, Lang J, Haeni H: lntravertebral disc herniation 
 J Srmall Anirm Pract 1990; 3 1:404.
(Schrmorl's node) in five dogs. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1995;
142. Bradney IW: Vertebral osteormyelitis due to Nocardia in a dog. Aust
36:509.
Vet J 1985;62:315.
117. Jensen VF: Asymptormatic radiographic disappearance of calcified
143. Dunbar M, Vulgamott IC: Thoracic and vertebral osteomyelitis
intervertebral disc material in the Dachshund. Vet Radiol
 caused by actinomycosis in a dog. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1981;
Ultrasound 2001; 42:141.
76:1 159.
118. Brown NO, Helphrey ML, Prata RG: Thoracolurmbar disc disease in
144. Butterworth SJ, Barr FJ, Pearson GR, et al: Multiple discospondyli-
the dog: a retrospective analysis of 1897 cases. I Am Anirm Hosp
 ia lop e u  sads siase  eosse s
Assoc 1977; 13:665.
1995; 136:38.
119. Kirberger RM, Roos CJ, Lubbe AM: The radiological diagnosis of
145. Berry Wl, Leisewitz ALl: Multifocal Aspergillus tereus dis-
thoracolurmbar disc disease in the Dachshund. Vet Radiol
cospondylitis in two German Shepherd dogs. J S Afr Vet Assoc 1996; 
Ultrasound 1992; 33:255.
67:222.
120. Olby NJ, Dyce J, Houlton JEF: Correlation of plain radiographic
146. Watt PR, Robins GM, Galloway AM, et al: Disserminated oppor-
and lurmbar rnyelographic findings with surgical findings in thora-
tunistic fungal disease in dogs: 10 cases (1982-1990). J Am Vet Med
colurmbar disc disease. J Srmall Anirm Pract 1994; 35:345.
Assoc 1995; 207:67.
121. Sormerville ME, Anderson SM, GilPJ, et al: Accuracy of localization
147. Kaufer 1, Weber A: Systermic rmycosis in a dog caused by Graphiurm
of cervical intervertebral disc extrusion or protrusion using survey
fructicola. Mykosen 1977; 20:39.
radiography in dogs. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 2001; 37:563.
148. Siems JS, Jakovljevic S, Adams LG, et al: Discospondylitis in associ-
122. Hay CW, Muir P: Tearing of the dura mater in three dogs.Vet Rec
 ation with an intraabdominal abscess in a dog. J Srmall Anirn Pract
2000; 146:279.
1999; 40:123.
123. Roush JK, Douglass IP, Hertzke D, et al: Traurmatic dural laceration
149. Fischer A, Mahaffey MB, Oliver JE: Fluoroscopically guided percu-
in a racing Greyhound. Vet Radiol Utrasound 1992; 33:22.
124. Dallman MJ, Moon ML, Giovannitti-Jensen A: Comparison of the
Intern Med 1997; 11:284.
width of the intervertebral disc space and radiographic changes
150. Patnaik AK, Liu SK, Wilkins RJ, et al: Paeciloycosis in a dog. J Arn
before and after intervertebral disc fenestration in dogs. Am J Vet
Vet Med Assoc 1972; 161:806.
Res 1991; 52:140.
 151. Turrel JM, Pool RR: Bone lesions in 4 dogs with visceral leishrmani-
125. Hurov L, Troy G, Turnwald G: Discospondylitis in the dog: 27 cases.
asis. Vet Radiol 1982; 23:243.
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1978; 173:275.
152. Barton CL, Russo EA, Craig TM, et al: Canine hepatozoonosis: a
126. Kornegay JN, Barber DL, Earley TD: Cranial thoracic dis-
 retrospective study of 15 naturally occurring cases. J Am Anirm
cospondylitis in two dogs. J A1m Vet Med Assoc 1979; 174:192.
Hosp Assoc 1985; 21:125.
127. Kornegay JN, Barber DL: Discospondylitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med
153. Frendin J, Funkquist B, Hanson K, et al: Diagnostic imaging of for-
Assoc 1980; 177:337.
eign body reactions in dogs with diffuse back pain. J Small Anin
128. Johnson RG, Prata RG: lntradiscal osteormyelitis: a conservative
Pract 1999; 40:278.
approach. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1983; 19:743.
154. LaCroix JA: Vertebral body osteormyelitis: a case report. J Am Vet
129. Gonzalo-Orden JM, Altonaga JR, Orden MA, et al: Magnetic reso-
Radiol Soc 1973; 14:17.
nance, computed tomographic and radiologic findings in a dog
155. Johnston DE, Summers BA: Osteormyelitis of the lumbar vertebrae
with discospondylitis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2000; 41:142.
 in dogs caused by grass-seed foreign bodies. Aust Vet I 1971;
130. Aroch l, Shamir M, Harmelin A: Lurmbar discospondylitis and
47:289.
 Imeningormyelitis caused by Escherichia coli in a cat. Feline Pract
 156. Wright JA, Bell DA, Clayton-Jones DG: The clinical and radiologi-
1999; 27:20.
cal features associated with spinal turmors in thirty dogs. J Small
131. Watson E, Roberts RE: Discospondylitis in a cat. Vet Radiol
Anirm Pract 1979; 20:461.
Ultrasound 1993; 34:397.
157. Morgan JP, Ackerman N, Bailey CS, et al: Vertebral turmors in the
132. Kerwin SC, Lewis DD, Hribermik TN, et al: Discospondylitis associ-
dog: a clinical, radiologic, and pathologic study of 61 primary and
(6i s     s  yi e
secondary lesions. Vet Radiol 1980; 21:197.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:1253.
158. Suter PF, Morgan JP, Holliday TA, et al: Myelography in the dog:
133. Lobetti RG: Subarachnoid abscess as a cormplication of dis-
diagnosis of turmors of the spinal cord and vertebrae. J Am Vet
cospondylitis in a dog. I Small Anirm Pract 1994; 35:480.
Radiol Soc 1971; 12:29.
712
Small Animal RadiOloGy And UitrasonoGraphy
159. Thormas WB, Daniel GB, McGavin D: Parosteal osteosarcorma of the
186. Bentley JF, Simpson ST, Hathcock IT, et al: Metastatic thyroid solid-
cervical vertebra in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38: 120.
follicular carcinorma in the cervical portion of the spine of a dog.
160. Harmerslag KL, Evans SM, Dubielzig R: Coccygeal vertebral chon-
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:1498.
drosarcorma in a Saint Bernard dog: a case report. Vet Radiol 1980;
187. Zaki FA, Prata RG, Hurvitz Al, et al: Primary tumors of the spinal
21:194.
cord and rmeninges in six dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1975; 166:511.
161. Drost WT, Love NE, Berry CR: Cormparison of radiography, rmyel-
188. Kennedy FA, Indrieri RJ, Koestner A: Spinal cord medulloepithe-
ography and cormputed tormography for the evaluation of canine
lioma in a dog. I A1m Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185:902.
vertebral and spinal cord tumor in sixteen dogs. Vet Radiol
189. Clark DM, Picut CA: Neuroepithelioma in a middle-aged dog. J Am
Ultrasound 1996; 37:28.
Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:1330.
162. Thormas WB, Daniel GB, McGavin D: Parosteal osteosarcorma of the 
 190. Dallman MJ, Saunders GK: Primary spinal cord lymphosarcorma in
cervical vertebra in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38:120.
a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189:1348.
163. Moore GE, Mathey WS, Eggers IS, et al: Osteosarcorma in adjacent
191. Neer TM, Kreeger IM: Cervical spinal cord astrocytoma in a dog.
lurmbar vertebrae in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217:1038.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191:84.
164. Green EM, Adams WM, Steinberg H: Malignant transforrmation of
192. Neel I, Dean GA: A rmass in the spinal colurmn of a dog. Vet Clin
solitary spinal osteochondrorma in two rmature dogs. Vet Radiol
Pathol 2000; 29:87.
Ultrasound 1999; 40:634.
193. Macri NP, Van Alstine WV, Coollrman RA: Canine spinal nephrob-
165. Levy MS, Mauldin G, Kapatkin AS, et al: Nonlymphoid vertebral
lastoma. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1997; 33:302.
canal turmors in cats: 11 cases (1987-1995). I Arm Vet Med Assoc
194. Jeffrey ND, Phillips SM: Surgical treatment of intrarmedullary spinal
1997; 210:663.
cord neoplasia in two dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1995; 36:553.
166. Thomas WB, Daniel GB, McGavin MD: Parosteal osteosarcorma of
195. Surmrmers BA, deLahunta A, McEntee M, et al: A novel intradural
the cervical vertebra in a dog. Vet Radiol 1997; 38:120.
extrarmedullary spinal cord turmor in young dogs. Acta Neuropathol
167. Robinson Gw: Vertebral chondrosarcoma in a dog. I Am Vet Med
(Berl) 1988; 75:402.
Assoc 1966; 149:294.
196. Vaughan-Scott T, Golding I, Nesbit JW: Spinal nephroblastorma in
168. Parker AJ, Klormp DG, Slusher R, et al: Vertebral chondrosarcorma
an lrish Wolfhound. I S Afr Vet Assoc 1999; 70:25.
with extensive pulrmonary rmetastases in a dog. I Srmall Anim Pract
197. Ribas JL: Thoracolurmbar spinal cord blastorma: a unique turmor of
1971; 12:673.
young dogs. J Vet lntern Med 1990: 4:127.
169. Chavet AE, Hogge GS, Sandin JA, et al: Vertebrectormy, bone allo-
198. Jeffrey ND, Philips SM: Surgical treatrment of intramedullary spinal
graft fusion, and antiturmor vaccination for the treatment of verte-
cord neoplasia in two dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 1995; 36:553.
bral fibrosarcoma in a dog. Vet Surg 1999; 28:480.
199. Pearson GR, Gregory SP, Charles AK: lrmrmunohistochermical
170. Hine EA, Sheppard E, Schulz K, et al: What is your diagnosis?
 dermonstration of Wilms' turmour gene product WT1 in a canine
Osteosarcorma of the spine in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;
"neuroepithelioma" providing evidence for its classification as an
211:987.
extrarenal nephroblastoma. I Cormp Pathol 1997; 116:321.
171. Platt SR, Sheppard BJ, Graham J, et al: Pheochromocytoma in the
 200. Terrell SP, Platt SR, Chrisrman CL, et al: Possible intraspinal metasta-
vertebral canal of two dogs. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1998; 34:365.
sis of a canine spinal cord nephroblastoma. Vet Pathol 2000; 37:94.
e e xe    o   
 201. Kirchof N, Nohr B: Spinal metastasis of a canine transrmissible
ated with bone lysis in a dog. I Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 1998; 34:373.
tumor. Kleinterpraxis 1994; 39:797.
173. Jergens AE, Miles KG, Moore FM: Atypical lytic proliferative skele-
 202. Hopkin AL, Garner M, Ackerman N, et al: Spinal meningeal sar-
tallesions associated with plasima cell myeloma in adog. Vet Radiol
coma in a Rottweiler puppy. J Small Anim Pract 1995; 36:183.
1990; 31:262.
 203. MacPherson GC, Chadwick BJ, Robbins PD: lIntrarmedullary spinal
174. Parchrman MB, Crameri FM: Prirmary vertebral hemangiosarcoma
cord rmetastasis of a primary lung turmor in a dog. J Small Anim
in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:79.
Pract 1993; 34:242.
175. Parchman MB, Crarmeri FM: Prirmary vertebral hemangiosarcorma
 204. Waters DJ, Hayden DW: lntrarmedullary spinal cord rmetastasis in
in a dog. I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194:79.
the dog. I Vet Intern Med 1990; 4:207.
176. Suess RP, Martin RA, Shell LG, et al: Vertebral lymphosarcoma in a
 205. Fingeroth JM, Prata RG, Patnaik AK: Spinal meningiormas in dogs:
cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:101.
13 cases (1972-1987). I Arm Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191:720.
177. Moon ML, Saunders GK, Martin RA: Vertebral osteosclerosis in a
 206. Olsson SS: Osteochondrosis in the dog. In Kirk RW, ed: Current vet-
cat secondary to rhabdomyosarcoma. Vet Radiol 1990; 31:39.
erinary therapy Vl. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1977; p 880.
178. Bertoy RW, Umphlet RC: Vertebral osteosarcoma in a dog: patho-
 207. Lang J, Hani H, Schawalder P: A sacral lesion resermbling osteo-
 logic fracture resulting in acute hindimb paralysis. Comp Anirm
chondrosis in the Gerrman Shepherd dog. Vet Radiol Utrasound
Pract 1989; 19:7.
1992; 33:69.
179. Braund KC, Everett RM, Bartels JE, et al: Neurologic cormplications
 208. Jaggy A, Lang I, Schwalder P: Cauda equina syndrome in the dog.
of lgA rmultiple rmyelorma associated with cryoglobulinermia in a
Schweiz Arch Tierheilkrl 1987; 129: 171.
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 174:1321.
 209. Oliver JE, Selcer RR, Simpson S: Cauda equina cormpression from
180. Suess RP, Martin RA, Shell LG, et al: Vertebral lymphosarcoma in a
lurmbosacral malarticulation and malforrmation in the dog. J Am Vet
cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1990; 197:101.
Med Assoc 1978; 173:207.
181. Cayzer J, Jones BR: lIgA rmultiple myelorma in a dog. N ZVet J 1991;
 210. Tarvin G, Prata RG: Lurmbosacral stenosis in dogs. J Arm Vet Med
39:139.
Assoc 1980; 177:154.
182. Turner JL, Luttgen PJ, VanGundy TE, et al: Multicentric osseous
 211. Hanna FY: Lumbosacral osteochondrosis: radiological features and
lyrmphorma with spinal extradural involverment in a dog I Am Vet
surgical managerment in 34 dogs. J Small Anirm Pract 2001; 42:272.
Med Assoc 1992; 200: 196.
 212. Berzon JL, Dueland R: Cauda equina syndrome: pathophysiology
183. Rovesti GL, Guandalini A, Pieffer R: Suspected latent vertebral
and report of seven cases. J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 1979; 15:635.
Imetastasis of uveal melanorma in a dog: a case report. Vet
 213. Wright JA: Spondylosis deformans of the lumbosacral joint in dogs.
Ophthalrmol 200 1; 1:75.
J Srmall Anirm Pract 1980; 21:45.
184. Hines ME, Newton JC, Altman NH, et al: Metastasizing extra-adre-
214. Selcer BA, Chambers JN, Schewnsen K, et al: Epidurography as a
 nal paraganglioma with neurological signs in four dogs. J Comp
diagnostic aid in canine lurmbosacral cormpressive disease: 47 cases
Pathol 1993; 108:283.
(198 1-1986). Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 1988; 2:97.
185. Helphrey ML, Meierhenry EF: Vulvar leiormyosarcorma rmetastatic to
 215. Lang J: Flexion-extension myelography of the canine cauda equina.
the spinal cord in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172:583.
Vet Radiol 1988; 29:242.
CHAPTER SIX THE SPINE
713
216. Denny HR, Gibbs C, Holt PE: The diagnosis and treatrment of cauda
228. Huntley K, Frazer J, Gibbs C, et al: The radiological features of
 equina lesions in the dog. I Small Anim Pract 1982; 23:425.
canine Cushing's syndrorme: a review of forty-eight cases. I Srmall
217. Hathcock JT, Pechman RD, Dillon AR, et al: Comparison of three
Anirm Pract 1982; 23:369.
radiographic contrast procedures in the evaluation of the canine
 229. Mueller DL, Noxon JO: Primary hyperparathyroidisin in a dog.
Jurmbosacral spinal canal. Vet Radiol 1988; 29:4.
Comp Anim Pract 1989; 19:36.
218. Sisson AF, LeCouteur RA, lngrarm IT, et al.: Diagnosis of cauda
 230. Haskins ME, Jezyk PF, Desniak RJ, et al: Mucopolysaccharidosis in
equina abnorrmalities by using electrormyography, discography, and
 a dormestic short haired cat: a disease distinct from that seen in the
epidurography in dogs. I Vet Intern Med 1992; 6:253.
Siarmese cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175:384.
219. Morgan JP, Bailey CS: Cauda equina syndrorme in the dog: radi-
231. Morgan JP: Radiology in veterinary orthopedics. Lea & Febiger,
ographic evaluation. J Simall Anim Pract 1990; 31:69.
Philadelphia, 1972.
220. deHaan JI, Shelton SB, Ackerrman N: Magnetic resonance irmaging
 232. Saunders HM, Jezyk PK: The radiographic appearance of canine
in the diagnosis of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in four dogs.
congenital hypothyroidism: skeletal changes with delayed treat-
Vet Surg 1993; 22:1.
rment. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1991; 32:171.
221. Charmbers JN, Selcer BA, Butler TW, et al: A cormparison of corm-
 233. Greco DS, Feldrman EC, Peterson ME, et al: Congenital hypothyroid
puted tomography to epidurography forthe diagnosisof suspected
 dwarfisrm in a farmily of Giant Schnauzers. J Vet Intern Med 1991;
cormpressive lesions at the lurmbosacral junction in dogs. Prog Vet
5:57.
Neurol 1994; 5:30.
 234. Lieb AS, Grooters AM, Tyler IW, et al: Tetraparesis due to vertebral
222. Ticer IW: Roentgen signs of endocrine disease. Vet Clin North A1m
1977; 7:465.
J Srmall Anirm Pract 1997; 38:364.
 223. Klide AM, Steinber SA, Pond MJ: Epiduralograms in the dog: the
235. Greco DS, Peterson ME, Cho DY, et al: Juvenile-onset hypothy-
uses and advantages of the diagnostic procedure. J Am Vet Radiol
roidisim in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:948.
Soc 1967; 8:39.
 236. Gialamas J: Deforming cervical spondylosis in association with
224. Chastain CB, Panciera D, Waters C, et al: Nutritional secondary
vitarmin A excess in cats. Zentralb] Veterinarrmed [A] 1977; 24:160.
hyperparathyroidism in six cats. Sm Anim Clin Endocrinol 2000;
 237. Shirorma IT, Weisbrode SE, Biller DS, et al: Pathological fracture of
10:5.
wuy uv I bop e jo eiqaiiaa iequin e ul ish auoq [eusnaue ue
225. Chastain CB, Panciera D, Waters C, et al: Osteopenia and other
Hosp Assoc 1993; 29:434.
 238. Feeney DA, Oliver JE: Blunt spinal traurma in the dog and cat:
Endocrinol 2000; 41:491.
insight into radiographic lesions. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 1980;
 226. Riser WH, Brodey RS, Shirer IF: Osteodystrophy in mature cats: a
16;885.
nutritional disease. J Aim Vet Radiol Soc 1968; 9:37.
 239. Kraus MS, Mahaffey MB, Girard E, et al: Diagnosis of C5-C6 spinal
227. Kawaguchi K, Bragas IS, Takahashi A, et al: Nutritional secondary
luxation using three-dirmensional computed tomographic recon-
struction. Vet Radiol 1997; 38:39.
puppies. Jap I Vet Res 1993; 41:89.
INDEX
A
Acquired heart disease, 151-167
Abdormen, abnormal presentation of, 280-459
atrioventricular valvular insufficiency, 132-133, 151-154, 154-155
abscess of, 285
cardiormyopathy, 154-163
boundary structures of, 255
dilated, 134, 154-157, 156, 157, 158, 159
endocrine systen of, 456-459
hyperthyroid cardiomyopathy, 162-163
free gas in, 283, 283
hypertrophic cardiormyopathy, 157-160, 160, 161
free fuid in, 213, 254, 282, 282-283
infiltrative cardiormyopathy, 157, 159
genital systerm. See Genital system.
unclassified (intergrade, restrictive) cardiornyopathy, 161-162, 162
hernia of, 281, 282, 403
cor pulmonale, 163-164
norrmal anatomy of, 255-275, 250-252, 254
dirofilariasis, 27, 164-167, 165-166, 168, 169
radiography of, 249
endocarditis, 163,163-164
analysis of, 253
hypertensive heart disease, 163
details of, 253
hypertrophic heart disease, 157, 160, 161
positioning and view for, 250-253
masses, 167, 170,174
procedures for, 275-280
rmyocardial infarction, 163
technical considerations in, 249-250
 pericardial disease, 167-175
vasculature of, 275
pericardial effusion, 167-170, 171-172, 173-176
Abdorminal cormpression, for evaluating uterus, 429
pericardial masses, 170-173,174-175
 in radiography, 276
restrictive pericardial disease, 173, 176
 in sonography, 15
Acrormegaly, 157, 638
 in urography, 357
Actinomycosis, 529, 532
Abdominal lyrmph nodes, abnormal, 452-456, 454, 454-455
Adarmantinoma. See odontoma
Abdominal ultrasonography, of abdorminal free air, 286, 287
Addison's disease, microcardia in, 134, 136
of abdorminal free fluid, 285, 285
Aden0carcino1ma, adrenal, 456, 457-458, 459
of aorta, 255
ceruminous gland, 623, 625
of caudal vena cava, 275
large intestine, 352, 353-354
of celiac artery, 275
liver, 294, 296, 299, 300
of cranial mesenteric artery, 275
lung, 210-211, 214
 of diaphragin, 79
nose, 642-646, 645
 of diaphragrmatic hernia, 80, 81
ovary, 428, 428,
of herniated wall, 280
pancreas, 326, 327
 of intraabdorminal lymph nodes, 452-456
prostate, 440-441, 443, 443
of portal vein, 275
kidney, 360, 380, 383,
of renal artery, 275
simall intestinal, 329, 332, 342, 347-348
of vasculature, 275
stormach 319, 320, 323,327
of wall swelling, 255
thyroid, 217, 234-235, 234-235
Abdorminal wall, radiography of, 255
Adrenal glands, abnormal presentation of, 456-459
ultrasonography of, 255
mineralization of, 456, 457-458
Abscess, Brodie's, 529
neoplasia of, 456, 457- 458, 459
denntal, 648, 649
radiographic anatormy of, 266
hepatic, 290, 290-291, 302
sonographic anatomy of, 2266-267
intraabdominal, 285
Adynamic ileus, 336, 336
of brain, 630, 633
Aerophagia,45,313,315
of ear, 633
Age, dental changes related to, 620, 647-648
of soft tissue, 589
fetal, estirmation of, 435-437, 438-439
of thoracic wall, 67
Air, effects of, on ultrasound beam, 9, 17, 19
of uterine sturmp, 429, 430-431, 434, 435-437
 relative radiodensity of, 11
pancreatic, 326-327,331
Air bronchograrm sign, 180-181, 181
prostatic, 440,444, 444-445
Alaskan malamute, dwarfism in, 539, 541
pulmonary, 216, 218,224
Aleurostrongylosis, 197, 199
renal, 361, 378, 379, 383-384
Allergic bronchitis, 183
retrobulbar, 655-656
Allergic pulmonary disease, 198, 201-202
splenic, 451
Alveolar crest, 620
Acetabulum, 556, 589
Alveolar pulmonary pattern, 180-181, 181
Acoustic enhancerment, 18
Arnyloidosis, 374
Acoustic shadowing, 16
Anconeal process, un-united, 565-567, 570-571
Aneurysm, aortic, 137, 175
Aneurysrmal bone cyst, 525, 526
Page numbers in itatics refer to radiographs; numbers in boldface
 Aorta, abnorrmalities of, 175-179
refer to sonograms; numbers followed by the letter t refer to tables
aneurysm of, 137, 175
727
728
INDEX
Aorta, abnormalities of—cont'd
Articular hermorrhage, 578
calcification of, 179, 180
Ascites, 20, 254, 282, 282-283,285, 285
coarctation of, 175
Aspergillosis, nasal, 622, 624
radiographic anatormy of, 53-57
pulmonary, 207
S-shaped deforrmity of, 56, 61
skeletal, 529
thromboermbolism of, 154
spinal,690-693
turmnors of, 175-179, 177-178, 179
Aspiration pneurmonia, 121, 185, 189
Aortic arch, enlargenment of, 132-134, 135, 175
Asteroid hyalosis, 654-655, 655
persistent right,115,117
Asthrma, See bronchitis
Aortic valve, insufficiency of, 142, 163, 164
Atelectasis, 92, 94, 197, 198
stenosis of, 135, 140-142, 141-142, 175
Atlantoaxial subluxation, 674-675, 675
vegetations on, 163, 163-164
Atrial septal defect, 146, 146
Apical abscess, of teeth,648,649
Atrioventricular valve, malformation, 150
Appendicular skeleton, closure dates of, 478t-479t
prolapse of, 153, 153-154
cavitating bone lesions of, 525,525-526
Atrium, collapse of, 170, 173
congenital abnorrmalities, Alaskan Malarmute dwarfism, 539, 540
left, enlargement of, 131, 132-133, 138,139, 152, 154-155, 156, 157,160
chondrodysplasia, 539, 540
right, enlargerment of, 127, 128, 155
ectrodactyly, 542, 544
rupture of, 153
epiphyseal dysplasia,542,543
size of, 32, 48, 51-54, 55t
hermirmelia, 542-543
thromboembolism of, 159, 160
Osteogenesis imperfecta,543-544
tumors of, 167, 170, 174
osteopetrosis, 544, 546
Aural-pharyngeal polyps,229, 230,635,635
 pseudoachondroplasia in Poodles, 540-542
Auricular tumors, 623,625
Scottish Fold osteodystrophy, 543
Avulsion and ununited rmedial epicondyle of the hurmerus, 574, 576
sesarmoid bone abnormalities in Rottweilers, 543, 545
Avulsion fractures, 482, 486, 489
 skeletal and retinal dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers, 540, 542
Azotemia, 202, 206
degenerative diseases of, 552-55, 552-553
epiphyseal appearance of,478t-479t
B
fracture, 481-508
Barium enema, 280
classification of, 481-488, 482-488
Barium swallow, 115, 123
complications of, 493, 494
Basenjis, eryhyt pate kinasedficiny in, ,
healing of, 495-496, 495-501
Bearn width artifact, sonographic, 21
 postoperative evaluation of, 495
Bicipital tendon, 589-591, 590-591, 591
hypertrophic osteodystrophy of, 545-548, 549
Biliary calculi, 287, 288-289, 292, 305-307
hypertrophic osteopathy of, 548-551, 550
Biliary obstruction, 303-304, 304-307
infarcts of, 551, 551
Biliary sludge (sedirment), 301, 306
infection of, 527-533, 528-532
Biopsy, ultrasound-guided, 5, 6
joint disease of, 551-586, 552-586
Bladder, abnormal presentation of, 399-421
nutritional and metabolic diseases of, 534-536, 535-536
air bubbles in, 400, 402, 415
osteochondrosis of, 564-574, 565-574
blood clots in, 411, 412-413, 416, 419
osteopenia of, 14, 506, 506, 535, 536, 700-701,701
calcification of, 400, 401, 416
Osteopetrosis of, 544, 546, 701
calculi in, 399, 399-401, 411, 411-412, 416, 419-420
osteosarcorma of, 506-509, 508-512
cystitis of, 405, 406-407, 410, 414, 415-417
panosteitis of, 544-545, 547-548
cystography of, 404-414
 parasitic infestation of, 533
debris in, 412, 413
soft tiss1es of, 586-593, 586-593, 591-593
density changes in, 399, 401
turmors of, benign, 522-524, 524
displacement of, 281, 282,403, 404, 441
 differential diagnosis of, 533t
distension of, 421, 425
Imetastatic, 518-521, 518-520
diverticula of, 405, 405
of sof tissue, 521-522, 521-522
ermphyserma of, 400, 403, 418,420
prirmary, 505-518, 506-518
foreign bodies in, 412, 416, 418
Arachnoid cyst, 681
hermatomas of, 411, 412-413, 416,419
Architecture, of organ, 14
hermorrhage in,411, 412-413, 416,419
Arterial calcification, 284, 588
location of, changes in, 403-404, 404, 414
Arteriovenous malforrmation, 311, 680, 682
neoplasrms of, 400, 402, 407, 408-409, 414, 415, 417-418
Arthritis, 55 1-586, 552-586
persistent urachal remnant of,405,405
classification of, 551-552
polyps in, 407, 409
conforrmation or developrmental, 57-574, 559-574
radiographic anatomy of, 250-252
crystal-induced, 552-556, 552-555
rhabdormyosarcorma of, 407, 409
degenerative, 552-555, 552-553, 684
rupture of,407, 410-411
immune mediated, 583, 585-586
shape of, changes in, 405, 405, 414
infectious, 581-583, 581-582
size of, changes in, 401-402, 403
rmetabolic and mutritional, 578-581
sonographic anatormy of, 270-271,271-272
miscellaneous, 575-578
wall changes, 405-409, 406-411, 529, 530
neoplastic, 521-522, 521-522
Blastommycosis, 207, 208, 529, 530
trauma and, 555-557, 554-559
Blebs, pulmonary, 222, 222
Arthropathy, neoplastic, 521-522, 521-522
Block vertebra, 672-674, 674, 677
Articular fractures, 488, 491-493
Blood clots, in bladder, 411, 412-413, 416, 419
INDEX
729
Bone, cysts of, 525-527, 525-527
Canine dental forrmula, 620
fracture of. See fracture.
Canine hip dysplasia, 557-565, 559-563
infarct of, 55 1, 551
Canine“wobbler syndrorme,” 676-681, 679-681
sequestrurm of, 503, 504, 527-529, 528
Capillaria aerophilia,197,
tumor, benign, 522-524, 523
Carcinoma, adrenal, 456, 457-458,459
metastatic, 518-521, 518-520
cerurminous gland, 623, 625
prirmary, 505-518, 506-518
large intestine, 352, 353-354
versus infection, 533t
liver, 294, 296, 299, 300
Bony thorax, abnorrmal presentation of, 70-73
lung, 210-211, 214
 radiographic anatormy of, 36-39
nose, 642-646, 645
Brain, abscess of, 630,633
ovary, 428, 428,
Meningiorma, 622, 623
pancreas, 326,327
ultrasound of, 621
prostate, 440-441, 443, 443
Branchial cyst, 97, 101
kidney, 360, 380, 383,
Bronchi, calcification of, 44, 226-227, 227
small intestinal, 329, 332, 342, 347-348
collapse of, 111, 113
stomach 319, 320, 323, 327
cyst,222, 225
thyroid, 217, 234-235, 234-235
dysgenesis of, 216
urethral, 421, 425-426
inflammation of, 183, 216, 219
Carcinomatosis, 281
 metabolic diseases affecting, 228
Cardiac. See also Heart entries.
neoplasia of, 210-211, 214
Cardiac disease, acquired, 151-167 also Acquired heart disease.
 norrmal radiographic anatomy of, 44
congenital, 137-151 also Congenital heart disease.
patterns of, 182-183,183
Cardiac mensration, radiographi,46
thickening of, 216, 219
 sonographic, 51-55
Bronchiectasis, 216, 220-221
Cardiac silhouette, cardiomegaly and, 125
Bronchitis, 216, 219
radiographic evaluation of, 45-54
Bronchoesophageal fistula, 122-123, 124
Cardiac tamponade, 170, 173
Bronchogenic adenocarcinoma, 210-211, 214, 519-520
Cardiac ultrasound. See Echocardiography.
Bronchopneumonia, 185, 186-188
Cardiogenic pulmonary ederma, 190, 191-193
Bulla, 0sseous, 619, 622-634
Cardiomegaly, 45, 125-134
increased density of, 630-634
Cardiormyopathy, 154-163
Osteitis of, 630-634, 634
dilated, 134, 154-157, 156, 157, 158, 159
tumor of, 622-623, 625
hyperthyroid cardiormyopathy, 162-163
pulmonary, 222, 222
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 157160, 160, 11
Bursting fracture, 704, 706-707
infiltrative cardiormyopathy, 157, 159
unclassified (intergrade, restrictive) cardiormyopathy, 161-162, 162
Caries, 648-650
Calcanean tendon, comrmon, rupture of, 589,592
Cartilaginous exostosis, 522-524, 524
Calcification, abdominal masses, 285-286, 286, 288
Cataracts, 653, 653
adrenal, 456, 457-458
Cauda equina syndrome, 669-670, 670
aortic, 179, 180
Caudal vena cava, 59-62
arterial, 284, 588
abnormalities of, 179
bronchial, 44, 226-227, 227
radiographic anatony of, 59-62
cystic, 400, 401, 416
sonographic anatomy of, 275
dural, 684, 685
Cavitary lesion, within lungs, 222, 223-225
gastric, 313, 314
Cecum, inversion of, 351, 351
hepatic, 286,287-288
 radiographic and sonographic anatomy of, 270
of chondral cartilage, 37
Celiac artery, 275
of fetus, 432, 433
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma, 623, 625
of intervertebral disc, 685, 685
Cervical esophagus, 44, 45, 113
of rmesenteric vessels, 284, 284
Cervical spine, disorders of, radiographic anatomy of, 665, 666
of tracheobronchial lyrmph nodes, 207, 209
Cervical trachea,44, 45
pancreatic, 327
Cervical vertebral rmalformation, 676-681, 679-681
pleural, 43, 202, 206
Chest conforrmation, 38
prostatic, 440
Chest wall, see thoracic wall
renal, 386-387, 391
Cholecystitis, 304, 305
tracheal, 44
ermnphysermatous, 290, 292
Calcinosis circumscripta, 588-589, 591
Cholecystography, 277
Calculi, biliary, 287, 288-289, 292, 305-307
Cholelithiasis, 286-287, 288-289, 292, 306, 307
cystic, 399, 399-401, 411,411-412, 416, 419-420
Cholesterol cysts, 284, 284
renal, 364-365, 370, 381, 388, 392
Chondral cartilage, calcification of, 37
ureteral, 390-391, 394
Chondrodysplasia, 539, 540
urethral, 418, 421, 423
Chondroma, rmultilobular, 622
Callus, 495-496
Chondroma rodens, 622
Calvarium, abnorrmal presentation of, 622-657
Chondrosarcoma, 72-73, 73, 513, 514-515, 693
neoplasia of, 622-627, 623
Chordae tendinae, rupture of, 154
radiographic anatormy of, 617-621
Chylothorax, 90, 92
trauma to, 627-630
Cirrhosis, 292, 298, 299, 312
730
INDEX
Clotting. See Thromboembolism.
Cystitis, 405, 406-407, 410, 414, 415-417
Coarctation, of aorta, 175
ermphysematous, 400, 403, 418, 420
Coccidioidormycosis, 207, 529, 530
polypoid, 407,409
Colitis, 352, 354, 355
with rmucosal ulcer, 407, 407
Collapse, bronchial, 113, 113
Cystography, 357-358
of lung lobe, 92, 94, 197, 198
right atrial, 170, 173
D
tracheal, 111-113, 112-113
Degenerative disease, of appendicular skeleton, 552-555, 552-555
Colon. See Large intestine.
spinal, 682-685,684
Cormpartrment syndrome, 586
termporomandibular, 630,633
Congenital heart disease, 137-151
Degenerative valvular disease, 151-154, 154-155
aortic insufficiency, 142, 163, 164
Delayed union, 503
aorticopulmonary septal defect, 140
Dens, 665, 674-675, 675
aortic stenosis, 135, 140-142,141-142,175
Density, 11-13, 11-12
atrial septal defect, 146,146
Dental abscess, 648, 649
atrioventricular septal defects, 148
caries, 648-650, 650
atrioventricular valve malforrmations, 150
formulas, 620
combined and miscellaneous defects, 151
fracture, 649-650, 650
cor triatriaturm dexter, 150
infection, 648-651, 649, 651
cor triatriatum sinister, 150
tumor, 624-628, 625, 628
endocardial cushion defect, 148
Diabetes rmellitus, 291-292, 382-383, 400
endocardial fibroelastosis, primary, 151
Diaphragm, 39
Eisenrmenger's physiology, 148-150
abnormal function of, 83
mitral valve insuffciency, 150-151, 152
abnormalities of, 73-84
mitral valve stenosis, 151
congenital defects of, 73
patent ductus arteriosus, 137-140, 138,139-140
hermias of, 75-79, 76-80, 81
pericardial diaphragrmatic hernia, 80, 83, 84
hiatal, 79, 82
pulmonic stenosis, 130, 142-145, 143, 144-145
pericardial, 80, 83,84, 175
tetralogy of Fallot, 148, 149, 150,
masses in, 73
tricuspid valve insufficiency, 150-151, 153
paralysis of, 84, 85
tricuspid valve stenosis, 151
radiographic anatormy of, 39
ventricular septal defect, 146-148, 147,148
"tenting" of, 95, 96
Congestive heart failure, 135-137
thickening of, 81
Contrast echocardiography, 50, 140
utrasonography of, 39
Cor pulmonale, 163-164
Dilaceration, 646, 647
Cor triatriaturm dexter, 150
Dirofilariasis, 27, 167-167, 165-166, 168, 169, 210
Cor triatriaturm sinister, 150
Dislocation, articular, 555-557, 554-557
Coronary sinus, 134
of lens, 653, 654
Coronoid process, fragmented, 477, 567-571, 572-573
spinal, 705-708, 707-708
Costal cartilage, calcification of, 37
Disc. See Intervertebral disc.
Coxofemoral joint, degenerative disease of, 52-555,
Discography, 664
in canine hip dysplasia, 557-565, 559-563
Diskospondylitis, 690-693, 692-693
Cranial mesenteric artery, contrast radiography of, 275
Disserminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis ( DISH), 684
sonography of, 275
Distortion, 10
Craniomandibular osteopathy, 639-640, 639
Diverticulum, esophageal, 115, 118
Cricopharyngeal achalasia, 235-236
urachal, 405, 405
Cryptococcosis, 209, 529, 531
Doppler echocardiography, 51-52, 60-63
Cryptorchidism, 446-447
 Double contrast cystography, 404-414
Crystal-induced arthritis, 552-555, 552-555
 Double contrast enerma, 280
Cushing's syndrorme, 195-196, 195, 284, 284, 290-292, 504, 588-589,
Ductus arteriosus, patent, 137-140, 138, 139-140
700-701
Duodenum, pseudoulcers of, 279, 339, 343
Cyst, branchial, 97, 101
ulcers of, 343, 344
bronchial, 222, 225
Dura, ossification of, 684, 685
epidermoid, 525
Dwarfisrm,in Alaskan Malarmute, 539, 541
hepatic, 294, 295, 299,301
pituitary, 534
mesenteric, 284, 284
Dynamic ileus, 334, 336
of bone, 525, 525-526
Dysphagia, 235-236
ovarian, 428, 434, 434
Dysplasia, chondrodysplasia, 539, 540
pancreatic pseudocyst, 326, 330
epiphyseal, 542,543
paraprostatic, 440,442,444,446
in Labrador retrievers, 540, 542
pericardial, 170, 174
of hip, 557-565, 559-563
perirenal, 360, 361, 373, 374, 388, 397
of rmitral valve, 150-151, 152
prostatic, 440, 444, 445
of tricuspid valve, 150-151, 153
renal, 381, 381, 383-384, 386
renal, 370, 370
thyroid, 235, 235
Cystadenoma, 292, 298
Cystic calculi, 399, 399-401, 411, 411-412, 419-420
Ear, abscess of, 633
Cystic polyps, 407, 409
infection of, 630-635
INDEX
731
Ear, abscess of—cont'd
 Esophagus, abnormalities of—cont'd
turmors of, 622-623, 625
gastroesophageal reflux, 124
Echo, intensity of, 15
hiatal hernia of, 79, 82
Echocardiography, contrast, 50, 140
hypomotility of, 115
Doppler, 51-52, 60-63
infection of, 119, 119
left parasternal long-axis 4-charmber view, 58-59
intraluminal masses in, 119, 120-121
left parasternal long-axis 5-charmber view, 58-59
intramural masses in, 119, 119
right parasternal long-axis 4-charmber view, 47, 48,49, 50
neoplasia of, 119, 119
right parasternal long-axis left ventricular outflow view, 48
obstruction of, 121-122, 123
right parasternal short-axis views, 55-57, 58
radiographic anatormy of, 44, 67
measurenments in, 32, 48
reflux into, 124
norrmals, 51-54, 55t
rupture of, 105
modes of, 49, 49
sonographic evaluation of, 114
technique, 33-35
stricture of, 117, 118
transducer locations for, 34, 34
vascular ring anomaly of, 115, 117
Ectopic ureter, 394, 396-397
Ethylene glycol, toxicity of, 374,
Ectrodactyly, 542, 544
Excretory urography, 356-357, 370-372, 371-372, 382
Ederma, cardiogenic, 190, 191-193
Expiration,28-29
 non-cardiogenic, 190, 194-195
Exposure, radiographic, factors affecting, 29-33
Eisenrmenger's physiology, 148-150
Extradural hermorrhage, 687, 690
Elbow, fragrmented coronoid process of, 477, 567-571, 572-573
Extradrallsins, affecting spinal cord,  7
Osteochondritis dissecans in, 564, 565-569
Extrarmedullary-intradural lesions, of spinal cord, 670, 672
un-united anconeal process in, 565-567, 570-571
Extrapleural rmass, 84, 86
Embryo. See Fetus.
Eyes, asteroid hyalosis of, 654-655,655
Ermbolus, pulmonary, 195-196, 196
cataract in, 653, 653
Ermphyserma, cholecystic, 290, 292
foreign body in, 651
colonic, 350, 350
hemorrhage in, 652
fetal, 432, 433
iris cyst, 651
hepatic,290, 290-292
lens luxation, 653, 654
of urinary bladder, 400, 413, 418, 420
lens, scar of, 651, 652
pulmonary, 222, 226
neoplasia of, 652, 652-653
subcutaneous, 68, 68, 494, 494, 588
retinal detachrment, 654, 654-656
Ermphysematous cystitis,400,413,418,420
sonography of, 651-656
Enchondroma, 524
Endocardial cushion defect, 148
Endocardial elastosis, primary, 151
Fallot, tetralogy of, 148, 149, 150,
Endocarditis, 163, 163-164
Feline chronic progressive polyarthritis, 583, 585
Endochondral cartilage, retention of, 570-571, 574
Feline hip dysplasia, 557
Endocrine systerm, abdorminal, 456-459
Feline infectious peritonitis, 170, 207, 273, 378, 387, 392
Endometritis, 429,434,435
Fetus, age of, estirmation of, 435-437, 438-439
Enema, barium, 280
calcification of, 432, 433
Enostosis, 544-545, 547-548
death of, 432, 433
Enteritis, 338
ermphyserma of,432, 433
Eosinophilia, in enteritis, 338
sonographic measurerments of 435-437, 438-439
in lung diseases, 166, 183, 198, 201-202, 210, 211
viability of, estirmation of, 432-433, 433, 438-439
in panosteitis, 544-545, 547-548
Fibroelastosis, endocardial, 151
Ependyrmoma, 696, 699
Fibrosarcorma, of bone, 86, 513, 515, 623-627, 642-646
Epidermoid cyst, 525
 of right atrium, 170, 171
Epidurography, 663
of soft tissues, 22,22
Epiglottis, 65-66,66, 232
Fibrosis, hepatic, 292, 297, 299
Epiphyseal dysplasia, 542, 543
interstitial, 181, 182,203
Epulides, 624-625, 626
periurethral,421, 426
Erythrocyte pyruvate kinase deficiency, 536, 538
 pulmonary, 203
Esophagitis, 119, 119
Filaroides osleri, 106
Esophagram, 115, 123
Fistula, bronchoesophageal, 122-123, 124
Esophagus, abnormalities of, 113-124
soft tissue, 647
cervical, 67
rectovaginal, 359
contrast evaluation of, 115, 123
urethrorectal, 421
density of, 119
Fistulogram, 68, 647
dilation of, generalized, 115, 116
Flail chest, 70
localized, 115-117, 117
Fluoroscopy,in diaphragmatic dysfunction, 83
displacement of, 120-121
in dysphagia,235-236
diverticula of, 115, 118
in esophageal dysfunction, 114, 123-124
extralurminal rmasses of, 119
in tracheal collapse, 111
fistulae of, 112-123, 124
Foreign bodies, cystic, 412, 416, 418
foreign bodies in, 121-122, 122-123
esophageal, 121-122, 122-123
function of, 113-114, 123-124
gastric, 288, 313, 314
gastroesophageal intussusception, 81, 314
in bladder,412,416, 418
732
INDEX
Foreign bodies, cystic—cont'd
Gastrointestinal (Gl) series, 277-280, 279
in simallintestine, 333, 334-337, 335-337, 341, 344, 346
Genital systerm, abnormalities of, 427-447
in soft tissue, 592, 593
in pregnancy, 435-437
Jaryngeal, 231, 232
Gestational age, 437t
linear intestinal, 333, 334, 335, 340
Gestational sac, 435
nasal, 646
Gl (gastrointestinal) series, 278-280
ocular, 65 1
Giant cell tumor, 517, 517
pharyngeal, 229
Glormerulonephritis, 374
tracheal, 108
Granuloma, gastric, 313, 313, 323, 326
Fracture, 481-508
laryngeal, 232, 233
articular, 488, 491-493
of uterine stump, 429, 430-431, 434, 435-437
avulsion, 482, 486, 489
pulmonary, 210, 210,212
bursting, 701 704, 706
tracheal, 106
classification of, 481-488, 482-488
closed (sirmple), 494
H
complications of, 493,494
Heart. See also Cardiac entries.
costal, 70, 72
acquired diseases of, 151-169. See also Acquired heart diseases.
cranial, 627-630, 628-632
base of, turmor of, 175-176, 177-178, 179
definition, 481
congenital diseases of, 137-151. See also Congenital heart disease.
dental, 649-650, 650
displacement of, due to pneumothorax, 93 
healing of, 495-496, 495-501
echocardiography of, 33, 47
mandibular,629-630, 632
contrast, 50, 140
nonunion, 503-505, 505-506
Doppler, 51, 52,60-63
open (compound),494, 494
 radiographic and sonographic anatormy of, 45
osteomyelitis and, 503, 503-504
Heart failure, congestive, 135-137
pathologic,482,487,494,505,507,701
left, 135, 190, 191-193
physeal, classification of, 488, 491-493
right, 137
postoperative evaluation of, 495
Heartworrn disease, 27, 164-167, 165-166, 168, 169, 210
pseudoarthrosis, 505, 505
Hermangiosarcoma, appendicular, 513-517, 516
sequestrum, 503, 504
hepatic, 299, 300
spinal, 70, 71, 701-704, 702-707
of right atriur, 167, 174
stress, 494
of spleen, 449, 450
tumor arising from, 496
pleural, 93,93
Fragrmented coronoid process, 477, 567-571, 572-573
Hermatoma, of bladder, 411, 412-413, 416,419
Function, assessment of, 14
of liver, 299, 300
Fungal inetins, gastric 2,3
splenic, 449, 450,
nasal, 642, 644
Hermirmelia, 542-543
pericardial, 170
Hemivertebra, 670-671, 674
pulmonary 207-210, 208-209
Hernolyrnphatic systerm, abnorrmalities of, 448-456
skeletal 529, 530-532
Hemophilia, 578
spinal, 690-697
Hemorrhage, articular, 578
extradural, 687, 690
G
in compartment syndrome, 586
Gallbladder, bi-lobed, 257, 258
intraocular, 652
cholecystitis of, 304, 305
nasal, 646
cholecystography of,277
of urinary bladder, 411, 412-413, 416, 419
cholelithiasis of, 286-287, 288-289, 292, 306, 307
pulmonary, 77, 195, 200-202
ermphyserma of, 290, 292
retroperitoneal, 392
evaluation of, 301
Hepatic. See Liver.
sludge in, 301, 306
Hepatitis, 299,302
Gas densities, fetal, 432, 433
Hepatorma, 299, 300-301
in gallbladder, 290, 292
Hepatormegaly, 290-292, 293
in liver, 290, 290-292
Hepatozoan sp., 533
in open fractures, 494, 494
Hernia, diaphragrmatic, 75-79, 76-80, 81
in urinary bladder, 400, 413,418, 420
esophageal hiatal, 79, 82
rmediastinal, 102, 105-106
inguinal, 403,404
peritoneal, 283, 283, 286, 286
pericardial, 80, 83,84, 173-175
pleural, 92-95, 94-96
perineal,440, 441
subcutaneous, 68, 68, 494, 494, 588
ventral, 281, 281-282
Gastric. See Stomach.
Hip, dysplasia of, canine, 557-565, 559-563
“Gastric torsion", 313, 316-317
feline, 557
Gastrinoma, 343, 344
OFA, 562-564
Gastritis, 319-321
PennHip, 564
hypertrophic, 321
sonography of, 589
Gastroesophageal intussusception, 81,3 14
Histiocytoma, nasal, 642, 644
Gastroesophageal reflux, 124
Histoplasmosis, 207, 209, 529, 530
Gastrogastric intussusception, 315, 325
Hyalosis, asteroid, 654-655, 655
Gastrography, double contrast, 280, 324
Hydrocephalus, 635-637
INDEX
733
Hydrocephalus—cont'd
Joint diseases—cont'd
radiography of, 635-637, 635-636
classification of, 551-552
sonography of, 633-637, 636-637
conformation or developrmental, 557-574, 559-574
Hydrormetra, 429, 430
crystal-induced, 552-556, 552-555
Hydronephrosis, 360, 365, 373, 375, 383, 385-386, 393
degenerative, 552-555, 552-553, 684
Hydroperitoneurm, 20, 254, 282, 282-283, 285, 285
irmmune mediated, 583, 585-586
Hydrothorax, 86-87, 88, 89, 92, 93, 348
infectious, 581-583, 581-582
Hydroureter, 384, 395
 metabolic and nutritional, 578-581
Hyoid bones, 65-66, 66, 231
miscellaneous, 575-578
Hyperadrenocorticisrm, 195-196, 195, 284, 284, 290-292, 504, 588-589,
neoplastic, 521-522, 521-522
700-701
trauma and, 555-557, 554-559
Hyperparathyroidisrn, 484, 640, 641, 535, 536, 581, 700-701, 701
Jugular processes,619, 624
Hyperplasia, benign prostatic, 439, 440, 443, 443
nodular, of liver, 360, 369
K
nodular, of spleen, 448,451,452
Kartagener's syndrorme, 216
renal, 360, 369
Kidney. See also Renal entries.
Hyperthyroidism, 162-163,235, 235
abnorrmal presentation of, 360-395
cardiormyopathy from, 162-163
abscess of, 361, 378, 379, 383-384
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 157-160, 160, 161
acute tubular nephrosis, 381, 382, 387, 391
Hypertrophic heart disease, 157, 160, 161
adenocarcinoma of, 360, 380, 383
Hypertrophic gastritis, 321
arnyloidosis of, 374
Hypertrophic muscular dystrophy, 81
bilateral, large, irregular, 360
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy, 545-548, 549
bilateral, large, regular, 360
Hypertrophic osteopathy, 548-551, 550
bilateral, small irregular, 360
Hypervitaminosis A, 536, 538,581, 700-701
bilateral, small, regular, 360
Hypoadrenocorticism, 115,134, 136,535
calcification of, 381, 387,391
Hypomotility, 115
calculi in, 364-365, 370, 381, 388, 392
Hypoplasia, of frontal sinus, 615
chronic renal disease, 360, 363, 376, 393
 of odontoid process, 674-675
cysts 0f, 381, 381, 383-384, 386
renal, 360, 367
density of, changes in, 361-367
tracheal, 107-109,114
Doppler studies, 388-389
Hypothyroidism, 535, 537, 581, 701
dysplasia of, 370, 370,
Hypovolermia, 134, 136
echogenicity of, 383-388
ethylene glycol toxicity, 374
1
excretory urography of, 356-357, 370-372, 371-372, 382
ldiopathic hyperostosis of the calvarium, 640
failure of, acute, 381, 382, 387,391
lleocecal intussusception, 348, 349, 352, 353
feline infectious peritonitis, 373, 378,387, 392
lleus, adynamic, 336, 336
glormerulonephritis 374
dynamic, 334, 336
halo sign, 387
lmrmune pulmonary disease, 198, 201-202
hydronephrosis of, 360, 365, 373, 375, 383, 385-386, 393
lncormplete osfication of the hurmeral condyles, 574, 575
hyperplasia of, 360, 369
Infectious arthritis, 581-583, 581-582
hypoplasia of, 360, 367
lnguinal hermia, 403, 40466
infarcts of, 378, 378, 383, 384
Inspiration, thoracic radiograph of, 28-29, 30
leptospirosis, 388
Interstitial fibrosis, 181-182, 182
lipidosis of, 374
Interstitial pulmonary patterns, 181- 182, 182
lyrnphorma of, 360, 362, 372-373, 373, 378, 387, 388-389
acinonodular, 181, 208, 211
metastatic neoplasia, 383, 384
linear, 181, 182,197-206
multiple 1myeloma of, 375
nodular, 181, 205, 206-216
neoplasia 0f, 360, 362, 366, 373, 378, 380, 383,384
reticular, 181, 201
nephroblastoma of, 360, 366, 380
Intervertebral disc, diseases of, 685-690, 685-691
 norrmal size and shape, 360
infection of, 690-693, 692-693
perirenal cysts on, 360, 361, 373, 374, 388, 393
prolapse of, 685-690, 685-691, 708
polycystic disease of, 374, 377, 387, 390
Intestines. See Large intestine, Small intestine.
position of, changes in, 367-368, 383
Inradiscal oste0rmyelitis, 690-693, 692-693
pyelonephritis, acute, 374, 376,381, 385,37
Intradural-extrarmedullary lesions, of spinal cord, 670, 671
chronic, 360, 364, 368, 369, 376, 378, 379, 386
Intramedullary lesions, of spinal cord, 669, 669
 pyogranulormatous nephritis, 387, 392
Intraocular hemorrhage, 652
pyonephrosis of, 378, 379, 384
Intraocular neoplasia, 652, 652-653
radiographic anatormy of, 262-263, 250-252
Intravenous urography, 356-357, 370-372
renal vein thrormbosis in, 378
Intussusception, gastroesophageal, 81, 314
rupture of, 381
gastrogastric, 315, 325
sonographic anatomy of, 264-265, 264-265
ileocecal, 348, 349, 352, 353
size and shape of, 360t, 382-383
lnvolucrum, 503, 504, 527-529, 528
subcapsular fuid in, 360, 361, 372, 374
unilateral large, contralateral small, 360
unilateral, large, irregular, 360
Jejunum. See Small intestine.
unilateral, large, regular, 360
Joint diseases, 551-586, 552-586
unilateral, small, irregular, 360
734
INDEX
Kidney. See also Renal entriescont'd
 Liver, abnorrmal presentation of—cont'd
unilateral, small, regular, 360
 position of, changes in, 296
Kyphosis,674
radiographic anatormy of, 255-256, 250-252
shape of, changes in, 292, 294-296, 298, 298
L
size of, changes in, 290-292, 293-297, 296-298
Labrador retrievers, dysplasia in, 540, 542
small, 293, 297
Large intestine, abnormal presentation of, 347-354
sonographic anatomy of 6,256-257,257
adenocarcinoma of, 352, 353-354
sonographic texture of 256,257
barium examination of, 280, 352
torsion of, 296
cecal inversion of, 351, 351
venous congestion of, 307, 311
colitis of, 352, 354, 355
Lordosis, 674
density of, changes in, 350, 350
Lumbosacral instability, 698-700
ermphyserma of, 350, 350
Lumbar sinus venography,663,700
examination of, procedures for, 351-354
Lumbar spine anatormy of, 666-667, 668
intussusception of, 346, 349, 352, 352
radiography of, 661-662
obstipation of, 347, 349
Lungs. See also Pulmonary and Respiratory entries.
pneurmatosis coli, 350, 350
abscess of, 216, 218, 224
pneurmocolon, 280, 352
acinonodular patterns in, 181, 184t, 208, 211
position of, changes in, 351
allergic pulmonary disease, 198, 201-202
radiographic anatormy of, 269-270, 250-252
alveolar patterns of, 180-181, 181, 184t
short colon, 348
arterial thrombosis of, 164, 223, 226
size of changes in, 347-348
aspiration pneurmonia of, 121, 185, 189
sonographic anatomy of, 270
asthma, See bronchitis
torsion of, 351
atelectasis of,92, 94, 197, 198
ulcerative colitis of, 354, 355
azotemia, 202, 206
larynx, abnormalities of, 231-234
bacterial pneurmonia of, 181, 185, 186-188, 200
extralurminal masses of, 234
blebs and bullae of, 222, 222
foreign bodies in, 231,232
bronchial dysgenesis in, 216
granuloma of,233,233
bronchial calcification in, 44, 226-227, 227
paralysis of, 231, 233
bronchial cyst, 222, 225
radiographic anatomy of, 65
bronchial patterns in, 182-183,183, 184t, 216-219
stenosis of, 233
Bronchiectasis, 216, 220-221
swelling of, 232
bronchitis of, 183, 216, 219
lead intoxication, 536
bullae and blebs of, 222, 222
lef atrial enlargerment, 131, 132-133, 138, 139, 152, 154-155, 156, 157,
calcification of, 202, 206, 226-228, 228
162
cardiogenic pulmonary edema, 190, 191-193
left ventricular enlargement, 131, 133, 134, 138, 139, 152, 154, 156, 157,
cavitary lesions in, 222, 222-223
158, 159
collapse of, 92, 94, 197, 198
legg-Calves-Perthes disease, 577-578, 578-580
contusion of, 71, 195
Leiomyosarcoma, of simall intestine, 283, 283, 347
differential diagnoses by pulmonary pattern, 183, 184t
of spleen, 451, 452, 453
Dirofilariasis, 27, 164-167, 165-166, 169
Lens, cataract of, 653, 657
ederma of, 190, 191-195
luxation of, 653, 654
ermbolic disease of, 195-196, 196
Lipidosis, 298, 300
ermphyserma of, 222, 226
Lipoma, 68, 586, 587
eosinophilic lung diseases, 166, 183, 198, 201-202, 210, 211
Liposarcoma, 552, 523
fbrosis of, 203
Lissencephaly, 636
foreign body in, 210, 212
Liver, abnormal presentation of, 286-304
fungal infections of, 207-210, 208-209
abscess of, 290, 290-291
granulomas of, 210, 210, 212
arteriovenous fistula, 311
hermorrhage of, 71, 195, 200-202
calcification of, 286, 286-287
histiocytosis, 210
cirrhosis of, 292, 298, 299, 312
irmmune disease of, 198, 201-202
cysts of, 299, 301
interstitial fibrosis of, 181-182, 182
cystadenorma of, 292, 298
interstitial patterns of. See Interstitial pulmonary patterns.
density of, changes in, 286-288, 287-288
left heart failure and, 151-156, 152, 156, 190, 191-193,211
ermphyserma of, 290, 290
linear pattern of, 181, 182, 184t
enlargerment of, 293, 297
lyrmphorma of, 200, 203-204
extraskeletal osteosarcoma of, 286, 287
lyrmphomatoid granulormatosis, 210
fibrosis of, 292
metabolic diseases affecting, 202, 206, 228
gas densities in, 290, 290-292
metastatic neoplasia of, 200, 205, 216, 217-218
hermangiosarcoma of, 299, 300
Inycotic pneurmonia of, 207-210, 208-209
hermatorma of, 299, 300
neoplasia of, 190, 210, 213-215
hepatitis of, 299, 302
nodular pattern of, 181, 184t, 205
lipidosis of, 298, 300
non-cardiogenic pulrmonary edema, 190, 194-195
 rmetabolic diseases affecting, 290
oligermia of, 223-224, 227
neoplasia of, 292, 294-296, 298, 299, 300, 302-303
osteomas of, 2226-228, 228
nodular hyperplasia of, 291, 292
parasitic pneurmonia of, 185, 197-198, 199, 207, 207
 portosystermic shunts in, 307, 308-310, 310-311
paragonimiasis of, 207, 207
INDEX
735
Lungs. See also Pulmonary and Respiratory entries—contd
Mucometra, 429
 pneumoconiosis of, 205
Mucopolysaccharidosis, 581, 638, 700
 pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia, 190, 190
Multilobular osteochondrosarcoma, 622
 pulmonary patterns of, 180-185
Mycotic infections, gastric, 23, 37
radiographic anatomy of, 63-65
nasal, 640, 642, 644
torsion of, 90-91, 196, 197
 pericardial, 170
yascular patterns of, 183
pulmonary, 207-210, 208-209
viral pneumonia of, 185, 198, 200
skeletal, 529-532, 529-532
Lyrmnph nodes, lymphorma of, 103, 452-456, 454, 454-455
spinal, 692
tracheobronchial, calcification of, 207, 209
Myelography, 662-663, 670, 671-672
Lyrmphangiectasia, 338, 338
extradural, 670, 672
Lyrmphorma, gastric, 319, 319-320
intrarmedullary, 670, 671
hepatic, 292
intradural-extrarmedullary, 670, 671
intestinal, 339, 343
Myeloma, 516, 517
rmediastinal, 97, 99-100, 102, 103
of skull, 622
mesenteric, 286, 286-287, 454, 454-455
renal, 375
nasal, 642
spinal, 694, 695
of bone, 517, 518
Myocardial infarction, 163
of lyrmph node, 103, 287, 454, 454-458
Myocardium, cardiormyopathy of, 154-163
pulrmonary, 200, 203-204
infiltration of, 157, 159
renal, 360, 362, 372-373, 373, 387, 388-389
Myxoma, 522
spinal, 694
Myxormatous degeneration, of heart valves, 151, 154-155
splenic, 448
N
M
Nail bed, inflammation of, 533
Mach phenomenon, 13
squamous cell carcinoma of, 522, 523
Malabsorption, 338, 338
 Nasal passages and sinuses, abnormal presentation of, 640-646
Male pseudohermaphroditism, 432
aspergillosis of, 642, 644
 Malignant fibrous histiocytorma, 513
foreign body in, 646
Mandible, craniomandibular osteopathy of, 639-640, 639
hermorrhage of, 646
fracture of,629-630,632
infection of, 642,643-644
metabolic disease affecting, 640, 641
reoplasia of,642-646, 644-645
neoplasia of, 623-627, 626-627
radiographic views for, 607-615, 607-615
trauma to, 629-630, 632
trauma to, 628, 631
Manx cat, sacral deforrmities in, 676, 678
 Neoplasia. See under specific sites of neoplasia.
Mast cell turmor, 292, 340, 449, 449
Neoplastic arthropathy, 521-522, 521-522, 581
 Mediastinurm. See also Thorax
Nephroblastorma, 360, 366, 380
abnormalities of, 95-104
Nephrocalcinosis, 381, 387, 391
air accumulation in, 102, 105-106
Neurofibroma, 671, 698
fat in, 43
Neurogenic pulrmonary ederma, 190, 194-195
fluid accumulation in, 102
Nocardiosis, 88, 209, 529, 531
masses in, 97, 98, 101, 102-103
Nodular hyperplasia, of liver, 291-292
radiographic anatormy of, 431
of spleen, 448, 451, 452
 sonographic anatomy of, 442
Nodular pulrmonary pattern, 181, 205, 206-216
Megacolon, 347, 349
 Noncardiogenic pulmonary ederma, 190, 194-195
Megaesophagus, 115, 116
Nonunion, 503-505, 505-506
Melanorma, pharyngeal, 229, 230
Nutrition, and appendicular skeleton, 534-536, 535-536
Meningioma, 622, 623
Meningocele, 676
0
Meningormyelocele, 676, 677
Obstipation, 347, 349
Mesentery, cysts of, 284, 284
Occipital dysplasia, 638, 638
rmasses in, 286, 286-287
 Occipitoatlantoaxial rmalformation, 675
portography of, 276, 308
Ocular sonography, 621, 651-656
Metabolic disorders, affecting appendicular skeleton, 534-536, 535-536
Odontoid process, 665, 674-675, 675
affecting bronchi and lungs, 202, 206, 228,
Odontoma, 626, 627
affecting joints, 578-581
Oligermia, 223-224, 227
affecting liver, 290
Operative rmesenteric portography, 276, 308-310
affecting mandible, 640, 641
Oral neoplasims, 623-627, 626-627
affecting spine, 700-701, 701
Orbit, of eye. 655-656
Metastatic neoplasia, of bone, 518-521, 519-521
Os clitoris, 432, 432
of kidney, 383, 384
Oslerus osleri, 106
of liver, 299, 303
Osseous bullae, 619
of lung, 200, 205, 216, 217-278
increased density of, 63 1, 634
Microcardia, 134, 136
normal anatomy of, 612, 616, 619
Middle ear, 619
osteitis of, 63 1, 634
Mitral insufficiency, 132-133, 151-154, 154-155
tumor of, 623, 626
congenital, 150-151, 152
 Osseous tentorium cerebelli - thickening of, 640, 641
Mucinous gland, carcinoma of, 623, 625
Ossification centers and bony fusion times, 478t-479t 
736
INDEX
Osteitis, bulla, 63 1, 634
 Pericardiun, cysts of, 170, 174
Oste0arthritis, 552-555, 552-553
masses of, 170-173, 174-175
of termporomandibular joint, 630, 633
restrictive disease of, 173, 176
Osteochondritis dissecans, 569, 565-569
Perineal hernia, 351, 440
Osteochondrorma, 552-524, 524
Perinephric pseudocysts, 360, 361, 373, 374, 388, 393
Osteochondrosis, 564-574, 565-574,
Periodontal disease, 648-651, 648-651
spinal,696-697
Periosteal new bone formation, 175, 176,480, 480, 682-683, 683-684, 690-
Osteodystrophy, hypertrophic, 545-548, 549
693, 692-693
Osteogenesis irmperfecta, 543-544
Perirenal cysts, 360, 361, 373, 374, 388, 393
Osteoid osteoma, 525, 527
 Peritoneography, 276
Osteoma, 622, 622
Peritonitis, free gas in, 283, 283, 286, 287
Osteormedullography, 481, 505
infectious, 170, 207,373, 378, 387, 392
Oste0myelitis, 527-533, 528-532
 Periurethral fibrosis, 421, 426
bacterial, 527-529, 528-529
Persistent right fourth aortic arch, 115, 117
chronic, 529
Persistent urachal rermnant, 405, 405
due to fracture, 503, 503-504
Peyer's patches, 279,333, 343
intradiscal, 690-693, 692-693
Pharynx, abnormalities of, 228
mycotic, 529, 530-532
aural-pharyngeal polyp in, 229, 230
parasitic, 533
dysfunction of, 230
sequestrurm,527-529, 528
foreign bodies in,229
versus neoplasia, 533t
radiographic anatormy of, 65
vertebral, 693, 693-694
tumors of, 229, 230,
Osteonecrosis, 577-578, 578-580
Physis, closure of normal, 478t-479t
Osteopathy, craniormandibular, 639-640, 639
prermature 488, 492-493
Osteopenia, 14, 504, 505, 535, 536, 700-701, 701
fractures of, 488, 491-492
Osteopetrosis, 544, 546,701
Pigeon breast, 720, 75
 Osteosarco1ma, of appendicular skeleton, 506-509, 508-512
Pituitary, dwarfisrm and, 534
parosteal, 509, 513
 Pleura, abnorrmalities of, 88-95
extraskeletal, 287, 288
air in, 92-95, 94-96
of skull, 622, 624
calcifications, 43, 202, 206
of spine, 672, 694, 699
fuid in, 86, 86-89, 92, 93, 103
Otitis externa, 630-634, 633
neoplasia of, 92, 93
Otitis rmedia, 630-634, 633
thickening of, 88
Ovary, 265, 266-267, 428, 429
 Pleural space, radiographic anatormy of, 41
cysts of, 428, 434, 434
Pneurmocolon, 280, 354
reoplasia of 428, 428
 Pneurmoconiosis, 205
Pneumormediastinum, 102, 105-106
P
Pneumonia, aspiration, 122, 185, 189
Pancreas, abnorrmal presentation of, 325-332
bacterial, 181, 185, 186-188
abscess of,326,327,331
irmmune-rmediated, 198, 201-202
"bladder" forrmation in, 326, 329
rnycotic, 207-210, 208-209
calcification of, 337
parasiti999
density of, changes in, 325
viral, 185, 198, 200
masses, 326-327
Pneumonitis, 166, 166
neoplasia of, 326-327
Pneumoperitoneum, 283, 283, 286, 287
pseudocysts of, 326, 330
 Pneumoretroperitoneum, 286
radiographic anatomy of, 259
Pneurmothorax, 92-95, 94-96
sonographic anatomy of, 259-260, 260
 cardiac displacerment due to, 93
Pancreatitis, acute, 325,328, 330-331
spon taneous, 94
chronic, 325
tension, 94-95, 96, 134
Panosteitis, 544-545, 547-548
 Polyarthritis, feline progressive, 583, 585
Paracostal hernia, 68
in greyhounds, 583
Paragonirmiasis, 207, 207
Polyeystic kidney disease, 374, 377, 387, 390
Paralysis, laryngeal, 231, 233
Polycystic ovary, 434, 434
Paraprostatic cysts, 440, 442, 444, 446
Polypoid cystitis, 407, 409
Parasitenia fm,,1919
Polyps, aural-pharyngeal, 229, 230, 635, 635
skeletal infection frorn, 533
cystic, 407, 409
Parathyroid glands, neoplasia of, 235,236
gastric, 321, 322
Paronychia, infection of, 533
in gall bladder, 305, 305
Parosteal osteosarcoma, 509, 513
 Poodles, pseudoachondroplasia in, 540-542
Patellar luxation, 576-577, 577
Portal blood flow, 244-245
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 137-140, 138, 139-140
Portal veil, sonography of, 243
Patent ductus venosus, 307, 309
Portography, operative mesenteric, 273, 273
PDA, see Patent ductus arteriosus
Portosystermic shunts, 273, 273-274, 275-276
Pectus excavaturm, 72, 72
Position, of object, 11-12, 13
Periapical infections, 644, 649, 650-651, 651
Positive-contrast cystography, 320
Pericardial diaphragrmatic hernia, 80, 83, 84, 173- 175
Pregnancy, determination of,398
Pericardial effusion, 167-170, 171-172, 173-176
radiography of, 393-394, 395
INDEX
737
 Pregnancy, determination of—cont'd
Respiratory phase, radiography of, 28, 30
sonography of, 398, 399-400
Restrictive cardiormyopathy, 161-162, 162
 Prostate gland, abnormal presentation of, 401-408
Retained endochondral cartilage, of distal ulna, 570-574, 574
abscess of, 401, 404, 406, 408
Retina, detachrment of, 654, 654-655,
benign hyperplasia of, 401, 404
dysplasia of, in Labrador retrievers, 540, 542
calcification of, 401
Retrobubar space, 655-656, 655-656
cysts of, 401,405,407
Retrograde rethrography, 35359
enlargerment of, 401
Retroperitoneal hemorrhage, 392
inflammation of, 401, 401-402, 406
 Retroperitoneal masses, 391
neoplasia of, 315, 388, 401, 402, 404, 405
 Retropharyngeal masses, 229
paraprostatic cysts 0n,401,403,405,407
Reverberation artifact, sonographic, 18, 19,20
radiographic anatomy of, 240-241, 401
Rhabdomyosarcorma, botryoid, 407, 409
 sonographic anatorny of, 404
Rheumatoid-like arthritis, canine, 583, 584
Pseudoachondroplasia, 540-542
Rhinitis, bacterial, 642-646, 643-644
 Pseudoarthrosis, 505,
frorm foreign body, 646
Pseudocysts, pancreatic, 326, 330
fungal, 642, 644 567
perinephric,360,361,373,374,388,393
Rib, fractures of, 70, 72
 Pseudohermaphroditism, 432
infection of, 72
Pseudoulcers, of duodenum, 279, 333, 343
radiographic anatorny of, 36
Pulrmonary. See also Lung entries.
tumors of, 72, 73, 86
 Pulrmonary artery, enlargerment of, 127, 130, 144,
Right atrial enlargerment, 127, 128,
normal Doppler study of, 63
Right ventricular enlargerment, 127, 128-130, 132, 152-153, 159
 radiographic anatomy of, 62
Rottweilers, sesarmoid abnormalities in, 543, 545
 Pulmonary aspergillosis, 210
Pulmonary bullae, 222, 122, 297
S
Pulmonary ederma, 190, 191-195,
Sacralization, 670, 673
Pulmonary ermbolus, 195-196, 196
Sacrocaudal spine, 667-678
Pulmonary hypertensin, 16164
Sacroiliac luxation, 705, 707
Pulmonary patterns (radiographic), 180-185
Sarcorma, synovial cell, 521-522
alveolar pattern, 180-181, 181
Sclerosis, 480
bronchial pattern, 182-183, 183
Scoliosis, 674
 differential diagnoses based on pattern, 183, 184t
Scottish Fold osteodystrophy, 543
interstitial pattern, 18-182,182
Septic arthritis,581-583,581582
vascular pattern, 183
Septum, ventricular, defect of 146-148, 147,148
Pulmonic stenosis, 130, 142-145, 144-145
Sequestrum, 503, 504, 527-529, 528
Pyelonephritis, acute, 374, 376,381, 385, 387
Sertoli cell turmor, 446, 447, 447
chronic, 360, 364, 368, 369, 376, 378, 379, 386
Sesarmoid, abnormalities of, 543, 545
Pyloric outflow obstruction, 279, 321-322, 322
Shadowing effect, sonographic, 17
Pyloric stenosis, 321, 322
Shape, of object, 10-11, 1415
Pyometra, 429,430,434,435
Shunts, portosystemic, 307, 308-310, 310-311
Pyonephrosis, 378, 379, 384
Sinus, frontal, hypoplasia of, 615
Pyothorax, 86-92, 87-88
Sinus of Valsalva, 57, 134
Pyruvate kinase deficiency, 536, 538
Sinusitis, 642-644, 643-644
Size, of object, 10, 142
R
Skeletal dysplasia, in Labrador retrievers, 540,542
 Radiography, bea1m-restricting devices for, 32
Skeleton, appendicular. See Appendicular skeleton
 darkroom procedure for, 32
Skin fold, 37
exposure factors in, 29,31
Skull, abnorrmalities of, of base, 627-630, 628
inmportance of, 1
of calvariurm, 622-627, 623
indications for, 4
of mandible, 632, 632
 pathology in, 9
of middle ear, 623, 625
 patient preparation for, 7, 32
of nasal passages and sinuses, 627-630, 631
 physics of, 1
of occipital bone, 638, 638
positioning for, 7,25, 26-29
of teeth, 646-65 1, 647-651
relative densities, 12
 of temporormandibular joint, 627-630, 329-637
technique of, 6, 30
brain abscess, 630, 633
technical quality of, 32
epulis, 626, 626
viewing conditions for, 32
fractures of, 627-630, 628-630
Radiolucent objects, 11
larmina dura dentes, 620
Radiopaque objects, 11
meningiorma, 622, 623
Rectourethral fistula, 421
mucinous (ceruminous) gland adenocarcinoma, 623, 625
Rectovaginal fistula, 359
rmultilobular osteochondrosarcoma, 622
Reflection, of sound, 2
neoplasrms of, 622-627, 622-627
Refraction artifact, sonographic, 15
odontoma, 624, 627
Renal. See also Kidneys.
osteosarcoma, 622, 624
Renal artery, sonography of, 275
Otitis externa/rmedia, 630-634, 633-634
Renal vein, thrormboembolisim of, 360
radiographic anatomy of, 617-620
Respiratory. See also Lung entries.
radiography of, dental, 617
738
INDEX
 Skull, abnormalities of, of base—-cont'd
 Spine, abnormal alignment of—cont'd
dorsoventral view, 608, 610
cartilaginous exostoses, 675, 676
frontal view, 613-615, 615
cauda equina syndrorme in, 698-700, 700
intraoral ventrodorsal and dorsoventral views, 610-611, 614
cervical, 661, 665, 666
lateral oblique view, 609, 612
congenital anormalies of, 670-682
lateral view, 607, 608
contrast studies of, 662-664
modified occipital view, 615-617, 618
degenerative diseases of, 682-685
open-mouth frontal view, 615, 616
degenerative joint disease, 683, 684
open-rmouth lateral oblique view, 609-610, 613
diffuse idiopathic spinal hyperostosis (DISH), 684
open-rmouth lateral view, 609,611
discosp0ndylitis, 690-693, 692-693
open mouth ventrodorsal view,611-613,614
dislocation of, 705-708, 707-708
positioning for, 607
dural ossification, 684, 685
ventrodorsal view, 607, 609
ependymorma, 696, 699
termporomandibular degenerative joint disease, 630
fracture of, 70, 71, 701-704 702-707
traurma, 627-630, 628-632
hermivertebra, 670-671, 674
 Srmall intestine, abnorrmal presentation of, 329-348
infection of, 690-693, 692-695
adenocarcinoma of, 329, 332, 342, 347-348
intervertebral disc disease of, 685-690, 685-691, 708
adynarmic ileus, 336, 336
Intradiscal oste0rmyelitis, 690-693, 692-693
adhesions to, 344, 345
kyphosis, 674
density of, changes in, 329-332, 332-333
lordosis, 674
dynarnic ileus, 334, 336
lurmbar, 661-662, 666-667, 668
extrarmural lesions of, 343-344, 345, 347-348
luxation, 705, 705, 707
foreign bodies in, 334-337, 333, 335-337, 341, 344, 346
rmeningormyelocele, 676, 677
gastrinoma of, 343, 344
metabolic diseases of, 700-701, 701
Gl series 277-280, 338
rmetastatic neoplasia, 669, 695-697
hernias of, 333, 334
Inyelorma of, 694, 695
infiltrative diseases of, 338, 338
neoplasia of, 671-672, 693-696, 694-699
intraluminal lesions of, 339, 340
neurofibroma, 671, 698
intussusception, 346, 349
occipitoatlantoaxial malforrmation, 675
leiomyosarcoma of,283, 283
osteochondrosis in, 696-700
linear foreign bodies in,333,334,335,340
sacrocaudal,667-668
lyrnphangiectasia of, 338, 338
scoliosis, 674
lymphoma of, 339, 343
spina bifida, 676, 677-78
malabsorption in, 338, 338
spondylitis, 693, 693-694
mucosal patterns of, 338
spondylolisthesis, 676, 681
mural lesions of, 339, 342, 347
spondylosis of, 682-683, 683-684
neoplasia, 329, 332, 345, 347
synovial cyst, 683
position of, change in, 333-334, 334-335
thoracic,661-662, 665-666, 667
pseudoulcers of, 279,339, 343
thoracolurmbar, 661-662, 666, 668
radiographic anatomy of, 268,
transitional vertebrae in, 670, 673
rupture of, 283, 283
traurma to, 701-708, 701-708
size and shape of, change in, 334-338, 335
"wobbler syndrorme" and, 676-681, 679-681
sonographic anatomy of, 269, 269
Spirocercosis, 175, 176
torsion of, 336
 Spleen, abnorrmal presentation of,448-454
ulceration of, 343, 344
abscess of, 451
Srmoke inhalation, 190
congestion of 448
Soft palate, abnormalities of, 229
enlargerment of, 448, 449
Soft tissues, cervical, 65-68
hematorma of, 449, 450,
abnorrmalities of, 67-70, 67-69, 228-236
hypersplenisn, 448, 449
calcification, 68
infarction of, 452, 454
fistula of, 67
inflarmmation of, 448 
foreign bodies in, 66, 231, 232
neoplasia of, 448, 449, 449-450, 452, 453
hematoma of, 67
nodular hyperplasia of,448, 451, 452
neoplasms of 68,69,521-522,521-522
radiographic anatormy of, 261, 250-252, 262,448
of appendicular skeleton, 586-593, 586-593, 591-593
rupture of 448
radiographic anatorny of, 65, 66
sonographic anatomy of, 261-262, 263,450
Spina bifida, 676, 677-678
torsion of, 450-45 1, 451
Spinal cord, lsins afcting,667
Splenography, in portal blood flow 276, 308
extradural, 670, 672
Splenormegaly, 448-449
extrarmedullary-intradural, 670, 671
Spondylitis693,693694
intradural-extrarmedullary, 670, 671
 Spondylolisthesis, 676, 681
intrarmedullary, 670, 671
Spondylosis, 682-683, 683-684
neoplasrms of, 671-672, 693-696, 694-699
DISH, 683, 684
Spine, abnorrmal alignrment of, 676, 679, 681
 Spontaneous pneurmothorax, 94
anatormy of, 664-668, 666-668
Squamous cell carcinoma, 210-211, 214, 623-626
arachnoid cyst, 681
aural, 623
arteriovenous malformation, 680, 682
mandibular, 623, 626
block vertebrae in, 672-674, 674, 677
paronychial, 552, 523
INDEX
739
S-shaped aortic deformity, 56, 61
 Temporomandibular joints, abnormal presentation
Steatitis, 281, 282
of, 627-630
Stenosis, aortic, 140-142, 135, 141-142, 175
ankylosis, 640
pulrmonic, 130, 142-145, 144-145
degenerative joint disease of, 630, 633
pyloric, 321-323,322
fracture of, 627
tracheal, 106, 109-110
luxation of, 629, 629
Sternebra, 39, 72-73, 73
subluxation of, 624, 630, 640
Stormach, abnormal presentation of, 313-325
Tendons, rupture of, 589, 589
adenocarcinoma of, 319, 320, 323, 327
Tension pneurmothorax, 94-95, 96, 134
calcification of, 313, 314
Testicles, retained, 446, 447
density of, changes in, 288, 313, 313-314
Neoplasia, 443, 446, 447-448
dilation of, 313, 315
sonography of, 274, 274
displacement of, 313, 316-317
torsion of, 446
double contrast gastrography, 323, 324
Tetralogy of Fllt, 148, 149, 150,447
foreign bodies in, 288, 313, 314
Thoracic aorta. See Aorta.
gastritis of, 319-321
Thoracic spine, 661-662, 665-666, 667
hypertrophic, 321
Thoracic wall, abscess of, 67
gastrography of, 280
anomalies of, 72
gastrointestinal (G1) series for, 278-279, 279, 315, 318
flail segrment of, 70
granuloma of, 313, 313,323,326,327
intercostal tears in, 70, 72
hiatal hernia, 79, 82
neoplasia of, 68, 69
infections of, 319-321
Thoracolurmbar spine, 661-662, 666, 668
infammation of, 319-321
Thorax. See also names of specific thoracic structures.
intussusception of, into esophagus, 120, 314
bony structures of, 36-37
lyrmphoma of, 319, 319-320
abnormalities of, 70-73
masses in, 313, 313, 320-322,323,327
radiographic anatomy of, 26-31, 36, 37-43, 61
neoplasia of, 319, 319-321, 323, 327
 Thrormboermbolism, aortic, 154
outflow of, obstruction of, 321-323, 322
left atrial, 159, 161
polyposis of, 321, 322
pulrmonary, 195-196, 196
pyloric obstruction of, 279, 321-323, 322
renal vein, 360
radiographic anatorny of, 257-258, 250-252
Thymus, 40
sonographic anatomy of 258-259, 258-259
Thyroid cartilage, 65-66, 66
ulcers of, 321, 321, 325
Thyroid gland, cysts on, 235, 235
volvulus of, 313, 316-317
hyperplasia of, 235, 235
wall of, thickening of, 319-321, 319-321
neoplasia of, 217, 234-235, 234-235
Stones, biliary 287, 288-289, 292, 305-307
 sonographic anatomy of, 234
cystic 399, 399-401, 411, 411-412, 419-420
Torsion, colonic, 351
renal 364-365, 370, 381, 388, 392
“"gastric,”313, 316-317
ureteral 390-391, 394
intestinal, 336
urethral 418, 421, 423
of liver, 296
Stress fractures, 494
of lung lobe, 90-91, 196, 197
Stump granuloma, 429, 430431, 434,43537
splenic, 450-451,457
Subcutaneous ermphyserma, 68, 68, 494, 494, 588
testicular, 446
Subperiosteal cortical defect, 525, 526
Trachea, abnorrmalities of, 104- 113
Swallowing disorders, 235-236
avulsion of, 106, 109
Synovial cell sarcoma, 521, 521
calcification of, 44
Synovial cyst, 683
cervical, 44, 67
Synovial hypertrophy, 578, 580
collapse of, 111113, 112-113
Synovial osteochondromatosis, 493
 displacerment of, 108
granuloma of, 106
foreign bodies in, 108
Tamponade, cardiac 167-170, 173-176
hypoplasia of 114, 107-109
Teeth, abnormal presentation of, 646-651
inflarmmation of, 106, 108
abscess of, 648, 649
neoplasia of, 106, 110
age-related changes to,647
radiographic anatomy of, 44, 66, 114
alveolar resorption of, 648, 649
rupture of, 106, 109
acquired lesions, 648-650, 650
stenosis of, 106,109-110
developrmental abnorrmalities, 646-647, 647
Tracheobronchiallymph nodes, calcification of, 207, 209
endodontic disease, 650-65 1, 650-651
Transitional cell carcinoma, of bladder, 407, 408, 414, 418
formulas of, 620
of urethra, 421, 425
fracture of, 649-650, 650
Transitional vertebrae, 670, 673
infection of, 648, 649, 650-651,651
Tricuspid valve, dysplasia of, 127-128, 153
neoplasrms of, 624-628, 625-628
insufficiency of, 127-128, 151-154, 153
periapical abscess of, 648, 649, 572
Tubular nephrosis, acute, 381, 382, 387, 391
 periodontal disease of, 648, 648-649
Turmors. See under specific sites of turmors.
radiographic anatormy of, 620
Tympanic bullae, inflammation of, 630-634, 634
radiography of, 609-611, 613-614
neoplasia of, 622-623, 625
740
INDEX
U
Urethra, abnormal presentation of—cont'd
Ucer, colonic, 354, 355
norrmal urethrograrms of, 419, 422-423
cystitis with, 406-407, 407
periurethral fbrosis of, 421, 426
duodenal, 343, 344
rupture of,421,424
gastric,321,321,325,
urethritis, 421, 425
lcerative colitis, 354,355
Urethrography,358-359
Una, closure of, prermature, 488, 492-493
Urethrorectal fistula, 421
coronoid process of, fragrmented, 568-570, 572-573
Urinary bladder. See Bladder.
retained endochondral cartilage of, 570-574, 574
Urinary systerm, abnormalities of, 360-427
un-united anconeal process of, 564-568, 570-571
Urography, excretory, 356-357, 382
Utrasonography, artifact recognition in, 16
abdominal cormpression in, 429, 430
acoustic enhancerment, 18
Uterus, abnorrmal presentation of, 429-437
 bearm reflection/attenuation, 16
endormetrial hyperplasia of, 429, 434, 435
bearn width artifact, 21
in pregnancy,432,433,437,438439
comet tail artifact, 19
pyormetra,429,430,434,435
echo display in, modes of, 2, 4
radiographic anatorny of, 272
gain and reject controls of, 8
sonographic anatorny of, 272, 273
guided biopsy techniques for, 5, 6
sturmp abscess of, 429, 430-431, 434, 435-437
in head traurma, 630, 633
tumors of, 429, 431
indications for, 4
V
physical principles of, 12
power control in, 2
Vagina, rmasses in, 427
pulse-echo principle in, 2
os clitoris, 432,432
refraction, 17
stricture of, 427, 428
reverberation, 18-20
yaginograrn, 427, 428
ring-down artifact, 19
Valsalva, sinus of, 57, 134
Vascular ring anormalies, 115-117, 117
technique of, 8
transducer selection for, 25
Vena cava, caudal, 59
Unclassified cardiomyopathy, 161-162, 162
 abnormalities of, 179
Underexposure artifact, 30
radiographic anatormy of, 59
Ununited anconeal process, 565-567, 570-571
Venography, lurmbar sinus, 663, 700,700
Urachal diverticulurm, 405, 405
Ventricle, enlargerment of, bilateral, 132
Ureter, calculi of, 390, 391, 394
left, 131, 133-134
ectopic,394,396-397
right, 127,129,
excretory urography of, 393
Ventricular septal defect, 146-148, 147, 148
hydroureter of, 394, 393, 395
Vertebrae. See Spine.
radiographic anatomy of, 390-393
Villonodular synovitis, 587
Viral bronchitis, 216
rupture of, 392, 394, 397, 398
ultrasound of, 397-398
Viral pneumonia, 185, 198, 200
Ureterocele, 396, 397
Volvulus, gastric, 313, 316-317
Urethra, abnorrmal presentation of, 418-427
W
avulsion of, 403, 404
calculi in, 418, 421-423
"Wobbler syndrome," 676-68 1, 679-681
diverticula of, 424, 427
Z
duplicate, 424, 427
 Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 343, 344
neoplasia of, 421, 425-426