Post Graduate Foundation
in Veterinary Science
University of Sydney
TDEREME
"An Orthopaedic Odyssey'
Advances in Small Animal Orthopaedic Surgery
Proceedings 363
6th - 10th February, 2006
Veterinary Science Conference Centre
University of Sydney
The JD Stewart Refresher Course
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Name:
An Orthopaedic Odyssey
Advances in Small Animal Orthopaedic Surgery
THE JD STEWART REFRESHER COURSE FOR VETERINARIANS
Proceedings 363
6-10 February 2006
Veterinary Science Conference Centre
Regimental Crescent, Camperdown Campus 
University of Sydney, NSW Australia
Michele Cotton
Director
Veterinary Science Conference Centre
 Building B22, Regimental Crescent
 Published by:
University of Sydney NSW 2006
 Post Graduate Foundation
T: 61 2 9351 7979
in Veterinary Science
F: 61 2 9351 7968
The University of Sydney
www.pgf.edu.au
Copyright @ Post Graduate Foundation 2006
Printed in Australia by the
Post Graduate Foundation in Veterinary Science
of the University of Sydney
ISBN: 0 9756876 5 4
Notice
 Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broadens our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and drug therapy may become necessary or
appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current information provided (1) on procedures
featured or (2) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended
dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the
responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of the patient, to
make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to
take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor
 the Editors/Authors assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property
arising out or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
The Publisher
Front cover photo courtesy of Dr. Kenneth Johnson
Speaker Profiles
Dr John M. Angles BVSc(Hons), BSc(Vet)(Hons), MACVSc, MVStudies, PhD.
Diplomate ACVIM (Intermal Medicine), Diplomate ECVIM (Companion Animal)
Animal Referral Hospital
444 Hume Highway
Strathfield South, NSW 2136
T: 61 2 9758 8666
F: 61 2 9758 8880
E: j.angles @ arhvets.com
John graduated with honours from the University of Sydney and worked for 5 years in small animal practice in
Canberra, before completing a small animal medicine residency at the University of Califormia at Davis. John
 has advanced training in medical immunology and genetics, and extensive experience working with dog and
cat breed clubs in Europe and the USA. For the past 3 years, John has been at The Animal Referral Hospital as
a Small Animal Medicine specialist. A PhD in Comparative Pathology was awarded 2005 by the University of
Califormia at Davis for research investigating underlying causes for breed-specific autoimmune diseases.
Current research interests include autoinflammatory disease and hypertrophic osteodystrophy in the
Weimaraner dog. John is a Diplomate of both the American and European Colleges of Veterinary Intermal
Medicine.
Dr Tony Black BVSc, FACVSc
Northerm Sydney Veterinary Specialist Centre.
290 Bobbin Head Rd.
North Turramurra NSW 2074
T: 61 2 9449 3820
F: 61 2 9441 6082
Tony Black graduated with honours from The University of Sydney in 1974. After a few years in general
 practice he then completed a small animals surgery residency at the University of Saskatchewan in Canada in
1979 and was head of Soft Tissue Surgery at the Animal Medical Centre in 1980. On returming to Australia,
  as ad aas isads un uaag s p za u (ns) ovh e pame sm 
 He is the principal of the Northerm Sydney Veterinary Specialist Centre and has a strong interest in diseases of
the canine hip and has been performing total hip replacements since 1991. Tony lectures within Australia,
principally on diseases of locomotion.
Dr Mark Glyde BVSc, MACVSc, MVS, DipECVS, MRCVS
University College Dublin
 Department of Veterinary Surgery
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
 Belfield, Dublin 4
Ireland
T: 0011 353 1 716 6058  E: mark.glyde@ucd.ie
 Mark graduated from the University of Sydney in 1983. After eleven years in small animal practice he
completed a surgical residency at the University of Melbourme before moving to the University of Liverpool as
a lecturer in small animal surgery and then to University College Dublin. Mark's principal interests are small
animal orthopaedics and veterinary undergraduate and postgraduate education. In 2004 he was awarded the
UCD President's Teaching Award. His current research involves fracture and implant biomechanics of
humeral condylar and femoral supracondylar fractures and learming through online case studies. Mark holds a
Masters degree in Veterinary Surgery, is a Diplomate of the European College of Veterinary Surgeons and an
 RCVS Recognised Specialist in Small Animal Surgery. He is currently chief of service in Small Animal
Surgery at University Veterinary Hospital, University College Dublin.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
Dr Sarah Goldsmid BVSc, MVetClinStud, FACVSc
Animal Referral Hospital
444 Hume Highway
Strathfield South, NSW 2136
T: 61 2 9758 8666
F: 61 2 9758 8880
E: s.goldsmid @ arh vets.com
After graduating from the University of Sydney in 1986, Sarah worked in small animal practice in the Blue
Mountains for 18 months. She returmed to the University of Sydney to complete a residency in Small Animal
Sydney 1991-1995. From 1996-1998, Sarah was a consulting specialist to the University Veterinary Centre,
Camden. Since 1994, Sarah has also run a referral service in Hobart, Tasmania every couple of months. Sarah
gained Membership in 1993 and then Fellowship of the Australian college of Veterinary Scientists in Small
Animal Surgery in 1996. Sarah is one of the co-founders and directors of the Animal Referral Hospital,
 Sydney, where she now works. Her interests include all areas of small animal surgery - soft tissue,
 orthopaedics, neurosurgery, oncologic and reconstructive surgery.
Associate Professor Geraldine Hunt BVSc(Hons), MACVSc PhD, FACVSc(Small Animal Surgery)
University Veterinary Centre
B10 - Evelyn Williams
University of Sydney NSW 2006
T: 61 2 9351 3230
F: 61 2 9351 4261
E: gbhunt @mail.usyd.edu.au
Geraldine graduated from the University of Sydney in 1983 and worked for two years in private small animal
practice in Canberra before returming to Sydney to do a PhD in cardiac electrophysiology at Westmead
Hospital. She then worked a further year in small animal practice in Bankstown, Sydney before undertaking a
Residency in Small Animal Surgery at the University of Sydney. From 1991 to 1997 she was Lecturer in
Veterinary Anatomy and Surgical consultant to the University Veterinary Centre, Sydney. She was then
 appointed Senior Lecturer in Small Animal Surgery and Head of Surgery, Department of Veterinary Clinical
Sciences, University of Sydney in 1997. In 2001 she was appointed Associate Professor and from 2003 has
been Director of the University Veterinary Centre, Sydney. Her Clinical and Research Interests include:
Surgical treatment of cardiovascular disease in dogs and cats. Inheritance of congenital portosystemic shunts in
 un ls an  As r  aan d ns anss os as
Professor Kenneth Archer Johnson MVSc, PhD, Diplomate ACVS and ECVS.
Professor of Orthopaedics, The Ohio State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
1010 Vet Hospital
601 Vermon Tharp Street
Columbus Ohio
USA 43210
T: 0011 1 614 292 3551 F: 0011 1 614 292 0895 E: johnson.2064@osu.edu
Ken graduated from the University of Sydney, and then went on to complete a residency in small animal
surgery at Colorado State University and become a Diplomate ACvs. After 6 years at the University of
Wisconsin as Associate Professor of Orthopaedics, he became Professor of Companion Animals at the
University of Bristol. He then moved back to the USA, and is currently Professor of Orthopaedics at Ohio
State University. Osteoarthritis, cruciate disease, total hip replacement and fracture management, especially
interlocking nailing, are his main clinical interests. He is co-author of three textbooks, including the fourth 
edition of Piemattei and Johnson: and more then 20 book chapter and 90 publications on orthopaedics.
 Professor Johnson organizes the annual AO courses held in Columbus, and he is Past president of AO VET.
Speakers
Professor Daniel Dean Lewis DVM, Diplomate ACVS, Jerry and Lola Collins Eminent Scholar in Canine
Sports Medicine and Comparative Orthopaedics
University of Florida - College of Veterinary Medicine
Campus Box 100125
2015 SW 16" Avenue
Gainesville, Florida USA 32611
T: 0011 1352-392-4700 F: 0011 1 352-392-6125 E: LewisDa@mail.vetmed.ufl.edu
 Dan graduated from the University of Califomia in 1983. He completed an intemship at the School of
Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University and completed his residency in Small Animal Surgery at the
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida. He then accepted a position for a year as the Surgical
Registrar at the University of Sydney's Veterinary Teaching Hospital before returming to Louisiana State
University in 1988 as the Assistant Professor of Surgery. In 1993 he returmed to the College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Florida and is presently a Professor of Small Animal Surgery there. In addition, he is
the former President of the Veterinary Orthopaedics Society. His special interests include trauma and
extermal skeletal fixation of fracture management, correction of limb deformities and limb salvage procedures.
Dr David Lidbetter BVSc, MVS, FACVSc, Diplomate ECVS, ACVS
Veterinary Surgical Specialists
16 Ross St
North Parramatta, NSw, 2151
T: 61 2 9683 3177
E: surgivet@bigpond.com
 David graduated form the University of Sydney. He undertook an Internship at The Royal Veterinary College,
The University of London. Following this he completed a 2 year Surgical Residency at The University of
 David was Assistant Professor of Surgery and Chief of Service at The University of Tennessee. He is a Fellow of
the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists as well as a Diplomate of the European College of Veterinary
Surgeons and the American College of Veterinary Surgeons. He has published in several jourmals and texts and
 has presented in the UK, USA, Ireland and Australia. David is currently in private referral practice in Sydney. His
interests include arthroscopy, cemented and cementless hip replacement, TPLO and neurosurgery.
Dr Chris Little BVMS, MSc, Diplomate ACVS, PhD
Department of Surgery
E25 - Royal North Shore Hospital
University of Sydney,NSW 2006
T: 61 2 9926 7239
F: 61 2 9926 6539
E: cblittle @med.us yd.edu.au
Chris received his veterinary training at Murdoch University in Westerm Australia and stayed on to do an
imtermship in equine medicine and surgery at the same institution. He then moved to the University of Minnesota
to undertake a large animal surgery residency and complete an MSc studying arthritis in horses. Chris took up a
faculty position at the Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph in Canada and during this appointment
passed his certifying examinations to become a Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Surgeons. He
 g e h ai u Aas o sa a    e p    yg 
postdoctoral position at Cardiff University School of Biosciences in the UK, he took up an Arthritis Foundation of
Australia Ulysses Research Fellowship at the University of Melbourme Department of Paediatrics. In 2003 he was 
appointed as the new Director of the Raymond Purves Bone & Joint Research Laboratories at the Royal North
Shore Hospital in Sydney. During his clinical and research career, Chris has investigated various aspects of
biosynthesis in articular cartilage in a novel animal model of osteoarthritis. The focus then shifted to the
degradative mechanisms and proteolytic pathways responsible for aggrecan loss from cartilage using neoepitope
antibody methodologies and most recently mice with knock-in mutations in proteolytically sensitive sites of
aggrecan. Chris has published 52 scientific papers, 5 book chapters, over 40 peer reviewed abstracts and has been
 mvited to present at numerous national and intemational scientific meetings.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey,Proc.No.363
Dr David Little MBBS FRACS(Orth) PhD
The Children's Hospital at Westmead
Locked Bay 4001Address
Department of Orthopaedics
Westmead, NSW 2145
T:61 2 9845 3352
F: 61 2 9845 3180
E: davidl3 @ chw.edu.au
Dr Little graduated MBBS from the University of Sydney in 1986. After selection on the Australian
Orthopaedic Association training scheme in 1990 Dr Little graduated FRACS(Orth) in 1994. He undertook
fellowships in Paediatric Orthopaedics at the Shriners Hospital for Children in Portland, OR, USA and Texas
Scottish Rite Hospital for Children in Dallas TX, USA. Dr Little commenced on staff at the Children's
Hospital, Westmead, when it opened in November 1995. In 1998 he began researching the role of
bisphosphonates in distraction osteogenesis and in 1999 officially founded Orthopaedic Research and
Biotechnology at CHW. Dr Little remains Head of the Unit, and Deputy Head of the Department of
Orthopaedics. In 2002 Dr Little was an ABC travelling fellow, presenting his research with other intermational
fellows from UK, NZ and South Africa on a six-week tour of North America. In 2005 Dr Little was awarded
his PhD on bisphosphonates in distraction osteogenesis. He has initiated further research on osteonecrosis,
fracture healing and the interaction of the anabolic and catabolic responses in bone repair. Dr Little remains
active clinically and is now working on translating pre-clinical work on bone healing to clinical practice.
Dr Craig MacPherson BVSc (Massey) MVCSC (Syd), FACVSc (Small animal surgery)
University Veterinary Centre
B10-Evelyn Williams
University of Sydney NSW 2006
T:61 2 9351 3230
F:61 29351 4261
E: craigm @ vetc.usyd.edu.au
Craig is one of the most experienced surgical specialists working in Australia. After a few years of general
practice in New Zealand, Craig moved to Sydney where he completed a residency with Chris Bellenger and
then worked as a referral surgeon in private practice. Craig is currently a Senior Lecturer in the University
Veterinary Centre Sydney in the Faculty of Veterinary Science at The University of Sydney. Craig has a
wealth of experience about all aspects of small animal surgery, and is keen for today's practitioners to realise
their diagnostic skills are or can be optimal.
Professor Rick Read BVSc, PhD, FACVSc
Murdoch University
School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Room 1.049
Murdoch, WA 6150
T: 08 9360 2644
E: R.Read @murdoch.edu.au
 Rick Read graduated BVSc (Hons) from the University of Sydney in 1976 and worked in small animal practice
in Sydney for 2 years before taking up a surgical residency at the University of Queensland. A PhD at
Murdoch University in Perth followed and the lure of the west has been so strong that 23 years later he is still
there!! Rick joined the teaching faculty at the Murdoch vet school in 1985 and is currently Professor of Small
Animal Surgery. He is a Fellow of the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists in Small Animal Surgery
and has clinical and research interests in small animal orthopaedics with a special focus on osteoarthritis. Rick
has lectured widely in Australia and overseas on topics related to osteoarthritis and small animal surgery.
Speakers
Dr Bruce Smith BVSc(Hons), MSc(Biomechanics), DipACVS, FACVSc
Northerm Sydney Veterinary Specialist Centre
290 Bobbin Head Road
North Turramurra NSw 2074
T: 61 2 9449 3820
F:61 2 9441 6082
Dr. Bruce Smith is a graduate of the University of Sydney (1985) and undertook surgical training as an interm
at Murdoch University (1991-92) and as a resident at Louisiana State University, U.S.A (1993-96). He has a
 Master of Science in Veterinary Physiology (Biomechanics) as well as being a Fellow of the Australian
College of Veterinary Scientists in Small Animal Surgery and Diplomate of the American College of
Veterinary Surgeons. Since attaining specialist registration in 1997 Dr. Smith has been in private small animal
surgical referral practice; currently at the Northerm Sydney Veterinary Specialist Centre in Sydney
Dr Rodney Straw BVSc, Dip ACVS
Brisbane Veterinary Specialist Centre (BVSC)
Cnr Keong & Old Northem Roads
Albany Creek Qld 4035
T: 07 32649400
E: rodstraw @ animalcancercare.com.au
Rodney Straw received his Bachelor of Veterinary Science (Honors) from the University of Melbourme in
1979. He then went on to do a Surgery Residency at the University of Missouri (83-86) and then a
    (    n   l un d l
(Associate Professor of Oncology) at the Comparative Oncology Unit, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University from 1988-1995 From 1997-2004, he was the Consultant
Oncologist for the School of Veterinary Science and Animal Production at the University of Queensland. He
is presently the Director of Animal Cancer Care Pty Ltd. in addition to Director of the Brisbane Veterinary
(1987), Associate Member of the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists (1988) and Registered Specialist
Surgeon and Surgical Oncologist, Queensland Veterinary Surgeons Board (1995). Dr Straw was awarded the
Smith Kline Beecham Research Award in 1991 and the ASAVA Scientific Contribution Award in 2003. He
was on faculty (Associate Professor of Oncology) at the Comparative Oncology Unit, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University from 1988-1995.:"
Dr Penny Tisdall BSc(Vet), BVSc, MVetClinStuds, FACVSc(Small Animal Surgery)
Veterinary Specialist Centre
PO Box 307
North Ryde NSw 2113
T: 02-9888-9800
F: 02-9888-9338
Penny graduated from the University of Sydney with a BSc(Vet) for studies on portosystemic shunts in
Maltese and Australian Cattle dogs in 1992 and with a BVSc in 1994. After working for several years in
private small animal practice in westerm Sydney she retumed to the University of Sydney to complete a Small
 Animal Surgical Residency starting in 1997. Research interests included management of perianal fistulae in
dogs and feline megacolon. Following completion of training she was employed at the Veterinary Teaching
Hospital as a senior surgical registrar. She obtained Fellowship of the Australian College of Veterinary
Scientists in 2002 by examination and is a registered Small Animal surgical specialist. She has been active as
an examiner for the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists and as a member of the Metropolitan
Practitioners Branch of the AVA. She is currently employed in private small animal surgical practice at the
Veterinary Specialist centre located in North Ryde. While active in soft tissue, orthopaedic and neurosurgery,
her particular interests are in orofacial and general reconstructive surgery, oncology and gastrointestinal
surgery. She is the proud owner of two particularly good looking Curley Coated Retrievers and two Devon
Rex cats.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
s
Program
MONDAY 6 FEBRUARY, 2006
9.00am - 9.05am
Introduction and welcome
Chris Bellenger
9.05am - 10.00am
Anatomy and biophysics of the stifle joint, including the
arthroscopic anatomy of this joint
David Lidbetter
This lecture will discuss the relevant anatomy and physics of the canine stifle. Cadaver and operative images
will orientate the practitioner with regard to the local nerves, ligaments, cruciates and meniscus. Arthroscopy
of the stifle is a minimally invasive new modality which can be incorporated into cruciate repairs such as tibial
plateau leveling (TPLO). The arthroscopic anatomy of the stifle will also be discussed.
10.00am - 11.00am
Stifle, elbow and other joints - how far can we go with
arthroscopic intervention?
Mark Glyde
This session will look at the diagnostic and treatment indications for arthroscopy in the canine stifle joint and
 give an overview of indications for arthroscopy in other joints. Relative benefits of arthroscopy and arthrotomy
 will be reviewed in a case-based approach.
11.00am - 11.30am  Morning Tea
11.30am - 12.30pm
 Osteoarthritis - what we can learn from cellular and
 molecular biology
Chris Little
and synovial fluid, joint capsule, ligaments, meniscus and cartilage. However, it is the degradation and loss of
articular cartilage that is pathognomonic for OA, and controls the long-term prognosis and need for eventual
and no reliable diagnostic tools to easily assess the progressive loss of this tissue. In order to develop new
treatments and biomarkers to monitor disease, we need to better understand the cellular and molecular
pathways that drive both the initiation and progression of cartilage breakdown. This talk will review some of
the latest findings in this field and how these might lead to improved diagnosis and treatment of OA.
12.30pm - 1.30pm Lunch
1.30pm -- 3.00pm   Anterior cruciate ligament symposium
This half day symposium will focus on cruciate ligament disease, currently one of the major causes of
lameness in dogs. Apparently degenerative, rather than traumatic in origin, the true cause of this problem is
enigmatic. Furthermore the instability resulting from cruciate ligament rupture is frequently further
complicated by meniscal tearing and displacement. While there has been no shortage of new surgical
outcome. The diverse views of the panel experts will likely initiate some hot debate.
These topics, and more, will be discussed by a panel consisting of Mark Glyde, Dan Lewis, and Rick
 Read, John Culvenor and Chair Ken Johnson
3.00pm - 3.30pm
Afternoon tea
3.30pm - 5.00pm
Symposium panel of Ken Johnson, Mark Glyde, Dan Lewis,
and Rick Read continues...
5.00pm - 7.00pm
Welcome Drinks
An Orthopaedic Odyssey,Proc.No.363
TUESDAY 7 FEBRUARY, 2006
9.00am - 9.45am
 Stifle disease in the cat - what's news pussycat?
David Lidbetter
The common conditions of the feline stifle will be discussed such as stifle fractures, cranial cruciate rupture,
collateral ligament damage and the “global knee". Surgical management of these conditions with an emphasis
on case based leaming will be featured.
9.45am - 10.30am
 Patella luxation - has anything changed in the
last 20 years?
Mark Glyde
 This session willfocus on treatment decision-making in the management of patella luxation. Reasons for
reluxation and other surgical complications will be explored using case material. Techniques for trochleoplasty
and tibial crest transposition will be reviewed.
10.30am -11.00am
Although patellar luxation is predominately a disorder of the small dog, it can be a very challenging problem in
large breeds. It may be associated with distal femoral deformity, as well as dysplasia, coxa valga and
excessive anteversion of the hip joint. The traditional procedures of trochlear wedge recession and tibial
achieve better aligmment of the extensor mechanism, a distal femoral wedge osteotomy is performed to correct
 axial and torsional deformity. Indications, planning and technique, together with available outcome data will
be discussed.
11.00am - 11.30am Morning Tea
11.30am -- 12.30pm   State of the Art Lecture - Fixateurs and circular fixateurs   Dan Lewis
with increased frequency in dogs and cats. Circular fixator frames consist of a series of complete and/or
incomplete extermal rings that are interconnected by multiple threaded rods and are uniquely designed.
allowing the frame to be elongated or shortened during or following surgery. Elongation of the frame during
the convalescent period allows for distraction osteogenesis in which regenerate bone is formed within the
osteotomy gap resulting from gradual separation of the secured bone segments. Circular fixators can be used
to stabilise fractures and arthrodeses, perfonm bone lengthening and transport as well as correct angular,
translational and rotational deformities and thus can be used to treat a multitude of developmental, traumatic
and neoplastic orthopaedic problems in dogs and cats.
12.30pm - 1.30pm Lunch
1.30pm - 3.00pm
Management of canine osteosarcoma: latest
recommendations for amputation, limb sparing and
 chemotherapy, cytotoxic implants, and radiotherapy
Rod Straw
Limbsparing, Flip'n Nuke, Atriplat, Paliative RT, Bisphosphonates, Metronomic chemotherapy... what does it
 all mean? We will try to make sense of the new things and come to grips with the old things while taking a
clinical view on the management of canine osteosarcoma during a case based, interactive oncology workshop
3.00pm - 3:30pm
 Afternoon Tea
3.30pm -- 5.00pmOrthopaedic Emergencies
Craig Mac Pherson
When does an orthopaedic injury require immediate attention? What emergency therapy is indicated and how
 does appropriate initial injury management impact the long term prognosis for recovery? Craig will outline the
major issues associated with acute traumatic orthopaedic injuries and the ideal approach to their management.
This will be done using illustrative case studies as well as through a discussion of relevant principles.
Program
WEDNESDAY 8 FEBRUARY, 2006
9.00am - 11.00am
Technologies for management of acute simple or complex
long bone fractures - pins, plates, rods, interlocking nails
Ken Johnson
In recent years there has been a move away from attempts at complete, anatomical reduction of diaphyseal
fractures. Currently the emphasis is on "biological management" whereby the main proximal and distal
fragments are brought into axial aligmment, without disturbing the fracture zone and haematoma.
 Development of interlocking nailing for stabilisation of these fractures of the femur and tibia in humans has
been followed more recently by popularisation of this method of fracture repair in dogs and cats. However,
not all long bone fractures can be adequately stabilised by interlocking nailing, and there certainly are cases
where plate or plate-rod constructs are superior. Plate design has evolved considerably from the traditional
DCP, though limited contact plates and point-contact plates, to the latest version of a no-contact plate called
the locking compression plate, or LCP. Each of these techniques will be discussed, along with their
advantages and disadvantages, the goal being to appreciate which technique of fracture repair is most likely to
result in uncomplicated fracture healing for the patient.
11.00am -- 11.30am   Morning Tea
11.30am - 12.30pm
Acute simple and complex diaphyseal
fractures of the femur
 Dan Lewis
umion and optimal limb function. While simple fractures may be amenable to stabilisation with an
intramedullary pin (potentially in combination with cerclage wiring), the application of an adjunctive extermal
skeletal fixation may improve clinical results and prevent fixation failures. Interlocking nails or plates often
provide more stable fixation of diaphyseal femoral fractures and are associated with a rapid returm to weight
bearing. The use of more elaborate fixator configurations, such as "tie-in" constructs and hybrid frames, may
be advantageous in stabilising more complex fractures.
12.30pm - 1.30pm
Lunch
1.30pm - 3.00pm
Simple and complex distal articular femoral and other
long bone fractures
Mark Glyde
This session will use a case-based approach to outline options for management of selected metaphyseal and
 articular long bone fractures, including distal femoral and humeral condylar fractures
3.00pm - 3.30pm
Afternoon Tea
3.30pm - 5.00pm
 Chronic infected unstable bone deficient fractures
Dan Lewis
Fractures that are infected, have gone to nonunion, or involve substantial bone deficits pose unique problems.
 Infected fractures require debridement, a stable environment and appropriate antibiotic therapy in order to
achieve union. Nonunion fractures similarly require stable fixation to obtain union. In addition, bone grafting
is an integral component in facilitating a successful outcome. Fracture with large segmental defects are
uniquely problematic and may require extensive cancellous bone grafting, cortical bone allograft placement, or
bone transport to restore bone continuity without sacrificing appreciable bone length.
7.00pm -- 10.00 pm   Harbour Cruise
An Orthopaedic Odyssey,Proc.No.363
THURSDAY 9 FEBRUARY, 2006
9.00am - 10.30am
Modulation of the anabolic and catabolic
responses in bone repair
 David Little
Bone repair is a fast-moving field in which many biotechnology initiatives are starting to make an impact.
While orthopaedic surgeons have traditionally relied on anabolic treatments such as bone grafing to
supplement bone repair, anti-catabolic therapies are also available. We have hypothesised that the outcome in
bone repair is determined by the magnitude and interaction of the anabolic and catabolic responses. It is logical
that if an endogenous anabolic response is underway, the effect of this can be augmented by control of
catabolism. Similarly, anabolic and anti-catabolic therapy could be synergistic if timed appropriately. Current
and emerging therapies allow dissociation of the anabolic and catabolic responses in bone repair, such that a
more optimal balance can be dictated for a given situation. Translation of these concepts could provide a
framework for the use of new agents in bone repair.
10.30am - 11.00am  Morning Tea
11.00am -- 12.30am  Challenging cases in small animal orthopaedics
 Penny Tisdall
 Have you ever thought carefully about how to best manage a particular surgical problem and every option that
you come up with appears to have significant disadvantages? Some of the greatest challenges we face in
orthopaedic surgery relate not to the technical difficulty of the procedure itself, but to the decisions or
compromises that must be made. Not every problem has an ideal solution, finances may be limited, surgical
equipment may be unavailable and referral may not always be an option. In this case based presentation we
will examine various cases of traumatic injuries to the distal limbs of dogs and cats. The focus of the
discussion will be on when to operate, surgical and non surgical treatment options and possible pitfalls. In
some cases the surgical solution is straightforward but the challenge is in the size or age of the patient, the
mode of injury and/or the availability of post surgical management. In other cases the surgical treatment itself
 gupueuap aout aq Aeu 
12.30pm - 1.30pm
yunT
1.30pm - 3.00pm
Medical diseases of bones and joints
John Angles &
 Bruce Smith
Congenital, developmental, inflammatory, and infectious causes for bone and joint diseases will be presented
in a case orientated approach. Recognition of these conditions can be difficult, and accurate diagnosis is often
treatment will be discussed.
3.00pm - 3.30pm
Afternoon Tea
3.30pm - 4.30pm
Wound management
Sarah Goldsmid
In her talk on Wound Management, Sarah will be using interactive case studies to cover topics such as wound
assessment, principles of wound healing, choices in treatment and the future of wound management. This will
be an informative and practical review of how to manage wounds in your practice.
Program
FRIDAY 10 FEBRUARY, 2006
9.00am - 10.30am
Management of osteoarthritis: instead of
surgery, or after surgery
Rick Read
Issues to be covered will include dietary management, graded exercise, physiotherapy, hydrotherapy, trigger
 point therapy, acupuncture, disease modifying drugs, nutraceuticals, NSAIDs, intrarticular medication.
10.30am - 10.50am
Morning Tea
10.50am - 11.50am
Management and reconstruction of severe soft tissue lesions
and skin deficits of the pelvic limb
Geraldine Hunt
 s   sd an sa  snss d a  sn l ss sn
injuries to the hind limb, including early wound managerment, the healing process and options available fo
wound reconstruction. Abundant visual material will be used to illustrate basic principles and practices, and the
of potential pitfalls will also be included.
11.50am - 12.50pm Hip dysplasia and osteoarthrosis
Mark Glyde
This session will focus on a clinical approach to the diagnosis and assessment of animals with hip dysplasia
and the place for physical examination and assessment of hip joint laxity
12.50pm - 1.40pm 
Lunch
1.40pm - 2.40pm
Early interventions for hip dysplasia.
Tony Black
Hip dysplasia continues to be one the of the most important canine orthopaedic diseases. It may be debilitating
for both the young pup and the aged dog. Owners are often faced with a very difficult decision with a young
puppy, to which the family has already bonded: "What do I do with my puppy, which has hip dysplasia?
"Who's to blame and should he/she have expensive surgery or should I wait to see how he/she goes?" Tony
will provide you with a plan and his answers to these questions.
2.40pm - 3.25pm
Obtaining Surgical Training in Australia
Bruce Smith
The evolution of companion animal practice and the place of the pet in Australian life have resulted in an
increasing demand for surgical services both from the public and the profession. For public protection and
similar to the medical profession, Australian and New Zealand Veterinary Boards require minimum standards
in training and assessment for specialist status. Despite an increasing public and professional demand for
specialist surgical services specialist surgical training opportunities have decreased in recent years. Within
Australia and New Zealand the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists have defined training and
administered examinations that fulfill the Veterinary Board requirements. However, in contrast to tertiary
 institution degrees programs, the ACVSc is not a training body. This presentation examines the current state
 of the small animal surgical specialty within Australia. Factors associated with the decline in formal training
programs will be identified and altermative training strategies proposed.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey,Proc.No.363
3.25pm - 3.45pm
Afternoon Tea
3.45pm-5.00pm
Late intervention for degenerative joint disease of the hip
femoral head excision and total hip replacement
Ken Johnson
 In the surgical management of the chronically painful, osteoarthritic coxofemoral joint, there are several
options including femoral head excision, so-called denervation, and total hip replacement. The latter
procedure comes closer than any other technique in the restoration of a painfree and anatomically functional
joint. However this is a highly demanding, specialised procedure and the consequences of complications can
be disastrous for the patient. Therefore it is critical to know the correct indications for this procedure.
Furthermore, dogs with neurological disease, concurrent cruciate disease, pyodenma and other problems must
 be recognised as being potentially unsuitable candidates. Currently there are two main types of commercially
 available hip implants, the traditional cemented and the porous coated, non-cemented bone ingrowth 
 prostheses. The advantages and disadvantages of each will be discussed. The ultimate goal is to better
understand what to expect in terns of post-operative rehabilitation, likely complications and long tenm results 
from this procedure, so that informed advice can be given to clients.
Program
Table of Contents
Chapter 1
Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stifle
David Lidbetter....
Chapter 2
 Stifle, Elbow and Other Joints - How Far Can We Go With
Arthroscopic Intervention
Mark Glyde ....
21
Chapter 3
Osteoarthritis
Chris Litte....
29
Chapter 4
 Feline Stifle Surgery
David Lidbetter....
Chapter 5
 Patella Luxation - Has Anything Changed in the Last 20 Years?
Mark Gtyde..
59
Chapter 6
Corrective Osteotomy for Patella Luxation in Large Breed Dogs
Kennet.h.ohnson....
Chapter 7
Circular External Skeletal Fixation
Dan Lewis....
Chapter 8
 Orthopaedic Emergencies
Craig MacPherson ....
L6.
Chapter 9
 Management of Canine Osteosarcoma: Latest Recommendations for Amputation,
 Limb Sparing and Chemotherapy, Cytotoxic Implants, and Radiotherapy
Rod Straw...
... 119
 Chapter 10  Technologies for Management of an Acute Simple or Complex Long Bone
Fractures - Pins, Plates, Rods, Interlocking Nails
Kenneth Johnson....
... 135
Chapter 11
 Acute Simple and Complex Diaphyseal Fractures of the Femur
Dan Lewis.....
151
Chapter 12
 Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
Mark Glyde......
Chapter 13 Chronic Infected, Unstable, Bone Deficient Fractures
Dan Lewis....
... 179
Chapter 14 Modulation of the Anabolic and Catabolic Responses in Bone Repair
David Little ..
187
Chapter 15  Challenging Cases in Small Animal Orthopaedics
Penny Tisdall..
. 199
Chapter 16  Medical Diseases of Bones and Joints
John Angies and Bruce Smith......
.211
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc.No.363
 Chapter 17  Wound Management and Bandaging
Sarah Goldsmid ....
.. 223
 Chapter 18  Management of Osteoarthritis - Instead of Surgery or After Surgery
Rick Read....
231
Chapter 19 Management and Reconstruction of Severe Soft Tissue Lesions and Skin
Deficits of the Pelvic Limb
Geraldine Hunt....
... 247
Chapter 20 Hip Dysplasia: A Clinical Approach to Diagnosis
Mark Glyde...
253
 Chapter 21  Early Intervention for Hip Dysplasia
Anthony Black..
263
Chapter 22
 Obtaining Surgical Training in Australia: Review and Personal Comment
Bruce Smith..
.289
Chapter 23
3 Late Surgical Intervention for Hip Osteoarthritis
Femoral Head Excision and Total Hip Replacement
KennethJohnson.
297
Index
... 303
TableofContents
Chapter 1
Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stifle
David Lidbetter
THE CRUCIATES
Cranial Cruciate Gross Anatomy
The cranial and caudal cruciates are named for their respective
tibial insertion sites. The cranial cruciate originates from a fossa on
the caudal aspect of the medial side of the lateral femoral condyle.
Some of the fibres also attach to the intercondylar area in the
caudal lateral recess. The actual attachment site shape is semilunar
caudally and similar to an arrow head cranially. The attachment
site axis is vertical and the caudal semilunar region is parallel to
the caudal femoral condyle.
Anteriorcruciate
nterior
uciate
cruciate
Posterior cruciate
Insertion points of the cruciates
Arnoczky, S.P., and Marshall, J,L.: The cruciate ligal
Res., 38: 1807, 1977.
 The ligament courses distally, cranially and medially to its
insertion point on the tibia. The actual insertion is on the cranial
intercondyloid region of the tibia, and its shape resembles a
comma. A portion of the ligament's fibres insert on the cranial
lateral aspect of the medial intercondyloid tubercle. Because both
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
the cruciates are covered by synovium, they are classified as intra-
articular but extra-synovial.
Levelof
-Levelof
lateral
medial
epicondyle
epicondyle
Operative Anatomy
 Origin points of the cruciates
Arnoczky, S.P., and Marshall, J,L.: The cruciate ligaments of the canine stifle. Am. J. Vet. Res., 38: 1807, 1977.
Bands of the Cranial Cruciate Ligament
The cranial cruciate has two bands, the craniomedial band and the
 caudolateral band. The craniomedial originates in the craniodorsal
 aspect of the femoral attachment and extends to the craniomedial
 aspect of the tibial attachment.
The craniomedial bands remain taut in flexion and extension. The
caudolateral band contains the remainder of the bulk of fibres and
is taut in extension and loose in flexion.
Anderson, J: The Stifle. BSAVA Manual of Small Animal Arthrology, 1994.
2
Ch 7: Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stifle
ANTERIOR
IN FLEXIO
Cranial cruciate in extension and flexion
Arnoczky, S.P., and Marshall, J,L.: The cruciate ligaments of the canine stifle.
Am. J. Vet. Res., 38: 1807, 1977.
Caudal Cruciate Gross Anatomy
The caudal arises from the ventrolateral aspect of the medial
femoral condyle and extends caudodistally to the lateral edge of the
ligament is slightly longer and broader than the cranial cruciate. As
it passes distally, it spirals slightly inward.
section through condyle
medial
lateral
lateral
medial
cranial
caudal
cruciate
cruciate
cranial
caudal
cruciate
cruciate
patellar
ligament
Anderson, J: The Stifle. BSAVA Manual of Small Animal Arthro]
0gy,1994
Microscopic Cruciate Anatomy
The cruciates are made up of collagen in fibrils that range in size
from 20-250nm. Collagen fibrils form networks which interlace
and intern form subfascicular units which are surrounded by
endotenon. Three to 20 subfasciculi together form a fasciculus
surrounded by epitenon. These fascicles often spiral around the
long axis of the ligament or indeed may run from femur to tibial
attachment. A group of fascicles is surrounded by the paratenon
which is thicker than the epitenon.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
Ligament Bone Interface
Fibres of collagen from the ligament must somehow interdigitate
with bone, and to facilitate this dramatic change in anatomy and
biomechanics, there is a zone of fibrocartilage called the
transitional zone. This allows a gradual dissipation of forces and
stiffness, and prevents stress concentration at the attachment sites.
Blood Supply
Most of the blood supply to the cruciates does not come from the
 bone ligamentous junction. In people the direct attachment of
ligament to bone is free of vessels. Instead the blood supply enters
the ligament via the synovium ensheathing the ligament. Branches
of the genicular artery from both the medial and lateral stifle are
the predominant source. The terminal branch of the descending
genicular vessel attaches directly onto the femoral origin of the
caudal cruciate. This branch may be first seen when performing an
arthrotomy spanning from the infrapatellar fat pad to the caudal
cruciate.
The synovial membrane of the ligaments is the richest source of
vessels. The infrapatellar fat pad and caudal soft tissues also
s s n   s  n sss  
that penetrate the ligament transversely and anastomose with the
endoligamentous vessels.
The core of the midsection of the ligaments is not as well
vascularised as the core of the proximal and distal ligament.
Mechanoreceptors
Mechanoreceptors have been found in the canine cruciates in the
distal, mid and proximal ligament. There is debate whether more
receptors are located proximally or in the middle of the tendon.
These neurological inputs play a protective role. Both Ruffini and
Pacinian receptors have been identified by modified gold chloride
staining. The receptors are reported to be innervated by 5-10
micron diameter axons which penetrate from the peripheral
synovium that invests the ligament. The cranial cruciate of the dog
is capable of afferent input to the central nervous system and is a
very important biomechanical component of the stifle. Stimulation 
of afferent nerve fibres results in contraction of the caudal thigh
 muscles and relaxation of the quadriceps group.
Biomechanics
The cranial cruciate bulk is taut in extension and loose in flexion,
and the bulk of the caudal cruciate is loose in extension and taut in
flexion. During extension both craniomedial & caudolateral are
taut. During flexion only the craniomedial is taut.
4
Ch1:Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stifle
The cruciate ligaments are the primary restraint against cranial or
caudal movement. The cranial restrains cranial drawer or motion
and the caudal restrains caudal motion.
Cruciates wind around each other and are the primary restraint
against internal rotation during flexion.
During extension the cruciates unwind and the collaterals are the
primary restraint.
Because the entire cranial cruciate is taut in extension it is also the
major preventative against hyperextension injury.
During flexion the lateral collateral ligament relaxes. During
extension it becomes taut.
THE MENISCUS
 Meniscal injury accompanying cranial cruciate ligament rupture is
literature is between 10% and 70% of cases. In large breed dogs a
consensus of approximately 55% has been reached. This makes
meniscal pathology a major issue in cruciate reconstruction
surgery.
 The medial meniscus is the most commonly damaged and normally
requires surgical attention. Traditionally the lateral meniscus has
been documented as being injured in 0-2% of cases. (Note: Recent
arthroscopic evidence in dogs shows that fibrillation of the cranial
horn of the lateral meniscus occurs commonly however rarely
requires surgical attention.)
that the joint is examined by arthrotomy.
Failure to identify meniscal pathology is a common cause of
continued postoperative lameness.
 Complete examination of the menisci requires proper
 instrumentation and training.
Meniscal Mechanics and Function
The functions of the menisci are numerous and complex. They
include:
 1. Load transmission between the femur and tibia
2. Shock absorption
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
 3. Stabilising the stifle joint
4.
 Joint lubrication
 5. Prevention of Synovial impingement during weight bearing
Meniscal Anatomy
The mensci in the dog are biconcave C shaped discs of
fibrocartilage. They are open towards the axis of the bone.
The cross section of the meniscus is wedge shaped. The central
edge is thin whilst the abaxial edge is thick. In large breed dogs,
the edge may be as thick as 8mm. Meniscal shape corresponds to
the subjacent femoral condyles. The lateral meniscus is slightly
 thicker than its medial counterpart.
The menisci are held in place by six meniscal ligaments.
The lateral meniscus is attached to the tibia by the cranial and
caudal meniscotibial ligaments. In addition, the caudal horn of the
lateral meniscus extends dorsally to the femur via the
  ns    s s i 
medial femoral condyle.
 Meniscofemoral ligament of the lateral meniscus
The medial meniscus also is attached via the cranial and caudal
joins the cranial portions of the lateral and medial menisci
The medial meniscus is more firmly attached to the tibia and has a
fibrous attachment to the medial collateral ligament. It also has the
coronary ligaments which right round its periphery attach it to the
joint capsule. It is subsequently far less mobile in a cranial
direction than the lateral meniscus.
The blood supply to the meniscus arises from branches of the
medial and lateral genicular arteries. Branches from these initially
supply the stifle joint capsule thence onwards to the menisci.
6
Ch 1:Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stifle
Vessets penetrate the meniscus from the periphery and onty extend
15-25% of the width. The inner aspects of the meniscus are devoid
of vessels and must rety on diffusion of synovial fluid for nutrition.
Deepal
Arnoczky, S.P., and Marshall, J,L.: The cruciate ligaments of the canine stifle. Am. J. Vet. Res., 38: 1807, 1977.
The caudolateral portion of the lateral meniscus, immediately
adjacent to the popliteal tendon has no peripheral capsular
 attachment and is devoid of any penetrating vessels.
The cranial and caudal horn attachments of the medial and lateral
meniscus are covered by a layer of vascular synovial tissue. This is
continuous with the sheath around the cruciates.
Patellar ligament
Intermeniscal ligament-
Cranial tibial ligament
Lateral meniscus
of medial meniscus
Medial meniscus
Cranial tibial ligament
of lateral meniscus
Anterior cruciate
Fibular collateral
ligament
ligament-
Tibial collateral
ligament
Femoral ligament
of lateral meniscus
Caudal tibial ligament
of medial meniscus
Caudal tibial ligamentoflateralmeniscus
Posterior cruciate ligament
Arnoczky, S.P., and Marshall, J,L.: The cruciate ligaments of the canine stifle. Am. J. Vet. Res., 38: 1807, 1977.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
MENISCAL BIOMECHANICS
Hoop Mechanism
 The shock absorbing properties of the meniscus are characterized
by a hoop mechanism. The principle of this mechanism is that any
 point contact or force is redistributed around the meniscus like a
wave, and thus the force is evenly distributed.
Why are medial meniscal injuries more common than lateral?
After the cranial cruciate has been compromised, there is tibial
thrust. With this the tibia translates cranially and proximally. The
femur slides caudally and distally down the tibial plateau slope.
The lateral meniscus is far freer than the medial and is able to
move cranially and avoid crushing. The medial meniscus with its
peripheral attachments cannot move and is trapped and crushed by
thecaudalfemoraltranslation.
NORMAL
ANT.DRAWERPOSITION
Piermattei D, Flo, G: Handbook of small animal orthopaedics and fracture repair, 3rd
Edn.1997
Meniscal Healing
The type of meniscal injury can determine the presence or absence
of healing. If a meniscus is sectioned from the abaxial to axial
surface, a vascular channel is created and the defect will heal,
albeit with an inferior scar replacement. Injuries to the inner axial
portion of the meniscus heal poorly due to the lack of vascularity.
Diagnosis of Meniscal Injury
History and Signalment
Meniscal injuries in dogs accompany cranial cruciate rupture, and
should be suspected and ruled out in all such cases. Meniscal injury
is not limited to, but tends to occur in the larger breed dogs such as
Rottweilers, Labradors, Newfoundlands, Chows and Shepherds.
Ch 7: Anatomy ana Biomechanics of the Stifle
Because meniscal pathology is more common in chronic cases and
complete tears, the presence of disease for an extended time should
increase suspicion.
Orthopaedic Examination
Occasionally a meniscal click can be heard, however this is
uncommon. When performing range of motion examination of the
knee, in some cases, the click may be felt as the meniscus moves
back and forth. In a study from Melbourne University only 10% of
cases had a meniscal click present as part of the initial
examination. In all these cases, meniscal pathology was confirmed
via arthrotomy.
In general, it is very difficuit if not impossible to confirm or deny
meniscal disease before surgical exploration.
Meniscal injury should be suspected in any dog with a craniat
cruciate rupture.
Diagnostic Imaging
Radiology is not a sensitive tool for meniscal diagnosis.
Occasionally a chronically damaged medial meniscus will appear
mineralized. Positive contrast arthrography and CT are also not
 particularly useful. The gold standard for preoperative diagnosis in
 people is MRI and this has been used in some dogs as well. The
soft tissue images provided accurate diagnosis however cost tends
to be prohibitive.
Arthroscopy
o a  s s  s o si o
diagnosis. The technique is minimally invasive and allows a
complete and thorough view of both menisci. Addressing the fat
 pad is the major challenge in arthroscopic cases and requires 
specialist instrumentation including a shaver as well as
electrocautery ablater.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
Stifle Arthroscopy
145598
Normal Cruciate
 Ruptured Cranial Cruciate
Normal Oyster Curl or Meniscal Flounce
 Normal Medial Meniscus
70
Ch1:Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stife
Medial Meniscectomy
Thermal Ablater
Treatment of Meniscal Iniury
Types of Meniscal Injury
1.
Bucket Handle Tear
This is the most commonly reported pathology and occurs as a
longitudinal tear along the inner axial rim of the meniscus. It is 
so called, because as the torn meniscus flaps upwards it
 resembles the handle of a bucket.
Bucket Handle Tear
Caudal Tear
2. Caudal Tear
This is a form of peripheral detachment of the meniscus. It is
first visualized as a prominent meniscus extending forward of
 the femoral condyle. The caudal half becomes dislodged and
flaps forwards.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
77
 3.  Transverse or Longitudinal Tear
These tears emanate from the axial border and extend towards
the periphery.
A. Transverse B. Longitudinal C. Bucket Handle D. Caudal Tear
Arnoczky, S.P., and Marshall, J,L.: The cruciate ligaments of the canine stifle. Am. J. Vet.
Res., 38: 1807, 1977.
 Meniscal Inspection
Instrumentation is an essential part of the examination, and the
following is mandatory:
1. Hohmann Retractor
A thin Hohmann that will fit into the trochlear femoral sulcus
is essential. It is important to remember the hohmann is placed
with the blade downwards, to the back of the tibial plateau. It
sometimes needs to be fitted past the partial cruciate ligament.
When using a Hohmann remember its purpose is not to force
the femur and tibia apart but to put the tibia into drawer so the
 menisci can be visualized.
Do not use the Hohmanns that have a sharp point. Laceration
of the popliteal artery can occur.
2. Senn Retractor
The Senn retractor is a sharp pointed small fine rake retractor.
This is placed into the fat pad to retract it out of the way and
also to help pull the tibia into drawer. The fat pad almost never
needs removal as this is unnecessary for correct visualisation
and results in a haemarthrosis.
72
Ch1:Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stifle
The Senn can also be angled around the joint capsule to
improve visualisation.
3. Gelpi Retractor
 as s an q  a d i  a 
the other behind the extensor tendon. Gentle opening of the
 arms facilitates the visualisation required.
COLLATERAL LIGAMENTS
The medial collateral ligament extends between the medial
epicondyle of the femur and the medial border of the tibia
 approximately 2cm distal to the medial tibial condyle. There is a
bursa between ligament and bone over the femur. The total length
varies up to 4cm in medium sized dogs. It fuses with the joit
capsule and medial meniscus. Its aftachment is greater than the
laterals. The distal insertion is long and reasonably broad.
The lateral collateral ligament of the stifle, originates on the distal
lateral femoral epicondyle and inserts in the fibula head. It passes
 over the politeus tendon.
Evans and Christensen: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. WB Saunders 1979.
JOINT CAPSULE
The joint capsule is the largest in the body and forms three sacs, all
 communicating with the other. Two are between the femoral and
tibial condyles, and the third beneath the patella. The patella
component attaches to the edges of the parapatella fibrocartilages
and extends beyond these in all directions.
 Proximally the sac extends up to 1.5cm under the quadriceps
muscle. Laterally and medially the capsule extends about 2cm from
the femoral condyles.
Distally, the synovial and fibrous layers of the joint capsule are
 separated by the infrapatellar fat pad.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
73
The femorotibial sacs are less roomy than the femoropatellar. The
femoropatellar sac is probably the best site for arthrocentesis in
the dog. The needle on the syringe is directed proximallty just
subjacent to the patella. This not only is the area of greater fluid
but also does not suffer from fat impingement.
Both femorotibial sacs are subdivided by the menisci into
femoromeniscal and tibiomeniscal sub parts. The lateral
 to the extension between lateral fabella and femur.
CAUDAL
CRANIAL
Evans and Christensen: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. WB Saunders 1979.
The tendon of the long digital extensor has its origin in the
extensor fossa on the lateral cranial femoral condyle. It is
ensheathed by synovial membrane. The tendon of origin of the
 popliteus muscle is also lateral on the lateral caudal distal
 epicondyle of the femur and is never completely surrounded by
synovial membrane, but does have on its deep surface, a well
defined synovial pouch which acts as a bursa.
RADIOGRAPHY
 Because of the high incidence of bilateral disease especially in
 overweight larger dogs, even when only one stifle is the main focus
of investigation, it is recommended to radiograph both stifles.
Standard radiographic views are the lateral and dorsoventral or
ventrodorsal. The lateral is taken in the natural weight bearing
 position. There is debate regarding whether the VD or DV is the
best projection. It can be argued that the VD view gives better
imaging of the intercondylar notch, which may be of interest if an
intracapsular technique is being planned. Either way, avoid rotation
of the limb.
74
Ch1:Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stifle
Parameters to Examine
1. Soft tissue swelling
- in acute cruciate rupture, significant periarticular soft tissue
swelling will be seen in the fascial planes around the stifle.
- in chronic cases, the surrounding tissues may look slightly denser
due to fibrosis of the joint capsule.
2. Infrapatellar fat pad
the infrapatellar fat is a small triangular soft tissue opacity
immediately caudal to the straight patella tendon. On lateral
 projections it acts as a sensitive indicator of joint effusion because
the radiolucent region it normally occupies gets smaller and it
becomes flattened.
3. Joint mice
in chronic severe cases, intraarticular calcified bodies may be seen.
 Not all these fragments will be free in the joint although they may
     s  a sn 
(medial and lateral sesamoids of the gastrocnemius muscle) and
the popliteal sesamoid. They may be avulsed fragments of
articular bone, osteoc hondral components of a disintegrating joint,
or small synovial osteochondromas.
4. Patella Changes
 new bone formation, osteophytes and spurs commonly form on the
 distal or proximal pole of the patella as part of the degenerative
process in the stifle.
5. Femoral condyles
perhaps the first place for osteophytes, and new bone to form is the
condylar ridges. This may initially be pannus, a film like vascular
fibrinous attachments, but soon becomes firmly attached
 palisading new bone. It is a radiodense sclerotic radiographic
change, with an irregular margin to it.
6. Fabella
the fabella may also have changes such as sclerosis, spurring and
lipping from osteophytes that form.
7. Tibial plateau
Changes on the tibial plateau include sclerosis, new bone
formation, and osteophyte production. These changes typically
follow changes to the patella and femur and often signify more
advanced DJD.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
75
Changes associated with stifle pathology in cruciate disease
TIBIAL PLATEAU LEVELING OSTEOTOMY (TPLO)
Biomechanics
Multiple surgical techniques have been described for treatment of
cranial cruciate rupture in the canine stifle. The majority attempt to
 mimic the function of the previously intact cruciate, i.e. prevent
cranial tibial translation, limit tibial internal rotation, and 
hy perextension of the stifle.
 In 1993 the TPLO was introduced. The TPLO does not attempt to
restore passive constraint of the cranial cruciate, and cranial
 translation can still be elicited manually.
The TPLO is functionally stabilizing by decreasing cranial tibial
thrust and preventing cranial translation. Whilst most retrospective
studies on canine cruciate repair report good clinical results,
neither intraarticular nor extra-articular repairs have been shown
to:
 Consistently maintain long term stifle stability.
2.
Stop progression of OA.
3.
 Prevent secondary meniscal damage.
76
Ch1:Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stifle
TPLO Plate and Oscillating Saw during TPLO procedure
Extra-articular techniques rely on nonabsorbable suture materials
(imbrication techniques) or periarticular tissues (fibular head
 transposition) and the resultant secondary periarticular fibrosis to
provide joint stability over time. The tibia is fixed in external
rotation, and stifle motion is limited to rotation about a single
transverse axis.
 This has been shown to increase compression on joint surfaces,
which results in articular and meniscal injuries. Continued
suture, slippage, tightening of the knot all lead to continued
instability leading to meniscal damage and osteoarthritis.
Intraarticular techniques attempt to mimic orientation & function
of the cranial cruciate, allowing normal stifle range of motion.
They are unfortunately more susceptible to early failure than
extraarticular. Studies have shown the grafted tissue undergo early
avascular necrosis and sustain significant loss of structural and
material properties.
Graft revascularization and remodeling is slow, and max strength
does not exceed 30% of the normal canine cranial cruciate
strength, whilst in humans after surgery it reaches 130% .
Joint motion after severance of the cranial cruciate has been
studied using 3D kinematics. These studies reveal cranial tibial
translation occurs during the weight bearing phase of the stride
with only minimal during the swing phase. In 1978 Henderson
introduced the tibial compression mechanism (cranial tibial thrust)
and demonstrated two biomechanical forces between femur &
tibia:
Weight bearing
 Contracture of the gastrocnemius.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
77
 Forces generated by tibial compression are antagonistic to the
cranial cruciate. Slocum in 1983 developed this principle stating
the force generated by weight bearing and superimposed with
contraction of the quadriceps and gastrocnemius was countered by
the cranial cruciate.
When the cranial cruciate was deficient, the force was directed
down the slope of the tibial plateau. Cranial tibial thrust & caudal
movement of the femur ensues. Slocum used this concept to
develop a procedure to eliminate cranial tibial thrust. Initially this
was the Closing Tibial Wedge procedure. This procedure was not
 popular. The TPLO was developed in the early 1990s.
The TPLO involves making the tibia nearly perpendicular to the
tibial functional axis. The tibial plateau is rotated to around 5-7
degrees. At this new angle there is no cranial tibial translation
when the animal walks.
Slocum B, Devine T: Veterinary Clinics of North America. The Stifle, 1993.
Craniocaudal and Lateral Images of the TPLO
78
Ch 1:Anatomyand Biomechanics of the Stifle
Two papers have looked at the effects of TPLO on stifle stability
and cranial/caudal thrust:
1. Warzee, Dujardin, Arnoczky Vet Surg 2001.
 Severing the Cranial Cruciate results in cranial tibial
thrust.
 The TPLO eliminates cranial tibial thrust.
 It does this by inducing caudal tibial translation, i.e.
converts cranial tibial thrust to caudal tibial thrust. This
places increased strain on the caudal cruciate, which
 becomes a stabiliser.
 Tibial internal rotation also decreased.
Leveling the slope to zero is not necessary to provide
functional stability. A postoperative TPLO slope of 6.5
+/- 0.9 was sufficient to restore stability.
stifle flexes, lateral collateral flexes, allowing caudal
displacement femur. Medial stays taut, medial internal
rotation tibia.)
The procedure functionally stabilises the stifle
2. Reif, Hauptman Vet Surg 2002.
· In this study the cranial cruciate was sectioned. A TPLO
was performed and caudal thrust was measured.
 Transection of the cranial cruciate creates cranial tibial
thrust.
 Increasing the axial load on the femur causes a linear
increase in caudal thrust.
 The amount of caudal thrust is proportional to weight
bearing.
REFERENCES
1.
Arnoczky SP: Pathomechanics of cruciate ligament and meniscal injuries. Disease
 mechanisms in small animal surgery. Ed Bojrab MJ. Lea and Febiger, 1993.
2.
Arnoczky SP, Marshall JL: The cruciate ligaments of the canine stifle: an anatomical and
functional analysis. Am J Vet Res. 1977 Nov;38(11): 1807-14
Baird DK, Hathcock JT: Low-field magnetic resonance imaging of the canine stifle joint:
normal anatomy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 1998 Mar-Apr;39(2):87-97.
4.
Banfield CM, Morrison WB: Magnetic resonance arthrography of the canine stifle joint:
technique and applications in eleven military dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2000 May-
Jun;41(3):200-13.
5.
Carpenter DH, Cooper RC: Mini review of canine stifle joint anatomy.
Anat Histol Embryol. 2000 Dec;29(6):321-9.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
79
6.
Comerford EJ, Innes J: Investigation of the composition, turnover, and thermal properties of
ruptured cranial cruciate ligaments of dogs. Am J Vet Res. 2004 Aug;65(8):1136-41
/.
Evans HE, Christensen GC: Miller's anatomy of the dog. 2"" Edn. WB Saunders, 1979
8.
Fitch R, Montgomery R: The intercondylar fossa of the normal canine stifle an anatomic and
radiographic study. Vet Surg. 1995 Mar-Apr;24(2): 148-55
9.
Galloway R, Lester R: Histopathological evaluation of canine stifle joint synovial membrane
collected at the time of repair of cranial cruciate ligament rupture.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1995 Jul-Aug;31(4):289-94.
10.  Hoelzler M, Millis D: Results of arthroscopic versus open arthrotomy for surgical
Apr;33(2):146-53.
11.J
12.
 Johnson K, Francis D: Comparison of the effects of caudal pole hemi-meniscectomy and
complete medial meniscectomy in the canine stifle joint.
Am J Vet Res. 2004 Aug;65(8):1053-60.
13.
Payne J, Constantinescu G: Stifle joint anatomy and surgical approaches in the dog.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 1993 Jul;23(4):691-701.
14.  Piermattei D, Flo G: Handbook of small animal orthopaedics and fracture repair, Saunders.
3* Edn, 1997.
15.
Ralphs WC, Whitney W: Arthroscopic evaluation of menisci in dogs with cranial cruciate
ligament injuries: 100 cases (1999-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2002 Dec 1;221(11):1601-4
16.  Slocum B, Devine T: Veterinary Clinics of North America. The Stifle, Mosby, 1993.
17.
 s    s o   is s a  
J Small Anim Pract. 1978 Aug:19(8):451-62.
18.
  s    s     g
functional analysis. Am J Vet Res. 1981 Jul;42(7): 1133-7.
20
Ch1:Anatomy and Biomechanics of the Stiffe
Chapter 2
Stifle, Elbow and Other Joints -
How far can we go with Arthroscopic Intervention
Mark Glyde
Small animal arthroscopy was first reported in the late 1970s
though it was not until the early 1990s that arthroscopic surgery in
small animals began to be more commonly practiced.
Arthroscopy offers many potential advantages over standard open
surgical joint ex ploration. These include:
 enhanced visualisation and accuracy through magnification
●
 greater access for visualisation of joint structures
 greater sensitivity in detecting early, mild or discrete lesions.
 Evaluation of cartilage damage is greatly superior to
arthrotomy. Some cartilage changes such as fibrillation,
chondromalacia and eburnation can not be appreciated at
arthrotomy.
 Detection of cartilage changes on arthroscopy is far more
sensitive than can be achieved on radiography and can be
made at a much earlier stage in the disease process.
 Radiographs detect the secondary changes consequent to
cartilage damage such as subchondral bone sclerosis or
defects and osteophytes formation.
● a minimally invasive approach with benefits of 
decreased periarticular fibrosis and scarring. Arthroscopic
joint treatment may help to preserve, or at least not to
further reduce, the range of joint motion.
lowered levels of patient morbidity and earlier return to
function as a consequence.
Second-look arthroscopy allows a minimally invasive method of
monitoring disease progression or response to treatment with
minimal morbidity.
 Complications and iatrogenic damage from arthroscopy can occur
though are uncommon. The most commonly reported complication
is fluid extravasation which is self-limiting.
Disadvantages of arthroscopy are significant and include:
· greater capital and disposable equipment costs
 greater maintenance costs. Maintenance of the arthroscopy
Aoso ssns ou sndu sis e s da
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
27
Attention to detail and appropriate training of support staff is
key. Maintenance costs and replacement of equipment can be
costly and these costs should be factored in to the pricing of
the procedure.
· Sterilisation of arthroscopy equipment is not straightforward
and must be factored in to pricing of the procedure. Steam
autoclaving of hand instruments and light cables is possible
 however the arthroscope and camera are not suitable for
autoclaving. Ethylene oxide gas sterilization is ideal however
is expensive, very slow (4 hour cycle) and has significant
health and safety concerns. Cold chemical sterilisation with
aldehyde solutions is suitable for the arthroscope and camera.
 The camera can also be covered in a specially designed
camera sleeve.
a steep learning curve with considerable experience needed
0  training courses are necessary plus considerable cadaver
practice
 long setup times. Equipment set up and connection is time
consuming
●
 initially longer surgery times
The elbow joint is the easiest of the joints in the dog to examine
s r  rs     os
 The stifle and hock joints are significantly more challenging.
STIFLE JOINT
The stifle joint is the joint most commonly operated via standard
  ns  s  s  n
for stifle joint ex ploration and surgery are treatment of cranial
cruciate ligament rupture and associated possible meniscal injury,
correction of medial patella luxation (MPL) and fracture repair of
distal femoral physeal and metaphyseal fractures.
 Common indications for arthroscopic surgery of the canine stifle
cranial cruciate ligament with concurrent degenerative joint
disease), acute traumatic cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
meniscal injury (usually concurrent with cranial cruciate ligament
injury), osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) lesions of the femoral
condyle and septic arthritis.
22
Ch 2: Stiffe, Elbow and Other Joints
Medialfemoral
Lateral
condyle
femoral
condyle
Medial
meniscus
Lateral
meniscus
Tibial
condyle
Tibial
condyle
Left stifle joint. Normal caudal horn of medial
Left stifle joint. Normal caudal horn of lateral
meniscus
meniscus.
Cruciate disease is the most common indication for arthroscopic
examination of the stifle joint. Accurate evaluation of the menisci
 n  n   g sd n  s 
cruciate ligament such as in some partial cruciate ruptures. This is
not possible via open arthrotomy where inspection of the menisci 
requires can only be achieved by positioning the tibia in cranial
drawer. Assessment of the menisci, synovium and articular
cartilage surfaces in a fluid medium provides much greater
sensitivity and accuracy. Debridement of the cruciate remnants is
 possible as is treatment of meniscal injuries.
Lateral femoral
Popliteal
005
condyle
LFC
tendon
Lateral
meniscus
Left stifle joint. Abaxial edge of lateral meniscus and
 Left stifle joint. Macerated radial tears of the cranial horn
popliteal tendon. (LFC = lateral femoral condyle)
 of the lateral meni scus.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
23
Medial
Medial
Medial
femoral
femoral
meniscus
condyle
condyle
Medial
meniscus
Medial
Tibial
tibial
condyle
condyle
Right stifle joint. Bucket handle tear of caudal horn of 
 Right stifle joint. Bucket handle tear of caudal horn of
 medial meniscus folded cranially.
 medial meniscus displaced cranially.
ELBOW DISEASE
The elbow joint is the easiest of the canine joints to examine
arthroscopically. A medial arthroscopic portal provides excellent
visualization of the elbow joint, with the exception of the lateral
 compartment, and treatment access. There is no clear evidence that
   a h  o  s
outcomes than those managed via an open surgical approach. The
 main advantage of arthroscopy of the elbow joint is more accurate
 and sensitive visualisation of lesions and minimal morbidity.
Common indications for arthroscopic examination of the elbow
joint include:
fragmented medial coronoid process (FCP)
Visualisation and assessment of subtle cartilage lesions are
superior to open arthrotomy. Access is limited but
arthroscopic treatment of FCP lesions is relatively simple.
24
Ch 2: Stifle, Elbow ana Other Joints
humeral
trochlea
FCP
MCP
Right elbow. FCP = fragmented medial coronoid process at 
the probe tip. MCP = medial part of the coronoid process.
 osteochondritis disssecans (OCD) of the medial humeral
condyle. Concurrent FCP and also chondromalacia of the
 medial part of the coronoid process (*kissing lesions") may
occur concurrently with condylar OCD.
ununited anconeal process (UAP)
The diagnosis of UAP is readily made via standard flexed
lateral radiographs. Arthroscopic examination is not necessary
for diagnosis of UAP but is indicated in cases of UAP as
significant medial compartment disease commonly coexists.
UAP
UIna
Humeral
trochlea
Left elbow. UAP = ununited anconeal process free in olecranon
fossa. A full thickness cartilage lesion is visible in the adjacent
humeral trochlea.
●  contralateral atraumatic humeral condylar fracture
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
25
Assessment of the intact contralateral humeral condyle for
incomplete ossification (IOHC) in dogs with atraumatic
humeral condylar fracture is recommended given the
commonly bilateral nature of this disease.
LHC
Right elbow showing a
condylar fissure consistent 
with incomplete ossification
of the humeral condyle.MHC
MHC
= medial part of humeral
condyle. LHC = lateral part of
humeral condyle.
Condylar
fissure
 Plain radiography may be insensitive in identifying condylar
fissures. Computed tomographic (CT) examination of the
contralateral condyle is currently considered to be the “gold
standard for identifying condylar fissures. Arthroscopic
examination will identify condylar fissures though is more invasive
and time-consuming than CT. No studies comparing the sensitivity
of arthroscopy to CT for identifying condylar fissures has been
 published to date.
The use of arthroscopy to assist closed or limited open repair of
humeral condylar fractures has not been reported to the author's
knowledge though is very feasible and could be expected to
facilitate achievement of accurate anatomic alignment and decrease
 postoperative morbidity.
 investigation of poor response to conservative management of
elbow degenerative joint disease
Radiographic severity of elbow disease often does not
 correlate with apparent clinical severity. In older adult dogs
that respond poorly to conservative management of elbow
disease or those in which lameness significantly worsens
arthroscopic examination is indicated.
 synovial membrane biopsy
 management of septic arthritis
26
Ch2:Stifle，ElbowandOtherJoints
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Beale B. (2004) Stifle arthroscopy - the benefits and tricks to success. Proceedings, Advanced
canine arthroscopy, Liverpool, England. Oct 2004.
 2. Bubenik L. (2002) Evaluation of lameness associated with arthroscopy and arthrotomy of the
canine cubital joint. Veterinary Surgery 31: 23
3.  Van Ryssen B. et al (2004) FCP in old dogs. Proceedings, Advanced canine arthroscopy,
Liverpool, England. Oct 2004.
4.Whitney W.O. (2003) Arthroscopy of the stifle. In: Beale BS et al. Small Animal Arthroscopy.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
27
NOTES:
28
Ch 2: Stiffe, Elbow and Other Joints
Chapter 3
Osteoarthritis
Chris Little
OSTEOARTHRITIS IS A MAJOR MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDER.
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system are the second most
prevalent medical condition in the Australian population, and the
second leading cause of health care expenditure, directly costing
over $4.6 billion in 2002 (1). The most widespread
musculoskeletal disorders are related to joint disease, with 16.7%
 of the entire Australian population afflicted with some form of
arthritis. The total financial burden (indirect and direct costs but
excluding pain and suffering costs) has been estimated at $11.2
billion, or 1.4% of the GDP. Osteoarthritis (OA) is by far the most
common form of arthritis (48% of total arthritides) compared to
10% for rheumatoid arthritis (1). The socio-economic
consequences of OA in our society are considerable, and as the
 prevalence increases dramatically with age, the burden of this 
disease will continue to escalate as the demographic age of the
 population rises.
OA is also the most common joint disease of dogs. Post mortem
analysis revealed that 20% of cadaveric canine stifle joints have
 morphologic evidence of OA (2). Data gathered in market research
in the USA indicates that:
35% of all households have a dog with about 60x10° dogs in
total
 8.4 to 15% of all dogs clinically have some arthritic condition
the incidence of OA in dogs increases with age
 9 million dogs in the USA have some form of arthritis with 5
million of these dogs being considered “senior”
 28% of pet owners with older dogs said arthritis was a
problem their dog experienced
Osteoarthritis was the 7th most common ailment reported to
Veterinary Pet Insurance Corporation
 7% of dog owners had used prescription medicines to treat
arthritis
High risk breeds are: German shepherd, Roftweiler, Labrador
Retriever, Golden Retriever & Sheltie
The key clinical features of OA in all species include joint pain and
disability associated with varying degrees of swelling, deformity,
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
29
and decreased range of motion. This clinical syndrome is manifest
radiographically by joint space narrowing and extensive re-
modelling of subchondral bone with proliferation at the joint
margins (osteophytosis). In humans, the aetiology of OA is
multifactorial, and while ageing is the most strongly associated risk
factor, mechanical, hormonal and genetic factors all contribute to
varying degrees. OA emerges as a clinical syndrome when these
aetiological determinants result in sufficient joint damage to cause
impairment of function and the appearance of symptoms.
In OA, changes occur in all joint tissues including bones, menisci,
ligaments and synovium, however the defining pathological feature
is progressive degeneration of the articular cartilage. Academic
the cartilage or bone, however the majority of researchers in the
field would strongly favour the cartilage model. Most recently this
argument has been supported in studies using inhibitors or genetic
these will be discussed in detail later. Articular cartilage covers the
ends of bones in joints and enables almost frictionless articulation
to occur under the compressive deformation experienced during
ambulation. Articular cartilage has a very poor reparative capacity,
and it is the progressive breakdown and ultimate erosion of this
necessitating joint replacement surgery. At present no effective
therapeutic measures are available to halt cartilage destruction and
 OA disease progression or to stimulate repair of damaged cartilage.
It is only by gaining a detailed understanding of normal cartilage
structure and development and, in particular, the molecular and
cellular pathological processes involved in the initiation and
progression of cartilage breakdown in OA, that early diagnostic
biomarkers and more beneficial therapeutic targets can be defined.
ARTICULAR CARTILAGE STRUCTURE AND DESTRUCTION IN OA.
The biochemical composition of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of
cartilage imparts the compression resistance that is vital for normal
joint function. The composite type II/IX/XI collagen fibrillar
network provides tensile strength and is kept ex panded through
absorption of water by the sulphated glycosaminoglycan (GAG)
chains of the aggrecan molecules entrapped within it. Aggrecan,
 the predominant proteoglycan in cartilage, remains bound within
the tissue through its link protein stabilised interaction with
hyaluronan. Cartilage contains many other proteins some of which
have been well characterised and their structural and functional
roles elucidated (see Reviews (3-5)). The correct temporal and
OE
Ch 3: Osteoarthritis
spatial expression of this complex array of proteins/glycoproteins
and proteoglycans and the maintenance of architecturally precise
interacting networks are critical for cartilage structure and
function.
While OA predominantly involves functional loss of the cartilage
ECM, it is important to appreciate that the complex array of
morphological and biochemical changes that occur, are
 predominantly initiated and orchestrated by changes in the gene
 ex pression of the cartilage cells (chondrocytes) themselves (Fig. 1).
The abnormalities in the cartilage ECM
result from both altered synthesis and
Normal chondrocyte
degradation of constituent molecules and are
Initiating stimuli
central to the pathology of cartilage
breakdown in disease. One of the earliest
 Changes in gene expression
pathological features observed in OA is a
modulation of phenotype
loss of cartilage GAG, due to both altered
 synthesis and increased proteolysis of
Dysregulation of
Initiation of ECM
 aggrecan. Loss of the GAG-rich domains of 
ECM synthesis
Degradation
 aggrecan renders the cartilage less able to
resist compressive load and therefore
susceptible to mechanical damage. Following
 Decrease in aggrecan
resolution of an acute insult to cartilage, the
aggrecan content can be restored by the
resident chondrocytes and the cartilage
Destruction of collagen
returned to functional "normality". However, 
network
with disease progression the collagen fibrillar
network is degraded, further weakening the
Fig.1
Cartilage destruction
tissue. Extensive disruption of the collagen
fibrils is often considered the point of
irreversible cartilage damage as the normal architecture of the
tissue cannot be repaired.
 Recent studies have lead to some remarkable breakthroughs in our
understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms that
control cartilage aggrecan and collagen breakdown in disease.
 Comparative studies suggest that similar processes occur in most
species including the dog. These new findings will hopefully lead
to new therapies that specifically halt the destruction of cartilage in
 OA and thereby stop disease progression. The underlying
hypothesis is that common degradative pathways or events occur in
cartilage breakdown irrespective of the initiating “cause” of the
joint disease (e.g. trauma, autoimmune disease, infection etc).
These common "endpoint' events such as aggrecan and collagen
 proteolysis, are by definition excellent global targets in the future
 treatment of many joint diseases and in particular OA.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
37
UNDERSTANDING THE MOLECULAR MECHANISMS IN CARTILAGE
FAILUREIN OA
As the point of "irreversible” cartilage breakdown, degradation of
the collagen network in cartilage has been extensively studied to
identify the causative mechanisms. In rheumatoid arthritis the
invasive pannus of inflammatory cells and synovial fibroblasts can
directly contact, degrade and invade the cartilage surface
particularly at the joint margins. In OA however, where no such
pannus is observed and there is little synovitis, it is the
chondrocytes themselves that degrade the collagenous ECM. In
vitro studies using cartilage explant or chondrocyte cultures have
 s   o    
mediators (9-14) induce the synthesis of matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) by chondrocytes. Inhibitor studies have demonstrated that
it is predominantly MMP activity rather than other proteinase
classes that is responsible for proteolysis and destruction of the
cartilage collagen network (10, 15-18). Soluble MMPs are secreted
from chondrocytes as zymogens and require activation to exert
their proteolytic activity. While the exact mechanisms involved in
MMP activation are still the subject of intense study, this process is
a critical step in the initiation of “"irreversible” cartilage destruction
(14). It seems likely that MMP-13, and not the other collagenolytic
MMPs (MMP-1, -2, -9 or -14), is the critical enzyme in the
degradation of the collagen network in cartilage. Inhibition of
collagenase activity has been shown in animal models to abrogate
cartilage destruction and OA progression (19-21). To date
however, no MMP-13 specific inhibitors have been tested, and
 clinical trials in humans with more broad-spectrum MMP
inhibitors have resulted in marked side effects associated with joint
 and tendon fibrosis. Nevertheless, inhibition of cartilage 
collagenolysis offers great potential as a therapeutic in OA,
particularly if MMP-13 specific inhibitors and/or localised delivery
become possible. Detection and quantitation of specific
collagenase-generated catabolites of type II collagen in synovial
pu osouep se pnyesn Araa aaond osie Ke ns no pin
prognostic markers in OA in many species including the dog (22-
24).
It is evident from animal models and in vitro studies that there is a
sequential degradation of cartilage matrix molecules in response to
 catabolic stimuli. Aggrecan degradation always precedes
collagenolysis in vitro and recent evidence indicates that removal
 of aggrecan may actually be a prerequisite for efficient collagen
proteolysis to occur in cartilage (10, 12, 25-28). Inhibition of the
therefore an attractive therapeutic target. Inhibitor studies showed
32
Ch3:Osteoarthritis
 that pathological degradation of cartilage aggrecan was due to zinc
and calcium dependent metalloproteinses, and it was assumed for
 many years that one or more of the MMP's was responsible.
However, seminal studies in the early 1990's (29, 30) showed that
the majority of aggrecan lost from cartilage into the synovial fluid
had been cleaved at a single amino acid bond (between glutamic
acid 373 and alanine 374) in the interglobular domain that resulted
in loss of the entire GAG-binding region from cartilage. It also
became evident that none of the known MMPs cleaved aggrecan at
this site and therefore a number of groups throughout the world
began trying to isolate and identify the so called "aggrecanase"
enzyme(s) responsible for this cleavage. Antibodies that only
recognized the newly generated carboxy- and amino- termini of the
 aggrecanase cleaved aggrecan (*"neoepitope antibodies" to
..XXEGE and ..ARGXX) were developed to monitor enzyme
activity (31, 32). These antibodies were used to show that
o s n o  r i siso p
all species with all catabolic stimuli tested was due primarily to
aggrecanase activity (11, 12, 33, 34). In 1999 the workers at
DuPont Pharmaceuticals in the USA identified two aggrecanses
which were members of the recently discovered A Disintegrin And
Metalloproteinase with ThromboSpondin motifs (ADAMTS)
family of enzymes, namely ADAMTS-4 and ADAMTS-5 (35, 36).
Since then 19 ADAMTS have been identified, and despite
 evidence for some aggrecan degrading activity being demonstrated
for several members, ADAMTS-4 and -5 still appear to be the
 predominant physiologically relevant and most active
aggrecanases.
Development of selective and specific ADAMTS-4 & -5 inhibitors
with good pharmaco-dynamics is still in progress. However, recent
work with genetically modified mice has shown remarkable "proof
of principle” for the likely success of these ADAMTS inhibitors in
the treatment of arthritis (37-42). These studies have shown that in
mice:
→ inhibition of aggrecan interglobular domain proteolysis by
aggrecanases or MMPs does not result in any developmental
of growth abnormalities
lou 1nq) saseueoaiaae Aq sisAloano1d ueoaiaae Bunddois 
 MMPs) inhibits stimulated aggrecan release from cartilage in
vitro
→ inactivation of ADAMTS-5 alone (and not ADAMTS-1 or -
 4), can completely inhibit stimulated aggrecan release from 
cartilage in vitro
→ inactivation of ADAMTS-5 alone (and not ADAMTS-1 or -
4), inhibits aggrecan loss from cartilage in experimental
models of both inflammatory arthritis and osteoarthritis
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
33
→ inactivation of ADAMTS-5 alone (and not ADAMTS-1 or -
4), abrogates cartilage damage (fibrillation and erosion) in
experimental models of both inflammatory arthritis and OA
→> inhibition of aggrecan proteolysis by aggrecanases (but not
 MMPs) augments aggrecan accumulation in cartilage after
resolution of inflammatory arthritis.
These exciting new findings demonstrate that loss of aggrecan
plays a key role in development of cartilage damage in arthritis and
furthermore that inhibition of aggrecan breakdown by ADAMTS is
a viable target in the management of joint diseases including OA.
Whether ADAMTs-5 also proves to be the single predominant
cartilage aggrecan degrading enzyme in other species including the
 dog remains to be determined and will require the development of
specific inhibitors.
The above studies have shown how basic research into cellular and
molecular biology is likely to significantly improve the diagnosis
and treatment of OA. We have recently demonstrated that
ADAMTS and MMP activity play a similar role in canine cartilage
as they do in other species both in vitro and in vivo (34, 43).
Advancing our understanding of the molecular pathobiology of OA
in all species will enable novel specific and safe therapies to be
developed that may not only halt disease progression but may
ultimately reverse the pathological process.
REFERENCES
1.
Arthritis - the bottom line. The economic impact of arthritis in Australia. Access Economics
2005.
2.
Tirgari M, Vaughan LC. Arthritis of the canine stifle joint. Vet Rec 1975;96(18):394-9.
3.
Heinegard D, Oldberg A. Structure and biology of cartilage and bone matrix noncollagenous
macromolecules. FASEB 1989;3:2042-2051.
Roughley P. Articular cartilage and changes in arthritis: noncollagenous proteins and
 proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix of cartilage. Arthritis Res 2001;3:342-347.
5.
 Svensson L, Oldberg A, Heinegard D. Collagen binding proteins. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage
2001;9 (Suppl. A):S23-28.
6.
Kurz B, Lemke AK, Fay J, Pufe T, Grodzinsky AJ, Schunke M. Pathomechanisms of
cartilage destruction by mechanical injury. Ann Anat 2005;187(5-6):473-85.
Ch 3:Osteoarthritis
7.
 Lee JH, Fitzgerald JB, Dimicco MA, Grodzinsky AJ. Mechanical injury of cartilage explants
causes specific time-dependent changes in chondrocyte gene expression. Arthritis Rheum
2005;52(8):2386-95.
8.
Patwari P, Cook MN, DiMicco MA, Blake SM, James IE, Kumar S, et al. Proteoglycan
        s s  
interaction with ex0genous cytokines. Arthritis Rheum 2003;48(5):1292-301.
9.
Flannery CR, Litle CB, Caterson B, Hughes CE. Effects of culture conditions and exposure
tocatabolic stimulators (IL-1 and retinoic acid) on the expression of matrix
metalloproteinases  (MMPs) and disintegrin metalloproteinases (ADAMs) by articular
cartilage chondrocytes. Matrix Biol. 1999;18:225-237.
10.
Litfle C, Hughes C, Curtis C, Janusz M, Bohne R, Wang-Weigand S, et al. Matrix
11.
 Little CB, Flannery C, Hughes CE, Mort JS, Roughley PJ, Dent C, et al. Aggrecanase versus
matrix metalloproteinases in the interglobular domain catabolism of articular cartilage
aggrecan in vitro. Biochem. J 1999;344:61-68.
12. Litfle CB, Flannery CR, Hughes CE, Goodship A, Caterson B. Cytokine induced
metalloproteinase expression and activity does not correlate with focal susceptibility of
articular cartilage to degeneration. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2005; 13(2): 162-70.
13.上
Koshy P, Lundy C, Rowan A, Porter S, Edwards D, Hogan A, et al. The modulation of
matrix metalloproteinase and ADAM gene expression in human chondrocytes by interleukin-
1 and oncostatin M: a time-course study using real-time quantitative reverse transcription-
polymerase chain reaction. Arthritis Rheum 2002;46:961-967.
14.  Milner J, Elliott S, Cawston T. Activation of procollagenases is a key control point in
cartilage collagen degradation: interaction of serine and metalloproteinase pathways.
Arthritis Rheum 2001;44:2084-2096.
15.上
Billinghurst RC, Dahlberg L, Ionescu M, Reiner A, Bourne R, Rorabeck C, et al. Enhanced
cleavage of type Il collagen by collagenases in osteoarthritic articular cartilage. J Clin Invest
1997;99(7):1534-45.
16.E
 Billinghurst RC, Wu W, Ionescu M, Reiner A, Dahlberg L, Chen J, et al. Comparison of the
degradation of type II collagen and proteoglycan in nasal and articular cartilages induced by
interleukin-1 and the selective inhibition of type I collagen cleavage by collagenase.
Arthritis Rheum 2000;43(3):664-72.
17.
 Dahlberg L, Billinghurst RC, Manner P, Nelson F, Webb G, Ionescu M, et al. Selective
osteoarthritic cartilage and arrest with a synthetic inhibitor that spares collagenase 1 (matrix
metalloproteinase 1). Arthritis Rheum 2000;43(3):673-82.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey,Proc.No.363
35
18.  Wu W, Billinghurst RC, Pidoux I, Antoniou J, Zukor D, Tanzer M, et al. Sites of collagenase
  oo p    1 a po   a
metalloproteinase 13. Arthritis Rheum 2002;46(8): 2087-94.
19.
 Janusz MJ, Bendele AM, Brown KK, Taiwo YO, Hsieh L, Heitmeyer SA. Induction of
osteoarthritis in the rat by surgical tear of the meniscus: Inhibition of joint damage by a
matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2002;10(10): 785-91.
Janusz MJ, Hookfin EB, Heitmeyer SA, Woessner JF, Freemont AJ, Hoyland JA, et al.
Moderation   of  iodoacetate-induced   experimental  osteoarthritis  in  rats  by  matrix
metalloproteinase inhibitors. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2001;9(8):751-60.
21.
Sabatini M, Lesur C, Thomas M, Chomel A, Anract P, de Nanteuil G, et al. Effect of
inhi bition of matrix metalloproteinases on cartilage loss in vitro and in a guinea pig model of
osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2005;52(1):171-80.
22.
Chu Q, Lopez M, Hayashi K, Ionescu M, Billinghurst RC, Johnson KA, et al. Elevation of a
fluid following induction of joint  instability in the dog.  Osteoarthritis Cartilage
2002;10(8):662-9.
23.
Matyas JR, Atley L, Ionescu M, Eyre DR, Poole AR. Analysis of cartilage biomarkers in the
early phases of canine experimental osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50(2):543-52.
24.上
Konttinen YT, Ma J, Ruuttilal P, Hukkanen M, Santavirta S. Chondrocyte-mediated
collagenolysis  correlates with cartilage destruction grades in osteoarthritis.  Clin  Exp
Rheumatol 2005;23(1):19-26.
25.
Sztrolovics R, White R, Poole A, Mort J, Roughley P. Resistance of small leucine-rich repeat
proteoglycans fo proteolytic degradation during interleukin-1-stimulated cartilage cata bolism
Biochem J. 1999;339:571-577.
26.
Litfle C, Otterness I, Hughes C, Caterson B. Proteolysis of type IX collagen and loss of
biglycan,  decorin_ and  fibromodulin  in   progressive articular  cartilage  degradation.
Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 2002;10(Supp A):S11.
27.
        r s  o  
Trans. Orthop. Res. Soc. 2002;27:168.
                
cartilage collagen from proteolytic cleavage. J Biol Chem 2003;278:45539-45545.
29. Lohmander LS, Neame PJ, Sandy JD. The structure of aggrecan fragments in human
synovial fluid. Evidence that aggrecanase mediates cartilage degradation in inflammatory
joint disease, joint injury, and osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 1993;36:1214-1222.
98
Ch 3:Osteoarthritis
30.  Sandy JD, Flannery CR, Neame PJ, Lohmander LS. The structure of aggrecan fragments in
human synovial fluid. Evidence for the involvement in osteoarthritis of a novel proteinase
which cleaves the Glu 373-Ala 374 bond of the interglobular domain. J. Clin. Invest.
1992;89: 1512-1516.
31. Caterson B, Hughes CE, Roughley P, Mort JS. Anabolic and catabolic markers of
proteoglycan metabolism in osteoarthritis. Acta. Orthop. Scand. (Suppl 266) 1995;66:121-
124.
32.  Hughes CE, Caterson B, Fosang AJ, Roughley PJ, Mort JS. Monoclonal antibodies that
   s    n    
Biochem. J. 1995;305:799-804.
33.
Caterson B, Flannery CR, Hughes CE, Little CB. Mechanisms involved in cartilage
 proteoglycan catabolism. Matrix Biol. 2000;19:333-344.
34.
Innes JF, Little CB, Hughes CE, Caterson B. Products resulting from cleavage of the
interglobular domain of aggrecan in samples of synovial fluid collected from dogs with
early- and late-stage 0steoarthritis. Am J Vet Res 2005;66(10):1679-85.
35.
 Tortorella MD, Burn TC, Pratta MA, Abbaszade I, Hollis JM, Liu R, et al. Purification and
cloning of aggrecanase-l: A member of the ADAMTS family of proteins. Science
1999;284:1664-1666.
36.
Abbaszade I, Liu R, Yang F, Rosenfeld SA, Ross H, Link JR, et al. Cloning and
characterization of ADAMTSll, an aggrecanase from the ADAMTS family. J. Biol. Chem.
1999;274:23443-23450.
37.(
Glasson S, Askew R, Sheppard B, Carito B, Blanchet T, Ma H, et al. Characterization of and
osteoarthritis susceptibility in ADAMTS-4-knockout mice. Arthritis Rheum. 2004;50:2547-
2558.
38.
Glasson SS, Askew R, Sheppard B, Carito B, Blanchet T, Ma HL, et al. Deletion of active
 e         
2005;434(7033):644-8.
39.
   n     o       
aggrecanase site in the IGD. Trans. Orthop. Res. Soc. 2005;30:357.
40. Little CB, Meeker CT, Hembry RM, Sims NA, Lawlor KE, Golub SB, et al. Matrix
metalloproteinases are not essential for aggrecan turnover during normal skeletal growth and
development. Mol Cell Biol 2005;25(8):3388-99.
              
ADAMTS-1-Knockout mice do not exhibit abnormalities in aggrecan turnover in vitro or in
vivo. Arthritis Rheum 2005;52(5): 1461-72.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey,Proc.No.363
42.  Stanton H, Rogerson FM, East CJ, Golub SB, Lawlor KE, Meeker CT, et al. ADAMTS5 is
the major aggrecanase in mouse cartilage in vivo and in vitro. Nature 2005;434(7033):648-
52.
43.
Litfle C, Cramp J, Curtis C, Richardson D, Schoenherr B, Innes J, et al. Canine articular
cartilage degradation: The role of catabolic cytokines. Trans. Orthop. Res. Soc. 2003;28:699.
38
Ch3:Osteoarthritis
 Chapter 4
Feline Stifle Surgery
David Lidbetter
INTRODUCTION
 Stifle disease in the cat is seen with less frequency than in the dog.
Many of the problems seen are secondary to trauma or injuries.
Lameness is commonly seen and a thorough orthopaedic and
neurological examination must be undertaken. Patients are often
difficult to examine necessitating a patient approach and repeat
aftempts. Examination under sedation or anaesthesia may allow a
 more complete study
STIFLE ANATOMY
The anatomy of the stifle is similar to that of the dog, however the
contour and outline of both the tibia and femur is quite different.
The femur is straighter and the condylar caudal bow less
 pronounced than the dog. The tibial crest is lower in profile and
lacks the bend in the mediolateral plane that is present in the dog.
The cranial and caudal cruciate ligaments control cranial and
caudal movement as well as medial rotation. They are major
stabilisers in the cat's knee. The medial and lateral collateral
ligaments prevent valgus and varus instability respectively.
Medial and lateral menisci are present in similar arrangement as
the dog.
INSTRUMENTATION
Thorough surgical examination of the joint requires good exposure.
Like in the dog this is achieved by the use of specific
open up the distal stifle joint space. It is placed between the medial
 A fine small Hohmann retractor is placed blade facing downwards,
to the back of the joint. It is important to remember the Hohmann 
is being used to place the joint into cranial drawer and not to hinge
the joint open. A Senn retractor with sharp blades is used to retract
the infrapatellar fat pad as well as to assist in placing the tibia into
cranial drawer.
Stifle distractors are commercially available in large and small
d sn s ss a 'xa  sr, g sis
 under the intermeniscal ligament at the cranial extent of the tibia
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
39
and into the intercondylar notch which is non-articular. Both the
large and small distractors have a ratchet mechanism.
It is important to place the arms carefully to avoid iatrogenic
scratching of the trochlear sulcus.
Electrocautery is very useful to control spot bleeding and suction 
helps keep the field dry and the structures visible.
A number 11 surgical blade and number 15 are useful in addition
to the standard number 10 blade for fine controlled cutting within
the joint. Alternatively Beaver blades which are microsurgical
 blades can be used. They require a different handle.
GelpiRetractor
Hohmann Retractor
SURGICAL APPROACHES
A lateral or medial approach may be made to the cast stifle. The
most common is the lateral approach. A lateral parapatellar
incision is made form the tibial crest to the mid thigh region.
Underlying tissue consists of the biceps and fascia lata. An incision
in the aponeurosis of the biceps fascia is made. The joint capsule is
incised with a number 15 blade at the mid level of the joint. If the
arthrotomy is made more distally, it is more difficult to open the
joint, due to the fat pad. Sharp metzenbaum scissors or
electrocautery is used to open the joint capsule further. The
incision is carried proximally into the quadriceps muscle. A small
 branch of the caudal femoral artery may be encountered. Bleeding
is normally easy to control. Alternatively the incision is carried
further into the natural divide between the quadriceps and biceps.
Unfortunately with this approach it is more difficult to open the
40
Ch4:Feline Stifle Surgery
ex amination of the entire joint structure. The joint capsule is
 relatively thin compared to the canine patient.
 Parapatellar Approach
Incision
Arthrotomy
Exposure
STIFLE LUXATION
Stability and function of the stifle joint depends on the four
femorotibial ligaments: the cranial and caudal cruciates, and the
 medial and lateral collateral ligaments.
Injuries that stretch these ligaments are called sprains. First degree
sprains are minor and involve stretching and minimal tearing of the
ligaments. They usually heal with rest alone and carry a favourable
prognosis.
Second degree sprains have partial rupture and third degree sprains
have complete interruption or failure and require surgical
intervention.
Isolatedcollateral ligament injury does occur in cats but isvery
uncommon.
 Most cats who sustain major trauma to the stifle have varying
degrees of damage to the cruciates as well as the collateral
 p nx as pan a sn ar s
 or global knee syndrome
In people these injuries are very severe and 50% of people will
have an accompanying popliteal vascular crush injury which can
 jeopardize the viability of the leg.
Presentation and examination
Traumatic stifle luxation tends to occur in mature animals and they
 present with a non-weight bearing lameness with the affected limb
in a characteristic position. Often the cats are quite painful and the
  d  sso   i si  jo a
ss a o e  q  s rou 
and thickened. Most cats have had a recent episode of trauma such
as being hit by a car or a dog attack. It is worth remembering that
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
47
 animals may have concurrent injuries, especially thoracic and
neurological.
There is marked stifle effusion present. Cranial and often caudal
drawer may be present. Because animals are so painful it is
worthwhile anaesthetizing them to perform stress radiographs and
stress palpation. Place lateral pressure to put the stifle in varus and
medial pressure to place the stifle in valgus.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is made based on orthopaedic examination and the
radiological findings. Plain lateral and craniocaudal views are the
minimum required. Other oblique views may be useful if a fracture
is suspected. Stress films using tape or a metal probe to document
valgus or varus is essential. In some cats the knee will be in such
drawer that this can be appreciated on radiographs. CT imaging is
useful in this setting as well. Radiographs can also confirm
 whether concurrent fractures are present and the degree of
 osteoarthritis that is present.
Stifle Luxation
Surgical Repair
It can be difficult preoperatively to assess the degree of 
ligamentous disruption and it is thus essential to examine the stifle
meticulously operatively. A thorough examination of the intra-
articular structures concentrating on the menisci and cruciates is
essential. Check the extensor tendon which also has been reported
to be torn on occasion. Closed reduction and external coaptation is
not recommended and results in poor functional outcomes.
Meniscal Examination
Medial meniscal injury is common after global disruption of the
stifle, and in all cases a high index of suspicion is need.
Transarticular Pinning
 In these cases, the best management is often the simplest. A
 transarticular pin is placed across the joint, with the stifle reduced
42
Ch 4: Feline Stiffe Surgery
and held in a normal weight bearing stance. The pin is placed from
 distal to proximal and an approach to the stifle is always made. The
 pin is left in for approximately 6 weeks.
The cat is placed in a modified Robert Jones bandage for
approximately 4 weeks and the pin is removed. Complications
 include pin migration and joint stiffness.
Other alternatives for reconstruction of the cruciates and
prefer the simple transarticular pin method.
Transarticular Pinning of the stifle for Luxation 
Cranial Cruciate Repair in Stifle Luxation
Before addressing the stabilization of the cranial cruciate ligament
it is very important to reduce the stifle and to ablate the position of
 drawer. If the stifle is stabilised in drawer, the outcome will not be
satisfactory. The tibia is forcibly reduced and pushed caudally
 Sometimes the medial meniscus will prevent reduction and may
need meniscectomy.
In most cases a DeAngelis or fabella to tibial crest suture is
advisable.
Leader line in a figure of 8 pattern is placed similar to a regular
cruciate repair.
Collateral Ligament Repair in Stifle Luxation
The medial collateral ligament is exposed by caudal reflection of
the caudal sartorius muscle. The lateral collateral ligament is
exposed by caudal reflection of the biceps and fascia lata. Examine
the ligaments under stress including valgus and varus.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
43
Grossly intact ligaments can have substantial underlying structural
 damage and not have load carrying ability.
panns are suai uot pue paequ are suaui paans
I prefer the locking loop suture. Monofilament non-absorbable
suture such as Prolene is recommended. The blood supply to the
collateral ligaments is from the surrounding fibrovascular tissue. It
is important not to strangle the ligamentous tissue which can
compromise the blood supply.
The collateral ligaments should always be sutured with the joint in
extension, which prevents iatrogenic shortening of the ligament.
Damage to the joint capsule is repaired concurrently.
Avulsed ligaments are repaired similarly and the avulsed portions
are sutured to the anatomic origin and insertion. The ligament must
be replaced to the anatomic region or it will be placed under
 excessive force resulting in rupture.
The torn ligament is isolated and debrided and secured by either
non-absorbable sutures or a plastic spiked washer and bone screw.
Successful collateral injury repair requires at least 3-4 weeks of
protection for healing to occur. The placement of bone screws,
 metal washers and figure of 8 synthetic suture prevents joint laxity
and enables successful healing of the collateral ligaments. It is
critical the screw placement mimics the origin and insertion of the
anatomic ligaments. For the lateral collateral ligament a screw is
placed in the distal femoral origin of the ligament and a hole is
drilled across the fibular head for the suture to be placed through.
In many case leader line will be an excellent prosthesis and is
preferred over wire or mersilene.
Fossum, T: Textbook of small animal surgery. Mosby, 1999.
Ch4:FelineStifleSurgery
CRANIAL CRUCIATE DISEASE
Aetiology and Pathogenesis
 s  s   sn ni  
in dogs or humans. They may be seen in isolation or may occur
with multiple injuries to the stifle.
Whitst in dogs the disease is characterized by degenerative
changes and gradual structural loss of ligament, in cats most
ruptures are thought to be traumatic. The age bracket that cats
 present also tends to be wider than in dogs, where middle aged
animals are over-represented.
Diagnosis
Cats initially present with hindlimb lameness. Most cats are weight
bearing with the occasional cat not using the leg at all. Atrophy
even in chronic cases is not as dramatic as in the canine. Similarly
medial buttress is often not detectable.
Stifle joint effusion is frequently present, and animals are painful
on examination and range of motion.
Cranial drawer should be tested in flexion and extension. Most of
the cases will be complete tears, and drawer can be readily found.
Partial tears have been reported and are much rarer.
Tibial thrust can be assessed at the same time as drawer and is
easily found. It is important to assess for any valgus or varus
caudal cruciate can be assessed by checking caudal drawer.
Treatment
Treatment for isolated cranial cruciate injury in the cat has been
traditionally conservative, at least to start with. Cats are given
restricted activity and weight loss is encouraged if they are
overweight. A period of 4-6 weeks is recommended. In most
instances, the cats have continued cranial drawer. Cats also get
 degenerative joint disease in their stifle.
Surgery
 If after 4-6 weeks the cat is still lame, surgical intervention is
recommended. A lateral fabella to tibial crest (DeAngelis) suture is
the recommended form of stabilisation. A lateral approach to the
joint is made. The remnants of the cruciate are debrided and the
caudal cruciate integrity inspected.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
45
The medial and lateral meniscus can be visualized relatively easily
in the cat, and if damage is present, a partial or complete
 meniscectomy can be performed.
Feline Menisci
The joint should be thoroughly flushed and suctioned and the joint
can be closed. A monofilament absorbable suture in the 3/0-2/0
range can be used. A continuous full thickness pattern or 
interrupted full thickness pattern can be used.
Next, dissection is gently continued in a plane below the biceps in
order to expose the lateral fabella.
Keep in mind the location of the common peroneat nerve, a branch
of the sciatic,which runs caudal to thefabella, deep to the biceps.
A hardened semilunar needle with suture attached is placed
 proximal to distal around the fabella staying as close to the
 periosteum as possible. The hold of this suture is then tested by
approximating the suture to the tissues and tensioning.
J Needle Placement Proximal to Distal around the Lateral Fabella
Placement of the lateral fabella suture to tibial crest
46
Ch4:FelineStifleSurgery
The cranial tibial muscle is partially lifted from the tibial crest with
a periosteal elevator and a hole larger than the diameter of the
needle and threaded suture is placed into the tibial crest with a pin
and Jacobs chuck. The suture is placed from lateral to medial under
the straight patella tendon and then through the tibial hole. In order
to avoid suture in the joint, the needle is grazed along the proximal
tibial plateau.
Location of the tibial tun nel
The leg is placed in a relaxed flexed weight bearing position and
gently internally rotated by approximately 5 degrees before the
sutures are tightly tied. The sutures should not strangle the
underlying tissue.
To gain a secure knot, a half hitch with numerous surgical knots
 placed on it may be used, or the tip of micro haemostats may be
 used to secure the first throw. The leg is then tested for cranial
drawer.
The fascia lata is imbricated by performing “vest over pants"
mattress sutures, or alternatively a strip of fascia approximately 1
cm wide is cut out along the caudal edge of the fascia and a
continuous suture pattern is used to close the deficit. The soft
tissues are closed in sequential layers to obliterated dead space.
 Postoperatively the joint is iced for 10 minutes before a modified
 Robert Jones bandage is placed.
Leader line has the best cycling characteristics and is placed in a
figure of eight pattern. The size most frequently used is 20-50lb.
The leader line can be knotted or crimps may be used.
Crimps are low profile tubes, which can be crushed to hold the
suture in place.Studies have shown they have superior holding
ability and arelesslikety toloosenthanknots.Theyhelpavoid
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
47
seroma formation. Another advantage is that post operative
radiographs can document the position of the crimps. If at a later
 date the cat is not progressing as expected, or there is excessive
drawer, the stifle can be re-radiographed and the position of the
crimp confirmed.
Crimp placement and Crimp Crushing with lrons
Results following DeAngelis surgery in cats are generally very
good. Most cats begin using their leg well within 4 weeks and long
term have excellent function.
PATELLA LUXATION
Both congenital and traumatic patella luxation can be seen in the
cat. Abyssinians and Devon Rex cats have an increased incidence
of congenital patella luxation. Most of the cases in cats are thought
to be traumatic. Similar to the case in dogs, medial patella luxation
in cats is the most common. They often have accompanying tearing
 of the lateral retinaculum. Lateral patella luxation is typically
secondary to trauma and may be accompanied by concurrent
trauma to the rest of the stifle.
Cats present with intermittent low grade lameness. The patella is
medially. Very occasionally, the patella will be persistently luxated
ss a sas aaoi a o pdai aq o spu p
for dogs can also be loosely used for cats.
48
Ch4:Feline Stifle Surgery
Craniocaudal Radiograph
Grading or Scoring the Degree of Luxation
A system of classifying the degree of luxation and conformational
abnormalities was initially described by Putnam and was adapted
by Singleton for dogs. This has subsequently been called the
Singleton System.
Grade 1: The patella can be manually luxated however returns to a
normal position when released. There is intermittent luxation and
occasional lameness. There is minimal deviation of the tibial
tubercle.
Grade 2: Patella luxates with stifle flexion or on manual palpation
and remains luxated until stifle is extended or manually reduced.
This grade is possibly the most frequently seen. Lameness is
usually mild, however enough for clients to seek treatment. The
patella will luxate easily when the foot is internally rotated. The
tibial tuberosity will be medially rotated up to 30 degrees. The
hock may be slightly abducted with toes pointing medially. The
 trochlea groove may be shallow.
Grade 3: The patella is permanently luxated. The patella can be
manually replaced, however will spontaneously reluxate once
manual pressure has been removed. There is deviation of the tibial
crest and torsion of the tibia between 30-60 degrees. The trochlea
 is very shallow or flattened.
Grade 4: The patella is permanently luxated and cannot be
manually replaced. This is the most severe form of the disease.
crest and tibia are deviated between 60 and 90 degrees. The stifles
are frequently flexed and the animal may be non-weight bearing
lame. There may be hypoplasia and wear of the medial condyle and
medial trochlear ridge. Muscle contracture and atrophy are more
severe.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
49
Examination of the animal begins with a good general exam,
orthopaedic exam and neurological examination. The animal can
dorsal recumbency. It is useful to examine the stifle and hock in
varying degrees of flexion and extension and to try and get some
idea of the amount of tibial medialisation and varus in the knee.
 Some animals may have clinical signs of patella luxation, yet be
difficult to manually luxate. Tips to improve confirming the
disease include internally rotating the tibia, and attempting to
luxate the patella in varying degrees of flexion and more
particularly extension.
In some small breeds in particular, it is possible to feel the depth of
the troc hlear groove percutaneously.
Radiographic Signs
All cats with suspected or confirmed patella luxation should have
lateral and craniocaudal views of the stifle taken radiographically.
This is to help define the disease, assess the amount of
 degenerative joint disease, and to make sure no other underlying
d on ro u ssa osie are sdeoer asad si ood
the surgical procedure for depth of the trochlear groove, and size of
 the tibial tuberosity.
Treatment Options
1. Lateral Arthrotomy
Cats with medial patella luxation generally should have an
arthrotomy in order to inspect the cruciates, assess femoral
trochlear depth and if possible to inspect the caudal articular
surface of the patella. The arthrotomy allows the completion of a
sulcoplasty when desired and facilitates the tibial tuberosity
transposition if necessary.
present, the lateral joint capsule in medial patella cases can be
trimmed to exert a lateral stabilising force on the patella.
50
Ch4:Feline Stifle Surgery
Closure of the arthrotomy must be meticulous, because after
correction of the MLP there may still be a tendency for the patella
to luxate medially. This could cause tearing of the arthrotomy
closure. The use of slightly larger suture sizes is recommended e.g.
3/0 or 2/0 in cats. Synthetic non-absorbable sutures such as Prolene
 or long lasting absorbables such as PDS or Maxon are
recommended.
2.Medial Desmotomy
Medial desmotomy involves the full thickness incision through
retinaculum and in most cases medial joint capsule. The technique
is used to facilitate the reduction of a chronically luxated patella
back into the sulcus. In many cases, the corrective patella
 procedure cannot be achieved without the desmotomy.
In most cases, the desmotomy is not sutured, but left open. The
subcutaneous fascia tissues cover the desmotomy at completion of
the procedure. Leakage of joint fluid does not appear to cause the
 animal complications. This is most likely because the initial
incision is lateral and the desmotomy medial.
3.Wedge Recession Sulcoplasty
An extremely common underlying cause of patella luxation is
underdevelopment of the trochlear sulcus depth. If the patella is
luxated in congenital cases, the immature animal will not have the
pressure exerted from the patella onto the sulcus. This leads to a
shallow groove.
 In the wedge recession technique an Exacto hobby saw or
reciprocating fine saw blade is used to make a wedge in the sulcus.
The sulcus length should span the contact surface of the groove
from distal to proximal. The blade is placed just medial to the
lateral condyle and lateral to the medial condyle. It is important to
 the hyaline cartilage.
A large wedge is removed and the underlying cancellous bed
deepened via a number of techniques. The most commonly
employed technique is to make a third cut with the saw blade,
usually from the opposite side to the side of luxation. Alternatively
a rasp may be used to deepen the bed.
Once the depth has been achieved the wedge is replaced. In general
sd m d a yo o a s s  si aa 
the wedge in place, and friction helps maintain it.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
57
ARTILAG
 Slocum.B, Slocum,T: Veterinary Clinics of North America. The Stifle. 1993.
Permattei D, Flo, G: Handbook of small animal orthopaedics and fracture repair, 3" Edn.1997
Operative image of wedge recession
4.BlockRecessionSulcoplasty
The block recession is a newer technique, loosely based on the
 adapted to cats if necessary. In this procedure, two parallel cuts are
made in the sulcus instead of the diverging sloped wedge cuts.
 Once the cuts are made, an osteotome is used with a mallet to make
a perpendicular osteotomy. The advantages of the block recession 
 are a longer surface of sulcus cartilage can be removed and
recession in the proximal sulcus seems to be better. This may
 prevent reluxation proximally which is seen in a small number of 
cases.
There are however perhaps more complications with this method
 and precise instrumentation is required. It is possible to create a
fracture of the sulcus osteochondral surface mid way through the
block.
Operati ve image of block recession
52
Ch4:FelineStifleSurgery
5.Abrasion Trochleoplasty
 The abrasion technique was the first sulcoplasty technique
 developed and again aims to deepen the trochlear groove to help
 keep the patella in place. In this technique no attempt is made to
 preserve the existing articular cartilage.
 Rongeurs are used to scrape and debride the sulcus to an adequate
depth. The loss of hyaline cartilage is replaced by a bed of inferior
fibrocartilage.
The procedure has essentially been abandoned and is not
recommended. The animal is left with a deepened groove however
osteoarthritis results and lameness following this procedure can be
severe.
Piermattei D, Flo, G: Handbook of small animal orthopaedics and fracture repair, 3rd
Edn.1997
6.  Tibial Tuberosity Transposition
One of the most important procedures in stabilising a luxated
 patella in dogs is to address the underlying medialisation of the
tibial tuberosity. One of the most common causes of failure
following patella surgery is the inability to straighten the patella
ligament and tibial tuberosity.
In cats the procedure is not always necessary, however if there is
medialisation the tibial crest it is mandatory.
A range of instruments can be used to for the osteotomy of the
tibial tuberosity from osteotome and mallet to bone cutters and
reciprocating saws. In many instances it is wise to leave the distal
tuberosity periosteum intact, and this will act as a tension band in
 conjunction with the K wires used to stabilise the fragment.
After the osteotomy of the tibial tuberosity, it is relocated laterally
in medial luxating cases and fixed to the tibia. The underlying bed
 can be freshened with a rasp.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
53
 In cats, the tuberosity is stabilised to the new tibial location with
fine K-wires alone.
Tibial tuberosity transposition 
7.Fabella to Patella Tendon Suture
 In order to help prevent the patella from reluxating after the
procedure a suture may be passed around the fabella and in a figure
of 8 through the patella tendon similar to a DeAngelis suture to act
 as an anti-rotational stabiliser. Most times Nylon, Prolene or PDS
is used, and the suture should not be too tight. It is to maintain
 position not to create tension which could create a lateralizing
force.
The suture is not always necessary and should not be used alone
but in conjunction with the other procedures.
FASCIALATA
_ATERALFABELL
FATELAR
Piermattei D, Flo, G: Handbook of small animal orthopaedics and fracture repair, 3rd
Edn.1997
Fascial Imbrication
This simple technique uses a suture pattern like the vest over pants
to tighten the fascia tissues on the lateral side of the joint in order
to prevent reluxation. It also provides impetus for fibroses at a later
 date which can help tighten the lateral side and provide long term
security.
54
Ch4:Feline Stifle Surgery
9.Patellectomy
In cases where the patella will not maintain a position in the sulcus,
even after the traditional methods have been used, patellectomy is
a viable alternative. Minimal research has been done to look at the
long term effects, so the prognosis may be guarded, but some
animals seem to respond well to the procedure.
DISTAL FEMORAL FRACTURES
Goals of Treatment
1. Rigid anatomical fracture reduction and fixation when possible.
 2. If articular, anatomical reduction of the joint surface and rigid
fixation.
 3. If comminuted, either reduce and stabilise or buttress the
metaphyseal region.
4. Restore normal axial alignment and length.
 5. Early controlled motion
Immature Cats
 Distal femoral fractures in young cats typically are relatively
straight forward to manage due to the simple nature of the fracture
and the animal's innate potential to heal rapidly. The fractures
normally occur through the weak zone of hypertrophy in the
physis, and the surface of the fracture often interdigitates in a W
shape giving the repair some inherent stability
The mainstay of distal femoral fractures in immature cats is cross
K wiring. In cats the availability of bone stock may be so small,
that it precludes the use of other implants. It is essential that
contact between the fracture fragments can be achieved. A lateral
approach is made to the distal femur and the caudally displaced
fracture reduced and maintained with reduction forceps. Care is
 taken to avoid crushing the bone in young adult animals. Fine plain
K wires are placed in cross fashion either from the medial and
lateral sides, or both from the lateral side. The pins may be placed
 distal to proximal, or proximal to distal depending on personal
 preference.
Adult Cats
 In adult cats distal femoral fractures can present substantial
challenges because of the unique anatomy of the distal femur and
the fact the fractures are often more comminuted and unstable
 These fractures are difficult to manage because of the presence of
large moments and forces acting on a fracture with a short segment
 of bone distally. Distal femoral fractures are located near an area of
high motion due to the presence of the knee joint and have a small
distal target for implant placement which is eccentrically placed to
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
55
the column of the bone. In adult animals, biobuttress formation is
slow, so there exists a need for maximum stability from the implant
used to repair the fracture, which is difficult due to the small
cannot be recommended as a reliable means of fracture
stabilisation of supracondylar femoral fractures in adults.
A range of plates are available to be used in the distal femur.
Dynamic compression plates are a good option, however they do
not fit to the caudal contour of the distal femur well.
 Reconstruction plates can be moulded caudally however are
weaker.
Cats tolerate external fixators extremely well, and transarticular
fixators can also be used.
Stifle Fractures
Transarticular Stifle Acrylice ESF
PATELLA FRACTURES
 Patella fractures are uncommon in cats, and usually follow trauma
such as a fall or being hit by a car. The most common fracture type
is the transverse slab fracture followed by comminuted and
longitudinal patterns. Occasionally the patella tendon will be
partially avulsed or traumatized at the same time.
must be taken into account when managing the case.
 Conservative management with bandaging and rest tends to give
poor results, because of the constant distraction. Cats develop
degenerative joint disease and have persistent lameness.
56
Ch4:Feline Stifle Surgery
Open reduction and internal fixation give reproducibly good
results. Good quality craniocaudal and lateral radiographs are
needed to determine the fracture type and to plan the repair.
A lateral parapatellar approach is made and the articular surface of
the patella is visualized. A single fine K wire is placed in
retrograde fashion through the proximal fragment. The patella
fracture is reduced and held in place with fine point to point
reduction forceps. The K wire is then normograded from proximal
to distal fragment. Sometimes the K wire must be predrilled with a
1. 1mm drill bit due to the density of patella bone.
Because usually only one K wire can be paced, rotation can be a
ends of the K wire.
REFERENCES
1.
Bruce WJ: Stifle joint luxation in the cat: treatment using transarticular external skeletal
fixation. J Small Anim Pract. 1999 Oct;40(10):482-8.
2.
stabilization in dogs and cats: 14 cases (1999-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2005 Aug
15;227(4):586-91.
3.
Laing EJ: Collateral ligament injury and stifle luxation.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 1993 Jul;23(4):845-53.
4.
McLaughlan RH: Surgical diseases of the feline stifle joint.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2002 Jul;32(4):963-82.
5.
Smith G, Langenbach A: Evaluation of the association between medial patellar luxation and
hip dysplasia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1999 Jul 1;215(1):40-5.
6.
poou g asn p sio pu sop 6s1 ui saoy oy rpuosdns :o ts
7.
Umphlet RC: Feline stifle disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 1993
Jul;23(4):897-913
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
57
NOTES:
Ch4:Feline Stifle Surgery
Chapter 5
Patella Luxation -
Has Anything Changed in the Last 20 Years?
Mark Glyde
Patellar luxation is one of the more common causes of lameness in
the dog. Surgical correction of patellar luxation is the second most
  r s s  d o
Complications following surgical correction of patellar luxation are
not uncommon. Reluxation is the most commonly reported
  s i  sa n  
The main reason for recurrence is due to surgical decision-making
available surgical corrective procedures. That is a failure on the
part of the surgeon to identify the abnormalities present in a
Assaou sanpaoid a uad oi an no / pe aso renored
to resolve those abnormalities.
No objective guidelines currently assist to aid surgical decision
making in MPL. The aim of this paper is to offer a guide to
surgical decision-making in medial patellar luxation (MPL) and to
 outline the appropriate surgical techniques.
BACKGROUND
 Patellar luxation may be developmental or traumatic, medial or
lateral. Patellar luxation in the dog is most commonly due to a
developmental or "congenital" musculoskeletal abnormality.
Traumatic patella luxation is less common than the developmental
form and generally occurs without underlying skeletal abnormality
and as such is more easily corrected.
MPL is much more common than lateral luxation. Medial luxation
is most commonly seen in small and toy dog breeds however also
occurs in large breed dogs, notably Labrador Retrievers, Akitas
and Alaskan Malamutes Lateral luxation tends to occur
a n m sp op  p i ui A
("knock-knee") conformation. Bilateral MPL has been estimated to
occur in approximately 20 - 50% of cases.
Concurrent cruciate disease has been reported in up to 20% of
middle-aged to older dogs with chronic medial patellar luxation.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
59
ANATOMY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 The patella is a sesamoid in the tendon of insertion of the
quadriceps muscle group. The patella acts as a lever arm,
 increasing the mechanical advantage of the quadriceps muscle
group by as much as 20%. It also serves to direct the pull of the
quadriceps by its location within the trochlea groove and provides
cranial and rotary stability to the stifle joint.
 The quadriceps primarily arises from the proximal femur via the
three vastus muscles (lateralis, intermedius and medialis). The
fourth belly of the quadriceps, the rectus femoris, has its origin
more medially and proximally on the ilium. Each of the four
muscle bellies inserts on the patella. The vastus lateralis and vastus
 medialis muscles also attach to the lateral and medial parapatellar
fibrocartilages. These lateral and medial fibrocartilage projections
from the patella increase patellar stability within the trochlea
 groove and increase stifle joint stability.
The quadriceps, patella, straight patella ligament, tibial crest and
trochlea groove comprise the extensor mechanism of the stifle.
Abnormal function of the extensor mechanism, such as occurs in
medial patellar luxation, produces abnormal stifle joint mechanics
and joint instability.
 Several theories on the pathogenesis of developmental medial
 patellar luxation have been proposed. While the underlying
musculoskeletal abnormalities have been well documented the
pathogenesis remains unclear. Arnoczky and Tarvin (1980)
underlying skeletal abnormalities, any of which may be a cause or
 an effect of the condition.
The essential biomechanical abnormality is the absence of a
straight line of force through the extensor mechanism of the stifle.
In the developmental form of MPL a variety of musculoskeletal
 abnormalities may be present:
●Coxofemoral joint:
coxa vara - decreased angle of inclination of the femoral
neck
 reduced angle of anteversion of the femoral neck
hip dysplasia
·Quadriceps mechanism
 medial displacement and atrophy of the quadriceps muscle
group
d   n   
60
Ch 5: Patella Luxation
 Femoral deformities
shallow trochlea groove
●
 femoral epiphyseal dysplasia (hypoplastic medial condyle)
● lateral torsion and lateral bowing of the distal femur
Tibial deformities
●  medial torsion (medial displacement of the tibial crest)
and medial bowing of the prox imal tibia
 Rotational instability of the stifle joint
The extent of musculoskeletal abnormality varies with the severity
of the luxation. It is important that the complex of abnormalities
present in an individual case is identified. It is also important to
emphasise that the skeletal deformities in severe cases occur
secondary to changes induced in the growth plates by abnormal
biomechanical forces. Therefore early diagnosis and appropriate
treatment is important to prevent marked skeletal abnormalities in
severe cases.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of MPL is usually straightforward. The history,
the severity of the luxation.
The importance of a thorough orthopaedic examination, with
particular aftention to the assessment of cranial cruciate ligament
integrity and the presence of concurrent coxofemoral abnormality,
 is emphasised.
 It is particularly important to assess the degree of tibial crest
rotation in the weight-bearing animal as the degree of rotation
Radiography is unnecessary for the diagnosis of patellar luxation
 however should be performed in every case to assess the degree of
skeletal abnormality present and to assess the severity of
osteoarthritis. Standardised radiographic projections such as
"TPLO views" are useful to allow some degree of consistency in
determining the magnitude of femoral or tibial torsion or bowing.
A grading system was developed by Putnam (1968) and adapted by
Singleton (1969) which combined clinical signs and physical
examination findings. There are four grades of severity with Grade
1 being the least severe.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
67
Grading of Patellar Luxation
Grade 1
Manual luxation of the patella is possible, however the patella reduces when pressure is
released. Spontaneous luxation and lameness are uncommon.
Grade 2
 Mild tibial rotation. Slight angular and torsional deformities may exist. The patella is
predominantly reduced however may be manually displaced or may luxate with flexion of the
stifle joint. The patella remains luxated until manually reduced or spontaneously reduced on
stifle extension. Intermittent skipping lameness is typical.
Grade 3
A greater degree of tibial rotation (30° - 60°). Moderate angular and torsional deformities
exist. Medial displacement of the quadriceps is apparent. The patella remains luxated, unless
manually reduced in extension. Stifle flexion causes spontaneous reluxation. Gait abnormality
is usually persistent though is often not appreciated as being abnormal by the owner.
Characteristic gait with a semi-flexed stifle joint.
Grade 4
Marked degree of tibial rotation (60° - 90°). Marked angular and torsional deformities. Medial
Persistent lameness.
SURGICAL DECISION MAKING: CONSERVATIVE OR SURGICAL? / NOW OR
LATER?
The choice of surgical or conservative management of
developmental patellar luxation depends on several factors. The
clinical history, the age of the animal, the severity of the luxation
and owner factors must all be considered.
Conservative management is generally indicated in asymptomatic
grade 1 immature animals or mildly affected older animals.
question is when to intervene:
·Skeletally mature dogs displaying clinical signs should have
surgical intervention at the time of diagnosis of MPL. It is
important to assess the gait of animals with MPL. Many
owners consider grade 3 and 4 dogs to have a “normal" gait if
the condition in bilateral as "that is just the way he/she walks".
 Immature animals with grade 4 MPL should have early
deformities.
62
Ch 5: Patella Luxation
 Immature animals displaying clinical symptoms with grade 1,
2 or 3 MPL should be monitored regularly through their
growth (every 1 -2 months) and operated when skeletally
mature or earlier if their condition worsens.
Owners should be fully informed of possible options and outcomes
to achieve the best result. It is important that owners opting for
conservative management of young asymptomatic animals are
informed of the potential for progression of the condition with
 growth and are aware of the clinical signs indicative of
deterioration.
the quadriceps mechanism, restrain the patella within the trochlea
groove and limit subsequent degenerative change within the stifle
joint. Several surgical techniques have been described for
correction of patellar luxation. In most cases a combination of
 techniques is necessary.
The available surgical techniques can be divided into soft tissue
reconstructive procedures and bone reconstructive procedures. The
most commonly used methods are listed below.
Soft tissue reconstructive procedures
Bone reconstructive procedures
Trochleoplasty
Lateral reinforcement techniques
fabello-patella suture
 trochlea wedge recession
fabello-tibial suture
trochlea block recession
fascia lata transposition
cartilage elevation chondroplasty
lateral capsular imbrication
 trochlea resection
lateral fascial imbrication
Tibial crest transposition
Medial release technique (medial desmotomy)
Transposition of the origin of the rectus femoris
Corrective osteotomy
Singleton's grading system, in a slightly modified form, provides a
 useful guide to the likely surgery necessary (see table below). The
need for a tibial crest transposition and the likely amount of
standing animal. The need for a trochleoplasty and / or a medial
release is determined intraoperatively.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
9
Grade of patellar
Soft tissue
Tibial crest
Trochleoplasty
luxation
reconstruction
transposition
Grade 1
+
Grade 2
+
Grade 3
+
Grade 4
+
+
 Traumatic luxation
+
It is essential that all of the underlying abnormalities in each
individual case are recognised and that each one is specifically
corrected with an appropriate technique. Failure to recognise the
abnormalities present and/or failure to specifically correct the
abnormalities will increase the risk of recurrence of luxation after
surgery.
Traumatic patellar luxations where there is no underlying skeletal
abnormality are usually successfully repaired by a soft tissue
reconstructive procedure.
The use of soft tissue methods alone to correct any underlying skeletal abnormality
will almost certainly result in surgical failure and reluxation after surgery
SOFT TISSUE RECONSTRUCTIVE PROCEDURES
Lateral reinforcement techniques
Lateral capsular imbrication
In most grade 2 and 3 medial luxations the lateral joint capsule is
considerably stretched. When the patella is reduced the redundant
joint capsule may be excised and firmly closed or alternatively may
be overlapped.
Lateral fascial imbrication
B se aidai uoexni reld Araa jo ld ui e aq pinos s
 parapatellar incision in the fascia lata will have been made to
approach the stifle joint. As with the joint capsule, once the
luxation has been reduced, there is usually redundant fascia lata.
To ensure sufficient lateral tightening it is normally necessary to
excise some of the fascia lata, overlap the fascia lata or perform a
fascia lata transposition as described above.
Techniques for fascial imbrication have been well described.
64
Ch 5: Patella Luxation
Medial release technique (medial desmotomy*)
 In animals with grade 3 or 4 luxations the medial joint capsule and
retinaculum is thickened and contracted and usually prevents
reduction of the patella into the trochlea groove without medial
tension. In these cases it is necessary to relieve this medial
restraint. A useful intraoperative “rule of thumb" in assessing 
whether a medial release is necessary is that the patella should
track and remain within the trochlea groove before the lateral
fascial imbrication is performed. If this is not the case, a medial
release is indicated.
A medial parapatellar incision is made through the medial fascia
 and joint capsule from the tibial crest and is continued as far
proximally as is necessary to relieve tension on the patella. This
sutured to the cranial edge of the desmotomy provided it is not
under tension.
Seroma or accumulation of synovial fluid is not a recognised
complication of this procedure.
Note: *Desmotomy = the cutting or division of ligaments. In
this context the ligament being cut is the medial
femoropatellar ligament. (This is a narrow band of fibres
partly blended with thefemoral fascia.On the medial side it
originates on the parapatellar fascia and inserts on the
medial epicondyle. The lateral femoropatellar ligament
insertsonthelateralfabella).
Transposition of the origin of the rectus femoris
This is a relatively recently described technique that involves either
elevating or osteotomising the origin of the rectus femoris from the
ilium and transposing it more laterally. The intention is to redirect
the slightly medially directed pull of the rectus femoris into a more
sagittal plane. The rectus femoris origin is fixed to the prox imal
femur close to the insertion of the deep gluteal muscle.
While this technique is biomechanically sound, a large case series
to assess its effectiveness has not currently been published to the
author's knowledge. One report by Robins (1998) of rectus femoris
transposition surgery performed in ten stifles in eight dogs, where
owner satisfaction was assessed in a retrospective survey, found
Additional stabilising procedures were performed in all stifles 
making it difficult to assess the impact of the rectus transposition
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
65
 alone. Complications were reported in four of the ten surgeries.
Further work needs to be done to fully assess this technique.
I use this technique most commonly in large breed dogs with MPL
who have significant lateralisation of the proximal femur as a result
 of hip dysplasia. I prefer to elevate the origin rather than perform
an osteotomy of the ilium.
BONE RECONSTRUCTIVE PROCEDURES
Trochleoplasty
The trochlea should be deep enough such that half of the depth of
the patella lies within the trochlea groove. Assessment of trochlea
 depth is subjective and best made intraoperatively.
In most grade 3 and 4 medial patella luxations, and in many grade
2 luxations, the trochlea is found to be shallow or in some cases
convex. To achieve permanent reduction of the luxation in these
cases it is essential to perform a trochleoplasty to achieve proper
trochlea depth.
The original method of trochleoplasty described was one of
trochlea resection where the articular cartilage is destroyed with a
rasp, file, rongeur or burr. The exposed rough cancellous bone is
eventually covered with fibrocartilage. While this is a simple
technique the destruction of the articular cartilage was shown to
produce greater post-operative pain, slower return to function
and more pronounced degenerative joint disease than a wedge
 recession trochleoplasty
 It is difficult to justify any reason for performing
a trochlea resection
Trochlea wedge recession
The wedge recession trochleoplasty was first described in 1983. It
is technically more demanding than the trochlea resection yet is a
cheap instrumentation. Given the better clinical results with the
 wedge recession trochleoplasty it is difficult to justify any reason
for performing a trochlea resection.
The trochlea wedge recession (TWR) is most easily performed
using an X-Acto saw number 234 or number 235 (X-Acto Inc.,
Long Island City, New York) or using the Hard-backed
66
Ch 5: Patella Luxation
Orthopaedic Saw (Veterinary Instrumentation, Sheffield, UK.
www.vetinst.com) which is stainless steel and so reusable. It is also
more robust than an Xacto Saw.
(Xacto saws are packaged lightly oiled to prevent rusting as they
are not stainless steel. Prior to use they should be washed in
detergent and thoroughly cleaned and dried before being
autoclaved. It is not necessary to use a handle with this saw.)
Most descriptions in the literature involve a four cut technique. The
 technique described here is a three cut technique.
Following a lateral arthrotomy the patella is luxated medially. The
stifle joint should be fully flexed to facilitate retraction of the soft
tissues during the procedure. A Gelpi retractor and Senn retractor
are useful.
The first cut is made at the apex of the medial trochlea ridge. The
 yo six soi ai on ped) a ls e  e si as
trochlea) and is angled diagonally toward the midline of the
 trochlea just cranial to the intercondylar notch distally and the
central proximal edge of the trochlea articular cartilage proximally.
It is important not to penetrate the intercondylar notch as this
will damage the origin of the caudal cruciate ligament.
First cut
Visualise third cut
The second cut is made after the plane of the third cut has been
visualised. The third cut, when made, will be identical to the first
cut with the exception that it is on the lateral side. (That is, the
third cut will be started at the apex of the lateral trochlea ridge and
angled to intersect with the first cut on the trochlea midline at the
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
67
trochlea notch). This imaginary third cut is visualised as it
determines the plane of the second cut.
The second cut is commenced slightly medial to the apex of the
lateral trochlea ridge and made parallel to the plane of the proposed
third cut. This cut will therefore not intersect with the deepest
s hn m  s m  n r   n
before the deepest point. This second cut has created an
osteochondral wedge which should be removed and wrapped in a
blood soaked gauze and tagged to the instrument table so as not to
be inadvertently discarded.
Second cut
Wedge removed
The third cut is then made as described above to intersect with the
first cut at its deepest point. In effect this means that the third cut is
removing a wafer of bone somewhere between 2 and 5mm thick
depending on the size of the animal. The thickness of this wafer of
bone removed will actually determine the amount of recession of
the trochlea achieved.
Third cut
Wedge replaced
The osteochondral wedge is then replaced and the depth of
recession assessed. Should the required depth of 50% of the
68
Ch5:PatellaLuxation
thickness of the patella not be achieved then a further wafer of
bone should be removed from the wall of the trochlea.
If the cut has been properly made the wedge should fit accurately
into the bed with no gap.
It is not necessary to fix the osteochondral wedge in place as the
net compressive force of the patella and the high friction between
the cut cancellous bone surfaces holds the wedge securely in place
 and allows rapid healing.
It has been
suggested that
should the
required depth not
 be achieved then
bone may be
 removed from the
 tapered edge of
the osteochondral
wedge. This will
not
Exaggerated trimming
result in
ofwedge
 deepening of the
groove (as
shown in the adjacent graphic) unless the second and third cuts
have been wrongly made and the angle of the third cut is wider
than the angle of the osteochondral wedge. In this case trimming
the tapered edge will deepen the trochleoplasty however the end
result will be a poorer "fir' of the osteochondral wedge and less
bone to bone contact than if the described method (with the second
 and third cuts parallel) was practiced.
 The most common mistakes when learning the wedge technique
are not cutting in a sagittal line, cutting into the intercondylar 
fossa, and not making cut 2 parallel to cut 3. With practice this is a
 simple and quick technique.
Trochlear block recession
The trochlea block recession trochleoplasty (TBR) is a
modification of the wedge recession trochleoplasty. It was first
described in 2000 by Talcot. The main complication with the
 trochlea recession is fracture of the block during as it is being
harvested.
It has the in vitro advantages over TWR of:
 increasing proximal patella depth
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
69
 increasing patella articular contact with the recessed prox imal
trochlea
recessing a larger percentage of trochlear surface area
results in greater resistance to patellar luxation in an extended
position
(Johnson 2001)
TBR may decrease long term degenerative joint disease post
trochleoplasty though this has not been proven. It is slightly more
difficult than TWR. The main complication is fracture of the
osteochondral block. No detailed results comparing clinical cases
managed with TBR or TWR have been published to the author's
knowledge. Further work is needed to determine whether it has
clinical benefit over TWR.
The technique is similar to TWR except a rectangular block rather
than a wedge is removed. Two cuts are made with an Xacto or
Hard-backed saw along the medial and lateral trochlea ridges and
angled 10° towards the center of the trochlea groove. The base of
the osteochondral block is flat and is made with a small 4mm
osteotome or small oscillating saw. The remaining cancellous bone
is deepened the required amount with rongeurs or an osteotome.
The block is then replaced and not stabilised.
AAA
Cartilage elevation chondroplasty
 In skeletally immature animals under about 6-9 months of age,
This technique preserves the articular cartilage which is reflected
from the underlying subchondral bone. The subchondral bone in
the trochlea is then deepened prior to replacing the articular
cartilage. This is possible in young animals because the articular
cartilage is not firmly attached to the subchondral bone.
This method is the only method suitable in cases of “"domed
trochlea" where the centre of the trochlea is elevated above the
level of the trochlea ridges
70
Ch 5: Patella Luxation
 Following a lateral arthrotomy the patella is luxated medially. The
stifle joint should be fully flexed to facilitate retraction of the soft
tissues during the procedure. A gelpi retractor may also be
necessary.
A full thickness incision is made in the articular cartilage of the
 s   s        o
create a flap that has its base distally just above the intercondylar
notch. The width of the flap is the width of the trochlea and it
should extend to the proximal end of the articular cartilage of the
trochlea.
The flap is reflected distally and the subchondral bone is removed
with a combination of rongeurs, curette and osteotome or a burr to
create a trochlea of appropriate depth. Once the required depth has
been attained, the cartilage flap is replaced. As with the wedge
recession trochleoplasty there is no need to fix the cartilage flap in
place.
 Cartilage elevation chondroplasty can also be performed in
skeletally mature animals however is more difficult due to the
firm attachment of the articular cartilage to the subchondral bone.
The technique is the same as in immature animals with the
exception that an osteotome is used to reflect the cartilage by
cutting through the trabecular bone about 1mm below the cartilage
surface. A burr is then used to create a trochlea of appropriate
shape and depth.
Tibial crest transposition
Tibial crest transposition is necessary in cases where the tibial crest
is rotated medially, which tends to be in grades 2, 3 and 4
luxations.
In cases where a trochleoplasty is necessary it is advisable to
perform the tibial crest transposition after the trochleoplasty to
allow better exposure of the trochlea for access of the saw.
A lateral parapatellar arthrotomy will have been made to inspect
the stifle joint and trochlea groove. Try and avoid elevating the
cranial tibial muscle from the lateral tibial crest and the tibial
plateau. Elevation will not be necessary if using an oscillating saw
or osteotome but will be necessary if using a reciprocating or
hobby saw.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
77
 A medial parapatellar incision is made through the fascia and
fibrous joint capsule from the distal pole of the patella to the tibial
crest.
The infrapatellar fat pad is dissected away from the caudal aspect
of the insertion of the patella ligament via the lateral and medial
 arthrotomies to allow sufficient access for an osteotome or saw to
 perform the osteotomy. Choice of instrument to perform the
 osteotomy is one of personal preference. Osteotomes, small-bladed
hand-held saws, oscillating saws and reciprocating saws are all
suitable for performing the osteotomy.
Most people find the osteotome the most difficult to use and have
 more trouble in producing an accurate osteotomy than when using
a bone saw. The best choice is the one the particular surgeon is
most comfortable with.
If a saw is used, performing the osteotomy with the leg in
extension (and effectively the quadriceps mechanism relaxed) will
make the saw cut more easily than if the leg were flexed.
osteotomystarts
midwaybetween
patella tendon
menisci
andmenisci
patella tendon
The size of the animal will determine the size of the osteotomy.
The osteotomised piece needs to be sufficiently large to be
stabilised with K wires. The more common mistake tends to be
the removal of too small a piece of tibial crest rather than to0
large a piece. The osteotomy should end on the lateral side cranial
to Gurdey's tubercle (this is about 30-40% of the distance between
the insertion of the patella tendon and the menisci/cranial cruciate
ligament insertion).
72
Ch 5: Patella Luxation
tibial tuberosity
Gurdey's
tubercle
extensor
groove
medial
lateral
condyle
condyle
intercondylar
fibular
eminence
head
 The severity of the problem and the degree of internal tibial
rotation will determine how far laterally the tibial crest needs to be
 transposed. This will determine whether the osteotomy needs to be
partial or complete. In most grade 2 and many grade 3 luxations
 the tibial crest may be partially osteotomised with the distal
laterally on the distal periosteal attachment until the tibial crest is 
immediately distal to the trochlea and the extensor mechanism
makes a straight line through the trochlea with minimal medial
pressure on the patella.
Tibial crest transposition results in some degree of caudalisation of
the tibial crest (Towle 2005) which may increase retropatellar
 pressure. There may be some benefit in angling the osteotomy to
exit more cranially on the lateral side. This may lessen the caudal
movement of the tibial crest as it is moved laterally. Further work
is needed in this area.
Angled
osteotomy
line
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
73
The tibial crest is secured with two K wires directed caudally to
engage the caudal cortex. Remember to double check the level of
the tibial plateau before driving the K wires. Palpate the fibula
head and do not aim above that level or the K wire may enter the
femorotibial joint space. Remember not to drive the wires
perpendicular to the tibial crest as this wil tend to aim them
dorsally towards the joint level.
The distal periosteal attachment serves as a tension band and in
small dogs allows fixation of the tibial crest in its new position
Xon pu s u i I- 6o sm y ns om o ao m
breeds, 1.6-2.0mm in larger breeds).
The general recommendations are that in partial osteotomies there
 is no need for the placement of orthopaedic wire as a tension band
unless the distal periosteal attachment has been damaged. I would
agree with this in small and toy breed dogs however would
consider that in medium and large dog breeds it is advisable to
reinforce the periosteal attachment with a tension band wire. My
current protocol is to place a tension band wire in partial
 osteotomies in animals greater than 15-20 kg.
In some grade 3 and most grade 4 luxations the tibial crest cannot
be positioned far enough laterally if only partially osteotomised. In
these cases a complete osteotomy is necessary and the tibial crest
should be stabilised with K wires and a tension band wire.
The most common mistakes with tibial crest transposition are
osteotomy of too small a piece of bone and driving the K wires too
far caudally through the tibia.
74
Ch 5: Patella Luxation
Correctiveosteotomy
Corrective osteotomy may be necessary in severe grade 4 luxations
that can not be corrected with conventional techniques. This is a
 difficult procedure and referral should be considered. The use of
CT and 3-dimensional reconstruction to aid correction planning has
been reported to simplify this procedure.
 It is important to remember that many of these grade 4 dogs could
 have been prevented from geting to a severely deformed state if
they had been diagnosed and treated while sufficiently immature to
 prevent these progressive skeletal deformities occurring.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey Proc.No.363
75
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Boone E.G., Hohn R.B., Weisbrode S.E.: Trochlear recession wedge technique for patellar
luxation: An experimental study. JAAHA 19; 735-742, 1983
2. Ferguson J.: Patellar luxation in the dog and cat. In Practice 174-184, April 1997
3.  Johnson A.L.: Comparison of trochlear block recession and trochlear wedge recession for
B 1 -01 g   o  g  ox d 
4. Piermattei, D.L. and Flo G.: Handbook of Small Animal Orthopaedics and Fracture Treatment.
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 3'" edn. 1997, 516-534
 5.  Putnam R.W.: Patella luxation in the dog. MSc Thesis. University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
1968
6.  Robins G.M.: Rectus femoris transplantation for the treatment of medial patellar luxation -
early clinical results. Proceedings of the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists Scientific
Meeting 1988.48-49, 1998
 7. Seguin B., Harari J.: Trochlear wedge recession for the treatment of patellar luxation. Canine
Practice 19; 24-27, 1994
8.  Singleton W.B.: The surgical correction of stifle deformities in the dog. JSAP 10; 59-69, 1969
9. Talcott K.W., Goring R.L. and deHaan J.J.: Rectangular recession trochleoplasty for treatment
of patellar luxation in dogs and cats. VCOT, 13: 39-43, 2000
10. Towle H.A. et al: Pre- and postoperative radiographic and computed tomographic evaluation of
    A x    ss
76
Ch 5: Patella Luxation
Chapter 6
Corrective Osteotomy for Patellar Luxation in Large
Breed Dogs
 Kenneth Johnson
SUMMARY
Although patellar luxation is predominately a disorder of the small
dog, it can also be a very challenging problem in large breeds. It
may be associated with distal femoral deformity, as well as
dysplasia, coxa valga and excessive anteversion of the hip joint.
The traditional procedures of trochlear wedge recession and tibial
patellar luxation in the large breed dog. To achieve better
alignment of the extensor mechanism, a distal femoral wedge
osteotomy is performed to correct axial and torsional deformity.
 Indications, planning and technique, together with available
 outcome data will be discussed.
Patellar Luxation
In most small breed dogs, this is a very common developmental
disorder. However traumatic patellar luxation can be seen any
breed of dog. Also, we are diagnosing lateral and medial patellar
luxation in large breed dogs more frequently. The majority of dogs
with developmental, medial patellar luxation are bilaterally
affected, but often not to an equal extent in each stifle joint.
Rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament may exacerbate the
clinical signs associated with chronic lower grade medial patellar
with genu valgum (knock-knee stance), coxa valga, excessive
anteversion of the femoral neck and valgus deformity of the distal
femur.
Grading Medial Patellar Luxation
Grade 1: This is the least severe. It is rarely associated with
clinical signs and generally an incidental finding on physical
examination. The patella can be pushed medially out of the
trochlear groove when the stifle joint is extended. Spontaneous 
reduction of the luxation occurs soon after the patellar is released.
In some dogs, medial patellar luxation can be detected more
readily when the animal is standing and weight bearing on the
limb. When dogs are restrained in lateral recumbency, they often
become very tense due to fear, and prevent the detection of a grade
1 medial patellar luxation.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
77
Grade 2: The patella luxates spontaneously and intermittently,
especially when the stifle joint is flexed with the tibia in internal
rotation. Reduction generally occurs with extension of the stifle,
and external rotation of the tibia.  The limb may be held in flexion
from time to time, or be completely non weight bearing.
Grade 3: The patella is luxated most of the time. Manual
reduction is possible, but this is immediately followed by re-
luxation when the patella is released or the stifle joint is flexed.
Grade 4: The patella is permanently luxated and cannot be
reduced. In unilateral cases, there is non weight bearing lameness,
whereas in bilateral cases there is a crouching gait. This grade of
medial patellar luxation is often accompanied by severe bone
deformity including distal femoral varus, proximal tibial torsion
and valgus, medial displacement of the tibial tuberosity. Shallow
 trochlear groove is common in most grades of medial patellaf
luxation.
Surgical Correction of Patellar Luxation
Surgery is generally only indicated when the animal is having signs
 of chronic skipping or lameness, and appears to be painful. Most
cases of grade 1 medial patellar luxation do not require any
surgery. Also some cases of grade 4 medial patellar luxation may
have such severe bone deformity and soft tissue contracture that
ul uaje oi arn Areans jo se aul 'papueooai jou si Arelns
extensor muscles and patella, as well of ensure the trochlear groove
is deep enough to retain the patella.
Trochlear Recession
 Deepening of the trochlear groove is achieved by either a wedge or
block recession technique, using a very small hobby saw or
oscillating saw. This is required in most cases. Chronic luxation
results in erosion of the proximal part of the medial trochlear ridge,
and this has an adverse affect on prognosis for successful
 correction of the lux ation.
Tibial Tuberosity Transposition
The tuberosity, or more correctly the entire tibial crest, is
osteotomized and transposed medially to realign the patellar
tendon. Be sure to leave the periosteum intact distal to the crest to
increase the stability of the repair subsequently. Usually the
 cranial tibialis muscle has to be elevated to make a new bed for the
tuberosity.
78
Ch 6: Corrective Osteotomy for Patellar Luxation in Large Breed Dogs
Femoral Osteotomy
Corrective osteotomy to overcome distal femoral varus, valgus or
torsion is needed more often in larger dogs with medial or lateral
patellar luxation. Femoral varus angles are approximately 15 to 18
degrees prior to surgery. Surgery is performed through a cranial
lateral approach to the stifle joint, in combination with a lateral
 approach to the distal shaft of the femur. It is usually necessary to
ligate the distal branch of the caudal femoral vessels that cross the
femur laterally, just proximal to the stifle joint. The patellar is
luxated medially after opening the joint capsule. To facilitate
correction, the Slocum TPLO jig is applied with two end threaded
pins. The first pin is driven in a cranial to caudal direction,
 perpendicular to the femoral shaft and just proximal to the
trochlear groove. After attaching the jig, the second pin is inserted
in the mid shaft of the femur.
Using an oscillating saw, a transverse osteotomy of the femur is
made just proximal to the stifle joint. The location of this first
 osteotomy has to be carefully planned to ensure that there will be
sufficient bone available to apply the plate. A second osteotomy is
made to remove a wedge of bone (base laterally for medial patellar
luxation), that corresponds in angle to the planned correction.
Cancellous bone from this wedge is kept as a bone graft.
 Temporary stability is gained by driving a K wire from the lateral
condyle of the femur proximally up the femur (Figure 1) The bone
 plate is then applied. In earlier cases we used Slocum and T plates
(Figures 2 and 3). However these may not provide sufficient
 an o  n p   se s
commonly we use a seven or eight hole, 3.5 LC DCP plate. Using
this technique it has only been necessary to perform trochlear
wedge recession or tibial tuberosity transposition in less than half
the cases. In dogs with concurrent cruciate ligament disease, a
TPLO surgery is then performed as well.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey,Proc.No.363
79
 Figure l: Correction of medial patellar luxation by distal femoral osteotomy. The jig and K
wire driven proximally from the lateral femoral condyle provide temporary stability while
the bone plate is being applied.
Figure 2: Internal fixation with a six hole Slocum plate after correction of medial patellar
Juxation by distal femoral osteotomy.
品
Ch 6: Corrective Osteotomy for Patellar Luxation in Large Breed Dogs
Figure 3: Pre and post operative radiographs showing corrective osteotomy of the distal femur for medial patellar
luxations. A tibial tuberosity transposition has also been performed in this case.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
NOTES:
82
Chapter 7
Circular External Skeletal Fixation
Dan Lewis
Circular external skeletal fixation is one of the more innovative
recent advancements in small animal orthopaedics. These are
modular systems, which can be assembled in an unlimited number
of configurations to stabilize fractures and arthrodeses, perform
 bone lengthening and transport as well as correct angular,
translational and rotational deformities. Circular fixator frames
consist of a series of complete and/or incomplete external rings that
are interconnected by a series of threaded rods. Rings are secured
 in position along these rods by placing a nut on opposing surfaces
of each ring. Unlike linear fixator systems, traditional circular
fixators use small diameter wires, rather than pins, as fixation
elements. The fixation wires are typically tensioned to improve
their stiffness characteristics. The fixation wires immobilize the
bone segments and adequately resist bending, shear, and torsional
forces while allowing some degree of axial micro-motion at the
osteotomy/fracture site. Axial micro-motion is considered to be
beneficial, creating a mechanical environment conducive to
osteogenesis and is purported to enhance fracture healing. Circular
fixators are uniquely designed, allowing the frame to be elongated
or compressed. Elongation of the frame allows for distraction
 osteogenesis in which regenerate bone is produced within the gap
ad aaeado-ssod a lunp
Circular fixators were initially developed by the Russian physician
 Professor Gavril A. Ilizarov during the latter half of the 20h
century. Dr. Ilizarov, having no formal training as a surgeon and
being the sole physician in his practice in Kurgan, Siberia, was
faced with treating numerous orthopaedic patients suffering the
consequences of World War II. Dr. Ilizarov, armed with very
limited supplies and equipment, was forced to use his 
resourcefulness and imagination to develop the revolutionary
methods to manage patients with nonunion fractures, bone defects
and osteomyelitis. Dr. Ilizarov designed components for a circular
fixator system and developed an entire treatment modality that now
is identified with his name.
 The Italian veterinarian Antonio Ferreti began using circular
fixators in the late 1980's to manage fractures, malunions,
pseudarthroses, congenital and traumatic luxations, and to perform
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
8
limb deformity correction in both small and large animals. Dr.
Ferretti indicated that fracture healing and overall union rates were
consistently faster than typically expected. As systems were
developed specifically for use in animals, an increasing number of
veterinary surgeons in Europe and later in North America began to
utilize circular fixators and the methods of Ilizarov. At the
University of Florida, we have worked closely with IMEXTM
Veterinary, Inc., in the clinical testing and application of their
circular fixator system.
 Traditional Ilizarov circular fixators consist of supporting elements
(complete rings, partial rings and arches), connecting elements
(threaded and telescoping rods and plates), assembly elements
(cannulated and/or slotted bolts, nuts and washers), and fixation
elements (small diameter wires). The IMEXTM Circular External
Skeletal Fixation System was developed in conjunction with the
Comparative Orthopaedics Research Laboratory of the Texas
Scottish Rite Hospital for Children in Dallas, Texas and is
patients. This system has several technical advancements designed
to simplify frame construction, improve precision and decrease
 patient morbidity. The utilization of lighter metals and engineering
plastics facilitated these advancements. A unique design feature of
the IMEXTM Circular External Skeletal Fixation System is its zero
tolerance, zero motion connecting elements. Components used for
 angular and linear distraction have nylon drive bushings or inserts
between metal parts, which prevent binding and allow for
distraction or compression without the need for loosening and
retightening nuts. This eliminates frame instability, which causes 
patient discomfort, and makes distraction simple and precise.
 Distraction or compression is performed simply with a wrench
making outpatient limb lengthening and/or angular correction user
friendly.
 aluminium alloy, which imparts strength to the supporting
elements while keeping the fixator weight appropriate for use in
 dogs and cats. Complete and five-eighths rings, and one-third ring
arches are available in four (50, 66, 84 and 118 mm) internal
diameters. Unique stretch ring arches have been developed which
facilitate circular fixator application to the distal humerus and
femur, proximal ulna and the proximal or distal tibia without
 interfering with range of motion when the ring is positioned near
 the adjacent joint. Stretch rings also simplify construction of
    s    
stifle regions.
Ch7:CircularExternalSkeletalFixation
Threaded rods (6 mm diameter x 1 mm thread pitch) are most
commonly used as connecting elements in the IMEXTM system.
Threaded rods are available in 60, 80, 100, 150 and 225 mm
lengths. A 3 mm hex drive fitting at the end of each rod
accommodates a 3 mm straight or angled Allen wrench which
allows rapid replacement or exchange of rods if necesary.
 One unique connecting element in the IMEXTM system is the zero
tolerance, zero motion 50 mm, 70 mm, and 100 mm linear motors
used to perform linear distraction or compression. Linear motors
are composed of a threaded rod (6 mm diameter x 1 mm thread
 pitch) encased in a stainless steel housing. A nylon drive bushing,
positioned between the stainless housing and threaded rod, allows
distraction or compression without loosening and retightening nuts
and eliminates frame instability which causes patient discomfort
 during distraction or compression. Distraction or compression is
performed simply and precisely by turning the clearly marked
drive bushing with a 10 mm wrench. One complete revolution of
the drive bushing produces 1 mm of linear movement.
Threaded rods can also be used for linear distraction or
compression if pairs of 10 mm (6 mm internal diameter) nylon nuts
are placed to secure a ring. Simultaneous rotation of the paired
nylon nuts with a special double jawed 10 mm wrench will
accomplish linear distraction or compression. One complete
revolution of the paired nylon nuts results in 1 mm of linear
movement of the secured ring. The use of paired nylon nuts is
preferable to linear motors for performing distractions when
adjacent rings are in close proximity. Connecting elements used for
angular correction include angular hinge assemblies and angular
motor assemblies: both components have nylon inserts, which
confer zero tolerance, zero motion properties, and the angular
motor assembly is clearly marked to aid in daily postoperative
distraction.
Assembly elements include 10 mm (6 mm internal diameter)
stainless steel nuts for securing connecting and other assembly
elements to rings. Fixation wires are secured to the rings with 6
 mm wire fixation bolts that are both slotted (for capturing wires
that cross rings between holes) and cannulated (for capturing wires
that cross rings over a hole). Slotted 6 mm washers are available to
capture wires at sites occupied by connecting elements and 6 mm
flat washers are available to be used as a spacer for capturing wires
that are not inserted immediately adjacent to a ring. Pin fixation
bolts are also available which allow the utilization of full- and half-
pin splintage fixation pins.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
85
Although standard Kirschner wires can be used as fixation
elements, use of 1.6 mm diameter wires with a single lip cutting
point is recommended. Fixation wires are also available with olives
(or stoppers) to increase stability of the construct and/or to
manipulate and secure bone segments. Olive (or stopper) wires
have a raised bead or olive fixed along their length. This olive is
brought into contact with the cortex of the bone. The olive can be
used to pull a bone segment in alignment or can be used to prevent
translation of a secured bone segment along the wire. An
inex pensive calibrated tensioning device is available to tension
wires.
 IMExTM also produces titanium hybrid rods which allow for the
construction of frames using both circular and linear components
The smooth shaft of the hybrid rods accommodates linear fixator
(IMEXTM sK) clamps. One end of each hybrid rod has threads
which can be secured to ring components of the IMExTM Circular
External Skeletal Fixation System to construct linear-circular
body which can be readily assembled and disassembled allowing
clamps to be added or removed from a construct at any time. The
SK clamp bolt features a retained clamp washer that secures the
fixation pan. The clamp washer has a multi-toothed surface that
interdigitates with the clamp body, which eliminates unwanted
fixation pin/clamp slippage on the connecting rod and provides
stable fixation, irrespective of fixation pin angle. The clamp
washer has a semi-circular meniscus that solidly engages the
shank of a wide range of diameters of fixation pins. The clamp
bolt can be used with a drill sleeve for convenient pre-drilling of
pilot holes and accommodates direct placement of appropriate
diameter positive-profile partially threaded fixation pins.
Circular fixators possess biomechanical characteristics which
purportedly enhance fracture healing and allow for distraction
osteogenesis. Circular fixators differ primarily from standard
unilateral and bilateral frame fixators in that the tensioned wires
 immobilizing the bone segments adequately resist bending, shear,
and torsional forces while maintaining some degree of axial
elasticity ("axial micro-motion") at the osteotomy or fracture site.
This characteristic creates a mechanical environment conducive to
osteogenesis. Circular fixators exhibit a nonlinear, dynamic
 behaviour under axial compression which is ascribed to increased
tensioning of the wires with increased loading. This translates to
engaged bone segments. Stiffness increases as applied loads
increase protecting the osteotomy or fracture gap from excessive
strain during ambulation. This "controlled instability" at low loads
98
Ch 7: Circular External Skeletal Fixation
occurs principally in the axial plane and is purported to favourably
 influence the fracture healing pathway.
The number of levels of fixation influence the mechanical
properties of a circular fixator. Ilizarov found that four ring circular
 constructs (one ring per segment). Additional, studies have shown
that if a four ring construct is used to stabilize a fracture, the
stability of the circular fixator is increased if the middle two rings
 are positioned in close proximity to the fracture. It is important to
distribute the levels of fixation, and subsequently the weight-
bearing forces, evenly over the length of each involved bone
n ,e--r-r, g  jaas
The diameters of the rings used to construct the circular fixator
have a profound influence on its mechanics. While ring diameter
effects stability in all modes of loading, ring diameter has its
 greatest effect on axial stability. Ring diameter is selected based on
anatomic constraints: the smallest diameter rings which can be
accommodated should be selected. Ilizarov recommends that a
minimal distance of 1 to 2 cm should be maintained between the
ring and the skin to allow for soft tissue swelling and cleaning of
the wire-skin interfaces.
Most of the biomechanical studies that have been reported have
evaluated circular fixator systems designed for use in human
patients. Ring diameters used in dogs and cats are obviously much
smaller than those used in humans, even children. Thus, the
mechanics of these circular fixators will be markedly different. We
have performed biomechanical testing on IMEXTM circular fixator
constructs and it would appear that there is litfle need to tension
wires when using the 50 mm and possibly the 66 mm rings
(although we generally tension wires in 66 mm ring constructs to
 30 kg). Our research would suggest that tensioning the wires in
constructs made with the 84 mm ring to 60 kg and wires in
constructs made with the 118 mm rings to 90 kg would be
tensioned beyond 30 kg because tensioning wires beyond 30 kg
results in deformation of the ring or posts.
 Olive wires can enhance the stability of fixation, particularly in
 oblique fractures. Two counter-opposed olive wires per bone
segment can significantly improve bending stiffness and stability
by minimizing translation of the bone along the wire. This is
particularly important when wires are placed on the same ring with
little divergency.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
87
Circular fixator constructs utilizing tensioned wires in combination
with half-pins are being used with increasing frequency. The use of
half-pins has been advocated where the use of transfixation wires is
not possible (such as the proximal femur or humerus) and to avoid
complications associated with placement of divergent wires
through vital soft tissue structures (such as the prominent muscle
mass on proximolateral tibia). These constructs have been shown
to have biomechanical characteristics intermittent between that of
conventional linear fixators and the traditional circular fixators.
 The combination of wire and half-pin fixation can be a problem if
too few half-pins are utilized in that excessive stress occurs at the
pin-bone interface. The use of two (or preferably more) evenly
distributed, diverging half-pins per bone segment (depending on
concurrent wire utilization) is advocated in these configurations to
avoid problems associated with premature pin loosening and
breakage.
Distraction osteogenesis represents the mechanical induction of
new bone formation in the gap produced by the gradual separation
of two bone segments. Bone formation in distraction osteogenesis
shares many histologic and biomechanical similarities with early
fracture healing. Bone retains an inherent capacity for repair and
remodeling in accordance with the imposed forces and strains. This
inherent capacity results in new bone formation in the distraction
gap that develops as two bone segments are gradually separated.
This process represents regeneration of bone tissue; hence, the
'auoq .aerauelai, se ol paejei ueo s! peonpoid auoq
 In our clinical cases we perform subperiosteal osteotomies using an
oscillating saw in preparation for performing distraction
osteogenesis. Ilizarov had originally recommended performing a
corticotomy, but studies have shown that preservation of the
periosteum has the most significant influence on regenerate bone
formation. Thus the method of cutting the bone is of lesser
importance as long as the periosteal envelope is preserved.
 Latency (or delay) refers to the time period following osteotomy
before beginning distraction. The latency period allows early
vascularization and soft callus formation before lengthening
io  a on  si   sm
prolonged, premature consolidation will occur. Several factors
influence the duration of latency including the patient's age, the
bone(s) involved, the location of the osteotomy (metaphyseal
 osteotomies produce higher quality regenerate than diaphyseal
 regenerate than distal osteotomies), associated soft tissue trauma,
88
Ch 7: Circular External Skeletal Fixation
the primary abnormality necessitating treatment as well as other
factors.
sop u sp i-t Aidai si suad uq u poad Aue a
and cats undergoing lengthening or angular correction, the latency
period observed is typically shorter. In skeletally immature dogs in
which the periosteal sleeve was well preserved while making the
osteotomy, a delay or latency period may be unnecessary. We
generally utilize a 1 day delay with animals in this age group. We
typically observe a 3-5 day delay before initiating distraction with
q  s  ro  o sa   n s
advisable in even older dogs or if the periosteum had been
 damaged substantially prior to or during surgery.
Experimental and clinical studies have indicated that the amount of
lengthening performed should be in the range of 0.75-2.0 mm/day
   q    
formation can be monitored radiographically and the rate adjusted
accordingly. Rates for skeletally immature patients and
metaphyseal osteotomies may be at the higher end of the limit due
 Rhythm describes the frequency (number of fractionations) at
which the distractions are performed during a 24 hour period.
Ilizarov had reported that increasing the rhythm from 1 or 2 times
formation and decreased consolidation times; however, more
 d s  p 't 'I o s a ss s
and found no significant effects of rhythm on radiographic,
mechanical, or histomorphologic regenerate parameters. Elevated
 rhythms do have a sparing effect on the regional soft tissues
allowing more gradual accommodation to tensile forces that
develop during distraction. At the University of Florida, we
generally perform distractions at a rate of 1.o-1.5 mm/day and a
rhythm of four distractions/day.
There are an unlimited number of potential clinical applications for
circular external skeletal fixation in veterinary surgery and at the
University of Florida we routinely use circular fixators to manage a
number of developmental and traumatic orthopaedic conditions in
dogs and cats. The most notable of these being limb deformity
correction, particularly antebrachial limb deformity correction. Pre-
instrumentation and its application and conscientious post-
operative patient care are essential for a successful outcome. We
have limited experience with hind limb lengthenings, both
 proximal and distal to the stifle. We often use circular fixators to
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
89
stabilize complex fractures of the antebrachium and crus. Linear-
circular hybrid frames allow for management of fractures of the
humerus and femur. We often use circular fixators for
transarticular stabilization, particularly in performing arthrodeses.
Circular fixator frames utilizing hinges allow the latitude to adjust
the angle of arthrodesis during the early convalescent period as
well as the removal of all implants following fusion. Finally,
bone tumors. The use of bone transport can also be used to replace
segmental bone defects in dogs and cats with traumatic bone loss
or following sequestrectomy
Linear-circular hybrid fixators have proven useful for managing
long bone fractures with short proximal or distal juxta-articular
fracture segments. Since hybrid constructs typically utilize both
small diameter wires and larger diameter pins as fixation
elements, these constructs possess advantageous properties 
 inherent to both fixation elements. Ring components are
particularly advantageous in fractures that extend into the
metaphyseal region as they allow for multiple points of fixation,
as many as three or four fixation wires, even in extremely short
fracture segments. Bicortical bone purchase is more feasible with
fixation wires than with pins in these short juxta-articular fracture
segments because fixation wires can be driven across a bone
Divergency of the fixation wires mitigates translation of a bone
 segment while improving the bending stiffness of the construct.
Optimally, two fixation wires placed on a ring should intersect at
a 90 angle; however, anatomic constraints often prevent maximal
wire divergency. Olive wires should be used to prevent
 translation of the bone segment along the wires, particularly if the
angle of divergency between fixation wires is small. The linear
components confer advantages typically associated with the use
of half-pins such as improved bending stability and avoidance of
large muscle masses (such as those located on the proximolateral
 aspect of the tibia) which results in decreased morbidity and
improved limb function during the convalescent period.
Utilization of wires as fixation elements on ring components in
fractures which have not been reconstructed may be beneficial in
allowing axial micro-motion which, as previously described,
 purportedly promotes fracture healing. Use of more rigid half- or
full-pins as fixation elements on ring components in anatomically
reconstructed fractures may be preferable as axial micro-motion
could be detrimental by placing excessively high strains on the
reconstructed fracture segments.
06
Ch 7: Circular External Skeletal Fixation
Hybrid constructs also allow utilization of ring elements proximal
to the elbow and stifle including "tie-in" constructs. Anatomic
constraints limit the application of more stable type II and II1
linear fixators and traditional circular fixator constructs to
fractures distal to the elbow and stifle. Modified type I linear
configurations, in which a full-pin (or pins) is (are) placed
through the distal fracture segment, have been described to
manage comminuted supracondylar humeral and femoral
fractures: a bent Steinman pin or connecting rod, articulated
connecting rods and clamps or an acrylic column have been
described to secure the medial portion of the transcondylar pin to
the lateral frame elements. Utilization of a hybrid construct
simplifies assembly of these complex frames. Hybrid frames,
unlike constructs made with the acrylic connecting columns, can
be readily disassembled and reassembled, simplifying post-
operative modifications or adjustments. The aluminium alloy ring
 components impart strength to construct and their circular design
offers a convenient means for providing bilateral support with
greater flexibility in the placement of the linear connecting
elements. The ability of SK single clamps to accommodate a
variety of pin diameters simplifies assembly of "tie-in'
constructs.
As three or four rings are generally used to stabilize fractures
with traditional circular fixator constructs, the limited anatomic
working space in the small dog and cats can complicate
application of a circular fixator frame. Application of hybrid
constructs is simpler than three or four ring circular fixators in
smaller dogs and cats. Hybrid constructs allow the surgeon to
 apply the frame using a more traditional "linear mentality" which
is simply for individuals less proficient in the methods of
Ilizarov. We have also used these hybrid constructs for
performing transarticular stabilization, most commonly to
stabilize arthrodeses, to supplement internal fixation
(intramedullary pins, interlocking nails or plate and screw
fixation) of fractures and for performing limb deformity
correction.
The post-operative management of animals with circular fixators or
hybrid frames really differs little from management of animals
with traditional linear fixators. Following surgery, the fixator is
wrapped to limit post-operative swelling and to protect incisions
and wire and/or pin insertion wounds. We place sterile gauze
sponges over any wounds as well as the wire and/or pin insertion 
sites and use the foam sponges to pack the space between the skin
and the frame to limit post-operative swelling. Care must be taken
not to pack the sponges too tightly or edema and swelling of the
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
97
distal limb may be aggravated. Cast padding and Vetwrap is then
wrapped around the entire fixator. The frame is initially unwrapped
on a daily basis. The limb and surgical sites are assessed for
swelling, the wire and/or pin-skin interfaces are cleaned with dilute
chlorhexidine solution and the frame is re-wrapped. When the
acute swelling and edema have subsided packing sponges within
the fixator frame is no longer necessary and we advise the owner
construct a shroud, which can be secured over the entire frame, but
can be easily removed for daily cleaning of the wire and/or pin-
skin interfaces.
During lengthenings and corrections of angular deformities it is
each day to reduce the development of flexure contracture
Contracture is less of a problem when elevated (more frequent
distractions) rhythms are used. Administration of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs also seems to be beneficial during the
distraction period.
The most common complication we have observed associated with
the use of circular fixators, and to a lesser extent hybrid frames is
wire and/or pin tract drainage and bone lysis surrounding wires
and/or pins. Inflammation associated with fixation element
drainage is usually not seen until several weeks after surgery and
generally does not influence the final result of the procedure even
when the apparatus is in place for an extended period of time. If
drainage is substantial or purulent or there is substantial bone lysis
 and proliferation adjacent to a wire and/or pin, that fixation
element should be removed. Proper insertion techniques and
meticulous, appropriate daily care can greatly decrease incidence
of wire tract complications.
REFERENCES
1.
Anderson GM, Lewis DD, Radasch RM, et al. Circular external skeletal fixation stabilization
of antebrachial and crural fractures in 25 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:479-498, 2002.
2.
           
importance of pin rigidity. J Ped Ortho 8:396-401, 1988.
3.
(eds). Operative Principals of Ilizarov. Milan, Italy, Medi Surgical Vido 1991;pp 65-72.
4.
Bianchi-Maiocchi A. The Ilizarov compression-distraction apparatus. In: Bianchi-Maiocchi
14.
Ch 7: Circular Extermal Skeletal Fixation
5.
Bronson DG, Samchukov ML, Birch JG, et al. A multi-variable biomechanical analysis. Clin
Biomech 13:441-448, 1998.
6.
Catagni M. Fractures of the leg (tibia). In: Bianchi Maiocchi A, Aronson J (eds). Operative
Principles of Ilizarov. Milan, Italy, Medi Surgical Vido 1991 ;pp 91-124.
7.
Collins KE, Lewis DD, Lanz OI, et al. Use of a circular external skeletal fixator for stifle
arthrodesis in a dog. J Sm Anim Pract 41:312-315, 2000.
8.
Cross AR, Lewis DD, Murphy ST, et al. Effect of ring diameter and wire tension on the axial
biomechanics of four ring circular external skeletal fixator constructs. Am J Vet Res
62:1025-1030, 2001.
9.
Cross AR, Lewis DD, Rigaud S, et al. Effect of wire tension on the biomechanics of
asymmetric four-ring circular external skeletal fixator constructs. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatol 15:44-50, 2002.
10.  Egger EL, Histand MB, Norrdin RW, et al. Canine osteotomy healing when stabilized with
Traumatol 6:182-187, 1993.
11. Ehrhart N. Longitudinal bone transport for treatment of primary bone tumors in dogs:
technique description and outcome in 9 dogs. Vet Surg 34:24-34, 2005.
12.
osteogenesis in dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:703-721, 2002.
13.  Elkins AD, Morandi M, Zembo M. Distraction osteogenesis in the dog using the Ilizaroy
external ring fixator. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:419-426, 1993.
14. Farese JP, Lewis DD, Cross AR, et al. Use of IMEXTM SK-circular external fixator hybrid
constructs for fracture stabilization in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:279-289,
2002.
15.  Ferreti A. The application of the Ilizarov technique to veterinary medicine. In: Bianchi-
Maiocchi A, Aronson J (eds). Operative Principles of Ilizarov. Milan, Italy, Medi Surgical
Vido 1991;pp 551-570.
16.  Fleming B, Paley D, Kristiansen T, et al. A biomechanical analysis of the Ilizarov external
fixator. Clin Orthop 241:95-105, 1989.
17.(
Gasser B, Boman B, Wyder D, et al. Stiffness characteristics of the circular Ilizarov device as
opposed to conventional external fixators. J Biomech Eng 112:15-21, 1990.
18.  Goodship AE, Kenwright J. The influence of induced micro-motion upon the healing of
experimental tibial fractures. J Bone Joint Surg 67[B]:650-655, 1985.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
93
19.  Green SA. Skeletal defects. A comparison of bone grafting and bone transport for segmental
skeletal defects. In: Green SA (ed). Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, JB
Lippincott Co 1994:pp 111-117.
20. Green SA, Harris NL, Wall DM, et al. The Rancho mounting technique for the Ilizarov
method. Clin Orthop 280:104-116, 1992.
21.H
Halling KB, Lewis DD, Jones RW, et al. Use of circular fixator constructs to stabilize
intertarsal/tarsometatarsal arthrodeses in three dogs. Aus Vet J (submitted).
22.
Ilizarov GA (ed). Transosseous Osteosynthesis. Theoretical and Clinical Aspects of the
Regeneration and Growth of Tissue. Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1992:pp 63-136.
23.  Jerram RM, Walker AM, Sutherland-Smith J, et al. Treating pedal shortening in a dog by
metatarsal distraction oste0genesis. J Sm Anim Pract 46:191-195, 2005.
24.
 Juan JA, Vera PP, Sanchez-Lacuesta HJ, et al. Biomechanical consequence of callus
development in Hoffman, Wagner, Orthofix and Ilizarov external fixators. J Biomechanics
25:995, 1992
25.
Kenwright J, Goodship AE. Controlled mechanical stimulation in the treatment of tibial
fractures. Clin Orthop 241:36-37, 1989.
healing of tibial fractures. Lancet 8517(2):1185-1187, 1986.
27.  Kummer FJ. Biomechanics of the Ilizarov external fixator. Clin Orthop 280:11-14, 1992.
28. Langley-Hobbs SJ, Carmichael S, Pead MJ, et al. Management of antebrachial deformity and
shortening secondary to a synostosis in a dog. J Sm Anim Pract 37:359-363, 1996.
29. Latte Y. A specific vet Ilizarov apparatus for the treatment of fractures, delayed union and
mal union. Proceedings of the 18" Annual Meeting of the Veterinary Orthopedics Society
1991;p 51.
30. Lesser AS. Segmental bone transport for the treatment of bone deficits. J Am Anim
Hosp Ass0c 30:322-330, 1994.
31.  Leuno, CY, Ma RYP, Clark JA, et al. Viscoelastic behavior of tissue in leg lengthening by
distraction. Clin Orthop 139:102-109, 1979.
32.
 Lewis DD, Bronson DG, Cross AR, et al. Axial characteristics of circular external skeletal
fixator single ring constructs. Vet Surg 30:386-394, 2001.
Ch 7: Circular External Skeletal Fixation
33. Lewis DD, Bronson DG, Samchukov ML, et al. Biomechanics of circular external skeletal
fixation. Vet Surg 27:454-464, 1998.
34.  Lewis DD, Cross AR, Carmichael S, et al. Recent advances in external skeletal fixation. J Sm
Anim Pract 42:103-112, 2001.
circular external skeletal fixation system. Part I: Use in fractures of arthrodeses. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 12:108-117, 1999.
36.  Lewis DD, Radasch RM, Beale BS, et al. Initial clinical experience with the IMEXTM
circular external skeletal fixation system. Part II: Use in bone lengthening and correction of
angular and rotational deformities. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 12:118-127, 1999.
37. Marcellin-Little DJ. Treatment of bone deformities with circular external skeletal fixation.
Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet 21:481-491, 1999.
38.
 Marcellin-Little DJ. Fracture treatment with circular external fixation. Vet Clin N Am: Sm
Anim Pract 29:1153-1170, 1999.
39.  Marcellin-Little DJ, Ferretti A, Roe SC, et al. Hinged Ilizarov external fixation for correction
of antebrachial deformities. Vet Surg 27:231-245, 1998.
40.
Orbay GO, Kummer FJ, Frankel VN. The effect of wire configuration on the stability of the
Ilizarov external fixator. Clin Orthop 279:299-302, 1992.
41.
Owen MA. Use of the Ilizarov method to manage a septic tibial fracture nonunion with a
large cortical defect. J Sm Anim Pract 41:124-127, 2000.
42.  Paley D. Biomechanics of the Ilizarov-external fixator. In: Bianchi-Maiocchi A, Aronson J
(eds). Operative Principals of Ilizarov. Milan, Italy, Medi Surgical Vido 1991;pp 31-41.
43.
 Paley D, Fleming B, Catagni M, et al. Mechanical evaluation of external fixators used in
limb lengthening. Clin Orthop 250:50-57, 1990.
44.F
 Podolsky A, Chao EYs. Biomechanical performance of Ilizarov external fixators. Trans
Orthop Res 15:416, 1990.
 45.  Rovesti GL, Bascucci M, Schmidt K, Marcellin-Little DJ. Limb sparing using a double bone-
transport technique for treatment of a distal tibial osteosarcoma in a dog. Vet Surg 3l:70-77,
2002.
 46.  Rovesti GL, Schmidt K, Bosio A, Margini A. Treatment of radius-ulna fractures by means of
the Ilizarov technique: 21 cases. Proceedings of the 10" Annual Scientific Meeting, European
College of Veterinary Surgeons, Velbert, Germany, July 6-8, 2001.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
95
47.  Stallings JT, Lewis DD, Welch RD, et al. An introduction to distraction osteogenesis and the
principles of the Ilizarov method. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 11:59-67, 1998.
Tommasini Degna M, Ehrhart N, Ferretti A, et al. Bone transport osteogenesis for limb
salvage following resection of primary bone tumors: Experience with six cases (1991-1996).
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 3:18-22, 2000.
49.
Welch RD, Lewis DD. Distraction osteogenesis. Vet Clin N Am: Sm Anim Pract 29:1187-
1205,1999.
96
Ch 7:CircularExternalSkeletal Fixation
Chapter 8
Orthopaedic Emergencies
Craig Macpherson
 Most orthopaedic emergencies are a result of trauma. Often the
 orthopaedic injuries are not life-threatening, but some concurrent
soft tissue lesions often are. Therefore, a thorough examination of
 the whole patient is mandatory.
 Moreover, the way an orthopaedic lesion is initially managed will
often have a bearing on the clinical course thereafter. Furthermore,
an understanding of traumatology and the epidemiology of
traumatology facilitates better understanding of cases that have
suffered physical trauma.
 Non-Orthopaedic Considerations:
Clinical Examination of the Traumatised Patient
Head Trauma
High-rise syndrome
Compartment syndrome
Open fractures of long bones
Open joint injuries: shearing injuries.
Luxations
Vertebral column injuries
Sepsis
Septic Arthritis
Discospondylitis
Osteomyelitis
 Procedural consequences
PMMA Usage (Bone Cement)
 Intra-medullary Reaming & Nailing ...
Thrombo-embolisation
Fat Embolisation
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
6
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE TRAUMATISED ANIMAL
The main principles of assessing traumatised animals are:
· Performing an initial physical examination of the
cardiovascular, respiratory and rostral neurological systems
Performing an initial thorough physical examination of all
 body systems including those mentioned above (often
examining the musculo-skeletal system last)
·  Performing serial repeat clinical examinations of all body
systems (especially for the urinary system)
Considering initial radiologic, serological and haematological
tests
 Considering serial radiologic, serological and haematological
tests
Determine whether the animal is in extremis and act appropriately
if it is; assess and deal with the cardiorespiratory systems and
major haemorrhage initially.
of lung sounds dorsally if there is pneumothorax, absence of lung
sounds ventrally if there is fluid in the pleural cavity, or absence of
lung sounds caudally (caudodorsally or caudoventrally or both) if
there is marked displacement of abdominal contents thorough a
diaphragmatic hernia.
In cases with respiratory distress it is often difficult to auscultate
the heart, so assessment of capillary refill and femoral or distal
(pedal) pulse is often a more prudent initial assessment.
When the patient is stable, work from rostral to caudal. Take time
to placate the animal and gain some rapport. This enables one to
work more confidently and with less risk of destabilising the
patient, especially if it's panting.
Evaluate the pupils and eye position as an initial cursory
neurological assessment. Assess the degree of mentation and look
for nystagmus. Assess the mucous membrane colour and capillary
refill as indicators of peripheral cardiovascular circulation.
Assess the abdomen by gentle palpation and ballotment.
Abdominocentesis may be warranted.
Consider collecting blood samples for haematological and
biochemical tests. These tests are useful for preliminary assessment
    s   r  n
 sss o n ss    in hs a
98
Ch 8: Orthopaedic Emergencies
known to be affected (eg. Elevated urea and creatinine in a cat with
diaphragmatic hernia and concurrent bilateral ureteral rupture).
If presented in recumbency assess the animal for abnormalities in
posture, pain perception in all four legs, voluntary movement and
Ss e yo iss A si ae f s sxaen x
injury, do not force the animal to stand or ambulate.
If ambulatory, evaluate the degree of ambulation (normal, ataxic.
weak or lame) on a sure footed surface such as carpet (inside), or
 grass or asphalt (outside). Perform a physical examination of the
 ae  ne ss assos
contrast radiographs, thoracocentesis and abdominocentesis).
Record all relevant findings and concerns for future reference,
particularly to document specific body systems for serial
      s s 
lesions (such as lower conduit rupture) may only have subtle
clinical signs such as pollakiuria, oliguria, or haematuria (ie. the
animal can still urinate to a degree).
If contrast radiological assessment of the lower urinary tract is to
be performed, it is best to start with a positive contrast urethrogram
to evaluate urethral patency, especially in male dogs, before
 progressing to do a cystogram. Lateral and oblique ventrodorsal
radiographs should be made of the urethrogram.
In cases of big dog/little animal (dog or cat) attack, surgical
examination and treatment. In some cases the adjacent body cavity
abdomen via ventral midline incision) as well as surgically
exploring the region containing the bite wounds (ie. two separate
surgeries).
 Even then one may need to approach the caudodorsal thoracic
cavity separately of via diaphragmatic incision. Omentum may be
utilised for packing into wound into the dorsal abdominal or
thoracic cavities.
 If one is operating on a body cavity for a specific lesion (eg.
Coeliotomy for diaphragmatic hernia), one should use the
opportunity to examine all the contents of that cavity (concurrent
lesions may include urinary bladder rupture, ureteral rupture as
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
99
 mentioned above, biliary duct rupture or avulsion, hepatic lobe
damage, etc.).
In summary, the main principles of assessing traumatised animals
are:
 Performing a thorough physical examination of all body
systems
■
 Performing serial repeat clinical examinations of all body
systems (especially the urinary system)
Considering surgical exploration of major wounds, (and
 adjacent body cavities if it is likely that they have been
entered)
 Considering (serial) radiologic, serological and haematological
tests
100
Ch 8:OrthopaedicEmergencies
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
The main principles of assessing animals with musculoskeletal
disorders are:
■
 Performing a thorough initial physical examination 
■
Performing appropriate regional diagnostic tests
·  Interpreting findings of those ancillary diagnostic tests (such
 as radiographs) in light or both the clinical history and the
findings of the physical examination
· Recording all relevant findings for future reference, and
 ■ Performing repeat examinations as indicated by the clinical
status
 d a si arn ds  a  p a 
evidence of disease (such as radiographic findings of hip dysplasia)
with multiple lesions such as coxofemoral degenerative joint
disease (DJD), lumbosacral stenosis (cauda equina syndrome),
elbow DJD and carpal DJD.
The former patient may or may not develop signs associated with
its hip dysplasia, or it may develop another lesion such as a
ruptured cruciate ligament. The second patient may have an acute
exacerbation of one of its lesions, or develop another lesion such as
an osteosarcoma or a ruptured cruciate ligament.
are often provocative. Palpation involves detecting anomalies in
hand pressure) in and around the structures and regions. One
should often compare one side to the other. One may consider both
sides to be abnormal (equally or unequally).
Manipulation involves moving and attempting to move structures
such as joints, tendons, muscles, patellae, the tail, or regions such
as the cervical region. Joints, the cervical region and the tail are
manipulated through a range of motion, which includes flexion,
extension, and mid range of motion. The coxofemoral joint, and to
a certain extent the shoulder and cervical region, can normally be
rotated and abducted or flexed laterally (neck) as well.
The degree of flexion or extension may be abnormal (limited/less
or excessive). There may be excessive pain response to either
flexion or extension or both. There may be abnormal lateral or
medial movement of the limb distal to a joint relative to the limb
proximal to the joint indicating collateral ligament insufficiency or
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
707
peri-articular bone fracture. In some instances limited range of
 motion may not be clinically significant.
For example, many normal dogs have restricted carpal flexion, and
 many German Shepherds have restricted hock extension compared
to other breeds (ie.do not extend to 180 degrees).
Radiographs are always indicated in regions with clinical
abnormalities. Further ancillary tests include joint fluid analysis,
bone scans, ultrasonography as it becomes better studied in small
animal orthopaedics, and CT & MRI scans.
 Careful palpation or even stress radiographs are required to assess
carpus. Cases of rupture of only the short component of the
collateral ligaments many only be detected by rotational instability
 of the tibiotarsal joint in the anaesthetised animal.
702
Ch 8:OrthopaedicEmergencies
HEAD TRAUMA
Cranial Fractures
 Cranial Fractures are described as extracranial (eg frontal bones
over sinuses, nuchal and saggital crests) or intracraniat; the latter
may be linear, depressed or comminuted.
Most are closed. Prior to the increased availability of cross-
sectional imaging - computed tomography and magnetic resonant
imaging - it was empirically thought only markedly depressed
isd n  a s i s
 and meninges were thought to prevent brain laceration or 
penetration.
Comminuted fractures are often considered the most severe, with
sharp fragments lacerating the meninges, venous sinuses and
cerebral cortex. It is difficult to elevate a depressed area of the
 calvarium. Lifting of one edge of a fragment tends to further push
the opposite edge deeper. Drilling multiple burr holes around the
edge of the fracture allegedly allows a small, curved blunt elevator
to be inserted to lever fragments from beneath, but even this is an
aggressive act. Large calvarial defects are often adequately
' protected' by the temporalis m.
Brain Injury
 Most primary brain injuries are the result of parenchymal
contusion, so are not often directly due to or associated with
fracture of the bones of the cranial vault or haematomas.
Secondary brain injury may then develop, so treatment should
reduce the risk of this. Hypotension, hypoxaemia and abnormal
blood glucose levels are important factors to address.
Considerations
Pulse Oximetry
Care with empirical "shock fluid therapy”
Maintain normal blood volume
Maintain normal blood pressure
Maintain normal blood glucose levels
 Supplemental oxy gen
Assisted ventilation
Concurrent spinal fractures may be present, especially cranial
cervical fractures.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
703
REFERENCES
1.
  s a d     s g   s
(30(1): 207-25.
2.
Platt Sr, Radaelli ST, NcDonnell JJ (2002) Computed tomography after mild head trauma in
dogs. Vet Rec 151 (8):243.
3.
 Platt SR (2003) the six points of head trauma management in dogs and cats. Veterinary
Times 33: 12-13
4.
Skerritt GC (2003) European Journal of Companion animal Practice 13(1):33-7.
5.
Syring RS, Otto CM, Drobatz KJ (2001) Hyperglycaemia in dogs and cats with head trauma:
122 cases (1997-1999) J Am Vet Med Assoc218(7):1224-9
Jaw Fractures
These are often open and therefore contaminated; however, there is
relatively greater resistance to infection. Careful correlation
between physical and radiographic findings must be made because
of the likelihood of multiple lesions and the difficulties in
interpreting radiographs.
 Endotracheal tube placement via pharyngostomy often aids
exposure and manipulation, and allows evaluation of post-
reduction occlusion.
Veterinary dental specialists and dental practitioners prefer inter-
 dental wiring or inter-dental bonding or both, if possible. Other
fixation techniques include external (muzzle, external
fixateurs/splints - especially acrylic) or internal (wires, pins, plates
and screws).
Hard Palate
Commonly midline. Often associated with other injuries, especially
thoracic trauma.
 Treatment involves either
1.  wiring teeth together (both canines and both P4 teeth),
 2. using a transverse pin and figure *8' wire, or
3.
passing wire dorsal (via holes drilled in the maxilla) and
ventral to the palate and twisting tight.
104
Ch 8: Orthopaedic Emergencies
HIGH-RISE SYNDROME
Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ. High-rise syndrome in cats J Am Vet
Med Ass0c. 1987 Dec 1;191(11): 1399-403
& Erratum in: J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988 Feb 15;192(4):542
High-rise syndrome was diagnosed in 132 cats over a 5-month
period presenting to the Animal Medical Center, New York,
NY 10021. The mean age of the cats was 2.7 years. Ninety
percent of the cats had some form of thoracic trauma. Of
these, 68% had pulmonary contusions and 63% had
 pneumothorax. Abnormal respiratory patterns were evident
clinically in 55%. Other common clinical findings included
facial trauma (57%), limb fractures (39%), shock (24%),
traumatic luxations (18%), hard palate fractures (17%),
hypothermia (17%), and dental fractures (17%). Emergency
(life-sustaining) treatment, primarily because of thoracic
 trauma and shock, was required in 37% of the cats. Non-
emergency treatment was required in an additional 30%. The
remaining 30% were observed, but did not require treatment.
 Ninety percent of the treated cats survived.
Vnuk D, Pirkic B, Maticic D, Radisic B, Stejskal M, Babic T,
Kreszinger M, Lemo N. Feline high-rise syndrome: 119 cases
(1998-2001). J Feline Med Surg. 2004 Oct;6(5):305-12.
Veterinary Faculty, University of Zagreb, Croatia.
High-rise syndrome was diagnosed in 119 cats over a 4-year
period. 59.6% of cats were younger than one year, and the
 average height of the fall was four stories. High-rise syndrome
was more frequent during the warmer period of the year.
96.5% of the presented cats, survived after the fall. 46.2% of
cats had fractured limbs; 38.5% of fractures were of the
forelimb, 61.5% of the hindlimb. The tibia was fractured most
often (36.4%), followed by the femur (23.6%). 78.6% of
femoral fractures were distal. The mean age of patients with
femoral fractures was 9.1 months, and with tibial fractures
 29.2 months. Thoracic trauma was diagnosed in 33.6% of cats.
 Pneumothorax was diagnosed in 20% of cats, and pulmonary
contusions in 13.4%. Falls from the seventh or higher stories,
are associated with more severe injuries and with a higher
incidence of thoracic trauma.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
705
 Pratschke KM, Kirby BM High rise syndrome with impalement in
three cats. J Small Anim Pract. 2002 Jun;43(6):261-4.  Royal
(Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
 Falls from second storey windows onto spiked metal railings.
Two cats presented with penetrating thoracic wounds and
extensive pulmonary parenchymal trauma, while one
 presented with abdominal impalement and splenic rupture.
Following stabilisation, all three cats underwent exploratory
 surgery. A good outcome was achieved in two of the cats: one
with thoracic and one with abdominal penetration.
Gordon LE, Thacher C, Kapatkin A (1993) High-rise syndrome in
dogs: 81 cases (1985-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc. Jan
1;202(1):118-22.
Animal Medical Center, New York, NY 10021.
Dogs fell from 1 to 6 stories, and of 52 dogs for which the fall
was witnessed, 39 had (75%) jumped. Dogs sustained a triad
of injuries to the face, thorax, and extremities, similar to
injuries seen in cats with high-rise syndrome, but with
 differences in degree and distribution. Height fallen and
landing surface affected initial status and type and severity of
injury. The cause of fall influenced distribution of extremity
injury. Dogs falling < 3 stories had a high prevalence of
extremity fractures. Higher falls resulted in more spinal
injuries. They recommend initial treatment for shock and
thoracic trauma followed by orthopaedic and neurologic
 evaluation. Visceral trauma should be considered if response 
to emergency treatment is poor. All but 1 of the dogs survived.
706
Ch 8:Orthopaedic Emergencies
COMPARTMENT SYNDROME
surrounded by bone, fascia, epimysium and skin. The main tissues
within them are muscle-tendon units, peripheral nerves, and blood
vessels. The bone, fascia, epimysium and skin are barriers to
swelling due to fluid accumulation - such as seen with
haemorrhage - resulting in increased pressure within one or more
compartments.
Sequelae include neuromuscular ischaemia. External dressings,
casts, infusions, tourniquets per se, and the way a limb is managed
after a tourniquet is removed, may also cause or contribute to
osteofascial compartment syndrome.
Symptoms in people include pain out of proportion to that expected
for the injuries sustained. Peripheral pulses and capillary filling
are often normal when compartment syndrome is developing.
I t is often difficult to distinguish between arterial occlusion due to
compartment syndrome and neuroporaxia after trauma in
veterinary and human patients: these may co-exist.
The only effective treatment is fasciotomy: incisions in the fascia
and often management of open skin wounds.
REFERENCES
1.  Anderson DM, White RA. (2000) Ischemic bandage injuries: a case series and review of the
literature. Vet Surg. Nov-Dec;29(6):488-98.
2.  Basinger RR, Aron DN, Crowe DT, Purinon PT (1987) Osteofascial Compartment Syndrome
in the dog Vet Surg 16(6):427-34
3.  cited Oliverieri M, Suter PF (1978) Compartment syndrome of the front leg of a dog due to
rupture of the median artery JAAHA 14: 210-8
4. Gunal I, Kose, Gurer D (1996) Compartment Syndrome after intraosseous infusion: an
experimental study in dogs J Pediatr Surg 31(11): 1491-3.
 5. Mars M, Brock-Utne JG. The effect of tourniquet release on intra-compartmental pressure in
the bandaged and unbandaged limb. J Hand Surg [Br]. 1991 Aug;16(3):318-22
6.
 Mars M. The effect of post-operative bleeding on compartment pressure. J Hand Surg [Br].
1994 Apr;19(2):149-53.
 7. McLaren AC, Rorabeck CH. The pressure distribution under tourniquets. J Bone Joint Surg
Am. 1985 Mar;67(3):433-8.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey. Proc.No.363
707
OPEN FRACTURES
There are obviously two main local lesions: the fracture and the
management facilitates wound and bone healing.
Assessment
 grades:
Grade I - Bone fragment(s) penetrate the skin from within.
 Grade II - Skin and soft tissue deficits, caused by external trauma,
 connect with the fracture. Hair, dirt and road material may be
driven into the wound.
 Grade II - Extensive loss of soft tissue. Includes degloving
injury, gunshot wounds and neurovascular injury.
The classification applied to humans in North America and
probably elsewhere - that of Gustillo and Anderson - is a little
more ela borate
Type I open fracture communicates with a clean wound, < 1 cm in
length.
Type II open fracture communicates with a wound > 1 cm long
without extensive soft tissue injury, flaps, or avulsions.
Iype IlIA open fracture has adequate soft tissue coverage despite
extensive lacerations or flaps, or is sustained by high energy
trauma regardless of the character and size of the wound.
Type IIIB open fracture has extensive soft tissue loss with
 periosteal stripping and bone exposure, and/or is associated with
massive contamination.
Type IlIC open fracture is associated with vasular injury needing
repair. This classification has been useful for comparison of results
 and assessment of treatment methods.
By comparison, Gustillo and Anderson types II and type IHIA are
 sd os n s p h a Aa on rs
& IIIC.
The rate of sepsis and non-union is generally higher with higher
grading
REFERENCE
 Gustillo R, B, Mendoza RM, Williams DN. (1984) Problems in the management of type III
(severe) open fractures: A new classification of type III open fractures.
J Trauma 24:742-46.
108
Ch 8: Orthopaedic Emergencies
Wound management.
Calm the patient; evaluate it thoroughly. Dress the wound until
ready to surgically explore the area; do not probe it until that time.
Radiograph the limb at this stage or after anaesthetised.
Meticulously prepare the adjacent skin and limb for surgery.
Swabs, or exudate and pieces of necrotic tissue, should be
submitted for bacteriological testing. The results of these tests will
 aid future infection control. Then use systemic antibiotics,
preferably intravenously (eq. cloxacillin). Try to avoid nosocomial
infection.
Debride and Lavage.
 For some time, it was taught that debridement within 6 hours
wounds would become secondarily infected. Proper wound
management is now deemed more important early wound
debridement,
Skaggs DL, Kautz SM, Kay RM, Tolo VT. Effect of delay of
surgical treatment on rate of infection in open fractures in children.
Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics 2000;20(1): 19-22.
Skaggs DL, Friend L, Alman B, Chambers HG, Schmitz M, Leake
B, Kay RM, Flynn JM 2005. The effect of surgical delay on acute
infection following 554 open fractures in children. J Bone Joint
Surg (Am) Jan;87(1):8-12.
the rates of acute infection were similar regardless of whether
 surgery was performed within six hours after the injury or at
least seven hours after the injury. The study suggested that, in
children who receive early antibiotic therapy following an
 open fracture, surgical debridement within six hours after the
 injury offers lile benefit over debridement within twenty-four
hours after the injury with regard to the prevention of acute
infection.
Boyd JI 3rd, Wongworawat MD. High-pressure pulsatile lavage
causes soft tissue damage. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2004
Oct;(427): 13-7.
Park SH, Silva M, Bahk WJ, McKellop H, Lieberman JR. Effect
of repeated irrigation and debridement on fracture healing in an
animal model J Orthop Res. 2002 Nov;20(6): 1197-204.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
709
 This experimental study suggested that repeated irrigation and
debridement, associated with persistent rigid immobilization,
may contribute to the development of delayed unions or
atrophic non-unions.
Anglen JO. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. Wound irrigation in
musculoskeletal injury. 2001 Jul-Aug;9(4):219-26.
Wound irrigation to remove debris and lessen bacterial
contamination is an essential component of open fracture care.
However, considerable practice variation exists in the details
of technique.
Volume is an important factor; increased volume improves
wound cleansing to a point, but the optimal volume is
unknown. High-pressure flow has been shown to remove more
bacteria and debris and to lower the rate of wound infection
compared with low-pressure irrigation, although recent in vitro
 and animal studies suggest that it may also damage bone.
 Pulsatile flow has not been demonstrated to increase efficacy.
Antiseptic additives can kill bacteria in the wound, but host-
tissue toxicities limit their use.
The use of antiseptics in contaminated wounds in animal and
 clinical studies of have yielded conflicting outcomes.
Antibiotic irrigation has been effective in ex perimental studies
in some types of animal wounds, but human clinical data are
unconvincing due to poor study design. There are few animal
 or clinical studies of musculoskeletal wounds. Detergent
irrigation aims to remove, rather than kill, bacteria and has
shown promise in animal models of the complex contaminated
 musculoskeletal wound.
Fracture Management.
 do oi d ss as are au s
fractures in humans for both open fractures per se and for children
(see below). The human studies make interesting reading but the
information and recommendations cannot at this stage be
ex trapolated to veterinary patients.
Dougherty and Smith (1995) reported in 20 canine cases
resulting from gunshot trauma in dogs: 16 were plated; 2 were
stabilised with external fixation and 2 were treated with pins
 and screws. Bacterial culture swabs taken during surgery only
770
Ch 8: Orthopaedic Emergencies
yielded one positive culture, but 3 developed osteomylitis:
none of these 3 were the animal with positive culture, yet all
had received post-op antibiotics.
Plan fracture fixation on the basis of the grading and results of
radiographs. If internal fixation is contemplated then plan the
enough, and close to a conventional approach to the affected bone.
*In principle (definitive) fracture fixation is preferred to temporary
measures such as bandaging and splinting because wound
management is easier, swelling diminishes more rapidly, there is
less ongoing injury to the soft tissues, and the patient is more
comfortable" (Johnson, 1986).
In general all grade I and non-infected grade II fractures are treated
is avoided because it permits continued fracture instability, it may
spread bacterial contamination from the fracture site further into
the medullary cavity, and it disrupts the medullary blood supply'
(Johnson, 1986).
aet punom peins aeredes e uoy aoey a yoodde o Ai
bone fragments may be washed and wiped in saline and
 of benefit.
Grade IHI fractures are initially stabilised with an external fixateur
which may be used as the sole means of stabilising the fracture or
be replaced with a plate after soft tissue healing has occurred or 
infection controlled.
External fixateurs afford easy wound management and limited
weight-bearing: there are relatively new models that function as
well biomechanically as unilateral (type I) constructs, and are
therefore generally easier and quicker to apply.
REFERENCES
1.
Dougherty MA & Smith MM 1995 Contamination and infection of fractures resulting from
gunshot trauma in dogs: 20 cases (1987-1992) JAVMA 206:203-5.
2.
Johnson KA (1986) Open Fractures, Postoperative Infection and Osteomyelitis
 In *Orthopaedic Surgery - Dogs and cats. Proceedings No. 87" pp 267-74. Post-Graduate
Committee in Veterinary Science, The University of Sydney.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
777
3.
 Rahal SC, Volpi RS, Vulcano LC, Ciani RB, Mannarino R. Large segmental radius and ulna
 defect treated by bone transportation with the Ilizarov technique. Aust Vet J. 2003
Nov;81(11):677-80
Bone Grafting
Autogenous cancellous bone graft (collected using separate
instruments from the iliac wings, humerus or tibia) may be used
initially or at 7-10 days. Autogenous cancellous bone graft is likely
to accelerate bone healing and should not sequestrate.
grafting should be performed in open fractures. In a human study
reported by Chapman et al (JBJS 1997), 31% of open fractures
were treated w/ bone graft substitutes and 28% of open fractures
were treated w/ autogenous bone grafts: infection at the fracture
site occurred in 5% of patients in which bone graft substitutes were
used versus 13% of fractures in which autogenous grafts were
used.
References from Human literature
Gustilo-RB; Gruninger-RP; Davis-T (1987) Orthopedics. Dec;
10(12): 1781-8
Analysis of 303 open fractures revealed an overall wound
sepsis rate in the 303 open fractures was 4.4%, with 0% in
a1 sisdas auL 'II adAi u1 %l'21 pue '1 adki ui %s'z 'I adk1
for type IIIA, IIIB, and IIIC were 5%, 28%, and 8%,
respectively. The overall non-union rate was 8.6%, yet for all
type II1 open fractures was 18.5%. The overall rate of
amputation for type III fractures was 18.7% with Type IIA,
IHIB, and IHIC open fractures having amputation rates of 2.5%,
5.6%, and 25%, respectively.
Hfpe-P-G. Cole-W-G.. J-Bone-Joint-Surg-[Br]. 1992 Jul. 74(4). P
546-53.
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
Results of treatment of open tibial fractures in 92 children; 22
fractures were Gustilo type I, 51 type II and 19 type I1. All
children received tetanus prophylaxis, systemic antibiotics for
48 hours and thorough debridement and irrigation of the
wound.
Fifty-one wounds with minimal soff-tissue injury were closed
primarily. The other 41 were initially left open; of these, 18
small wounds were allowed to heal secondarily and 23 larger
wounds required split skin grafts or soft-tissue local or
 microvascular free flaps.
712
Ch 8: Orthopaedic Emergencies
Stable fractures were reduced and immobilised in an above.
knee plaster cast (71%) and external fixation (28%) was used
 for unstable fractures, extensive soft-tissue injury and multiple
injuries.
Short-term complications included compartment syndrome
(4%), superficial infection (8%), deep infection (3%), delayed
union (16%), non-union (7.5%) and malunion (6.5%): these
incidences are similar to those reported in adults.
Selective primary closure of wounds did not increase the
incidence of infection.
External fixation was associated with a greater occurrence of
delayed and non-union than plaster immobilisation, but this
technique was used most often for the more severe injuries.
Late review, at 1.5 to 9.8 years, showed a high incidence of
continuing morbidity including pain at the healed fracture site
(50%), restriction of sporting activity (23%), joint stiffness
(23%), cosmetic defects (23%) and minor leg-length
discrepancies (64%).
 Open tibial fractures in children are associated with a high
incidence of early and late complications, which are more
frequent in children with Gustilo type III injuries. The Gustilo
classification was a useful guide for predicting the outcome
and planning treatment.
Johnson-KD; Bone-LB; Scheinberg-R J-Orthop-Trauma. 1988;
2(3): 175-80
A prospective randomized study of severe open tibial fractures
(Type II and II1) was performed. Individual fractures were
 randomized to treatment groups according to initial antibiotic
therapy: One consisted of a first-generation cephalosporin, and
the other consisted of a third-generation cephalosporin. Initial
 specific antibiotic treatment was used as indicated by culture.
 The purpose of this study was to determine whether or not
additional gram-negative coverage had an effect on the overall
infection rate or the type of infection in severe open tibial
fractures. Additional factors, such as the timing of bone grafts
and soft tissue coverage, were evaluated in this study as well.
Although there was no statistical difference in the rate of
infection with the use of a first- versus a third-generation
cephalosporin, there was a trend toward a decreased infection
rate as well as toward less morbid infections with the use of a
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
773
third-generation cephalosporin. The study also confirms that
early bone graft should not be performed prior to 6 weeks post
injury or after successful soft tissue coverage has been
achieved. On the other hand, soft tissue coverage procedures
should be performed at the earliest possible date to decrease
 the overall infection rate.
Non-operative Management of Pediatric Type I Open Fractures.
Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics. 25(4):513-517, July/August
2005.
lobst, Christopher A MD; Tidwell,Michael A MD; King, Wesley F
MD
Retrospective study of results of pediatric patients with type I
open fractures managed non-operatively from 1998 to 2003
the fracture clinically and radiologically. One deep infection
occurred in this series, producing an overall infection rate of
 2.5% . This compares favourably with the literature's infection
 rate of 1.9% in pediatric type I open fractures treated
operatively. There was a 0% infection rate in the 32 upper-
 extremity type I open fractures, and a 0% infection rate in the
 23 patients under age 12. These results suggest that non-
operative management of pediatric type I open fractures is safe
 and effective, especially in children under age 12 with upper-
extremity fractures.
774
Ch 8:Orthopaedic Emergencies
SHEARING INJURIES
These often grossly-contaminated wounds require thorough early
treatment with
●
 physical cleaning and removal of foreign particles,
 copious joint lavage, and
 culture and sensitivity.
These injuries should rarely, if ever, be closed primarily when this
is possible; all dirt that is ground into the wound cannot be
removed and may be better removed by subsequent exudation.
Also, some authors believe that the granulation tissue that develops
in these open wounds is likely to be converted into stronger, and
thus more supportive, scar tissue.
Tip: Use non-toothed or Adson-Brown thumb forceps to remove
foreign particles
Antibiotics, based on culture and sensitivity, should be continued
for at least 2-3 weeks.
A retrospective study published in 1995 by Beardsley and Shrader
indicated 85% of cases of joint instability due to shearing injury
had a good or excellent outcome when treated with a splint alone.
Subsequent surgical stabilisation may be indicated, however.
Management may be made easier with the use of external fixateurs
applied trans-articularly and the use of hinged linear fixateurs has 
recently been described.
Some authors have advocated early removal of a non-hinged
external fixateur - when the wound is covered by granulation
tissue (usually at 3-4 weeks) - and then supporting the limb in
 advocate exercise not be allowed until the 8th to 12th weeks.
depending on the stability achieved.
Screws and synthetic ligaments (monofilament suture, not wire)
may be placed to mimic the eroded, normal structures. Replacing
the short components of the collateral ligaments is difficult,
however.
Arthrodesis may be the best long term solution. Immediate
arthrodesis has also been described:
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
775
 Benson & Boudrieau (2002) Severe Carpal and Tarsal Shearing
Injuries Treated With an Immediate Arthrodesis in Seven Dogs.
JAmAnimHospAssoc. 38: 370-380.
Jaeger GH, Wosar MA, Marcellin-Little DJ, Lascelles BD. 2005
 Use of hinged transarticular external fixation for adjunctive joint
stabilization in dogs and cats: 14 cases (1999-2003). J Am Vet
Med Assoc. 227(4):586-91.
a retrospective study of the use of hinged trans-articular
external fixation frames in 8 cats and 6 dogs. The frames were
composed of metal or epoxy connecting rods and a hinge.: 9
animals (4 cats and 5 dogs) had tarsal. Ranges of motion in
affected stifle and tarsal joints were 57% and 72% of control
while the hinged frame was in place and 79% and 84% of
control after frame removal. Complications were encountered
 in 3 cats and 2 dogs and included breakage of pins and
connecting rods, hinge loosening, and failure at the hinge-
epoxy interface.
Diamond DW, Besso J, Boudrieau RJ 1999 Evaluation of Joint
Stabilization for Treatment of shearing Injuries of the Tarsus in 20
Dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35: 147-53.
44% of implants placed in 15 of 23 joints required removal at
infection, pain or lameness caused by broken or loose
implants. Wire was used in 13/15 cases and braided polyester
suture used in 2 cases, but 3 out of 4 cases with infection were
associated with the polyester suture...
REFERENCES
1.
Beardsley SL, Schrader SC 1995 Treatment of dogs with wound of the limbs caused by
shearing forces: 98 cases (1975-1993) J Am Vet Med Assoc; 207: 1071-5.
2.
Lee AH, Swaim SF, McGuire JA and Hughes KS (1987) Effects of Nonadherent Dressing
Materials on the Healing of Open Wounds in Dogs. JA VMA 190(4): 416.
3.
McGlennon NJ (1988) The Role of Bandaging in the Management of Open Wounds. Vet
Record 122: 630.
4.
Swaim SF and Lee AH (1987) Topical Wound Medications: A Review. JAVMA 190(12):
1588.
776
Ch 8: Orthopaedic Emergencies
LUXATIONS
Luxations such as elbow or coxofemoral luxations require early
 reduction to aid reduction and increase the chances of maintaining
reduction.
 Small bone or small joint luxations similarly require early
diagnosis and management.
SEPSIS
● bacteraemia (haematogenous spread),
 contiguous spread, or
due to inoculation at surgery.
They can have a sudden onset and thus may present as emergences
 ss ss nn n  a i  sd a
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
717
MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS
Fat embolism
This condition is recognised in human orthopedics, most
commonly associated with long bone fracture, particularly the
when preparing for intra-medullary nails or total hip replacement
(as well as during insertion of cement and the prosthesis), and
during the use of bone wax. The incidence in veterinary medicine
has not been investigated although there are occasional case reports
xa    (  ne )   
 studies in animals such as dogs or sheep.
The clinical signs are often respiratory, though may include altered
CNS states such as delirium, stupor or coma, lethargy or
 convulsions. Treatment should be directed at managing respiratory
failure.
Possible effects of polymethylmethacrylate (bone cement) (Anderson, 1988)
1. Hypotension - starting within 2 minutes and lasting up to 20
minutes
 2.  Cardiac irregularities - including bradycardia and cardiac
arrest
3.
 Hypoxaemia - for up to 2 and a half hours
4.B
 Bone necrosis - inevitable due to damage to the blood supply.
5.
Fat and Bone Marrow Embolism - see above
6.
Venous Thrombosis - local?
7.B
 Effects on Operating Room Personnel - contact allergy
(penetrates through 7 layers of Latex gloves), headache, eye
and respiratory irritations.
REFERENCES
1.
Anderson GI (1988) Polymethylmethacrylate: a Review of the Implications and
Complications of its Use in Orthopedic Surgery. VetCompOrthTraum 2: 74-9.
2.
Terrell SP, Sundeep Chandra AM, Pablo LS, and Lewis DD (2004)
Fatal Intraoperative Pulmonary Fat Embolism During Cemented Total Hip Arthroplasty in a
Dog J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40: 345 - 348.
778
Ch 8: Orthopaedic Emergencies
Chapter 9
Management of Canine Osteosarcoma:
Latest recommendations for amputation, limb sparing
and chemotherapy, cytotoxic implants and radiotherapy
 Rodney Straw
 During this presentation I will review canine osteosarcoma by way
of introduction highlighting the clinically relevant issues. With
this background as a springboard I will look at newer techniques in
clinical management and palliation. These notes may be useful as
a reference resource for some of the concepts and procedures I will
introduce and discuss.
INTRODUCTION
Osteosarcoma (Os) is the most common primary bone tumour in
dogs accounting for up to 85% of malignancies originating in the
skeleton. It is largely a disease of middle aged to older dogs, with a
median age of seven years. Osteosarcoma is classically a cancer of
large and giant breeds, only 5% of OS occur in dogs weighing less
than 15 kg. Males are reported to be slightly more frequently
affected than females however, in 544 cases of canine OS of all
sites treated at Colorado State University between 1986 and 1994
the male to female ratio was 1:1.2. Overall, approximately 75% of
OS occurs in the appendicular skeleton. The metaphyseal region of
long bones is the most common primary site with front limbs
affected twice as often as rear limbs and the distal radius and
proximal humerus being the two most common locations. It is
extremely rare for Os to be primarily located in bones adjacent to
the elbow.
Osteosarcoma is a mali gnant mesenchymal tumour of primitive
bone cells. These cells produce an extracellular matrix of osteoid.
Osteosarcoma has very aggressive local effects and causes lysis,
production of bone or both processes. The local disease is usually
attended by soft tissue swelling. Pathological fracture of the
affected bone can occur. Metastasis is very common and arises
early in the course of the disease, although usually subclinically.
Although less than 5% of dogs have radiographically detectable
    sd n s 
with metastatic disease, usually to the lungs, within 1 year when
amputation is the only treatment. Although the lung is the most
commonly reported site for metastasis, tumour spread to bones or
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
779
other soft tissue sites occurs with some frequency. The biological
behavior of Os of the mandible is probably an exception. Dogs
with OS of the mandible treated with mandibulectomy alone had a
1-year survival rate of 71% in one study. Survival of dogs with OS
distal to the antebrachiocarpal or tarsocrural joints was somewhat
longer than survival of dogs with Os of more common
 appendicular sites however OS in these sites is aggressive with a
high potential for metastasis.
Dogs with OS of appendicular sites generally present with a
lameness and swelling at the primary site. Large and giant breed
dogs that present with lameness or localized swelling at
metaphyseal sites should be evaluated with OS as the most likely
diagnosis. Initial evaluation of the primary site involves
interpretation of good quality radiographs. Based on signalment,
history, physical exam findings and radiographic findings a
 presumptive diagnosis of OS can be made. However, a definitive
diagnosis lies in correct procurement and interpretation of tissue
for histopathology. My preferred technique is a closed biopsy
       
evidence of apparent spread of the disease is important. High detail
thoracic radiographs should be taken during inspiration with the
patient awake, and should include three views: a ventrodorsal view
or a dorsoventral view and both right and left lateral views. The
patient's overall health status requires careful assessment.
Advancing years do not preclude treatment; however, prolonged
anesthesia and chemotherapy may not be tolerated in dogs with
organ compromise. A minimum database should include a
complete blood count, platelet count, serum biochemical analysis
and urinalysis. Occult metastatic disease is present in
approximately 90% of dogs at presentation and the median survival
is only 3 to 4 months if amputation is the only treatment, therefore
some form of systemic therapy is necessary if survival is to be
improved. Cisplatin used either alone or in combination with
doxorubicin on an alternating basis has been demonstrated to
improve survival in dogs with OS after amputation over
amputation alone. At Colorado State University (CSU), between
three and six doses of cisplatin 21 days apart at 70 mg/m^ body
Do Aranruxoidde oi paraisup aages ueq su eare aonns
dogs with OS after amputation or limbsparing. The median
survival was 392 days with a 1-year survival rate of 52% and a 2-
 year survival of 31%. The recommended dose for cisplatin is 70
mg/m? body surface area. Saline diuresis helps prevent
nephrotoxicity, which is the dose-limiting toxicity in dogs. Dogs
treated with amputation and 4 doses of cisplatin followed by
phosphatidylethanolamine (liposome/MTP-PE) had a median
720
Ch9:Management of Canine Osteosarcoma
survival time of 432 days. Carboplatin is a second generation
platinum compound that is less nephrotoxic than cisplatin. In a
 multi-institutional study of 48 dogs with appendicular OS treated
with amputation and up to four doses of carboplatin the median
survival was 321 days, and 35.4% of dogs were alive at one year.
The dose recommended for use in dogs is 300 mg/m? administered
every 3 weeks for four treatments however the maximum tolerated
cumulative dose has not been described. Doxorubicin was given at
 30 mg/m? every two weeks for five treatments to 35 dogs with
appendicular OS and surgical excision was performed either 13
days after the second or third treatment with the subsequent
 treatment given on the day after surgery. The 1- and 2-year
survival rates were 50.5 and 9.7% respectively.
BVSC CHEMOTHERAPY PROTOCOL
surgery with a combination of carboplatin, doxorubicin and
 piroxicam. The results from this small study were published in
2004 in the Australian Veterinary Practitioner 34:98. Carboplatin
was administered at 150 mg/m iv as a bolus for the first dose and
then the dose was increased to 220 mg/m? if there was no evidence
 of neutropaenia seven days after the initial chemotherapy.
Doxorubicin was also administered at a dose of 15 mg/m? iv over
20 minutes with 100mL of normal saline on the same day. The
dose of doxorubicin was not increased. This treatment regime was
repeated every 3 weeks for 4 cycles. A CBC was evaluated prior
to each chemotherapy. Piroxicam at 0.3 mg/kg q 24 hours PO was
administered through out the chemotherapy protocol. The median
survival time was 450 days and the treatment protocol was well
tolerated.
INVESTIGATIONAL SYSTEMIC ADJUVANT THERAPIES
Polymer Chemotherapy Delivery
A previously discussed drug delivery system, OPLA-Pt, releases a
high dose of chemotherapy into a surgical wound and cause slow
release of relatively low concentrations of chemotherapy
systemically. When OPLA-Pt was implanted in normal dogs no
systemic toxicity and no impedance of cortical allograft healing
was identified at doses of up to 80.6 mg/m2. Serum pharmacology
 data revealed approximately a 30 fold increase in area under the
curve (AUC) for systemic platinum exposure compared to a similar
dose of intravenous cisplatin. Local wound concentrations of
platinum are up to 50 times those achievable from a single
intravenous dose. This system has also been investigated for the
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
727
control of microscopic distant disease. Thirty nine dogs with stage
IIB, appendicular OS were treated with amputation and one dose of
OPLA-Pt implanted (median 86 mg/m') in the muscles of the
amputation stump at the time of surgery. The median survival was
240 days and the 1-year survival rate was 41.2%. This is
equivalent to the improvement in survival probability when two
intravenous doses of cisplatin are used with amputation. When the
effect of drug AUC on survival was evaluated in this same group
 of dogs, an AUC of greater than 7 ug/ml/min had a significantly
longer survival time than those below 7. This finding supports 
 adjuvant treatment of OS using sustained release drug delivery
giving a second dose of OPLA-Pt (4 weeks after the first) after
 amputation. To date, local tissue toxicity to the implant system is
the primary complication seen. We are currently evaluated another
form of injectable polylactic acid polymer system (Atrigel) for
sustained release of cisplatin. Neither OPLA-Pt nor Atriplat are
commercially available.
Immunotherapy
Most immunotherapy trials for dogs with Os involve the immune
stimulant liposome-encapsulated muramyl tripeptide-
phosphatidylethanolamine (L-MTP-PE). L-MTP-PE is a lipophilic
derivative of muramyl dipeptide, which is a synthetic analog of a
fragment of Mycobacterium cell wall. L-MTP-PE has been shown
to activate canine alveolar macrophages to and enhance their
cytotoxicity of OS cells in vitro. The combination of L-MTP-PE
and doxorubicin was also shown to synergistically enhance the
antitumour activity of canine alveolar macrophages in vitro and
 result in increased levels of circulating tumor necrosis factor and
IL-2 in dogs with haemangiosarcoma. Likewise, the combination
of ifosfamide and L-MTP-PE resulted in increased mononuclear
 cell tumouricidal activity and cytokine release in vitro, using
human mononuclear effector cells. In initial studies, dogs treated
with amputation and intravenously administered L-MTP-PE
ex perienced median survivals of 222 days, significantly greater
than amputation alone. In a follow-up study, dogs randomized to
L-MTP-PE, following 4 doses of cisplatin (70 mg/m², q 3 weeks)
had a median survival time of 432 days (14.5 months) versus 291
days (9.7 months) for those dogs receiving 4 doses of cisplatin and
placebo liposomes. A similar study involving the concomitant
administration of L-MTP-PE and cisplatin failed to achieve
survival similar to dogs receiving cisplatin alone. It is possible that
concurrent use with cisplatin results in a negative interaction, or
that cisplatin decreases cellular immunity. The Children's
Oncology Group (COG) and the Pediatric Oncology Group (POG)
722
Ch 9: Management of Canine Osteosarcoma
coordinated a national trial in children using L-MTP-PE in
 Preliminary analyses indicated that L-MTP-PE combined with
dox orubicin, cisplatin, high-dose methotrexate and iphosphamide
was superior to the same chemotherapy given alone, however, due
to the factorial study design and issues with entry criteria,
questions remain on efficacy and a follow-up trial in children is
currently ongoing. Several other immunotherapy approaches have
s sso yo s n i so ya sop i sai 
disease.
Molecular Targeted Therapies for Dogs with OS
There is a growing body of investigation into small molecule,
targeted or static therapies for the treatment of OS
 micrometastases. It has long been theorized that growth hormone
(GH) or insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) play a role in OS
 development in children as both are present in high levels during
the decade of risk associated with growth. To investigate the
randomized clinical trial in pet dogs with OS was undertake where,
 IGF-1 was suppressed with a long-acting analogue of somatostatin
(OncoLAR, octreotide pamoate long-acting release). A
combination of OncoLAR in combination with carboplatin in OS
dogs following amputation shown that while IGF-1 levels were
enhanced survival times. It was theorized that the extent and
duration of IGF-1 suppression might have been insufficient in this
protocol.
A number of recent reports have evaluated the potential therapeutic
effects of bisphosphonates for canine OS in vitro and in vivo. Both
cytotoxic and cytostatic effects were seen in canine OS cell lines
exposed to pamidronate, alendronate and zoledronate in vitro in a
dose-dependent manner. Additionally, surrogate biological activity
was shown in vivo following pamidronate administration in dogs
with gross primary OS as assessed by reduction in urinary N-
telopeptide excretion and enhanced bone mineral density (dual-
in vivo effects translate into survival advantages in dogs with OS
awaits investigation with controlled clinical trials.
In a prospective, randomized clinical trial using dogs with naturally
an inhibitor of protein-kinase-C (a potent stimulator of tumor cell
proliferation), dexniguldipine was evaluated. Dexniguldipine- and
cisplatin-treated dogs had longer median remission duration and
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
723
survival time than untreated dogs however; dexniguldipine-treated
 sop  n a aans s e p s
combination of dexniguldipine and chemotherapy has not been
investigated in dogs.
Several other agents have been investigated in preclinical models
and await clinical trial investigations. For example, as previously
mentioned, COX-2 has been shown to be over expressed in human
and canine OS tumors making it an attractive target for therapeutic
intervention. Indeed meloxicam has been shown to have
antineoplastic effects on canine OS cells in vitro. Additionally,
 thalidomide, a drug that is gaining a modest resurgence in
was found to potentially interfere with the ability of canine OS
model. Finally, reestablishing wild type p53 (chapter 3) expression 
in canine OS cell lines effects their growth characteristics. All of
these agents will require further investigations in order to
determine if preclinical activity translates to antitumour activity in
pet dogs with Os.
""CONVENTIONAL" SURGERY
Amputation of the affected limb is the standard treatment for
canine appendicular osteosarcoma. Even large and giant breed
 srmo sso pun togndn q re lm toun t sio
Although most dogs function well with amputation, there are some
dogs where limbsparing would be preferred over amputation, such
 as dogs with severe preexisting orthopedic or neurological disease
More than 500 limbsparing procedures have been performed at
CSU. Limb function has been good to excellent in these carefully
selected cases and survival has not been adversely affected by
 removing the primary tumour with marginal resection as compared
to radical margins, as with amputation. Limbsparing is a
complicated process and requires a supply of allografts (bone
bank) and, more importantly, a coordinated team effort between
surgical and medical oncologists, radiologists, pathologists and
technical staff.
 Currently there are many new and innovative studies, trials and
ex perimental protocols underway at various institutions around the
world to identify effective means to further improve survival and
quality of life of pets and people with osteosarcoma.
724
Ch 9: Management of Canine Osteosarcoma
"NOVEL" SURGERY
Metal Endoprosthesis Limb Sparing
This technique utilizes a commercially available metal
endoprosthesis with a modified bone plate. The surgery is nearly
identical to the procedure described above; however instead of
reconstruction with an allograft, the endoprosthesis is used to span
the radial defect. A prospective comparison of complications
between allograft limb sparing and metal endoprosthesis limb
sparing has yet to be completed. An advantage to the metal
endoprosthesis technique is that large cortical allografts are not
required, making limb sparing available to more patients. A
femur, involving a proximal femur allograft through which a
custom long-stem femoral prosthesis is placed for a total hip
replacement has been used in two patients to date with technical
success. This technique is used in people for tumour and non-
tumour disease of the proximal femur diaphysis and/or femoral
head and neck.
Pasteurized Tumoural Autograft
Two reports exist of a limb sparing technique that involves
removal of the segment of bone with the tumour and pasteurizing
the bone segment at 65 degrees Celsius for 40 minutes, followed
by re-implantation. Limb function was good in 12 of 13 dogs with
a 15% local recurrence, 31% infection and 23% implant failure
rate. The advantages of this method are that there is no need for an
S a a sn s   s
are similar to the allograft technique in terms of complications,
however, overall survival and disease-free progression was similar
to other studies.
Longitudinal Bone Transport Osteogenesis (BTO)
This technique for limb-sparing has been reported in veterinary
patients. This method utilizes Ilizarov (circular) fixators and the
principles of distraction osteogenesis to create bone in the defect
following tumour resection. Prior to surgery, a 5-6 ring circular
fixator is constructed to allow one central ring (termed a transport
 ring) to move independently of the rest of the fixator. Following.
the same procedure for removal of the tumour and preparation of
the radiocarpal bone described above, the circular fixator is placed
 on the limb and atached to the remaining radius using tensioned
1.6 mm diameter wires. A longitudinal section of normal bone
(termed the transport segment) from the radius immediately
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
725
 proximal to the defect is osteotomized and attached to the transport
ring with wires. Following a 3-7 day delay period, the
a rate of 1mm per day. Distraction osteogenesis occurs in the
trailing distraction pathway. New bone continues to form
longitudinally within the defect proximal to the transport segment 
for as long as the steady, slow distraction continues. When the
transport segment reaches the radiocarpal bone (docking), the
transport segment is compressed to the radiocarpal bone and heals
to create an arthrodesis. The circular fixator remains on the limb
while the newly formed bone remodels and the arthrodesis occurs.
This technique is compatible with cisplatin, carboplatin and
combination chemotherapy.
The advantages to BTO limb sparing are the lack of internal
hardware, the low risk of infection due to the autologous,
vascularized nature of the replacement bone and the ability of the
bearing within the first 48 hours and once the incision is healed do
not require exercise restriction. The disadvantages of the BTO
 procedure is the extensive client involvement needed to perform
the daily distractions on the fixator and the extended amount of
time the fixator remains on the limb. Double level longitudinal
 transport and translational transport of the ulna can significantly
diminish the time required for distraction and has been used
successfully in a case of limb salvage for a distal tibial OS.
Ulna Transposition Limb Sparing
The vascularized ulna transposition technique uses the ipsilateral
distal ulna as an autograft to reconstruct the distal radial defect by
rotating the graft into position while preserving the caudal
interosseous artery and vein. Following excision of the tumour as
described above, two transverse osteotomies of the ulna are made.
The distal osteotomy is performed at the level of the isthmus
proximal to the facet that articulates with the radius. The proximal
ulna osteotomy is performed 1-2 mm distal to the level of the radial
 osteotomy. Direct visualization of the caudal interosseous artery
 and vein allows these structures to be preserved during dissection
of the autograft. The ulna graft is “rolled over" into the radial
defect and fixed using a bone plate that extends from the proximal
radius to the distal one-third of metacarpal IV (i.e., carpal
arthrodesis).
Advantages to the ulna transposition technique are that there is no
 distant donor site morbidity, the replacement bone is autologous,
 and the graft is vascularized making it less likely to get infected
726
Ch 9: Management of Canine Osteosarcoma
are that the ulna transposition technique may be more prone to
smaller size relative to the radius and the need for permanent
internal hardware.
Intraoperative Extracorporal Radiation
This technique for limb sparing has been utilized in a small number
of canine osteosarcoma patients. This involves osteotomy above or
below the affected site (depending on the anatomic location of the
tumour) and removal of normal soft tissues from the tumour bone.
The neurovascular bundle, muscle, and skin are held away from the
affected bone and the tumour is pivoted from the site on the intact
joint tissue. A single dose of 70 Gy radiation is then directed to the
tumour, taking care to spare the distracted neurovascular bundle.
The radiated bone is then anatomically replaced and fixed back
 into position using either an interlocking nail system, dynamic
compression plating or a combination. The advantage to this
technique is in sparing of immediate joint function, the major 
limiting factor to the success of limb-sparing in non-distal radius or
ulna sites. To date, three proximal humeral sites, one distal
humeral site, one distal femur, one proximal femur, five distal
radius and three distal tibia sites have been treated with this
technique. All patients have had good function in the immediate
 post-operative period; however, seven patients have had to have
implant revisions within 5-9 months of initial surgery, including 4
amputations. Additionally, local tumour recurrence has occurred
in 4 patients and infection in 4 patients. Modifications of this
radiation of distal femur and any tibial tumours can be performed
further evaluation as well as technique modification is indicated
before this technique can be recommended.
Local adjuvant therapies used concurrent to limb-salvage
Since 1993, most cases of limb-sparing at CSU have received a
The system is a biodegradable polymer called open cell polylactic
acid (OPLA) containing cisplatin (OPLA-Pt). In a randomized trial
evaluating the effect of local implantation OPLA-Pt in 80 cases,
recurrence was diagnosed in 32.5% of dogs in the OPLA-Pt group
and 60% of dogs in the control group, which approached statistical
significance (p = 0.071).
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
727
Isolation of limb circulation and perfusion with chemotherapy has
been used in people with sarcomas and melanomas as a sole
 treatment or to downstage local disease and allow limb sparing.
Isolated limb perfusion (ILP) allows delivery of high
concentrations of chemotherapy as well as delivery of compounds
which are poorly tolerated systemically. Varying degrees of local
toxicity are reported dependent on the drugs used. Successful use
of ILP in canine OS has been reported. One study determined that
appendicular bone tumours have significantly higher interstitial
fluid pressure and lower blood flow than do adjacent, unaffected
 soft tissues. ILP may be a method to facilitate therapeutic drug
Bisumop aadod o sn red ui suo
prior to limb salvage. Currently investigations delivering the
radioisotope samarium at high doses using ILP are being
conducted in dogs to assess whether a clinically meaningful
 percent necrosis can be achieved prior to primary tumour removal.
Surgery for Non-appendicular OS
 Certain primary bone tumours of the pelvis can be removed by
techniques of hemipelvectomy and, although these surgeries are
difficult, function and cosmetic outcome have been excellent.
Bone tumours originating in proximal sites of the scapula can be
successfully removed by partial scapulectomy. Dogs function well
with partial scapulectomy; however gait abnormalities may occur
after complete scapulectomy by disarticulation at the
scapulohumeral joint. Aggressive postoperative physical therapy is
important in these cases to regain normal function. Metatarsal and
metacarpal locations can be treated with local resections or
amputation. My experience would support removal of a single
 [ouy poo ym so sou ui sauoq 7 nuan a o auo
outcome. In small dogs, removal of the medial or lateral 2 bones
 can result in normal function. Resection to this extent has not been
attempted in larger dogs. Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy are
appropriate surgeries for primary bone tumours of oral sites. In a
survey of owners of dogs undergoing partial mandibulectomy or
maxillectomy, 85% were satisfied with the outcome despite 44%
citing difficulty in eating as a complication. Tumours of
periorbital sites can be removed by orbitectomy. Rib tumours can
be removed by thoracic wall resection and the defect reconstructed
with polypropylene mesh with plastic plates for large defects, or by
muscle flap techniques. Diaphragmatic advancement can be used
for caudally located defects. Small primary tumours of the ulna
can be removed by partial ulnectomy, and reconstruction is rarely
needed. Vertebral OS sites are the most difficult with respect to
adequately treating local disease. Techniques of complete
vertebrectomy are not well established in veterinary medicine and
728
Ch 9: Management of Canine Osteosarcoma
olonu im sop ssdoap oi ndune ue si uo Aens
deficits or intractable pain and to obtain a diagnosis. Present
decompression (with or without stabilization) and institute
radiation therapy (see below) and chemotherapy.
Radiation
The combination of external beam radiation therapy and limb-
sparing has been described previously. It appears that radiation
therapy can cause considerable necrosis of primary Os in dogs. In
this manner, radiation is used in an effort to downstage the primary
tumour to improve the success of local disease control following
removal. At present, the role of radiation therapy used to replace
surgery, with or without systemic chemotherapy is unclear.
 Currently, the role of radiation therapy in dogs with appendicular 
 OS is primarily reserved for palliation of bone pain (see subsequent
section on palliative therapy). As a primary therapy, a median
survival time of 209 days was reported in 14 dogs with
 appendicular OS treated with fractionated high-dose radiation
(median dose of 57 Gy) to their primary tumour and systemic
chemotherapy for micrometastases. Similar results are seen in
 people with extremity OS treated with high-dose radiation with and
without surgical stabilization. Radiation therapy likely plays a role
in the treatment of OS of vertebrae. In a series of 14 dogs with
vertebral OS treated between 1986 and 1995, 12 had surgery to
decompress the spinal cord, 7 were treated with OPLA-Pt
implanted in a distant intramuscular site and 11 were given
intravenous cisplatin. Nine dogs were treated with fractionated
 external beam radiation therapy. All dogs had surgery, radiation
therapy or both while no dog was treated with chemotherapy alone.
Four dogs improved neurologically, 4 dogs worsened and 6 dogs
remained the same. The median survival of 135 days after
treatment was relatively short. Local disease recurrence rather than
metastasis was the usual cause of death.
Stereotactic Radiosurgery or Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT)
Stereotactic radiosurgery (gamma knife therapy) has been
 performed as a means of limb-salvage surgery in eleven dogs.
 Dogs were treated using a frameless stereotactic radiosurgery
intracranial tumours in humans. In some cases, carboplatin was
used immediately prior to treatment for its radiosensitizing
 potential in addition to its conventional cytotoxic qualities. In total,
radiosurgery alone. Five dogs developed pathologic fractures and
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
729
one dog developed infection. Acute effects to the skin were mild to
moderate in most dogs. Impressively, overall median survival was
363 days in this series, albeit numbers are still small.
Advantages of this technique include the normal tissue-sparing
effects that stereotactic radiation potentially provides and the
 ability to avoid surgery. Disadvantages are that the technique
 involves equipment that is not typically available to veterinarians.
 These results suggest that that stereotactic radiotherapy may
 provide a viable limb-sparing alternative, but further study is
heeded.
IMRT is a means of precisely delivering radiation therapy to
tumours while avoiding normal tissues. A form of IMRT,
Tomotherapy@, utilizes a marriage of a CT scan and a linear
 accelerator and has been investigated in dogs with OS and dogs
with nasal tumours. While such techniques are investigational in
radiation therapy that theoretically could be locally curative while
sparing normal structures.
Radioisotopes
The bone-seeking radioisotope, samarium ethylenediamine-
osteosarcoma in dogs and humans. In high doses, samarium has
been shown to locally deliver 20 to 200 Gy of radiation to normal
bone and osteosarcoma tumours, respectively. The efficacy of
samarium in canine OSA patients has been previously reported.
 n sop  o n e ss  ss
tumour doses equivalent to 20 Gy may be deposited in canine
osteosarcomas using low- to moderate doses of samarium, and the
ratio between tumour dose and dose to surrounding tissues is
favorable. The treatment provides pain relief in canine patients
and, in some cases, tumour growth delay but is not curative. In
both normal beagle dogs and in tumour bearing dogs, Sm-EDTMP
weeks) of all cell lines.
KNOWN OR SUGGESTED PROGNOSTIC FACTORS
Anatomic location and signalment
The biologic behavior for non-appendicular sites of OS appears to
be similar (aggressive) with the exception of the mandible and
possibly the rest of the calvarium. Dogs with OS of the mandible
 treated with mandibulectomy alone had a 1-year survival rate of
730
Ch 9: Management of Canine Osteosarcoma
71% in one study. In contrast, maxillary Os has demonstrated a
 median survival of 5 months following maxillectomy. A study
evaluating response to treatment for orbital OS reported long-term
survival following complete surgical excision. Similar behavior is
seen for OS of flat bones in people. Median survival for rib OS
lesions is reported to be 3 months for dogs treated with rib
resection alone and 8 months for dogs treated with resection and
 adjuvant chemotherapy.
Osteosarcoma of the canine scapula has been reported to have a
poor prognosis when treated with surgery and chemotherapy.
Survival of dogs with Os distal to the antebrachiocarpal or
 (s     s  s 
however OS in these sites is aggressive with a high potential for
metastasis.
ss  a e os ss so (ss os) ax
systemic behavior. In one report, extraskeletal OS treated with 
surgery alone had a median survival of only 1 month and a median
survival of 5 months was obtained for cases treated with surgery
and adjuvant chemotherapy. In a larger study, soft tissue OS were
separated from mammary gland OS; median survival of non-
mammary gland soft tissue lesions was 1 month and mammary
gland lesions 3 months following primarily surgical resection
alone.
Vertebral Os is uncommon; however, reported cases indicate
aggressive local and systemic behavior. In 15 dogs treated with a
combination of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, the median
         t  
appendicular sites has not been thoroughly evaluated. Although
there are differences in disease distribution and prevalence,
documentation of improved survival for small dogs with OS is
lacking.
In a multi-institutional study of 162 dogs with appendicular OS
 treated with amputation alone, dogs younger than 5 years of age
had worse survival than older dogs. Additional studies have
related large tumour size and humerus location to poor outcome.
Large tumour size has been reported to be a negative prognostic
factor for people with osteosarcoma. For OS originating from flat
bones, small dog size and completeness of excision were positive
prognostic indicators. A negative prognosis can also be predicted
by a higher tumour grade, based on the results of one study. Dogs
presented with stage II disease (measurable metastases) have a
very poor prognosis and dogs with lymph node metastasis had
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
737
short survivals with a median of only 59 days, compared to 318
days for dogs without nodal spread.
Serum alkaline phosphatase
Elevated alkaline phosphatase has been clearly associated with a
poorer prognosis for dogs with appendicular Os in several studies.
A preoperative elevation of either total (serum) or bone isoenzyme
of AP (greater than 110U/L or 23U/L, respectively) is associated
with a shorter disease free interval and survival. Likewise, dogs
that have elevated preoperative values that do not return to normal
 d n  n   s  
also fail earlier from metastasis. A recent study substantiated the
predictive nature of elevated pre-operative AP levels, however, no
association was found for elevated post-operative serum levels.
Molecular/genetic indices of prognosis
Measurement of p53 mutations have been associated with the
presence of the multiple drug resistance gene (MDR1) and have
been shown to predict cisplatin resistance in vitro. The presence of
drug resistance through the measurement of MDR1 or indirectly by
 the measurement of p-glycoprotein (PGP) has been loosely
associated with worse outcome in human patients with
osteosarcoma and high grade chondrosarcoma. Evaluation of the
role of PGP and outcome in canine OS is currently under
investigation. Recent work has also identified heat shock protein
72 to be predictive of good response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy
for Os in people. Increases in molecular measures of tumour cell
 proliferation rate, including the potential doubling time (Tpot) or
 MIB-1 expression, may be indicators of more aggressive tumour
cell kinetics, and have been associated with a worse prognosis.
One report evaluated the presence of over expression of
Buous saseo pue Z-xoo passaidxa raao saldues t Jo noy
strong ex pression had a significantly poorer outcome. Finally, the
 presence of ezrin, a membrane-cytoskeleton linker has been shown
to be predictive of metastatic behavior and survival in dogs with
OS.
PALLIATIVE TREATMENT -PRIMARY AND METASTATIC BONE PAIN
Palliative radiation therapy
 Radiation therapy to palliate bone pain has been investigated and
ranging from two to four 8 Gy fractions, pain management is
732
Ch 9: Management of Canine Osteosarcoma
palliated in 74 - 92% of dogs for medians ranging from 2 - 4
months. More specifically, a protocol of three 10 Gy fractions
delivered over a three week period on days 0, 7, and 21, for a total
dose of 30 Gy has been described for palliative treatment of OS in
dogs. For distal extremity lesions, daily, or every-other-day
treatment with three 8 Gy fractions can be performed without
 marked radiation toxicity. Over 70% of dogs responded positively
(improvement in clinical evidence of pain and lameness) for an
average of 2 months in one study using either 3, 10 Gy fractions (0,
7, 21 schedule) or 2, 8 Gy fractions (0, 7 day schedule). In that
study and an older report, the addition of cisplatin chemotherapy
 appeared to have a benefit in response rate; however, larger
randomized investigations are warranted to document this
advantage. A recent study failed to demonstrate a difference in
response for either three 8 Gy or four 6 Gy fractionation schemes
using electron therapy. In another study, four 8 Gy fractions was
well tolerated and resulted in a 90% response rate in 24 patients.
Adding additional fractions beyond the initial 3 has been
successful for further temporary pain relief in a few dogs; however,
the potential for marked acute radiation toxicity is increased.
Palliative radiation is a useful and effective treatment option for
dogs with stage IHI disease at presentation (that is distant metastasis
to lung for example) or where the owner does not want to pursue
attempts at long-term local control. In physician-based oncology,
investigations have shown single large fractions (e.g., 8 - 15 Gy)
 are as effective as multiple smaller fractions for palliating bone
pain. A caveat to this is that larger single fraction doses were
associated with a slightly higher pathologic bone fracture rate. 1
have observed similar results with a single large fraction in dogs
with Os and while this is more cost and time effective, observation
of a larger group of treated dogs would be necessary to confirm
this finding.
Radiopharmaceuticals (such as strontium and samarium) have also
been used to palliate pain from metastatic bone cancer in people.
As mentioned above, samarium-153-ethylenediamine-
tetramethylene-phosphonic acid (Sm-EDTMP) is a
radiopharmaceutical that has been used to treat metastatic and
 primary bone tumors in dogs.
Pharmacologic palliation
 For short-term pain control, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug,
(e.g., piroxicam, carprofen, meloxicam, etc) may be given,
dependent on control of clinical signs. This appears to give
temporary pain relief to most dogs with Os lesions. Dogs must be
carefully monitored for signs of gastrointestinal toxicity and the
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
733
 drug withdrawn if these signs occur. Corticosteroids must not be
administered at the same time because this combination can 
 predispose to the development of gastric or duodenal ulceration. It
is also not advisable to give corticosteroids or piroxicam
concurrently with cisplatin or in dogs with decreased renal
function. There has been some work that suggests cyclooxygenase
inhibitors, such as piroxicam may have some direct or indirect anti-
tumor effects. Other choices include acetaminophen/codeine
combinations and other opiates.
Bisphosphonates, diphosphonates and other compounds have been
used in people to control bone loss and subsequent pain due to
metastatic lesions. Two reports exist on the use of
bisphosphonates to palliate dogs with appendicular Os. In one
report, four of 10 dogs treated appeared to have modest subjective
mg/kg, given as a 2-hour constant rate infusion in 250 cc 0.9%
NaCl). In another report, daily oral alendronate was given to 2
dogs with Os, one of the maxilla and the other of the tibia. The
tibial OS was stabilized with an external fixator. Both dogs
 remained comfortable and survived 10 and 12 months respectively.
E
Ch 9: Management of Canine Osteosarcoma
Chapter 10
Technologies For Management Of Acute Simple &
Complex Long Bone Fractures - Pins, Plates, Rods &
Interlocking Nailing
Kenneth Johnson
OVERVIEW
Fortunately the veterinary surgeon has available a range of
different implant systems for the management of long bone
fractures. However, the choice of which to use can be daunting,
especially for the inexperienced surgeon. Two points should
always be kept in mind when making a choice for the optimal
repair method for any given fracture. The first point is that
although it is preferable to use a system of repair that is familiar
and reliable in your hands, one fixation system will not be
appropriate for every single shaft fracture because the
 'd a  s aa  s o ,
second point to keep in mind is that there may be two or three
different methods of fixation that can be used successfully for any
given fracture, so that differences in opinions between surgeons
 may exist as to what it the best way to proceed.
 In recent years there has been a move away from atftempts at
complete, anatomical reduction of comminuted diaphyseal
fractures. Currently the emphasis is on "biological management"
whereby the main proximal and distal fragments are brought into
axial alignment, without disturbing the fracture zone and
haematoma. Development of interlocking nailing for stabilization
of these fractures of the femur and tibia in humans has been
Jo poqau s yo uoezunndod Aq uaoai aou pamo
fracture repair in dogs and cats. However, not all long bone
fractures can be adequately stabilized by interlocking nailing, and
superior. Plate design has evolved considerably from the
traditional DCP, though limited contact plates and point-contact
plates, to the latest version of a no-contact plate called the locking
compression plate, or LCP. Each of these techniques will be
discussed, along with their advantages and disadvantages. The
goal being to appreciate which technique of fracture repair is most
likely to result in uncomplicated fracture healing for the patient.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
735
FRACTURE PLANNING
There are many factors to consider when choosing an appropriate
fixation method for comminuted and complex fractures. A
comminuted or multi-fragmented fracture is one in which there are
two or more interconnecting fracture lines. Complex fractures
include those with comminution, bone loss, infection, previously
failed fixation or nearby a metaphysis. Most fractures will benefit
from careful pre-operative planning.
It may be helpful to make a tracing of the contralateral intact bone
on clear plastic or unexposed x-ray film, then draw in the fracture
lines. This plan is intended to show the fracture in reduction;
rarely will it be perfect. However, it will help you to identify
significant bone loss and may determine if the fracture can be
reconstructed or not. If you cannot draw it, you may not be able to
reduce and fix it at surgery. Try to make some predictions about
which forces will be acting to disrupt the reduction, and what it
will take to control them in terms of implants.
Always develop a contingency plan for fracture stabilization, in
 case something unexpected occurs during surgery. Draw these
plans on the tracings, paying attention to amount of bone available
for screw/pin engagement, number of bone fragments, relative
size/stiffness of the implants, the distance of critical screws from
anatomical landmarks with respect to joints. Allow for about 10%
radiographic magnification. There are some important questions to
be answered. Are we aiming for total reconstruction or "biologic
osteosynthesis"? Do we have the necessary instruments and
implants sterile and available for surgery, and have we the
knowledge, experience and expertise?
Evaluate the plan with respect to three important parameters:
 1.  Biomechanics: tolerance of the planned implant-fracture
composite for axial, torsional, bending and distracting loads
postoperatively
 2.  Fracture biology: species, open/closed, infected, age of
animal, type of bone involved, healthy overlying soft tissues,
 bone loss or deficit, use of bone grafts, surgical exposure
needed.
 3. Patient: size, other injuries, demeanor, postoperative activity,
 ex pected function and economics.
Some Options for Stabilization of Shaft Fractures
1.  Pins and Cerclage Wire
2.
 Plates: Compression, neutralization and butress function
3.
Interlocking Nailing
4.
Plate Rod combination
981
Ch 10:Technologies for Management of Acute Simple & Complex Long Bone Fractures
5. Plate External Fixator combination
6.
 Clamp Rod Internal Fixator
7.
Locking Plates
Shaft Fractures near the metaphysis (limited bone for implant
purchase)
1.
Locking plates
2.
Hook plates
3.
Tibial buttress plates and T plates
4.
External fixator or Ilizarov
5.
 Trans-articular external fixator
 6. Fragment resection, cortical allograft and total hip replacement 
BONE PLATE FIXATION OF SHAFT FRACTURES
 In fractures totally reconstructed with lag screws and stabilized
with a neutralization plate, there is load sharing between implant
and bone. Preoperative plate contouring using a cadaver bone of
 similar size will save time during surgery and facilitate accurate
reduction. In fractures with comminution, deficit or gap at the 
trans-cortex, plates have buttress function. Neutral axis of loading
 passes through the eccentrically positioned plate, not the medullary
cavity, and so axial loading of the bone produces a bending
moment in the plate. Such cyclic loading causes metal fatigue
failure. In this situation, risk of plate failure can be reduced by
avoiding open plate holes over the fracture, using thicker plates,
leg lengthening plates or stacked plates.
INTERLOCKING NAILING OF SHAFT FRACTURES
The current trend in management of comminuted diaphyseal
fractures is to align and stabilize the two main (prox imal and
distal) fragments, and to not aftempt anatomical reconstruction of
smaller fragments because of the risk of damaging their blood
supply. Bone plates are used routinely for internal fixation of
comminuted diaphyseal fractures with great success. However
such plates have buttress function. A significant problem with
periosteal surface and is predominantly loaded in bending because
of the lack of a medial buttress at the fracture site. Continued
cyclic loading may result in fatigue fracture of the plate, or in
screw breakage or screw loosening. One approach to try to avoid
this complication is to use an interlocking nail. Resistance to
bending forces of interlocking nails depends on the nail diameter.
Locking screws or bolts through the nail in the proximal and distal
fragments counteract axial and rotational forces. Furthermore,
because interlocking nails are positioned within the medullary
cavity, in the neutral axis of the bone, they have greater resistance
to bending fatigue than a similarly-sized plate.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
737
Interlocking nailing evolved as a modification of the original
technique of intramedullary nailing pioneered by Kuntscher and
others. The first interlocking nails used in man were designed
about 1970 by Huckstep. Now this type of fixation is used
commonly for fractures of the tibia and femur in man. Grade 1
and 2 open fractures of the tibia are routinely stabilized with non-
reamed, solid interlocking nails using close reduction. Indeed
every major orthopaedic company now has its own system of
interlocking nails. Broadly there are two types - hollow nails that
are designed for reamed application and smaller diameter solid
 nails that are used without reaming.
Canine Interlocking Nails and Instrumentation
Canine interlocking nail systems have been developed by
Duhautois (1995) in France, Durall (1993, 1994, 1995) in Spain,
Huckstep in Australia (Muir 1993) and Dueland and Johnson
(1996, 1997, 1999) in U.S.A. Canine interlocking nails are round
in cross section, solid, 4, 4.7, 6 or 8 mm diameter and made from
316L stainless steel. Nails are available in these diameters in
various lengths. For example, the 4.7mm interlocking nails are
available in five lengths (68, 79, 91, 101 and 112 mm). The distal
end of the nail has a trocar point while the other end has two
keying flanges and an internal thread for aftachment of the
extension device, insertion handle and drill-aiming guide. At each 
end of the nail there are two holes (2.0, 2.7 or 3.5 mm) to allow the
insertion of transversely orientated locking screws or bolts.
20
O
5
O
O
5
For the two larger diameter nails, there are short (femur) and long
(tibia and humerus) extension rods that are intended for temporary
attachment of the aiming device to the nail.
738
Ch 10:Technologies for Management of Acute Simple&Complex Long Bone Fractures
The drill-aiming guide has holes that correspond to those of the
nails and allow accurate aiming for screw insertion. Sleeves which
 go into the holes in the drill aiming guide allow for drilling and
tapping, prior to insertion of locking screws. There is a special
drill aiming device for the small 4.0 and 4.7 mm interlocking nails.
Fracture Evaluation and Selection
 Medium and large breed dogs (6 and 8 mm nails), and small dogs
and cats (4 and 4.7 mm nails) with closed diaphyseal fractures of
the humerus, femur and tibia may be suitable candidates for this
 method of internal fixation. Severe comminution is not necessarily
a contraindication to interlocking nail fixation. However,
preoperative radiographs are evaluated to ensure that there is
sufficient bone in the proximal and distal fragments to allow
seating of the nail, as well as the insertion of at least one
interlocking screw in each main fragment. In addition, the
medullary cavity must be of sufficient diameter to accommodate a
4, 4.7, 6 or 8 mm nail.
Nail Strength
Resistance of an implant to bending is determined by the area
moment of inertia. The area moment of inertia (I) is calculated
 mathematically and represents the distribution of material (metal)
 in the implant, taking into account its cross-sectional geometry.
For solid, round nails, I = π x radius* /4. Because I is a function of
implant radius to the fourth power, small increases in radius result
in substantial gain in implant resistance to bending. Using this
formula, comparisons of different implants can be made provided
 that they are made of the same type of material.
Where there are holes in interlocking nails for locking screws, the
implant is much weaker, just like a plate. Clinically we have
experienced failure of 6 mm nails with 3.5 mm locking screws by
breakage through the screw hole, so screw hole diameter has been
reduced to 2.7mm. In vitro studies suggest that this design
modification of the 6mm nail will extend the fatigue life of the
implant by 52 fold. In the case of the 8mm nail, change of screw
holes from 4.5mm to 3.5mm is predicted to extend fatigue life by 8
fold.
 Because of their inherent weakness, screw holes in the nail should
never be situated in the fracture zone. As a guide it is suggested
that they be more than 2-3 cm from the fracture. Unlike plates, the
 presence of a locking screw through a nail does not help to reduce
the stress concentrating effects of the hole, because the locking
screw does not interact rigidly with the nail.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
739
SurgicalTechnique
An open fracture reduction is performed through a standard
surgical approach. Care is taken to preserve soft tissue attachments
to the bone, and to not unnecessarily disturb the fracture site
hematoma. Only very limited reflection of muscle is needed for
screw insertion. The medullary cavity is initially opened by the
successive insertion of a series of Steinmann pins of increasing
 diameter. Final size is reached with insertion of an interlocking
nail. An extension rod and handle are aftached to the proximal end
of the nail, for normograde insertion into the medullary cavity.
By making measurements from the radiographs, and by
comparison with another nail of the same length, the nail is seated
 into the distal metaphyseal cancellous bone without penetrating the
articular surface. After it is established that the nail is adequately
seated, the insertion handle is removed. The drill-aiming guide is
 attached to the end of the nail via the extension rod.
740
Ch 10:Technologies for Management of Acute Simple & Complex Long Bone Fractures
A sleeve is then inserted and with a long drill bit, a hole is drilled 
through the near cortex, the hole in the nail, and the far cortex.
The depth of the hole is measured, tapped and an AO cortical
screw inserted. After insertion of one or two interlocking screws
 distally, the fracture reduction is corrected for rotational alignment
 and axial length by reference to the radiographs of the contralateral
bone and anatomical landmarks.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey Proc.No.363
747
The proximal interlocking screws are then inserted. Adjunctive
stabilization with cerclage wires can be performed for fissures and
long oblique fractures, but this is not usually necessary.
Autologous cancellous bone graft from the humerus, tibia, or iliac
crest is packed at the fracture site in adult dogs.
Locking bolts
As an alternative to using screws for locking, we now routinely use
locking bolts. These have several advantages. Firstly it is not
 necessary to tap the bone prior to insertion. Also, because the
fatigue life of a screw is primarily determined by core diameter, it
has a much greater resistance to fatigue failure and breakage. In
addition, the final nail - bolt construct permits much less torsional
deformation and thus instability at the fracture site.
2.7cortical
Aftercare
Animals need to be restricted in their activity and the incisions
monitored, just as for other methods of open reduction and internal 
fixation of fractures. Postoperative radiographs are taken to
evaluate fracture reduction, and positioning of the nail and screws.
Follow-up radiographs are taken every 4-6 weeks to monitor for
union, until the fracture has healed. Healing is by callus formation,
because there is a small degree of motion between the nail and
locking screws. Implants are not removed unless there is an
implant related complication.
742
Ch 10:Technologies for Management of Acute Simple & Complex Long Bone Fractures
PLATE-ROD FIXATION OF SHAFT FRACTURES
intramedullary pin is inserted initially to obtain axial alignment of
the bone. Then a plate that has been contoured either before or
during surgery, is applied with monocortical screws. A pin
occupying 30 to 50% of medullary cavity protects plate from
failure during loading, increasing fatigue life of plate by 10-1000
fold. This technique can be used in comminuted fractures of the
femur, tibia and humerus. Normally the plate is left long enough
that it can be removed after 6-10 weeks, depending on the rate of
union. A disadvantage of the method is the potential morbidity of
leaving the pin long and protruding into the soft tissues.
CLAMP ROD INTERNAL FIXATOR AND SHAFT FRACTURES
The clamp rod internal fixator (formerly known as the VetFix) was
ddns ui asn aq pinoo e wasas e se padoaaap pue paaiaun
of the philosophy behind the biological management of shaft
fractures. The CRIF can be used with minimally invasive surgical
techniques, regardless of the degree of comminution of the
fracture. The rod component of the CRIF can be readily contoured
itself to fixation of fractures with a short metaphyseal segment.
Three sizes of CRIF are being used and these utilize the 3.5, 2.7
and 2.0 mm cortical screws for fixation. The rod, which is
contoured to the surface of the bone, provides for axial stability,
while the clamps that attach the rod to the bone via screws control
shortening and torsional forces.
The stiffness of the fixation can be increased by using the larger
sized CRIF, or by applying two CRIF to a bone. Alternatively
normagrade insertion of a small diameter intramedullary pin to
achieve axial alignment can be followed by the application of the
CRIF. It is only necessary to make limited surgical approaches to
the proximal and distal ends of the bone. The CRIF rod is
 precontoured and then tunnelled under the soft tissue along the
bone. A minimum of two clamps are loaded onto each end of the
rod for fixation. The clamps can be rotated around the rod, to be
applied to the underlying bone one side of the rod or the other
Firstly the distal clamp is afttached to the bone with a cortical
screw.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
E#
The screw should be tightened until the jaws are the clamp are seen
to close, and firmly grip the rod. It is this friction between the
clamp and the rod that provides the stability of the CRIF system.
The alignment of the fracture is then corrected and a proximal
clamp attached. After this all remaining screws are inserted and
tightened.
Slippage of the clamps on the rod may result in loss of fixation and
instability. The risk of this complication can be decreased by using
three clamps at each end of the rod, by bending the rod a litfle at
each end, and by using larger diameter screws. Particular care
should be exercised when using the CRIF in young animals with
very soft bone, as screw holding power will be reduced.
LOCKING PLATES IN SHAFT FRACTURE REPAIR
Evolution of Plate Fixation
between the plate and the bone for maintenance of stability.
Additional stability of the plate-implant construct can be obtained
in transverse and short oblique fractures by application of
interfragmentary compression. For this reason, the Dynamic
compression plate, with the inclined plane of the self compressing
plate hole has been the classical implant used by surgeons for
internal fixation of diaphyseal fractures. At the time of application,
forces of up to 500 N may generated under the plate, but over time,
this is significantly diminished. In most cases, healing of the
fracture precedes this loss of implant stability. However, if there is
 s  d     
of reduction and nonunion may follow (Figure 1).
Ch 10:Technologies for Management of AcuteSimple &Complex Long Bone Fractures
 Figure 1: Loss of reduction with screw loosening
(LCP illustrations courtesy of Synthes USA)
Accurate contouring of the plate to match the surface contour of
the bone is essential, so that a loss of reduction does not occur as
the screws are tightened (Figure 2). Conversely, there have been
concerns raised about interruption of bone vascularity under the
 plate due to contact of the plate with the bone, causing osteoporosis
(Figure 3)
Figure 2: Loss of reduction without contouring
 Figure 3: Disturbed vascularity by plate
To reduce plate contact with underlying bone, the Limited
Contact-Dynamic Compression Plate (LC-DCP) was developed
with a number of new features including sculpted cutouts on the
underside of the plate (Figure 4). This plate was of uniform
stiffness throughout, and was easier to contour (Figure 5).
LC-DCP
Plate
Standard
Plate
Figure 4: LC-DCP with sculpted underside
Figure 5: Uniform stiffness of LC-DCP
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
745
 The next development on the way to the reality of locking plates
was the PC fix. The PC fix was designed to further minimize plate
contact of the plate with the underlying bone. It had points that
contacted the bone, and it was applied with locking monocortical
screws that were fixed angle. In humans these plates were mainly
used in forearm fractures, but there was a higher complication rate
 in comparison to standard plating, as well as the problem of cold-
welding of screw heads to the plate which made implant removal
 difficult. These implants were not produced commercially, but the
experience gained with this implant led to development of locking
plates.
LockingPlates
The need for implants that could be used with minimally invasive
surgical technique following the philosophy of “biological
osteosynthesis’ was a driving force behind the development of
locking plates. In addition, plates that had improved mechanics and
less impact on bone blood supply were considered to be desirable.
It should be appreciated that the Zespol external plate fixator
developed in Poland in the 1980's was a concept that was ahead of
its time. In principle, the Zespol was exactly the same as modern
locking plates, because it had screw heads that could be locked into
 plate. These screws were applied perpendicular to the plate, and
were “fixed angle". The Zespol did not rely on friction between
the plate and the bone for stability. Indeed, the plate was situated
just outside the skin in some patients, similar to an external fixator.
There are currently several different types of locking plates
available that they may be useful for fracture fixation in small
animals, including the No Contact Plate and the Locking
Compression Plate (LCP). The LCP (Synthes) have
combination locking and compression holes, or so called *Combi
hole" (Fig 6). This allows the plate to be applied with either fixed
angle locking screws in the threaded part of the Combi hole, or
standard cortical screws that are placed in the dynamic
compression unit (DCU) part of the Combi hole (Fig 7).
746
Ch 10:Technologies for Management of Acute Simple & Complex Long Bone Fractures
Figure 6: The LCP Combi hole
Figure 7: Locking head and standard screws
Application of the LCP with entirely locking screws results in
fixed angle construct. Used it this way, there is not any
compression of the plate to the bone, or between the fracture
fragments. The most important use of this device comes in non-
 reducible shaft fractures when the plate is acting as a bridge plate.
Once the locking screws engage the plate, no further tightening of
the screw is possible. Therefore the implant locks the bone
fragment in their relative position, regardless of the degree of
reduction. Accurate contouring of the plate to the bone is not
essential (Figure 8). Furthermore, by locking the screws to the
plate, the risk of loss of reduction due to screw toggling and
fracture collapse is reduced (Figure 9).
Figure 8: Accurate plate contouring unnecessary
Figure 9: Locking screw maintain reduction
Since the plate can sit off the bone, and locking of screws prevents
compression of the periosteum by the underside of the plate, then
blood supply to the bone may be improved (Figure 10). In case of
reducible fractures, once the metaphyseal fragment has been fixed
with locking screws, the fracture can be compressed using standard
screws in the DCU portion of the Combi hole (Figure 11).
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
747
Figure 10: Blood supply under LCP
Figure 11: Locking screws (conical head)
& standard screws (spherical head) in the DCU
 producing interfragmentary compression.
Complications
1.  Need to be able to reduce the fracture, or obtain correct
alignment of the bone, prior to application of the LCP.
2.
 The plate needs to positioned so that screws are centered over
the intramedullary space. If there is axial malalignment of the
plate and bone, then some of the screws near the end of the
plate will not have adequate bone purchase, and thus fail
(Figure 12).
Figure 12: Axial malalignment of the plate may result in inadequate screw purchase.
3. Cross threading of screws can cause permanent locking of
cross threading of locking screws does not necessarily
compromise the stability of the fixation, implant removal may
involve cutting of the plate.
748
Ch 10:Technologies for Management of Acute Simple &Complex Long Bone Fractures
Figure 13: Cross threading of locking screws
The threaded portion of the combi hole in the straight LCP only
allows for placement of screws that are perpendicular to the plate.
This can be problematic in the metaphyseal region. Development
of 'anatomically’ contoured plates has overcome this problem, for
example the distal tibial plate for humans, although currently there
are no such implants for animals.
FURTHER READING AND INFORMATION
1.  Brunnberg L, Horst C, Gacel A, Weiler A, Raschke M: Die no contact plate (NCP)
osteosyntheseplatte - ein neues biologisched implantatsystem. Kleintierpraxis; 48:579-591,
1998
2.  Dueland RT, Berglund L, Vanderby R Jr, et al. Structural properties of interlocking nails
canine femora, and femur-interlocking nail constructs. Vet Surg 1996; 25:386-396.
3.  Dueland RT, Vanderby R Jr, McCabe RP. Fatigue study of six and eight mm diameter
interlocking nails with screw holes of variable size and number. Vet Comp Orth Trauma 1997;
10: 194-199.
4.  Dueland RT, Johnson KA, Roe SC, Engen MH, Lesser AS. Interlocking nail treatment of 
diaphyseal long-bone fractures in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 214:59-6 Duhautois B.
L'enclouage verrouille veterinaire: etude clinique retrospective sur 45 cas. Prat Med Chir
Amin Comp 1995; 30:613-630.
5.  Durall I, Diaz MC, Morales I. An experimental study of compression of femoral fractures of
      
6.  Durall I, Diaz MC, Morales I. Interlocking nail stabilization of humeral fractures. Initial
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
749
7. Durall I, Diaz MC. Early experience with the use of an interlocking nail for the repair of
canine femoral shaft fractures. Vet Surg 1996;25:397-406.
8. Frigg R: Development of the locking compression plate. Injury; 34: S-B6-B10, 2003.
 9. Gautier E, Sommer C: Guidelines for the clinical application of the LCP. Injury; 34: S-B63-
B76, 2003.
10. Huckstep RL. Rigid intramedullary fixation of femoral shaft fractures with compression. J
Bone Jt Surg. 1972;54B:204.
r    s     s 
12. Johnson KA: Internal Fixation of Fractures: Interlocking Nails. In Slatter DH (ed). Textbook
of small animal surgery. Third edition. WB Saunders, 2002: 1807-1811
13. Mast J, Jacob R, Ganz R: Planning and reduction technique in fracture surgery. Berlin:Springer-
Verlag, 1989.
14. Perren SM: Evolution of the internal fixation of long bone fractures. The scientific basis of
Surg 84B: 1093-1110, 2002
15. Piermattei DL and Johnson KA: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints of
the Dog and Cat. Fourth Edition. W.B. Saunders, 2004.
16. Ramotowski W, Granowski R, Bielawski J. Osteosynteza metoda Zespol. Teoria i praktyka
kliniczna. Panstwowy Zaklad Wydawnictw Lekarskich: Warszawa 1988.
17. Somogyvari K, Berentey GY, Kokeny G, et al. Interlocking medullary nailing, and its effect
on healing and the osteotomized bone. Acta Vet Acad Scient Hungar Thomas 1981;29:233-
247.
18. K. Zahn, U. Matis: The Clamp Rod Internal Fixator - Application and Results in 120 Small
Animal Fracture Patients. Vet Comp Orthopaed Traumat 2004;17:110-120.
150
 Chapter 11
Acute Simple and Complex Diaphyseal
Fractures of the Femur
Dan Lewis
Dogs and cats commonly sustain diaphyseal fractures of the femur.
Femoral fractures generally require surgical intervention to achieve
bone union and optimal limb function. Reduction and stabilization
is dictated by the location and configuration of the fracture, the
age, body weight and temperament of the animal, and the presence
and extent of any additional concurrent musculoskeletal injuries.
subcutaneous tissues are divided and dissected to expose the
underlying biceps femoris muscle and tensor fascia lata. The tensor
fascia lata is divided along the cranial aspect of the biceps femoris
muscle allowing retraction of the biceps femoris muscle caudally
and the tensor fascia lata cranially, exposing the underlying
 quadriceps muscle group. The vastus lateralis muscle is then
retracted cranially to expose the femur and the fracture. A
 ds i i sss     q 
the distal femoral metaphysis and can be a source of extensive
hemorrhage and must be divided and ligated when exposing the
distal femoral diaphysis. The adductor magnus et brevis muscle has
strong periosteal insertions (facies aspera) along the caudal surface
of the femur and maintenance of these muscular attachments will
result in more efficient callus formation during the convalescent
 period. These muscular attachments also serve as points of
reference for assessing rotational alignment when stabilizing
reconstructed.
Many simple diaphyseal fractures are amenable to repair by
 intramedullary pinning, either alone or likely in combination with
some form of adjunctive fixation. A few principles must be
observed to avoid postoperative complications. Intramedullary pins
may be placed in either normograde or retrograde fashion. With
either technique, the pin will pass through the trochanteric fossa.
The surgeon must consider the proximity of the pin to the sciatic
nerve as the pin passes out of the trochanteric fossa, particularly
during retrograde pin placement. Although abducting and
extending the hip as the pin is driven proximally through the
trochanteric fossa will decrease the potential for sciatic nerve
complications during retrograde pin placement, studies have shown
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
757
that there is less risk of injuring the sciatic nerve if pins are placed
in normograde fashion. Normograde placement positions the pin
further from the sciatic nerve than a pin that is placed in retrograde
fashion. Thus, normograde pin placement is advocated.
Before reducing the fracture, it is often advantageous to cut the
trochar tip off the end of the pin once the pin has been advanced
'shop u nasn aend si s ru Ar a umop
 a sop  s rs Aa a sn is 
prominent caudal angulation of their distal femur and the tip of the
pin will contact the endosteal cortex as the pin is advanced into the
distal metaphyseal region. Blunting the tip of the intramedullary
pin will help prevent the pin from inadvertently penetrating the
cranial cortex of the distal femur and possibly interfering with
stifle function.
The decision regarding whether or not to anatomically reconstruct
a diaphyseal femoral fracture is influenced by the age of the
animal, the location of the fracture, the presence of concurrent
musculoskeletal injuries and the type of primary fixation that will
be used to stabilize the fracture. Spiral, long oblique and minimally
comminuted fractures are often anatomically reduced and
stabilized with a series of cerclage wires when an intramedullary
pin is used as the primary method of repair. Anatomic
reconstruction is generally not performed with short oblique,
transverse and more highly comminuted fractures.
     a o r 
in dogs, which will not be anatomically reduced, it is often
advisable to slightly “over-reduce” the fracture when introducing
the pin into the distal segment. Over-reduction (angulating the
distal fracture segment cranially) straightens the femur and
facilitates seating the end of the pin deeply into the metaphyseal
cancellous bone of the distal segment without penetrating the
cranial cortex in the distal metaphyseal region. During weight-
bearing, some compression of the fracture will occur.
 Interdigitation of fracture segments also provides some stability
Intramedullary pinning alone often does not provide adequate
stabilization of diaphyseal femoral fractures and supplemental
stabilization is generally indicated. It is advisable, even in fractures
that have been anatomically reconstructed and stabilized with an
intramedullary pin and multiple cerclage wires, to place an
adjunctive type I external fixator. The fixator will counteract
 -iam a ad p sn rixe pe p
allows mobilization of the stifle thus preventing post-operative
stiffness.
752
Ch 11: Acute Simple and Complex Diaphyseal Fractures of the Femur
A diaphyseal femoral fracture which has been repaired with an
intramedullary pin should never be supplemented with coaptation,
particularly a Schroeder-Thomas splint. Placing the limb in some
form of coaptation, following open reduction and surgical
stabilization of the fracture will not enhance the stability of the
repair and restricts motion of the stifle, potentiating the
development of fracture disease or so called "quadriceps tie-down".
If a Schroeder-Thomas splint is applied, the ring of the splint acts
as a fulcrum at the fracture site and can disrupt the reduction. In
some instances, a 90/90 flexion bandage is applied to the limb for a
few days following surgical repair of a femoral fracture, but this is
done as a static form of physical therapy. The 90/90 flexion
bandage maintains both the stifle and hock at approximately 90
degrees of flexion, thus maintaining the quadriceps muscle group
a ael n no juaad o sdiau yum uoisod pepuaixa ue u!
development of fracture disease.
Intramedullary pins can be used in conjunction with external
fixation to stabilize moderate or highly comminuted diaphyseal
femoral fractures. While the intramedullary pin can occasionally
be installed by a closed method, the pin is more frequently
placed using a limited open reduction. Disturbance of the
fracture is kept to a minimum and the pin (again best to blunt
the end of the pin by cutting the trochar tip off once the pin has
been advanced to the fracture site) is used to distract the femur
 Axa si as a    sh n o
and an external fixator is placed following wound closure. In
these more complex fractures, the proximal end of the
p uys a yn sund al aq uo ud aenp!
to the hip and articulated ("tied-in") with the external fixator
frame.
Interlocking nails are often used to stabilize diaphyseal femoral
fractures. The nail is introduced in normograde fashion and it is
preferable to lock the nail both proximally and distally with two
screws or bolts. Over-reduction of the fracture will facilitate
seating the nail appropriately in the cancellous bone of the distal
metaphysis. The nail is generally inserted with minimal
disturbance to the fracture site and a graft is often implanted
at the isthmus and thus provide excellent bending stability. The
interlocking screws or bolts help counteract rotational and axial
forces and the stability afforded typically promotes a rapid
return to weight-bearing.
Plate fixation is still an excellent means of stabilizing many
diaphyseal femoral fractures. Plates are usually placed on the
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
753
lateral surface of the femur. Fractures that might be more
appropriately stabilized with plate fixation would include
 transverse fractures in which the fracture segments do not
interdigitate securely, fractures in aged or large and giant breed
dogs, and severely comminuted fractures where collapse of the
segments and limb shortening could be a problem following
intramedullary pin fixation. Important factors in plate fixation
include properly contouring and pre-stressing the plate,
obtaining at least six cortices of purchase with screws placed on
each side of the fracture, appropriate application of cancellous 
bone grafts, and gentle handling of soft tissues.
Plate-rod constructs are another useful method for stabilizing
comminuted diaphyseal femoral fractures. This combination
a o d  ,  sa 
the plate resists rotational and compressive forces and the pin
ana suaand snu 'aid aui o uns supuaq snpa
failure of the plate. Reduction and implant application is
 performed with minimal disturbance to the fracture site to
facilitate fracture union. The pin is placed first, preferably along
the medial aspect of the medullary canal, to distract the femur
out to normal length (again blunting the tip of the pin once it
has emerged at the fracture site will facilitate distraction) and
provide alignment of the major fracture segments. The plate is
 then applied. Bicortical screws are placed in the metaphyses, as
there is generally sufficient room in these regions to allow
screws to be placed and avoid the intramedullary pin.
Unicortical screws are placed in the more narrow diaphysis were
placement of bicortical screws can be difficult because of the
presence of the intramedullary pin. Studies have shown that an
Im  e n o t s  d 
allow sufficient strain to stimulate fracture healing while
substantially extending the fatigue life of the plate.
While diaphyseal femoral fractures can be managed using an
external fixator as the primary form of stabilization, application
of fixators to the femur has its drawbacks. In evenly distributing
an adequate number of fixation pins to provide suitable primary
fixation, the centrally located pins must pass through the
abundant muscle mass over the lateral aspect of the femoral
diaphysis. This tends to cause inflammation, drainage, and poor
weight-bearing. Also, only type I fixators are applicable to the
femur. Because of the large muscle mass of the thigh, the
connecting rod is positioned a considerable distance from the
bone, decreasing the stability afforded by the construct. This can
be partially compensated for by using a second connecting bar
and/or increasing the number of fixation pins per fracture
754
Ch 11: Acute Simple and Complex Diaphyseal Fractures of the Femur
segment, but there are limitations to the compensation. Thus
external fixators are best reserved for use as an adjunctive
(supplemental fixation with an intramedullary pin) form of
stabilization for diaphyseal femoral fractures
REFERENCES
1.  Aron D, et al. Experimental and clinical experience with an IM pin external skeletal fixator tie-
in configuration. Vet Comp Ortho Traumatol 4:86, 1991.
  o   n q   ss   ne   g
long bone fractures. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995
3.  Aron DN, Crowe DT. The 90-90 flexion splint for prevention of stifle joint stiffness with
femoral fracture repairs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:447, 1987.
4.  Black A, Withrow S. Changes in the proximal femur and coxofemoral joint following
intramedullary pinning of diaphyseal fractures in young dogs. Vet Surg 8: 19, 1979.
5.  Braden TD, Brinker WO. Effect of certain internal fixation devices on functional limb usage in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:642, 1973.
 6.  Braden TD, et al. Characteristics of 1o00 femur fractures in the dog and cat. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatol 8:203, 1995.
7. Dallman MJ, et al. Rotational strength of double-pinning techniques for repair of transverse
fractures in femurs of dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:123, 1990.
8.  Dewey CW, et al. Static strength evaluation of two modified unilateral external skeletal
fixators. J Small Anim Pract 35:211, 1994.
9. Dueland R, et al. Fatigue study of six and eight mm diameter interlocking nails with screw
holes of variable size and number. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 10:194, 1997.
10. Dueland RT, et al. Structural properties of interlocking nails, canine femora, and femur-
interlocking nail constructs. Vet Surg 25:386, 1996
11. Dueland RT, et al. Interlocking nail treatment of diaphyseal long-bone fractures in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 214:59, 1999.
12. Durall I, Diaz MC. Early ex perience with the use of an interlocking nail for the repair of canine
femoral shaft fractures. Vet Surg 25:397, 1996.
13. Fanton JW. Sciatic nerve injury possibly due to pin fixation. Canine Pract 9:35, 1982.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc.No. 363
755
14. Fanton JW, et al. Sciatic nerve injury as a complication of intramedullary pin fixation of
femoral fractures. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19: 87, 1983
15. Farese J, et al. Use of IMEX SK-circular external fixator constructs for fracture stabilization in
dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:279, 20002.
16. Foland M, et al. The adjunctive use of half-pin (type I) external skeletal fixators in
combination with intramedullary pins for femoral fracture fixation. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatol 4:77, 1991.
17. Franczuszki D, et al. Postoperative effects of experimental femoral shortening in the mature
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:429, 1987.
18. Gibson K, vanEe R. Stack pinning of long bone fractures: A retrospective study. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 4:48, 1991.
19. Gilmore DR. Sciatic nerve injury in twenty-nine dogs. J Am Anim Hasp Assoc 20:403,
1984.
20. Hulse D, et al. Effect of intramedullary pin size on reducing bone plate strain. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 13:185, 2000.
21. Hulse D, et al. Reduction in plate strain by addition of an intramedullary pin. Vet Surg
26:451, 1997.
22. Hulse D, et al. Clinical, in vitro, and mathematical analysis of plate/rod buttressing for
biological fracture stabilization. Vet Surg 23:404, 1994.
23. Hunt JM, et al. The complications of diaphyseal fractures in dogs: A review of 1o0 cases. J
Small Anim Pract 21:103, 1980.
24. Johnson AL, et al. Fragment reconstruction and bone plate fixation versus bridging plate
fixation for treating highly comminuted femoral fractures in dogs: 35 cases (1987-1997). J
Am Vet Med Ass0c 213:1157, 1998
 25. Kagan KG. Multiple intramedullary pin fixation of the femur of dogs and cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 182:1251, 1983.
26. Klause S, et al. A modification of the unilateral type I external skeletal fixator configuration
for the primary or secondary support of supracondylar humeral or femoral fractures. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumatol3: 130, 1990.
27. Langley Hobbs SJ, et al. Use of external skeletal fixators in the repair of femoral fractures in
cats. J Small Anim Pract 37:95, 1996.
28. Lesser AS. Method of internal fixation of femoral fractures using intramedullary pins and a
closed technique. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 12:754, 1976.
756
Ch 11: Acute Simple and Complex Diaphyseal Fractures of the Femur
 29. McLaughlin R. Internal fixation: Intramedullary pins, cerclage wires, and interlocking nails.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 29:1097, 1999.
30. McLaughlin RM Jr, et al. Stacked veterinary cuttable plates for treatment of comminuted
diaphyseal fractures in cats. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 5:22, 1992.
and bending stiffness. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 8:146, 1995.
32. Newman ME, Milton JL. Closed reduction and blind pinning of 29 moral and tibial fractures
in 27 dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:61, 1989.
femoral oblique fractures. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 9:106, 1996.
34. Palmer RH, et al. Relationship of femoral intramedullary pins to the sciatic nerve and gluteal
muscles after retrograde and normograde insertion. Vet Surg 17:65, 1988.
35. Simpson DJ, Lewis DD. Fracture the femur. In: Slatter DH (ed). Textbook of Small Animal
Surgery, 3"d ed. Philadelphia, PA, WB Saunders Co 2003;pp 2059-2089.
36. Vasseur PB, et al. Evaluation of fixation devices for prevention of rotation in transverse
fractures of the canine femoral shaft: An in vitro study. Am J Vet Res 45: 1504, 1984.
37. Walter MC, et al. Treatment of severely comminuted diaphyseal fractures in the dog, using
standard bone plates and autogenous cancellous bone graft to span fracture gaps: 11l cases
(1979-1983). J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:457, 1986.
38. Whitehair JG, Vasseur PB. Fractures of the femur. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
22:149,1992.
39. Withrow SJ. Sciatic nerve injury associated with intramedullary fixation of femoral fractures. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:562, 1977.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
757
NOTES:
758
Ch 11: Acute Simple and Complex Diaphyseal Fractures of the Femur
Chapter 12
Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
Mark Glyde
DISTAL FEMORAL PHYSEAL FRACTURES
Distal femoral physeal fractures are relatively common fractures in
immature dogs and cats up to two years of age. Salter-Harris II
fractures occur most commonly in dogs followed by Salter-Harris I
fractures. Salter-Harris I fractures are the most common form in
cats.
The epiphyseal fragment displaces caudally due to contraction of
 the gastrocnemius, semitendinosus and semimembranosus muscles.
Open reduction of these fractures is indicated.
Various techniques have been described for repair of these
fractures. The most commonly used method is crossed K wires
inserted in a normograde manner from the lateral and medial
epicondylar area. These can be placed through a standard lateral
parapatellar arthrotomy approach. Extending the incision more
 proximally simplifies the surgery.
The condyle should always be inspected for evidence of condylar
fracture (Salter-Harris IHI or IV fracture) that was not evident on
 pre-operative radiographs. Fracture reduction can be difficult. Try
and reduce the fracture by using bone holding forceps on the
fingers and using the tibia as a “push rod" to direct the condyle
cranially. If this is not possible use of pointed reduction forceps
across the condyle may be necessary. Maintenance of reduction
prior to pin insertion can be difficult with under-reduction (slight
caudal displacement of the epiphysis) being common. Under-
reduction can usually be avoided or corrected by placement of a
large pair of pointed reduction forceps in a sagittal line across the
fracture line. The distal point is placed into the cranial aspect of the
intercondylar fossa and the proximal tip is placed into a distally
directed partial thickness drill hole in the femoral metaphysis.
The lateral pin is inserted just cranial to the origin of the long
digital extensor tendon and directed proximally to penetrate the
medial cortex of the distal femur a few centimeters proximal to the
fracture line. The medial pin is then placed to “mirror"’ the lateral
pin.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
759
The large high friction surface area of the distal femoral physis and
W" shape of the epiphyseal fossae provide very significant
inherent stability provided anatomical reduction is achieved. It is
yery important to realise that this inherent stability is one of the
features of this fracture. If the same fracture repair method is used
in an adult dog with a distal femoral fracture, particularly if any
degree of comminution exists, the absence of this inherent stability
 greatly increases the risk of failure.
The two keys to successful repair of distal femoral physeal
 fractures are accurate anatomic reduction and engagement of
sufficient bone purchase in the epiphyseal fragment with the K
wires. Poor reduction (usually caudal displacement) will increase
the load on the fracture repair and increase the likelihood of failure.
Achieving sufficient bone purchase in the epiphyseal fragment in
chondrodystrophoid breeds is difficult due to the larger caudal bow
of the distal femur in these breeds.
The prognosis following anatomic repair of Salter-Harris I and II
fractures is good to excellent. Closure of the distal femoral physis
probably occurs in the majority of cases. In one study the only
significant prognostic determinant for development of lameness
 associated with premature closure and femoral shortening was age
at the time of fracture (Berg 1984). The distal femoral physis is
reported to provide 75% of femoral longitudinal growth and closes
between 6 and 8 months of age in dogs. Considerable breed
variation occurs with regard to closure times. In a study of
greyhounds 80% of femoral growth had occurred by five months of
 age and 95% had occurred by 7 months of age.
 Poor reduction and insufficient bone purchase are associated with
higher fracture repair complication rates.
DISTAL FEMORAL, SUPRACONDYLAR AND CONDYLAR FEMORAL
FRACTURES IN ADULT DOGS
Femoral condylar fractures in skeletally mature dogs are rare.
 Chondrodystrophoid breeds seem to be over-represented for this
type of fracture. Fracture repair follows the principles of articular
fracture repair. Lag screw repair of the condylar component
following standard principles is indicated.
Supracondylar femoral (SCF) fractures affecting the distal
et al, 1975; Braden et al, 1990).
760
Ch 12: Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
Distal femoral and supracondylar femoral fractures provide
considerable challenges for successful fracture repair. It is
important to stress the significant biomechanical differences
between these fractures and distal femoral physeal fractures in
immature dogs.
Fracture repair of distal femoral and supracondylar fractures is
technically difficult due to the:
 short length of the distal segment
● large medullary canal of the distal femur
●caudal bow of the distal femur
0 more pronounced in chondrodystrophoid breeds - this
 provides larger bending moments on axial loading than in
 non- chondrodystrophoid " breeds
 this is much less pronounced in cats
● lack of fragment interdigitation as seen with distal femoral
physeal fractures
· anatomy of the stifle joint
0 must be considered if implants are to be placed in the
condylar region of the femur. The articular surface of the
femoral trochlea, the cruciate ligament origins in the
intercondylar fossa and the collateral ligament origins
must all be avoided. It is particularly important when
placing screws or transfixation pins in the distal condylar
 area to remember and avoid the intercondylar fossa.
Fracture healing of distal femoral and supracondylar fractures
however is generally good as the bone structure of the metaphysis
is primarily cancellous with a thin cortical shell unlike the hard
cortical bone of the diaphysis.
necessitates a combined lateral approach to the femur and lateral
approach to the stifle joint. The caudal femoral artery and vein
should be identified if intact and preserved if possible.
Many methods of fixation of distal femoral and supracondylar
fractures have been described and include the use of cross pins,
Rush pins, intramedullary pins, external skeletal fixators, hybrid
external fixators, standard bone plates, customised hook plates,
reconstruction plates and tibial head plates. The method of fixation
chosen should be based on appropriate fracture assessment and full
consideration of biological, biomechanical and clinical factors
notably the animal's age, body weight and temperament, the
configuration and location of the fracture, conformation of the
femur, the presence and extent of concurrent orthopaedic injuries,
 and the ability and ex perience of the surgeon.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
767
Crossed K wires
Crossed K wires are the most commonly used method of repair of
supracondylar femoral physeal fractures in immature animals.
They can be used in very simple supracondylar femoral fractures in
adult animals provided the biomechanical load will not be great -
transverse, non-comminuted fractures in cats and small non-
chondrodystrophoid dogs.
Intramedullary (IM) pinning
IM pinning is generally unsuitable for supracondylar fractures and
should not be used for repair of comminuted fractures. Due to the
caudal bow of the distal femur and the lack of distal bone stock in
which to seat the pin, adequate stabilisation is usually not achieved
particularly with transverse and comminuted fractures. Pin seating
can be improved by over-reducing the distal fragment allowing pin 
penetration further into the condyles however the resulting
 aa n i  s ap  
disease in the stifle joint. Effective placement of IM pins in
chondrodystrophic breeds is unlikely to be achieved.
Bone plating
Dynamic compression plates
Bone plating of distal femoral and supracondylar fractures may
provide rigid fixation in many instances and some authors consider
plating to be the preferred method of repair for large dogs and for
 transverse and comminuted supracondylar fractures. The anatomy
of the distal femur however makes contouring of standard bone
 plates difficult. The lack of bone stock distally in supracondylar 
fractures means that the principles of bone plating (a minimum of
six cortices, and preferably eight cortices in larger breeds, should
be engaged by screws either side of the fracture) are not usually
achievable. The caudal bow of the distal femur further shortens the
length of the distal femur that is suitable for application of a
standard bone plate. In most supracondylar fractures stabilised with
standard bone plates typically only three to five cortices can be
achieved. To achieve sufficient cortices in the distal fragment with
a standard bone plate usually results in impingement of the plate on
the lateral trochlear ridge which consequent interference with
 patella tracking and in some cases patella luxation.
 Customised hook plating
Robins et al (1993) described the use of customised hook plates for
repair of humeral and femoral metaphyseal fractures. This is based
on the use of blade plates in human supracondylar fractures.
 ' a      sd  
customised hook plate involves a considerable amount of work
bending a regular DCP plate and fashioning sharp-pointed hooks
762
Ch 12:Distal Metaphyseal and ArticularFractures
with a hacksaw blade. The hooks allow increased bone purchase
 over a smaller area than standard plates. In addition a screw can be
 placed through the hooked area, further increasing the number of
cortices achieved with this plate. Simpler options now exist.
Modified hookplate
Reconstruction plates
 Reconstruction plates were designed for use in mandibular and
 pelvic fractures and allow bending in three dimensions due to
notches in the plate between screw holes (see picture below).
Reconstruction plates allow bending about the short axis as well
which enables contouring to fit the caudal bow of the distal femur
thereby maximising the number of screws that can be placed and
reducing interference with the stifle joint when compared to
standard bone plates. Even in chondrodystrophoid breeds with a
more pronounced caudal bow of the distal femur reconstruction
plates can be contoured to fit.
They are available in 2.0mm. 2.7mm, 3.5mm and 4.5mm sizes.
Standard bone plates can be bent in two planes; longitudinal
contouring around the R-S axis and twisting around the X-Y axis.
 Reconstruction plates may also be bent longitudinally around the
P-Q axis.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
763
Longitudinal bending
1
Twisting around
the X-Y axis
Longtudinal bending
around P-Q axis
The disadvantage of reconstruction plates is that they were not
designed for weight-bearing. They are not recommended for use as
buttress plates for repair of comminuted fractures in large breed
dogs. Combination of a reconstruction plate with one or two K
wires is recommended in the repair of comminuted fractures.
Tibial head plates
Tibial head plates are designed for use in human proximal tibial
fractures. They have been reported for repair of supracondylar
femoral fractures in humans and dogs.
Their main indication for use in supracondylar fractures is in large
breed dogs > 25-30kg body weight. The unique shape of the tibial
head plate allows placement of typically four or five screws in the
distal fragment without impinging on the stifle joint. The plate
head is curved either right or left at an angle of 13
764
Ch 12: Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
 degrees which fits well to the caudal bow of the distal femur when
 used upside down (left tibial head
plates are used for right femoral
fractures and vice versa). The head is
essentially triangular in shape and has
three round screw holes and one oval
hole. They are available with 5, 7 or 9
shaft holes. The plate has the same
thickness as the 3.5mm broad DCP
however is 2mm wider and accepts 3.5
and 4.5 cortical screws as well as 4.5
and 6.5 cancellous screws in the oval
hole. While placement of this plate is
intra-articular it does not impinge on
the lateral trochlear ridge to the degree
of a standard plate and allows
 placement of more screws in the distal
 fragment than a standard bone plate.
Lateraltibialhead
 Supracondylar femoral plates
buttressplate onfemoral
supracondylarfracture
2.7mm and 3.5mm broad
supracondylar femoral bone plates
 have been developed for veterinary use using finite element
femoral fractures in adult dogs and corrective femoral osteotomies
(Glyde et al 2005). Similar to the human lateral tibial head plate
the curved design of the distal end facilitates achievement of more
screws in short distal fragments than standard bone plates without
impinging on the lateral trochlea ridges. The most caudal hole is
oval to allow angled screw placement to avoid the intercondylar
fossa.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
765
External skeletal fixators (ESFs)
 Modified enhanced two or three-frame type Ib ESFs have been
 described for the repair of comminuted distal femoral fractures.
*"Tieing-in" to an IM pin is usually advisable as it will increase the 
resistance to bending.
166
Ch 12: Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
Achieving sufficient cortices in the distal fragment with standard
 ESFs in other than simple supracondylar fractures is difficult.
Hybrid ESFs (a combination of a proximal linear ESF with a distal
fractures. This involves using one or two circular rings most
distally, which are then connected to a type I ESF. The use of wires
rather than standard ESF pins usually achieves greater stability in
small distal fragments than with standard ESFs.
Interlocking Nails
 Interlocking nails provide significantly greater stability than
standard IM pins. Similar limitations however exist with regard to
the use of interlocking nails as with IM pins in supracondylar
fractures. Due to the caudal bow of the distal femur and the lack of
distal bone stock in which to seat the nail, adequate stabilisation of
comminuted supracondylar fractures may be difficult to achieve.
Achieving two screws distally is usually not possible and the single
distal screw is often located too close to the fracture line. As with
IM pins, over-reducing the distal fragment will allow nail
penetration further into the condyle.
HUMERAL CONDYLAR AND SUPRACONDYLAR FRACTURES
The majority of humeral fractures occur in the distal half. Humeral
diaphyseal fractures account for approximately 40% of all humeral
fractures. Distal humeral fractures (supracondylar and
condylar fractures) account for 54% of all humeral fractures.
Supracondylar fractures usually result from major trauma.
Concurrent injuries, particularly thoracic injuries are common.
Stabilisation of the animal and thorough assessment for concurrent
injuries is essential. A minimum requirement prior to surgery
would be a thoracic radiograph to rule out the presence of
pneumothorax or other traumatic pleural space disease, pulmonary
contusion or chest wall trauma.
Neurologic function of the fractured limb should also be assessed
 prior to surgical repair. The incidence of radial nerve injury with
humeral fracture is low however it is important that radial nerve
function is checked prior to surgery. The radial nerve supplies all
the extensor muscles of the forelimb except for the shoulder
extensors. The radial nerve at the distal humeral level supplies the
carpal extensors and antebrachial and metacarpal skin sensation.
Animals with humeral fractures will often “mimic" radial nerve
sh uo susai si med ai pue paddop si moqre au ieu ui Ainu!
dorsum. A full neurologic assessment of the fractured limb is not
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
767
possible due to pain and muscle incompetence consequent to the
fracture. Testing for the presence of superficial pain on the dorsum
 of the paw by pinching the skin and eliciting some form of
response from the animal is advised.
Humeral condylar fractures (HCFs) may occur traumatically
 or atraumatically during normal activity. The reported incidence
of humeral condylar fractures (HCFs) varies and ranges from 1.2%
- 5.6% of all canine fractures and from 17% - 54% of all humeral
fractures.
Humeral condylar fractures (HCFs) may be divided into:
lateral condylar
medial condylar
 intercondylar or dicondylar T or Y fractures
Lateral condylar fractures are the most common form of HCF
followed by dicondylar fractures with medial condylar fractures
being least common.
Average incidence from five reported series was:
lateral condyle
51%
medial condyle
13%
dicondylar fracture
36%
The lateral condyle is the major weight-bearing condyle and is also
eccentric to the humeral shaft causing weight-bearing forces to be
directed through the lateral epicondylar ridge rather than through
 the humeral shaft. In
addition the lateral
epicondylar ridge
(essentially the
small lateral
larger medial
"buttress" for the
epicondylar
epicondylar
condyle) is considerably
ridge.
ridge
smaller than the medial
 epicondylar ridge. The
lateral
 greater load and the
medial
condyle
biomechanical weakness
condyle
 predispose the lateral
condyle to fracture. The
lineof
evolutionary rationale
condylar
force directed
for this somewhat
fusion
fromradialhead
 paradoxical anatomic
through lateral
 design is not clear.
condyle
768
Ch 12: Distal Metaphyseal ana Articular Fractures
Causes of humeral condylar fracture
HCFs can occur as the result of major trauma where an abnormally
large non-physiologic force exceeds the strength of the normal
humeral condyle or may occur due to a pathologic weakness in the
condyle that is not able to withstand the normal physiologic forces
of weight-bearing.
Some controversy exists over which is the most common cause of
HCFs. Some authors consider that major trauma, typically a motor
vehicle accident, is the major cause of HCF. Others consider that
the majority of HCFs occur during normal activity such as running,
jumping or climbing stairs.
Marcellin-Little et al (1994) looked at 157 humeral fractures in
which 54% (85/157) were HCFs. Of the 54% of HCFs, 65%
more closely. Of these 55 skeletally mature dogs with HCF, 78%
 ()   o s o m o ()
during normal activity and a further 14% (8/55) occurred with no
known history of trauma].
Vannini et al (1987b) looked at 139 distal humeral fractures in
dogs of which 63% (88/139) were HCFs. Of these 88 HCFs, 69%
(61/88) were due to minor trauma (defined as normal activity of
running, jumping from heights under 1m and climbing stairs).
When unicondylar fractures were considered separately, 90%
(46/51) occurred due to minor trauma.
When considering the aetiology of HCFs it is important to
high incidence of condylar fractures in immature dogs as a result of
minor trauma is due to the normal relative weakness of the
 developing humeral condyle. The humeral condyles develop as
separate centres of ossification that appear approximately 14 days
(+/- 8 days) after birth. The lateral and medial centres of
ossification are separated by a thin cartilaginous plate and normally
unite at 70 days (+/- 14 days). This fusion zone between the
condyles is the weakest part of the immature condyle. HCFs
consistently occur along this fusion line in both immature and
 mature animals.
In skeletally mature animals the condyles should be fused and the
cartilaginous plate completely ossified. In normal animals condylal
fracture should only occur as a result of major trauma directed as
an axial compression force through the humeroradial joint. The
significant incidence of HCF in mature dogs as a result of normal
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
769
fusion zone.
While the existence of this line of weakness in dogs that suffer
 HCF during normal activity is not doubted, the exact nature of the
abnormality is not known. Spaniel breeds are significantly
 predisposed to HCF and a condition of incomplete ossification of
the humeral condyle that is inherited as a recessive gene in these
 breeds has been proposed though has not yet been proven.
Histopathological examination of bone from HCF sites in these
dogs reveals non-specific evidence of chronic inflammatory
change and previous remodelling. Fibrous tissue, increased
osteoclastic activity and increased numbers of plasma cells are
 s po  o As   s a
the humeral condyle in Cocker Spaniel and non-Cocker Spaniel
dogs found that Cocker Spaniels had a decreased vascular density
in the humeral condyles. This may explain the weakness between
the humeral condyles and also the delayed healing seen in
association with these fractures due to normal activity.
HCF has also been reported consequent to neoplasia.
Breed incidence and humeral condylar fractures
HCFs have been reported in many breeds and crossbreeds however
Spaniel breeds appear to be predisposed to HCF. Spaniel breeds
also have a significantly higher incidence of bilateral HCF.
Marcellin-Little et al (1994) investigated 43 atraumatic HCFs in 36
dogs and found that 78% (28/36) were Spaniel-type dogs (24
Cocker Spaniels, 3 Brittany Spaniels and 1 spaniel cross). Further
investigation of eight of these Cocker Spaniels with available
pedigree information found a significantly higher coefficient of
inbreeding than in 100 unaffected Cocker Spaniels suggestive of a
recessive mode of inheritance.
Vannini et al (1987b) found that Cocker Spaniels were over
represented in HCFs from minor trauma when compared to the
 overall clinic population.
Vannini et al (1987a) reported that of 20 adult dogs with
atraumatic HCFs 55% were Cocker Spaniels.
So a     si xa s  s
ds r an san ss p sp go r n 
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, Labrador Retrievers, Rhodesian
Ridgebacks, Jack Russell Terriers, Boxers and cross breed dogs.
170
Ch 12: Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
If a definite history of trauma is not associated with a humeral condylar
fracture assume it is a pathologic fracture until proven otherwise.
Age and gender
The age of dogs with traumatic HCF varies widely. Dogs with
atraumatic HCF can be divided into skeletally immature animals
and skeletally mature animals.
 ue ssal shop u panoo shh oenne jo juared Aixis
months old. Of these, 80% were less than 4 months old (Vannini et
al 1987b).
 The average age of skeletally mature dogs with atraumatic HCF
was six years (range 2 - 13 years) (Marcellin-Little et al 1994,
Vannini et al 1987a).
 Male dogs appear to be more prone to atraumatic HCF than
female dogs comprising 83% and 75% of cases in two studies that
considered gender. The reason for this is not known.
Incidence of bilateral humeral condylar fractures and radiographic findings
Traumatic HCFs are rarely bilateral. Atraumatic HCFs have a
moderate incidence of bilateral fracture and a high incidence of
bilateral disease.
Marcellin-Little et al (1994) in their study of 36 dogs with HCF
suffered during normal activity found 20% suffered bilateral
fractures. Of those with unilateral fractures, 86% had a vertical
radiolucent line between the condyles apparent on a
craniocaudal radiograph of the contralateral elbow.
Vannini et al (1987a) reported 25% of dogs that had an HCF
 during normal activity suffered a subsequent contralateral HCF at
an average of 8.3 months (range 5 days to 14 months) after the
initial fracture.
It is important to radiograph both elbows. At least two views
should be taken. The most useful projections are a flexed lateral
and a 15° craniomedial to 15° caudolateral view. Divergence of
more than 5" from the 15" in the craniocaudal radiograph is
reported to result in inability to detect the presence of a radiolucent
line in the intercondylar area.
Common radiographic findings in the contralateral elbow joint
of dogs with atraumatic HCF include:
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
771
 a vertical radiolucent
line
(black arrow in adjacent
image) (0.5mm - 1.0mm
wide) between the lateral
and medial condyles in
 the same location as the
cartilaginous line
separating the separate
 centres of ossification in
immature dogs. Sclerosis
 is typically apparent
 adjacent to this line which
may extend partially or
completely from the
 articular surface to the
 supracondylar foramen
(86%). CT and
 arthroscopy are more
 accurate than plain
 radiography for detecting
condylar splits.
Craniocaudal radiograph of intact left elbow in
Cocker Spaniel with atraumatic right lateral condylar
fracture. Black arrow - condylar split. White arrow -
periosteal reaction on lateral epicondylar ridge.
Broken arrow - osteophyte adjacent to medial
coronoid process.
degenerative joint disease (92%)
An osteophyte is visible adjacent to the medial coronoid
process (broken arrow).
 periosteal proliferation on the lateral epicondylar ridge
(white arrow) presumably due to increased stress on the
epicondylar ridge due to incomplete ossification / weakness of
the humeral condyles (50%). The specificity of this
radiographic change for incomplete ossification of the humeral
condyles has not been investigated. It is an unusual
radiographic finding however and should certainly provide a
high index of suspicion for incomplete ossification and justify
 further craniocaudal radiographs if a radiolucent line is not
readily apparent.
172
Ch 12:Distal Metaphyseal and ArticularFractures
fragmented medial coronoid process (25%). This is
 presumed to be due to micromotion between the lateral and
medial condyles placing abnormal stress on the medial
coronoid process as FCP is uncommon in spaniels.
Fracture repair
HCFs should be repaired following the principles of articular
surgery. It is essential that anatomical reduction of the fracture is
achieved.
Unicondylar fractures are usually repaired via a craniolateral or
 medial approach, whichever is appropriate.
Dicondylar fractures can be repaired by a combined craniolateral
and medial approach. Olecranon osteotomies have a high
complication rate and should be avoided if possible
The condyles should be repaired with an interfragmentary lag
screw or compressing pin and the supracondylar component of the
fracture subsequently repaired with K wires, lag screws or bone
plate depending on the extent and severity of the fracture.
Several options exist for the type of transcondylar implant. Cortical
screws, fully threaded cancellous screws, partially threaded
cancellous screws and self-compressing pins (Orthofix pins) can be
used. All will achieve interfragmentary compression if correctly
placed. The humeral condyle in the adult dog is quite dense bone.
For this reason cancellous screws are not essential to achieve
adequate purchase except in very young puppies. The use of
 partially threaded cancellous screws may be associated with a
higher incidence of screw failure than the cortical screw or fully
threaded cancellous screw.
Partially threaded 4.0mm cancellous screws have been shown to
have a significantly reduced pullout strength compared to fully
threaded 3.5mm cortical screws in an ex-vivo study (Glyde 2004).
Orthofix pins are self-compressing negative profile threaded pins 
that are simpler to place than lag screws. In an ex-vivo
biomechanical study large Orthofix pins (2.0mm core diameter)
were shown to be less stiff and allowed greater fracture
displacement than the 2.7mm and 3.5mm cortical thread lag screws
though this was at loads that were probably supraphysiologic (Vida
 s  n s d n    
 perform similarly to 2.7mm and 3.5mm screws.
If cortical screws or fully threaded cancellous screws are used a
glide hole must be drilled in the fractured condyle to enable
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
773
interfragmentary compression. This is not necessary if a partially
threaded cancellous screw is used provided the threads do not
engage the near bone
fragment.
There are two methods for
 placement of the
 transcondylar lag screw or
 pin; the inside-out method
 and the outside-in method
(the description below will
Lateral
be for a lateral condylar
epicondylar
fracture using a fully
threaded screw).
ridge
 Regardless of the method the
Lateral
landmarks that indicate the
epicondyle
centre of each condyle
(marked with an "X") are:
 lateral condyle: - the
extensor fossa which is
just cranial and ventral
to the lateral epicondyle
Medial
 medial condyle: -
epicondylar
immediately cranial to
ridge
the medial epicondyle.
 The medial epicondyle
forms a reverse "C"
 shape opening in a
Medial
cranial direction. The
epicondyle
 target point is right in
the concavity of the
"C".
the inside-out method
This is an easier method for correct screw placement than the
outside-in method although does require more manipulation of
the fracture. The lateral condyle is rotated outward to expose
the fracture surface. The glide hole is then commenced in the
centre of the fracture surface and drilled laterally parallel to
the articular surface to exit in the extensor fossa. The fracture
 is then reduced and maintained in reduction with bone holding
forceps or a condylar clamp. A drill sleeve is inserted into the
 glide hole and the appropriately sized thread hole drilled in the
774
Ch 12: Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
medial condyle. Screw length required is measured with a
 depth gauge and a thread is cut in the thread hole with a tap.
 Check that reduction at the epicondylar ridge is maintained as
the screw is tightened. The epicondylar / supracondylar part
of the fracture is then stabilised as required, usually with a K
wire. Alternatively the K wire can be placed prior to drilling
the thread hole.
● the outside-in method
The fracture is anatomically reduced and maintained in reduction.
A thread hole is drilled from the extensor fossa on the lateral
condyle parallel to the articular surface to exit at the medial
epicondyle. Use of an aiming device simplifies accurate drilling
 and is strongly recommended. The thread hole in the lateral
condyle is then over-drilled with the appropriate sized glide hole. It
is essential that the glide hole penetrate the full thickness of the
lateral condyle without penetrating too far into the medial part of
the condyle or the lag screw effect will not be achieved. The
remainder of the procedure is then as described for the inside-out
method.
Fixation Failure
Failure rates of HCF repair are higher for atraumatic fractures than
for traumatic fractures. Fracture fixation failure rates of 10 --
 23% have been reported for repair of atraumatic HCFs in
spaniel breeds compared to less than 5% failure rates in traumatic
HCFs. The reason for this has not been established however may
relate to the poorer blood supply to the humeral condyle in
spaniels.
Given the risk of subsequent contralateral HCF in animals with
 atraumatic HCF it is advisable to lag screw the contralateral
condyle if a radiolucent line is apparent radiographically or
identified on CT or arthroscopy.
Diagnosis of incomplete ossification prior to fracture
Diagnosis of this condition prior to occurrence of HCF is difficult
as many owners do not detect evidence of lameness prior to
fracture. Marcellin-Litle et al (1994) reported that in dogs with
HCF that had contralateral radiographic abnormality, lameness was
present in only 25% of dogs with a radiolucent line and evidence of
degenerative joint disease and in 0% of dogs with only a
radiolucent line and no degenerative joint disease. Vannini et al
(1987a) reported lameness prior to fracture in 45% of Cocker
Spaniels and in 0% of non-Cocker Spaniels.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
775
An index of suspicion and thorough physical and radiographic
examination of the contralateral elbow in dogs with atraumatic
to fracture of the contralateral elbow. Similarly inclusion of
forelimb lameness localised to the elbow joint, particularly spaniels
and other breeds that are not commonly affected with elbow
dysplasia, may enable diagnosis of this condition prior to fracture.
used to "rule out" the presence of a contralateral fissure in animals
with an atraumatic HCF.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Berg RJ et al. Evaluation of prognostic factors for growth following distal femoral physeal
injuries in 17 dogs. Veterinary Surgery 13: 172, 1984
 2.  Dueland and VanEnkevort. Lateral Tibial Head Buttress Plate: Use in a Pathological Femoral
Fracture Secondary to a Bone Cyst in a Dog. V.C.O.T. 1995; 8: 196-9.
3.  Glyde MR, Lidbetter DA and Wong WT. Use of a lateral tibial head buttress plate in the repair
of an open comminuted supracondylar femoral fracture in a German Shepherd dog. Irish
Veterinary Journal. 56 (2), 87-93 2003
4.  Glyde MR, FitzPatrick D, Fitzpatrick C. Use Of Finite Element Analysis For Design Of A
2.7mm And 3.5mm Broad Supracondylar Femoral Bone Plate BVOA Spring Meeting, BSAVA
Annual Congress 2005, Birmingham, England.
5. Glyde MR, FitzPatrick D, Shahar R, McCreary T, Mac Giolla Ri B. A biomechanical
comparison of pullout strengths of 3.5mm cortical and 4.0mm partially threaded cancellous
Germany. 2004
6.  Klause SE, Schwarz PD, Egger EL, Piermattei DL. A Modification of the Unilateral Type 1
External Skeletal Fixator Configuration for primary or Secondary Support of Supracondylar
Humeral and Femoral Fractures.V.C.O.T. 1990; 3: 130-4.
 7. Lewis DD et al.Use of Reconstruction Plates for Stabilisation of Fractures and Osteotomies
1          
 8. Lidbetter DA and Glyde MR (2o00). Supracondylar Femoral Fractures in Adult Animals.
Compendium Continuing Education. Vol 22 (11), 1041-1055.
9.  Marcellin-Little, D.J. et al. Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle in spaniels
Veterinary Surgery, 23, 475-487, 1994
776
Ch12:Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
10. Robins GM, Eaton-Wells R, Johnson KA. Customised Hook Plates for Metaphyseal Fractures,
Nonunions and Osteotomies in the Dog and Cat. V.C.O.T. 1993; 6: 56-61.
11. Schatzker and Tile. The Rationale Of Operative Fracture Care. 2" ed. Springer-Verlag. 1996:
387-413.
12. Sukhiani HR and Holmberg DL: Ex vivo biomechanical comparison of pin fixation techniques
for canine distal femoral physeal fractures. Veterinary Surgery 26: 398, 1997
13. Slatter, D. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edn. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2003
14. Vannini, R., Olmstead, M.L., Smeak, D.D. Humeral condylar fracture caused by minor trauma
in 20 adult dogs. JAAHA, 24, 355-362, 1987a.
15. Vannini, R., Olmstead, M.L., Smeak, D.D. An epidemiological study of 151 distal humeral
fractures in dogs and cats. JAAHA, 24, 531-536, 1987b.
16. Vida JT, Pooya H, Vasseur PB, Garcia TC, Schulz K, Stover SM. Biomechanical comparison
of Orthofix pins and cortical bone screws in a canine humeral condylar fracture model.
Veterinary Surgery 34:491-498. 2005
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
777
NOTES:
778
Ch 12: Distal Metaphyseal and Articular Fractures
Chapter 13
Chronic Infected, Unstable, Bone Deficient Fractures
Dan Lewis
Fractures that are infected, have gone to nonunion, or involve
substantial segmental bone deficits pose unique problems. These
 are fractures that are not only complicated by interruption of
loss of bone substance, but in addition these fractures are often
complicated by compromise of the regional soft tissues critical to
eventually achieving bone union. Owners must be given realistic
expectations with regard to the extent, duration and cost of 
 treatment and an accurate prognosis with regard to achieving not
only union, but also a return of function. If irreversible fracture
 disease exists, fracture union may not equate with a successful
return to function. The surgeon must also be cognizant to mitigate
the development of fracture disease during the treatment and
convalescent periods in order to achieve a successful outcome.
While some infected fractures can be attributed to extensive soft
 tissue damage or gross contamination incurred as a result of the
traumatic event causing the fracture, the lion's share are
unfortunately the result of inadequate or failed fixation. Bone as a
tissue is relatively resistant to infection as long as the fixation is
stable and the involved fracture segments have a viable blood
limit the body's ability to resolve contamination. Contaminated
fractures are not doomed to become infected; however, foreign
material (including surgical implants) and devitalized tissues
shelter infectious agents from the host defense mechanisms and
limit the effectiveness of antimicrobials, favoring the development
of infection.
Early diagnosis of osteomyelitis can be extremely difficult. Early
signals of developing infection include local swelling, heat,
drainage, pain and lameness, but these clinical abnormalities are
not absolute or always present in the early post-operative period.
There is also some overlap with clinical signs, which can normally
be ascribed to the trauma associated with the fracture and its repair.
 Radiography is not particularly useful in verifying a suspected
diagnosis of osteomyelitis during the first two weeks following
surgical stabilization of a fracture unless there has been an obvious
loss of reduction and/or fixation. Excessive soft tissue swelling
may be the only radiographic abnormality observed. Aspiration of
 the peri-osseous soft tissues may be useful in establishing a
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
779
diagnosis of sepsis. Performing cytology, including a Gram stain,
should be considered in addition to cul turing retrieved fluid.
Differentiation between early fracture healing and the development
of osteomyelitis can be difficult during the early phase of callus
formation, particularly in young dogs and cats. Radiographic
abnormalities characteristic of osteomyelitis are a mixed reaction
of bone destruction and production. Extensive, irregular callus
formation that radiates longitudinally away from the fracture (long
zone of transition) is highly suggestive of infection. The
periosteum will frequently produce spicules or sheaths of new bone
as it is separated from the cortex by purulent exudates resulting in
the development of an involucrum. A discontinuity (or cloaca) may
develop in the involucrum, which allows drainage. Avascular bone
fragments (sequestra) that are too larger to be resorbed serve as the
nidus of infection in many infected fractures. Sequestra do not
change in appearance on serial radiographs: their margins remain
sharp and distinct while adjacent viable bone fragments undergo
resorption or become incorporated in the developing callus.
Infected fractures require debridement, a stable environment and
appropriate antibiotic therapy in order to achieve union. The initial
method of stabilization is typically inadequate or has failed in these
cases and must be objectively assessed. Debridement generally
involves removal of all the previously placed implants as well as
any avascular bone fragments. While it is prudent to debride the
gelatinous granulation tissue surrounding the fracture site, further
periosteal stripping of the soft tissue attachments to viable bone
segments should be avoided. Distinguishing healthy bone from
avascular bone can sometimes be problematic, particularly in
fractures that are less chronic, and it is best to err on the side of
aggressiveness in these instances. After debridement, the wound is
extensively lavaged and a closed suction drain is placed if
abundant exudate is present. A cancellous bone graft may be
placed; however, consideration should be given to grafting on a
delayed basis if the fracture environment is particularly hostile. In
either instance, contamination of the graft site must be avoided.
Restabilization of infected nonunions is typically done with plates,
interlocking nails or fixators. Plates and interlocking nails are often
applied in a butress mode and generally provide a sufficiently
stable environment which will allow the fracture to achieve union
Eventual implant removal may be necessary, however, as these
implants provide a site for bacterial adherence. The bacteria are
sequestered from the immune system, which limits the efficacy of
antimicrobials. Bacteria encased in the mucopolysaccharide
biofilm, which can coat these implants, may be a source of
780
Ch 73: Chronic Infected, Unstable, Bone Deficient Fractures
persistent or cryptic infection and can only be eradicated with
implant removal. Thus, owners must be counseled that additional
radiographic union. Stabilization with external fixators offer an
advantage when managing an infected fracture in that implants are
not placed within the fracture site and all of the implants are
removed (without the need for an additional surgery) once the
fracture has achieved union.
Appropriate antimicrobial therapy is also a key component to
resolving osteomyelitis in these cases. Antimicrobial therapy
should be based on results of culture and sensitivity testing.
particularly as many of these animals have already received
empirical treatment with a number of antibiotics. Cultures for both
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria should be done. It is sometimes
prudent to obtain culture specimens prior to surgery, particularly if
 beads is being considered. Pre-surgical cultures should be done by
a deep aseptic aspirate of the nonunion site rather than simply
culturing draining tracts. If cultures are obtained at the time of
surgery, we typically place animals on broad-spectrum antibiotic
therapy consisting of a cephalosporin and an aminoglycoside while
awaiting the culture and sensitivity results. Once the culture and
sensitivity results are available, definitive long-term antimicrobial
therapy is implemented.
 Fractures with segmental bone defects are uniquely problematic. If
the defect is not too extensive, collapsing the fracture gap may be
the most efficacious means of resolving the issue. A recent study in
bloc resection (0.5-2.0 mm of resection of the nonunion site
d s  s     
fixation reported that 11 of 14 fractures treated in this manner had
 achieved radiographic union and the other 3 fractures were
progressing toward radiographic union 2 months following
surgery. Infection resolved in all of the fractures that were infected
prior to en bloc resection and compression plating. Lameness was
reported to be minimal or absent in 10 out of 11 of the dogs
available for long-term evaluation. Studies have shown that dogs
can accommodate up to 20% loss in the length of one femur
without the development of appreciable lameness. Dogs will
compensate for minor length deficiencies in the shortened limb by
straightening out the angles of the hip, stifle and hock joints in that
limb.
A second option is to apply a buttress type of fixation and perform
extensive cancellous bone grafting to achieve bone union without
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
787
sacrificing appreciable bone length. Autogenous cancellous bone
graft may need to be obtained from one or multiple sites. We
 generally utilize cancellous bone graft obtained from one or both
proximal humeri. If additional graft is needed, we will also harvest
corticocancellous bone graft from the wing of the ilium using an
 acetabular reamer. In North America, we have commercially
available cancellous bone allograft as well as several bone
substitute materials that can be used either as the sole source of
graft material or as an autogenous bone grafft extensor. In selected
cases large segmental cortical defects can be resolved with
implantation of a segmental cortical bone allograft. The allograft
segment is placed in direct contact with osteotomized ends of the
  si  q son p ss  
each host graft interface. The construct is stabilized with a bone
plate (preferably applied in a compression mode) and screws.
 Bone transport is a specific application of distraction
osteogenesis used to resolve large segmental bone defects in
which an intercalary bone segment is created by performing a
transverse osteotomy in the viable bone segment adjacent to an
osseous defect. Regenerate bone is produced in the distraction
gap which develops as the intercalary bone segment is
sequentially transported across the bone defect. Longitudinal
bone transport is typically performed using a five ring construct,
with a pair of rings securing both the proximal and distal bone
segments and the intermediate ring securing the intercalary
transport segment. Paired nylon nuts are use to secure the
 transport ring to the frame which allows the ring to be moved
sequentially along the threaded rods during the convalescent
 period. A delay period of 5-7 days may be warranted depending
upon the age of the animal, the condition of the regional soft
tissues and the location of the osteotomy. Docking is a term
and eventually fusing with the bone at the opposite end of the
osseous defect. Union at the docking site can be facilitated by
placing a cancellous bone graft at the site several days prior to
contact and constructing the fixator such that the transport ring
can be moved several centimeters beyond the bone defect, thus
 producing compression at the docking site.
While bone transport has been employed most often for
performing limb salvage procedures in dogs with appendicular
bone tumors, bone transport has also been used to resolve large
segmental defects resulting from highly comminuted fractures
or following sequestrectomy in infected fractures. Bone
 transport is particularly useful in the treatment of infected
782
Ch 13: Chronic Infected, Unstable, Bone Deficient Fractures
vascular and resistant to infection and all of the implants are
removed once the docking site has achieved union and the
regenerate bone has consolidated.
REFERENCES
1.
 Aron D, et al. Experimental and clinical experience with an IM pin external skeletal fixator tie-
in configuration. Vet Comp Ortho Traumatol 4:86, 1991.
2. Aron DM, et al. Biologic strategies and a balanced concept for repair of highly comminuted
long bone fractures. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 17:35, 1995
3. Aron DN. Management of delayed union and nonunion fractures in small animals. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 1:677-702, 1979.
4. Aron DN: Delayed union and nonunion. In: Bojrab MJ (ed). Current Techniques in Small
Animal Surgery, 3" ed. Philadelphia, PA, Lea & Febiger 1990:pp 895-901.
5.
 Betts CW. Malunion, delayed union, and nonunion. In: Olmstead ML (ed). Small Animal
Orthopedics, St. Louis, MO, Mosby 1995:pp 277-291.
6. Blaeser LL, Gallagher JG, Boudrieau RJ. Treatment of biologically inactive nonunions by a
limited en bloc ostectomy and compression plate fixation: a review of 17 cases. Vet Surg
32:91-100, 2003.
7. Caywood DD, et al. Osteomyelitis in the dog: a review of 67 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc
172:943, 1978
 8. Dewey CW, et al. Static strength evaluation of two modified unilateral external skeletal
fixators. J Small Anim Pract 35:211, 1994.
9. Dueland R, et al. Fatigue study of six and eight mm diameter interlocking nails with screw
holes of variable size and number. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 10:194, 1997.
10. Dueland RT, et al. Cryopreserved intercalary bone allografts: Early experience (1975-1980) in
eight canine cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:305, 1989.
11. Dueland RT, et al. Interlocking nail treatment of diaphyseal long-bone fractures in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 214:59, 1999.
12. Dueland RT, et al. Structural properties of interlocking nails, canine femora, and femur-
interlocking nail constructs. Vet Surg 25:386, 1996
13. Durall I, Diaz MC. Early experience with the use of an interlocking nail for the repair of canine
femoral shaft fractures. Vet Surg 25:397, 1996
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
783
14. Ehrhart N. Longitudinal bone transport for treatment of primary bone tumors in dogs:
technique description and outcome in 9 dogs. Vet Surg 34:24-34, 2005
15. Farese J, et al. Use of IMEX SK-circular external fixator constructs for fracture stabilization in
dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:279, 2002.
16. Foland M, et al. The adjunctive use of half-pin (type 1) external skeletal fixators in
combination with intrameduillary pins for femoral fracture fixation. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatol 4:77, 1991
17. Franczuski D, et al. Postoperative effects of experimental femoral shortening in the mature
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:429-437, 1987.
18. Gendreau C, Cawley AJ. Excision of the femoral head and neck: the long term results of 35
operations. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13: 605, 1977.
19. Green SA. Skeletal defects. A comparison of bone grafting and bone transport for segmental
skeletal defects. In: Green SA (ed). Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, JB Lippincott
Co 1994:pp 111-117.
         o  n  q    0
1989.
21. Hinko PJ, Rhinelander FW. Effective use of cerclage in the treatment of long-bone fractures in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Ass0c 166:520, 1975
antimicrobial agents. J Small Anim Pract 19:670-687, 1978.
23. Hohn RB, Rosen H. Delayed union and nonunion. In: Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD
(eds). Manual of Internal Fixation in Small Animals, Berlin, Springer-Verlag 1984:pp 241-254.
24. Hulse D, et al. Clinical, in vitro, and mathematical analysis of plate/rod buttressing for
biological fracture stabilization. Vet Surg 23:404, 1994.
Orthop Traumatol 13:185, 2000.
26. Hulse D, et al. Reduction in plate strain by addition of an intramedullary pin. Vet Surg
26:451,1997
27. Johnson AL, et al. Fragment reconstruction and bone plate fixation versus bridging plate
fixation for treating highly comminuted femoral fractures in dogs: 35 cases (1987-1997). J
Am Vet Med Ass0c 213:1157, 1998
28. Johnson KA. Osteomyelitis in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1882-1887, 1994.
784
Ch 13: Chronic Infected, Unstable, Bone Deficient Fractures
29. Klause S, et al. A modification of the unilateral type I external skeletal fixator
fractures. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 3:130, 1990
30. Langley Hobbs SJ, et al. Use of external skeletal fixators in the repair of femoral fractures
in cats. J Small Anim Pract 37:95, 1996
31. Lawson D. The technique of Rush pinning in fracture repair. Mod Vet Pract 40:32, 1959
32. Lesser AS. Segmental bone transport for the treatment of bone deficits. J Am Anim
Hosp Ass0c 30:322-330, 1994.
33. Martinez SA, Walker T. Bone grafts. Vet Clin North Am 29:1207-1210, 1999.
34. Muir P, Johnson KA. Anaerobic bacteria isolated from osteomyelitis in dogs and cats. Vet Surg
21:463-466, 1992.
fixation. Clin Orthop Rel Res 138:175-196, 1979.
36. Robins GM, et al. Customized hook plates for metaphyseal fractures, nonunions and
1 9:9 g1 doo d na 1 u op a ui so
37. Rosen H. Compression treatment of long bone pseudoarthrosis. Clin Orthop Rel Res 138: 154-
166, 1979
38. Ross JT, Matthiesen DT. The use of multiple pin and methylmethacrylate external skeletal
fixation for the treatment of orthopaedic injuries in the dog and cat. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatol 6:115, 1993
     is     a st a ss 
Surgery, 3" ed., Philadelphia, WB Saunders Co, 2003:pp2059-2089.
40. Sinibaldi KR. Evaluation of full cortical allografts in 25 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
194:1570, 1989.
41. Smith CW, et al. Osteomyelitis in the dog: a retrospective study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
14:589, 1978.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:765-767, 1989.
feline tibial nonunion model. Am J Vet Res 46:519-528, 1985
44. Vasseur PB, et al. Evaluation of fixation devices for prevention of rotation in transverse
fractures of the canine femoral shafft: an in vitro study. Am J Vet Res 45:1504, 1984
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey,Proc.No.363
785
 45. Walter MC, et al. Treatment of severely comminuted diaphyseal fractures in the dog, using
standard bone plates and autogenous cancellous bone graft to span fracture gaps: 11 cases
(1979-1983). J Am Vet Med Ass0c 189:457, 1986.
46. Weber B, Cech O. Pseudoarthrosis. Berne, Switzerland, Hans-Huber, 1976:pp 14-323
 47. Woodard JC, Riser WH. Morphology of fracture nonunion and osteomyelitis. Vet Clin North 
Am 21:813-830, 1991.
786
Ch 13: Chronic Infected, Unstable, Bone Deficient Fractures
Chapter 14
Modulation of the Anabolic and Catabolic
Response in Bone Repair
David Litle
INTRODUCTION
Bone Repair
 Fracture union is brought about by three broad forms of bone
repair - endochondral ossification, intramembranous ossification
and appositional bone formation. Close to the fracture site, cellular
responses lead to the production of cartilaginous tissue, which
undergoes endochondral ossification, while at more peripheral
sites, direct intramembranous ossification occurs through a
collagenous framework. The entire callus is also bolstered by areas
of appositional bone formation - bone laid down on existing
surfaces. Initially, woven bone forms, and this is then remodelled
into lamellar bone. Eventually, the entire external callus is
removed as cortical restoration is achieved.
The process of endochondral ossification in bone repair has been
likened to the growth plate. At the growth plate, a multitude of
cells and tissues behave in a coordinated and orderly fashion.
Firstly, proliferation of chondrocytes takes place, a non-
mineralised cartilage model is produced, and then hypertrophic
chondrocytes mineralise the vertical (but not transverse) septae of
the matrix. Vascular invasion follows, whence the vascular
endothelial cells remove the transverse septae and any remnants of
the chondrocytes'. Osteoblastic cells then lay down new bone on 
the mineralised chondral remnants to produce the primary
spongiosa. Spongiosa is a synonym for trabecular bone, such that
the components of primary spongiosa can be termed primary
trabeculae. At this stage, remodelling starts to occur with the
coupled processes of osteoclastic resorption followed by new
lamellar bone formation. It is important to realise that the complete
removal of the mineralised chondral remnant scaffold by
osteoclasts before new bone formation would lead to
destabilisation and disorganisation of the growth plate, as the
 template for the new bone formation would be lost. Primary
spongiosa, as part of its intended design, contains mineralised
The interface of the soft cartilaginous callus and the bony hard
callus at the repair site resembles the growth plate, but with
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
787
important differences that are essential to appreciate. Firstly, the
 process of ossification in fracture repair is less orderly, with some
areas of the callus undergoing remodelling while others are still in
the cartilaginous phase. Secondly, while the anabolic activity of the
growth plate is constantly replenished until cessation of growth, in
fracture repair there is a finite burst of anabolic gene expression
after injury, the response to which must produce the soft and hard
callus ? This anabolic burst wanes in favour of cellular
 differentiation and remodelling over time. The magnitude of both
 the anabolic and catabolic responses in fracture repair are
dependent on, and heavily modulated by, environmental stimuli,
both biological and mechanical 3.
 Unlike the orderly process in the growth plate, endochondral
 ossification in bone repair can fail. Recent evidence suggests that,
ex pression may last for a constant length of time regardless of
whether the bone actually unites^. Remodelling of the bone that
does form also proceeds regardless of the state of union in a rigidly
fixed fracture.
Anabolic and Catabolic Responses
 Fracture repair can be thought to consist of anabolic (bone
forming) and catabolic (bone resorbing) responses. When bone
repair is proceeding, the net production of bone can be observed
macroscopically using techniques such as radiographs. In this net
response, an increased production of bony callus is usually
observed leading to union, followed by a progressive decrease in
size as the bone remodels. Eventually, in an ideal situation, the 
original form and function of the bone is restored. However, it is
important to note that the magnitude of this net response is the
product of two competing responses - the anabolic and catabolic
responses - which cannot be seen macroscopically
Before the bone is injured, a state of homeostasis exists with the
anabolic and catabolic responses running at low levels, a process
often referred to as bone turnover. This turnover replenishes the
skeleton and repairs microdamage accumulation. When fracture
occurs, there is an appropriate inflammatory response to the event
in the bone and surrounding tissues, which sets the repair response
in motion. The anabolic phase is stimulated by the inflammatory
 response to injury and is followed by cellular recruitment and
proliferation. Differentiation and the production of organised
connective tissue matrices ensue, this being coordinated with
 revascularisation of the injured region. The catabolic response,
which often lags behind the anabolic phase, involves the removal
of unwanted tissue and bone resorption associated with subsequent
bone remodelling. Normally, these anabolic and catabolic
788
 responses are coordinated such that mineralised callus is
significant remodelling occurs.
These events are graphically depicted below:
Figure l: Anabolic and Catabolic Responses
—Anabolic
In the top figure, the net response observed on
Catabolic
—Net
radiographs is displayed.Before the fracture,
the bone appears unchanging. Afterwards there
isaresponse
leading to increased bone
production that forms the bridging callus. This
callus remodeis and the bone appears at
originally did.
In the bottom figure, the anabolic response can
be seen to be larger than the net response. The
bone resorption of the catabolic response is
ideally coupled such that it occurs slightty after
Anabolic
the anabolic response. When the net response
Cataboli
Net
reaches zero,
the
anabolic
and
catabolic
responses
are
still
active,
but
matched.
Homeostasis is eventually achieved.
In this system, net bone production can be
achieved by bolstering the anabolic response
while keeping catabolism
constant,
or
by
decreasing catabolism such
that
the
same
anabolic response has a larger net effect.
FAILURE OF BONE REPAIR
 Delayed union and non-union after fracture result in ongoing pain,
 disability and increased medical complications for many patients.
In adult human medical practice it has been estimated that 60o,000
delayed unions occur per year in the US; it is likely that the figure
in Australia approaches 60,000 per year. Bone repair can also fail
 aqo au lns-isod se yns 'suisn ro u
arises from this results in both a social and economic cost 4. The
 treatment of a non-union is approximated at $10,000, and assuming
10% of delayed unions go on to non union, this equates to $60
million dollars annually in direct cost alone.
We theorise that in some situations, bone repair fails due to an
insufficient anabolic response, while in other circumstances the
these two mechanisms is extremely important, the anabolic
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
789
 response providing the necessary cellular and vascular proliferation
 and differentiation that leads to the laying down of appropriate
extracellular matrices, and the catabolic response coordinating the
removal of unwanted tissue, and the processes of osteoclastic
remodelling.
Anabolic Failure
While many causes are possible, the most common cause of
anabolic failure is bone and soft tissue disruption as in open
fractures or extensive surgical procedures. Such injury renders the
bone and surrounding tissues dysvascular. This is a problem on
two fronts, as vascular injury in itself hinders repair in any tissue.
However, it is known that the vascularity returns even in
established non-union in both animals and humans. Further, the 
initial events in endochondral ossification are cartilaginous, and
thus avascular. The important second factor is that the infarcted
tissues (bone, marrow, muscle) may have insufficient donor cells
to be recruited by the inflammatory cascade to form sufficient
initial repair tissue that can differentiate into cartilage or bone. The
important gene expression signalling and cytokine cascade may
have waned by the time sufficient cells have migrated to the site
after such a destructive injury. In animal models and clinical
 observation, this problem becomes more likely with advancing age,
but even young patients can suffer anabolic failure. Disease
 processes (and smoking) can be an added co-morbidity making
anabolic failure more likely.
Anabolic treatments therefore are those that increase the signal to
 cells to proliferate and differentiate into appropriate tissues for
bone repair and those that facilitate the migration, retention, and
support of those cells including the vasculature. Anabolic
treatments abound and can be mechanical (e.g. distraction
osteogenesis, ultrasound), pharmacological (BMPs, PTH), graft
based (autologous bone graft, allograft), and cell based (bone
marrow and derivatives, platelets, gene therapy). Further anabolic
options are continually being explored.
Catabolic Overactivity
It is our hypothesis that either relative overactivity of catabolism or
lack of appropriate coordination of anabolic and catabolic events
could be responsible for insufficient net callus formation,
especially in rigidly fixed fractures.
Rigid fixation of fractures enhances soft tissue recovery and
ensures optimal alignment of the fractured limb for future function.
This comes at the price of a smaller fracture callus. Traditionally,
rigid fixation has been thought to inhibit callus formation due to
790
Ch14:MooulationoftheAnabolic&CatabolicResponsesinBoneRepair
stress shielding. In an extreme example, Thompson et al. ' showed
that absolutely rigid fixation in the mouse tibia prevents the
stimulation of chondrogenic pathways, resulting in the formation
of a small, mostly intramembranous callus. These authors noted
that callus size was increased by three times when fractures were
left completely unfixed and unstable. This study shows that there
rigid fixation and no fixation.
However, in our view, the stress shielding of such rigid fixation
also modulates bone turnover in favour of catabolism (resorption)
such that some of the primary trabeculae that form initially are
rapidly resorbed and not replaced. This is observed clinically when
a cloud of fracture callus is seen on radiographs, but then
disappears with resultant non-union. It has been our premise that
retaining the primitive scaffolding of primary trabeculae for a
longer period could increase callus volume and provide a more
robust early repair, even in stress shielded situations. We have
gathered a significant amount of evidence consistent with this
hypothesis in multiple experiments where bone repair was
osteoclast function (see below).
containing bisphosphonates - N-BPs - such as zoledronic acid).
However, other forms of stimulation may act through anticatabolic
 means by reducing stress shielding (e.g. dynamisation of fixators).
MODULATION OF THE ANABOLIC AND CATABOLIC RESPONSES
Our model of the anabolic and catabolic responses has been largely
formulated by ex periments examining bisphosphonate modulated
bone repair. These experiments provide insight into the results of
dissociation of the anabolic and catabolic responses. We also
n g  assd n xa sdxa s
pro-anabolic and anti-catabolic therapies
EXAMPLE OF ANABOLIC THERAPY - BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEINS
(BMPS)
Interest in bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) as mediators of
bone healing began in the 1960s *, but the efficacy of BMP therapy
in fracture healing has only been proven this century. BMPs are
naturally occurring proteins in the TGFβ superfamily. Only some
of the BMPs are truly osteogenic (i.e. can induce bone formation as
an isolated stimulus). BMPs used in pharmacological doses
stimulate recruitment and proliferation of osteoblasts as well as
increasing net new bone production ". BMP-7 and BMP-2, both
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
797
involved in skeletogenesis and bone homeostasis, have been
successfully marketed commercially.
The OP-1 device (BMP-7 3.5 mg in 1g bovine collagen powder) is
now approved for use in Australia. In a clinical trial, OP-1 was
shown to be as efficacious as autologous bone graft in most
u j n  m sds
Radiographic union was present in 75% of these difficult cases.
The other BMP that has been successfully trialled is BMP-2. 6.0
mg BMP-2 in an absorbable collagen sponge (InFuse) is effective
in the treatment of open tibial fracture, with 74% proceeding to
union without secondary intervention as compared to 54% of non-
treated controls ""
These trials followed on from a myriad of animal studies
documenting the efficacy of BMPs in bone repair.
EXAMPLE OF ANTI-CATABOLIC THERAPY - ZOLEDRONIC ACID (ZA)
 ZA prevents osteopenia and increases bone strength in a rabbit
model of distraction osteogenesis through the mechanism of
transiently delayed remodelling
As discussed, distraction osteogenesis is one of the most potent
anabolic processes known, and has been a major therapeutic
advance. However failures do occur, and we have shown clinically
that most of those failures are in fact due to catabolic
overactivity'2. In animal studies, we have shown that one or two
doses of ZA increases bone mineral content, new bone volume, and
strength in a distraction osteogenesis model in NZW rabbits'′. In
the 2-dose group, bone volume was increased by 59% and bone
uanbasqns qiod pua yaam-g aqi 1e %6g Aq yguans
remodelling (catabolism) as the mechanism, rather than any
anabolic effect. Mineral apposition rate was actually reduced in
treated animals 4. Bone yolume over tissue volume (BV/TV) in
distracted bone remained larger in treated animals up to 18 weeks
 but returned to near normal by 44 weeks. Distraction osteogenesis
occurs by both intramembranous ossification and endochondral
ossification in this model. Chondrocyte removal was normal in ZA
 treated animals but calcified chondral matrix remnants in primary
trabeculae were retained for a longer period, as desired, to give
increased callus size and strength.
 In this study, the anabolic stimulus was provided by the
mechanical stimulation of distraction osteogenesis, but we were
able to optimise this by modulation of the catabolic response. We
792
Ch 14: Modulation of the Anabolic & Catabolic Responses in Bone Repail
 have commenced clinical application of this approach in the hope
that a sufficiently robust callus will be present at fixator removal to
resist deformation and fracture. Remodelling can then occur, as the
effect of the N-BP diminishes, in response to the normal
mechanical environment of free-weight bearing, and not the stress
shielded environment of the fixator.
ZA enhances callus size and strength but does not inhibit
endochondral ossification in fracture repair
 Fracture repair models of endochondral ossification are commonly
performed in the closed fracture model of Bonnarens and
Einhorn'. Using this model, we have explored the effect of clinical
doses of ZA on the histology of endochondral ossification.
Fractures in this model heal by the formation of a cartilage
intermediate, with cartilage calcification, vascular invasion, and
endochondral ossification completely ossifying the callus by six
weeks.
89
96%
94%
92%
90%
2weeks
4weeks
6weeks
2Woeks
4Wecks
6Wccks
Figure 2: (A) Process of endochondral ossification in rat fractures. The dark staining cartilage is invaded
and replaced with vascularised bone. (B) The percent bone in the callus reaches 100% by 6 weeks (solid
line) No delay in endochondral ossification was noted with a total ZA dose of 0.1 mg/kg given either as α
bolus(dashed line)orweekly(dotted line)
We have documented that the percentage of the callus made up of
vascular bone versus cartilage is identical in control and ZA-
treated animals'. Both bolus ZA dosing at 1 week post fracture 
 and continuous dosing from weeks 1 to 5 were analysed. Neither
had a negative effect on the rate of progression of endochondral
repair with a total dose of 0.1 mg/kg.
In a further study using the same model, we gave 0.1mg/kg ZA at
either the time of surgery or 1 or 2 weeks after surgery and
compared this to saline treatment'7. All fractures had united at 6
weeks. ZA treated animals showed increases of 48-90% in bone
mineral content and 50-90% in callus volume (p<0.01).
Importantly, mechanical strength on the fractured side was
increased in all ZA groups over saline, with little effect on the
intact side (Fig 3A). Strength increases ranged from 29-51% with a
trend towards increased strength when the ZA treatment was
delayed. Strength was increased up to 168% of the saline intact
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
793
value. Thus, by delaying resorption of the peripheral bony callus
with ZA treatment, we have provided a fracture callus more
resistant to re-fracture. 4C-labelled ZA studies (Fig 3B) revealed
that the uptake of ZA at the fracture site was actually less than on
the intact side when the dose was given at surgery. It is possible
that compromised circulation at the time of injury could decrease
uptake. However, when bolus ZA treatment was delayed, the
uptake was increased 5-fold over the non operated limb.
.0
0.8
*
Fracture
水
6.0
0.7
Intact
Intact
5.0
0.4
3.0
0.3
0.2
2.0
0.1
1.0
Saline
ZATzero
ZAT1
ZAT2
Saline
ZATzero
ZAT1
ZAT2
Figure 3: (A) Strength testing results. Each ZA group is stronger than the saline value, with increasing
strength as the dose is delayed. (B) '4C labelled ZA studies show low uptake in animals dosed at surgery,
but a 5 fold increase in ZA uptake at the fracture site v the non -operated limb at later dose time points.
ZA increases callus volume and strength in OP-I mediated bone
formation
As noted, BMPs are provide a potent anabolic stimulus. However,
BMPs also directly stimulate osteoclastogenesis, and also stimulate
BMPs also stimulate osteoclastogenesis indirectly through
osteoblasts via the RANK/RANKL pathway 20. Therefore, the
application of BMPs could be limited by the fact that both anabolic
and catabolic stimulation are occurring simultaneously, inducing a
high bone turnover state. This is perhaps one reason why such
 large doses of BMP are required for clinical utility.
Using a rat critical-sized defect model, we applied a fixed anabolic
stimulus (OP-1 50 μg) and showed that by controlling catabolism
with ZA, we were able to increase the volume and strength of bone
tissue that formed in 8 weeks2′. Definite differences were revealed
with the timing of ZA therapy. Initial model development showed
that untreated defects, defects with carrier alone, and defects with
carrier alone plus ZA, did not show a significant anabolic response
and did not unite. We compared OP-1 alone to OP-1 plus ZA
administered at the time of surgery, and OP-1 plus ZA
794
Ch 14: Modulation of the Anabolic & Catabolic Responses in Bone Repair
administered 2 weeks later. As shown in Figure 4, at the end-point
of 8 weeks, we achieved increases of 45% to 86% in callus
volume. Mechanical testing in three-point bending revealed an
increase in strength of 107% and stiffness of 148% in the 2 week
 post group (p<0.05). There were also trends towards increased
 energy absorption, indicating that ZA treatment did not make the
healing bone brittle.
B
TotalVolume
Peak Load
350
180
160
300
140
250
M120
E
200
100
品100
40
50
20
OP-1
OP-1 ZA OP-1 ZA
OP-1
OP-1 ZA
OP-1 ZA
2W
2W
CZA
OP-1
OP-1ZA
OP-1ZA2W
Figure 4: Critical size defect model. (A) Only groups with the anabolic stimulation
of OP-lunited.
(B) Addition of zoledronic acid increased bone volume by up to 86% and strength by up to 107%.
Histology showed that the bone had formed through both
endochondral and intramembranous pathways. ZA did not interfere
with removal of hypertrophic chondrocytes, but there was retention
of some of the primary trabeculae containing calcified chondral
matrix remnants. Retaining this framework allowed for increased
 net callus formation, much of which appeared to be appositional
bone formation as evidenced by the presence of multiple osteoid
seams. The osteoid seams were not due to failure of mineralisation;
bone mineral content (BMC) was increased by 45% and 96% in
ZA groups (p<0.01). Histomorphometry showed increases in
BV/TV of 59%-119% (p<0.05) on the basis of increased trabecular
number (63%-197%, p<0.05), as in our distraction studies 3031.
Further acquisition of dynamic histomorphometric data is ongoing.
However we believe that overall, this study supports the hypothesis
that anabolic response can be enhanced by delaying catabolism.
SUMMARY
These studies support the conceptual framework we have applied
to bone repair: that manipulation of the magnitude and interaction 
of the anabolic and catabolic responses can result in profound
changes in outcome. As more tools become available for
intervention in bone repair, it is of paramount importance to define
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
795
a framework in which to apply them. We hope that further
refinements of this model will assist in logical approaches to the
optimisation of fracture and bone repair.
REFERENCES
 Deckers MM, Van Beek ER, Van Der Pluijm G, Wetterwald A, Van Der Wee-Pals L, Cecchini MG, Papapoulos SE, Lowik CW
Dissociation of angiogenesis and osteoclastogenesis during endochondral bone formation in neonatal mice. J Bone Miner Res
2002;17:998-1007
2
 Meyer RA Jr, Meyer MH, Tenholder M, Wondracek S, Wasserman R, Garges P. Gene expression in older rats with delayed union
of femoral fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003;85-A: 1243-54
3 Kenwright J, Gardner T. Mechanical influences on tibial fracture healing. Clin Orthop 1998 355(Suppl): S179-90
41
 Bea ver R, Brinker MR, Barrack RL. An analysis of the actual cost of tibial nonunions. J La State Med Soc. 1997; 149:200-206.
Reed AA, Joyner CJ, Brownlow HC, Simpson AH. Human atrophic fracture non-unions are not avascular. J Orthop Res.
2002;20:593-9
6 Brownlow HC, Reed A, Simpson AH. The vascularity of atrophic non-unions. Injury. 2002;33: 145-50.
7
 Thompson Z, Miclau T, Hu D, Helms JA. A model for intramembranous ossification during fracture healing. J Orthop Res. 2002
Sep:20: 1091-8.
8 Urist MR. Bone: formation by autoinduction. Science 1965 12;150:893-9
 Einhorn TA. Clinical applications of recombinant human BMPs: early experience and future development. J Bone Joint Surg Am.
2003;85-A Suppl 3:82-8.
10 Friedlaender GE, Perry CR, Cole JD, Cook SD, Cierny G, Muschler GF, Zych GA, Calhoun JH, LaForte AJ, Yin S. Osteogenic
2):S 151-8
11 Govender S, Csimma C, Genant HK, et al. Recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 for treatment of open tibial
fractures: a prospective, controlled, randomized study of four hundred and fifty patients. J Bone foint Surg Am 2002;84-A:2123-34
12Litfle DG, Kiely P, Ward K, Bellemore MC, Briody J, Cowell CT. Bisphosphonate rescue in distraction osteogenesis: a case series.
Unpublished data.
13 Litfle DG, Smith NC, Williams PR, Briody JN, Bilston LE, Smith EJ, Gardiner EM, Cowell CT. Zoledronic acid prevents openia
and increases bone strength in a rabbit model of distraction osteogenesis. 1 Bone Miner Res. 2003; 18: 1300-7.
14  Smith EJ, McEvoy A, Litfle DG, Baldock PA, Eisman JA, Gardiner EM. Transient retention of endochondral cartilaginous matrix
15  Bonnarens F, Einhorn TA. Production of a standard closed fracture in laboratory animal bone. J Orthop Res. 1984;2:97-101
796
Ch 14: Mooulation of the Anabolic & Catabolic Responses in Bone Repair
16  McDonald MM, Dulai S, Godfrey C, Hamilton B, Lifle DG. Zoledronic acid treatment enhances net vascularized hard callus
2005
17 Amanat N, MeDonald MM, Godfrey C, Bilston L, Lifle DG. A single systemic peri-operative dose of zoledronic acid increases
callus volume and strength in rat fracture healing. Australian & New Zealand Bone & Mineral Society 2005 ASM Perth, WA
September2005
19  Kaneko H, Arakawa T, Mano H, Kaneda T, Ogasawara A, Nakagawa M, Toyama Y, Yabe Y, Kumegawa M, Hakeda Y. Direct
osteoclasts. Bone 2000;27:479-86
20 Katagiri T, Takahashi N. Regulatory mechanisms of osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation. Oral Dis 2002;8: 147-59
21  Litfle DG, MeDonald MM, Bransford R, Godfrey C, Amanat M. Manipulation of the anabolic and catabolic responses with OP-1
and zoledronic acid in a rat critical defect model. J Bone Miner Res J Bone Miner Res. 2005;20:2044-52
An Orthopaedic Odyssey,Proc.No.363
797
NOTES:
798
Chapter 15
Challenging Cases in Small Animal Orthopaedics
Penny Tisdall
CHALLENGES IN VETERINARY ORTHOPEDICS
 Some of the greatest challenges we face in orthopaedic surgery
relate not to the technical difficulty of the procedure itself, but in
making a complete assessment of a particular patient and deciding
which treatment is most appropriate. Treatment recommendations
 may involve various compromises, not every problem has an ideal
solution. The following cases involving traumatic injuries to the
distal limbs of dogs and cats. The focus of discussion will be on
 complete evaluation, when to operate, surgical and non-surgical
 treatment options and possible pitfalls
FRACTURES OF THE METACARPUS AND METATARSUS
Anatomy
The anatomy of the metacarpus and metatarsus are similar and are
only described for the forelimb. The metacarpal bones are
numbered 1-5 from medial to lateral. They have a proximal base,
body and the head distally (counterintuitively!). Metacarpals 2-5
are weight bearing with most weight transferred through the 3" and
4th bones. Proximally the metacarpals articulate with numbered
carpal bones. At the metacarpophalangeal joints of the weight-
bearing digits there are two palmar sesamoids and a single dorsal
sesamoid. The dorsal sesamoid is not visible in many smaller dogs
and cats. There is limited soft tissue coverage so surgical approach
to the dorsal metacarpus is straightforward. Anatomical structures
of importance include extensor tendons and dorsal metacarpal
arteries dorsally. These structures can generally be preserved in
surgical approaches. The deep metacarpal artery and vein and
flexor tendons lie on the palmar surfaces of the bones
Eractures
Fractures of the metacarpus and metatarsus are common and are
 associated with major trauma, falls, crushing and entrapment
injuries or stress fracture from repetitive strain. Metacarpals were
fractured more commonly then metatarsals in a retrospective study
of 37 dogs (Muir and Norris 1997). In this study fractures most
often involved all four bones (41%) while fracture of a single bone
occurred in 24 % of dogs, two bones in 16 % of dogs, and three
bones in 19 % (Muir and Norris 1997)
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
799
Treatment options
Which fractures require surgery?
While surgical management of these fractures is generally straight
forward. The most appropriate treatment option remains
controversial. Techniques that have been described for stabilisation
of metatarsal/carpal fractures including external coaptation,
 alignment with K wires, lag screws or cerclage wire and bone plate
fixation. Fracture healing usually occurs regardless of the
stabilisation method, however, non-union is reported in 8 % of
fractures regardless of treatment (Muir and Norris 1997). Non
union or malunion may not always result in poor function,
particularly in small or light animals.
External coaptation has been recommended when injury involves
 only 1or 2 bones as the intact bones provide internal splinting to
maintain alignment. General recommendations to achieve a
minimum of 50% cortical overlap for fracture healing in casts have
been made although this may not be necessary to achieve union in
this location. Healing time is variable depending on age and extent
of soft tissue and vascular disruption. Radiographically, metacarpal
 u aios ai q oi rede sg ls p
animals. Callous formation is often limited although there is
usually callous visible by around 8 weeks and most fractures reach
clinical union by 10-12 weeks. External coaptation may therefore
need to be prolonged. If fractures are misaligned external
coaptation does not consistently improve alignment (Muir and
Norris 1997).
As with any fracture patient with mechanical, biologic, patient or
owner factors that may delay healing such as old age, comminution
or soft tissue damage, surgical stabilisation should be considered.
Specifically, internal fixation of metacarpal/tarsal fractures has
the same leg, fractures of both metacarpals 3 and 4, intra-articular
fractures, fractures with marked displacement, open fractures, and
fractures in large-breed, athletic, show, or working dogs. These
guidelines have mainly been extrapolated from the human
literature and it is only in recent years that several studies in dogs
have been published that provide a more rational basis for
treatment choice. In a study comparing outcomes after surgical and
non surgical management of fractures that were all theoretically
considered surgical candidates according to these criteria there was
no significant difference in outcomes in the surgical and non-
 s  o  e  s s
not be necessary in many cases for functional outcomes
200
Ch 15: Challenging Cases in Small Animal Orthopaedics
Displacement or axial malalignment is more likely with fractures
 of the mid or distal regions of the metacarpus or metatarsus.
Proximal fractures are less likely to cause misalignment and
require surgery (Muir and Norris 1997). Bear in mind that neither
 bone alignment nor the presence of intra-articular fracture
significantly affected patient outcome in another study (Kapatkin et
al 2000).
Some specific indications where surgical stabilisation may be
indicated include lag screw fixation for basilar fractures of MC 2
 and 5 as ligament aftachments in these locations tend to distract
these fragment and may allow overextension.
Internal fixation does not alleviate the need for external coaptation
as implants will not sustain the forces associated with
weightbearing. In general a splint or cast needs to be maintained
 until there is radiographic evidence of bone healing
Surgical techniques
 Fracture alignment is most consistently improved by open
 reduction and internal fixation of fractures with bone plates. Plates
are usually placed dorsally or laterally on MC 2 or 5. 2 mm DCP,
1.5/2.0 or 2.0/2.7 mm Veterinary cuttable plates are often suitable.
Pin fixation is probably suboptimal, it has not been shown to
greatly improve alignment compared to external coaptation alone
in simple fractures and in complex fractures bone plating is
superior. In addition, it may be difficult to insert adequately sized
 implants and implants may impinge on the proximal
metacarpo/tarso phalangeal joint. If pins are used they are best
inserted normograde by inserting the pin in the distal fragment
through a cortical slot away from the metacarpophalangeal joint.
The fracture is then reduced and the pin driven across with the end
bent away from the joint to minimise impingement. Retrograde pin
placement is more likely to be associated with joint penetration.
Although frequently recommended, implant removal is generally
not necessary unless there is evidence of pain or ongoing lameness
d ss a  se  so n  n
 o do u  q  sx i 
fractures and assist in open wound management. Pin fixation may
tie down soft tissues and prevent wound healing by contraction.
Timing of surgery
Generally reduction and fixation of any fracture should be
performed as soon as is feasible and the patient is stable. Delay
may make fracture reduction more due to muscle contraction and
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
201
soft tissue inflammation and development of a circulatory response
may increase surgical site bleeding and swelling. The extent of
fragment displacement may also be associated with pain and/or
compromised circulation to the paw and reduction may be
necessary restore more normal circulation and improve comfort.
In metatarsal/carpal fractures the decision to proceed immediately
to surgery may not always be clear cut. In some cases of acute
injury, particularly crushing injuries, the extent of soft tissue
compromise may not be evident immediately after injury. In such
cases a surgical approach to the affected area could further damage
marginally viable soft tissues. Such a case may be best managed
conservatively at least in the short term. At least then the soft tissue
surgery.
Case:
 A 3 year old MN Boxer presented with a swollen paw associated
with markedly caudally displaced closed fractures of all four
metatarsals. The injury had occurred as he tried to jump out of the
back yard and was associated with the foot being caught between
the palings of a timber fence. There was some crush injury to the
paw but the skin was intact on presentation. The length of time the
foot had been caught in the fence was unknown but development
of soft tissue necrosis over the dorsal aspect of the paw was
considered likely. Swelling of the paw initially appeared to
improve in the first few hours with external coaptation, sensation
and circulation appeared adequate. On this basis a decision was
    a    n 
tissue injury to manifest and swelling to improve before surgical
 approach and stabilisation that could compromise the viability of
the dorsal soft tissues further. Over the next 5 days, the paw and
metatarsus become progressively more swollen and oozed serous
fluid and the skin became superficially moist and ulcerated. The
  sa s s  a s i 
complete vascular compromise was not suspected. The
development of extensive swelling and ulceration complicated
surgical management of the case. Permanent implants were not
placed as the paw could not be adequately cleaned for aseptic
surgery so the bones were aligned with and external fixator
supported with a back splint. The soft tissue swelling prevented
soft tissue closure and the wound was left to heal by second
intention. This was delayed by soft tissue fixation by the external
fixation pins. Bone healing was delayed and was associated with
bone lysis and development of a central bone defect in the 3rd
metatarsal. Function returned to normal and no treatment or follow
up radiographs were performed.
202
Ch 15: Challenging Cases in Small Animal Orthopaedics
I currently proceed to surgery immediately in most cases when
surgery is planned except if there is obvious skin devitalisation and
open wounds. I warn the owners of the possibility of progressive
soft tissue injury that could require management and may be
exacerbated by surgical approach. Once a foot becomes swollen
over several days there is often extensive oozing of serum, loss of
skin integrity and the patient becomes a worse candidate for
internal fixation and alternatives such as external fixation may be
required. Extreme swelling of the paw is rarely a problem where
there are open wounds even when there is major trauma as tissue
fluid does not accumulate. Consideration could be given to
performing a releasing incision away from devitalised skin to
relieve pressure if swelling is progressive and surgery must be
delayed.
Open fractures and bone defects
Metatarsal fracture may be associated with shearing injuries and
extensive soft tissue wounds. The main determinants of whether a
foot can be salvaged are the presence of adequate nerve and
yascular supply and adequate pad tissue to create a durable weight
bearing surface. While there are reports of successful management
 of dogs with lower limb prosthesis, I will usually recommend
Generally for distal limb wounds loss of < 90 degrees of
circumferential skin will eventually heal with contraction and
epithelialisation whereas injuries involving more then 180 degrees
are likely to require skin closure whether grafts or flaps. Early
 an environment more suitable to fracture repair
Case :
A 2 year old German coolie with fracture of all four metatarsals
and extensive metatarsal shearing injury with bone loss is
discussed. Despite extensive bone loss the soft tissue structures of
the paw were substantially preserved and with a committed owner
limb salvage was elected. Open wound management was initially
performed during which time necrotic tissues were debrided and
the wound was managed open initially with medical- grade honey
and wet to dry dressings. Following debridement the proximal 1/3
of all metatarsals was intact but only the distal head of metatarsals
3 and 4 remained. There was no significant bone fragment distally
in the second or firth metatarsal. There was a bone defect of 2-5 cm
between the fragment ends. Once the wound was considered clean
with a healthy granulation bed it was closed secondarily with a
reverse saphenous conduit flap. This flap is developed using the
 proximal landmark of the central 1/3 of the medial thigh at the
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
203
level of the patella. Then cranial and caudal incisions are made
converging slightly distally 0.5-1 cm on either side of the cranial
 and caudal saphenous arteries and medial saphenous vein. The flap
is dependent on intact collateral circulation distally so it needs to
be used with caution in animals with injury proximal to the hock.
No effort was made to assess the collateral circulation
 preoperatively in this case but due to the location of other injuries
it was considered likely that the circulation would be undamaged.
The flap was allowed to heal for 2 weeks in a protective splint
before bone transfer was performed. This allowed flap healing and
resolution of infection with a closed wound. Axial pattern flaps
retain blood supply and improve circulation to less vascular areas,
they are also resistant to infection making them well suited to
wound closure for this purpose compared to alternatives such as
skin grafting.
After 2 weeks a final procedure was performed to create a
functional metatarsus. A distal ulna segmental allograft was
harvested from the ipsilateral forelimb. The remaining proximal
part of MT 5 was aligned with the head of MT 4 and stabilised
with a 2 mm T- plate. The graft was placed in the defect between
the proximal MT 3 and 4 and the head of MT3 and stabilised with
a veterinary cuttable plate. Autogenous cancellous bone graft from
the proximal right humerus was placed. The second and 5" digits
were preserved although they were not articulating with a
metatarsal. The repair was protected in a splint for 8 weeks.
 Function was initially poor following splint due to resolving sciatic
nerve neuropraxia on the affected side. At reassessment 6 months
after bone grafting leg use was nearly normal although there was
some tenderness associated with palpation over the plate. The plate
 result is proximal synostosis of MT 3 and 4 to form a single bone
that splits in the distal 1/3 to articulate with the 3" and 4th
metacarpophalangeal joint. Craniocaudal alignment is excellent.
This case illustrates the use of autogenous cancellous and cortical
graft to fill a bone defect to reconstruct a functional metatarsus. It
was possible to achieve an excellent functional and cosmetic
 appearance because the soft tissues of the paw and the digits were
well preserved. The costs of such procedures become extensive
requiring significant owner commitment but the outcomes may be
excellent with the right owner and dog.
204
Ch 15: Challenging Cases in Small Animal Orthopaedics
METACARPOPHALANGEAL AND PHALANGEAL LUXATION
Anatomy
Each digit consists of proximal, middle and distal phalanges. The
deep digital flexor runs on the plantar/ palmar surface and the
digital extensor runs dorsally.
The distal interphalangeal joint is stabilised by stabilised by the
lateral and medial collateral ligaments and joint capsule. Elastic
dorsal ligaments extend from the dorsal aspect of the middle
phalanx to the dorsal ungual crest of P3. The ligaments keep the
claws retracted passively in extension except when the deep digital
flexor contracts.
The proximal interphalangeal joint is stabilised by the joint
capsule, medial and lateral collateral ligaments.
The metacarpophalangeal joint is stabilised by medial and lateral
collateral ligaments and joint capsule, paired sesamoids articulate
with the palmar/ plantar aspect of the joint and are stabilised by
cruciate ligaments, lateral and medial sesamoidian ligaments.
Luxation of the phalanges may occur at any level but most
commonly affect the distal interphalangeal joint.
Treatment
If the injury is acute and the joint can be effectively reduced,
d  s o   
 interphalangeal joint may respond to conservative treatment with
splinting for 2-3 weeks particularly in non-racing dogs. The
 prognosis is better for single digit injuries. Amputation above the
level of instability can also be considered and is likely to result in
acceptable function depending on the digits affected and the size
and activity level of the affected animal. Primary surgical repair of
collateral ligament injuries with suture imbrication of the ligament
and associated joint capsule is ideal however it is rarely feasible
particularly in cats and smaller dogs. The collateral ligaments are
 readily identified. In larger animals prosthetic li gament repair may
be performed using screws and sutures, or hemicerclage wire.
Luxation of the distal interphalangeal joint is best treated with
 amputation of P3 with preservation of the digital pad.
The phalangeal area is difficult to clip and prepare for aseptic
surgery. Consider using surgical stockingette sutured to the skin
edges or Opsite to minimise contamination. Prophylactic
antibiotics are also indicated. Except following amputation
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
205
splinting or external coaptation is usually indicated to provide
 additional support.
Case
A 3 year old MN Russian blue cat was presented after falling from
the third storey balcony. The cat was non ambulatory on his
forelimbs and there was palpable swelling and crepitus of the
paws. Stressed radiographs of the carpi demonstrated no evidence
 of hyperextension or collateral instability. There was
 metacarpophalangeal luxation affecting the 3"d and 4"h digits of
both the left and right paws. It was not possible to reduce the
luxation under general anaesthesia. A dorsal approach to the 3 
and 4" metacarpals was performed. The joints were reduced and
stabilised with a 3/0 prolene suture placed through bone tunnels in
the head of the metacarpal and the base of the first phalanx. Soft
tissues were closed routinely and the cat was managed in hexalite
splints for 4 weeks and soft padded dressings for 2 weeks. The cat
returned to normal ambulation progressively over 2 weeks 
following splint removal and had no palpable crepitus and normal
foot posture. The owners could occasionally hear a click when the
cat walked but this was not associated with lameness, pain
instability or other dysfunction and appeared to subside with time.
 The click was attributed to persistent subluxation of the flexors
 tendons and sesamoids.
LIGAMENT INJURIES IN THE CARPUS
Anatomy
The carpus consists of 7 bones that form three joint levels. The
radial, ulna and accessory carpal bones form the proximal row, the
first, second third and fourth form the distal row.  The
antebrachiocarpal joint provides most flexion and extension, there
is limited movement in the middle carpal joint and very limited
movement in the carpometacarpal joint. The ligaments of the
carpus are short and none span all three joint levels. Medially the
short radial collateral ligament originates from the styloid process
 of the radius has straight and oblique portions. The straight portion
inserts on the medial aspect of the radiocarpal bone and is taut in
extension when it is the main stabiliser against valgus deformation.
The oblique portion arises slightly more laterally and distally and
runs deep to the straight part. It inserts on the palmaro-medial
aspect of the radial carpal bone. In isolated injury of the oblique
 portion instability can only be detected in flexion and is associated
with mild valgus and increased rotation. The short ulnar collateral
extends from the ulnar styloid to the ulnar carpal bone and the
radioulnar ligament runs obliquely. The ulnar ligaments are of
lesser significance as the carpus is in 5-10 degrees of valgus
206
Ch 15: Challenging Cases in Small Animal Orthopaedics
reducing stress loading on these structures. Injury to the medial
collateral ligament is more common and likely to cause a
significant instability as it is under constant tension during weight
bearing. Additional radiocarpal stability is provided by the joint
capsule, radioulnar ligaments, dorsal radiocarpal, ligaments from 
the accessory carpal bone and the palmar fibrocartilage.
Collateral ligament injury
Carpal collateral ligament injuries are generally accompanied by
lameness, postural changes, swelling and instability. Diagnosis of 
complete ligament rupture is generally straightforward with
palpable joint instability. In some cases instability may be difficult
to elicit acutely due to swelling or pain in the acute phase or where
there is incomplete tears. In this case reexamination under
 anaesthesia or following 24-48 h of supportive dressing may
facilitate diagnosis. Common modes of injury include jumps and
falls, bites and shearing injuries. Maintaining an index of suspicion
for ligament injury in affected animals in which the cause for
to be effective in the acute phase. Complete evaluation requires
careful palpation, plain radiographs to exclude bony avulsion or
injury and stressed radiographs to demonstrate the extent and level
of instability. Carpal trauma cannot be evaluated completely
without stressed views.
It is common for suspected ligament injuries to be treated
conservatively in practice with splinting. This relies on production
 of fibrous tissue to stabilise the affected joint. Acceptable
outcomes may be obtained in small or inactive dogs particularly if
only the lateral collateral ligament is involved. In most cases
conservative treatment will result in persistent instability, lameness
and joint degeneration, particularly in large or athletic dogs, or in
dogs with a preexisting valgus conformation.
Surgical stabilisation is best performed early after injury as
identification and primary repair becomes difficult with fibrosis
from chronicity. Primary surgical repair of the ligaments with
sutures is optimal and is usually supplemented with prosthetic
suture material placed through bone tunnels, attached to suture
anchors, or with autogenous tissue grafts from the abductor
pollicus longus or flexor carpi radialis tendons. Using the bone
tunnel technique may be preferable as it theoretically facilitates
stabilisation of both components of the radial collateral ligament.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
207
Treatment
Case
A 6 year old FN Irish wolfhound was presented with non-weight
bearing forelimb lameness, carpal valgus and medial collateral
ligament injury after a dog fight. There were no external skin
wounds. Primary surgical repair of both the straight and oblique
portions of the radial collateral ligament was performed with
locking loops sutures of 2/0 prolene. The repair was additionally
stabilised with a l prolene suture placed through bone tunnels
drilled craniocaudally in the distal radial styloid process and the
 radial carpal bone to simulate the two components of the
radiocarpal ligaments. A figure 8 suture placed around screws in
 the radiocarpal bone and distal radius. Multiple techniques were
o sy alrei pnad xa aui aoaao mi Arnfui aul astis oi pasn
weight bearing in this giant breed dog. The repair was protected in
a bivalved dynacast splint in slight flexion for 8 weeks followed by
3 weeks in a modified Robert Jones dressing to provide slow return
 to function. The joint was stable on palpation and grade 1/ 6
 issp os     ssd sa ss
was reduced range of movement in flexion. Progress has been good
aui uo dn-moy wai suoi lk jou si aeq ynoq anp oi
outcome of this case.
Successful ligament repair is possible even in giant breed dogs.
Cast management of giant breed dogs is problematic and may be
associated with an increased risk of cast related complications. Use
of stockingette, appropriate padding, walking bars and careful
 client education allowed successful management in this case.
Case
 Rolly a 4 year old Maltese dog presented with a 7 month history of
mostly non-weightbearing right forelimb lameness that had not
improved with several courses of non-steroidal antinflammatories
or pentosan polysulphate. The dog had mild carpal valgus on the
left front leg that was considered typical of the breed and a more
 marked valgus posture on the right side when forced to weight
bear. Pain was localised to the right carpus. There was moderate
soft tissue swelling and pain on flexion and extension of the carpus
and stressing the medial collateral ligament. Joint aspirates
demonstrated mildly increased nucleated cell counts with an
increased proportion of neutrophils (72%). Radiographs showed no
significant bony abnormalities, there was soft tissue swelling and
enthesiophytes on the medial aspect of the radiocarpal joint. There
were mild degenerative changes suggestive of osteoarthritis present
in the carpus. Stressed radiographs showed no evidence of
208
Ch 15: Challenging Cases in Small Animal Orthopaedics
hyperextension but confirmed medial radiocarpal instability
compared to the left side. The joint was stabilised surgically using
a combination of bone anchors and a bone tunnel suture technique.
It was not possible to repair the ruptured ligament but the
was stabilised in a hexalite splint for 8 weeks after surgery.
 There is not yet long term follow up in this case but the prognosis
remains guarded due to the chronicity of the injury, degenerative
changes in the joint and the valgus posture in this dog. If pain and
dysfunction persist then consideration could be given to pancarpal
arthrodesis. Barclay Slocum (in the spirit of his penchant for
cutting bones to stabilise ligament injuries) described a technique
for distal radial osteotomy to overcome carpal medial collateral
ligament injury that was either acute or chronic or for dogs with a
p1112). This also may be an alternative to carpal arthrodesis in this
 dog if he fails to do well after primary ligament repair.
REFERENCES
1.Muir P ; Norris JL
Small Anim Pract 38[8]:344-8 1997
2. Conservative Versus Surgical Treatment of Metacarpal and Metatarsal Fractures in Dogs. A.
Kapatkin; R. Howe-Smith; F. Shofer . Vet Comp Ortho Trauma 13[3]:1123-127 2000
3.  Barclay Slocum & Theresa Divine Slocum . Distal radial osteotomy for the treatment of carpal
collateral ligament damage. In: Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery 4" Edn. Edited
MJ Bojrab p 1112-1114
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
209
NOTES:
210
Ch 15: Challenging Cases in Small Animal Orthopaedics
Chapter 16
Medical Disease of Bones and Joints
John Angles and Bruce Smith
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS (OSTEOCHONDRODYSPLASIAS)
Osteochondrodysplasias are disorders involving abnormal growth
and development of cartilage, bone, or both. Abnormal growth may
be intentional through selective breeding (as seen in breeds such as
the bulldog, Pekingese, pug, dachshund, basset hound) or
Achondrodysplastic breeds of dog (e.g. bulldog, Boston terrier,
Pekingese, Pug, Shih Tzu) have shortened maxilla, depressed nasal
bridge, flared metaphyses, and short bowed limbs as part of
 accepted breed standards. Hypochondrodystrophic breeds (e.g.
basset hound, beagle, dachshund, Scottish terrier, Welsh corgi)
have similar shaped legs as a breed characteristic, although their
skulls are normal.
Dwarfism (unintended osteochondrodysplasia) has been reported in
 the Alaskan malamute, Norwegian elkhound, English pointer, Irish
setter, Great pyrenes, beagle, Labrador retriever, cocker spaniel,
miniature poodle, French bulldog, Scottish terrier, and Scottish
deerhound. The condition affects physes of the long bones
resulting in shor limbs with or without curvature. Affected dogs
are normal at birth, but growth retardation is recognised in the first
few months of life. Concomitant disorders include cataracts and
retinal detachment (Samoyed, Labrador retriever), retinal dysplasia
(Labrador retriever), and haemolytic anaemia (Alaskan malamute).
Osteochondrodysplasia has also been seen in cats. Two domestic
short hair cats presented with bowed forelimbs and showed
radiographic changes including widening of growth plates and
metaphyseal flaring consistent with osteochondrodyplasia. The
Scottish fold cat has an autosomal dominant form of
osteochondrodysplasia, with affected cats showing lameness,
reluctance to jump, stiff and stilted gaits, short misshapen distal
limbs, and short thick inflexible tail.
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS
Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are a group of lysosomal disorders
for degradation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Affected animals
are normal at birth, but they then have progressive growth
abnormalities and may exhibit skeletal and/or neurological
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
277
abnormalities as GAG products accumulate within lysosomes.
Metachromatic granules are often noted within peripheral
leukocytes. The combination of clinical, haematologic and
radiographic findings is not sufficient for a diagnosis of MPS, with
most cases confirmed by a spot test for excessive urinary
glycosaminoglycan excretion.
Several MPS syndromes have been reported in dogs (MPS 1, 11,
IIIA, IIIB, VI, and VII) and cats (MPS I, VI, and VII). Examples
include the following:
(i) MPS VI is caused by decreased arylsulfatase B activity, and
leads to intracellular accumulation and increased urinary excretion
of dermatan sulfate. Skeletal disease is prominent in MPS VI.
Clinical features are seen early, and include a broad face and
shortened nose, small ears, stunted growth, and reduced flexibility
of the cervical spine. Severe generalised skeletal disease is evident
radiographically, with widespread osteopaenia, epiphyseal
dysplasia, thinning of long bone cortices, bilateral coxofemoral
subluxation, and vertebral fusion. Two mutations (L476P and
D520N) have been found within the feline 4-sulfatase gene in
 affected Siamese cats and combinations of these mutations result in
varying phenotype. Cats homozygous for L476P exhibit classic
 MPS VI with severe skeletal disease. In contrast, cats homozygous
for D520N have no evidence for disease despite enzyme deficiency
characteristic of MS V1.
(ii) MPs II was diagnosed in Labrador retriever with coarse facial
features, macrodactylia, generalised osteopaenia, progressive
neurological deterioration and a positive urine test for
glycosaminoglycans. MPS II is due to iduronate-2-sulfate sulfatase
deficiency.
(ii) MPS I in DSH cats due to alpha-L-iduronidase deficiency.
Clinical features are similar to MPs VI, but facial dysmorphism
 may not be as pronounced as in Siamese cats, and metachromatic
I S pe I s u r p ss n a sa
Radiographic features are similar to MPs VI, except that
epiphyseal dysplasia and dwarfism are absent. Affected animals
are detected at weaning by excessive excretion of dermatan sulfate
and heparin sulfate in urine. MPs I has also been reported in dogs.
(iv) MPs VII has been seen in both dogs and cat, and is caused by
 decreased beta-glucuronidase activity. Affected animals appear
normal at birth, but show growth retardation, facial
dysmorphology, corneal clouding and swollen lax joints by 2-3
months of age. Multiple skeletal defects are seen radiographically
including coxofemoral luxation, abnormal shaped carpal and tarsal
212
Ch 16: Medical Disease of Bones and Joints
bones, generalised epiphyseal dysplasia, cervical dysplasia and
platyspondylosis. Urinary excretion of chondroitin sulfate is
increased. Genetic DNA tests are available to differentiate MPS
VIlI carrier dogs and cats from homozygous normal animals.
CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM
 Congenital hypothyroidism causes disproportionate dwarfism, and
has been seen in both dogs and cats. Affected animals appear
normal at birth, but after weaning birth rate slows and small stature
is appreciated compared to normal littermates. Affected animals
are lethargic, mentally dull and less active compared to litter mates.
Physical features of hypothyroid dwarfism include hypotonia,
enlarged tongue, broad maxillas, distended abdomen, dry skin,
delayed dental eruption and hypothermia. Skeletal abnormalities
include characteristic delayed maturation and epiphyseal
dysgenesis. Delayed closure of ossification centres of long bones
and vertebral bodies is visible on plain radiographs. A nonsense
mutation was recently documented within the thyroid peroxidase
gene for Miniature Fox terriers, and a DNA-based carrier test is
available for breeders to prevent the disease. The recommended
treatment for affected animals is sodium levothyroxine at a dose of
20ug/kg/day.
NUTRITIONAL SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism most commonly occurs
aod m p iea e Aaisnxa pay sieo pe sop auanf u!
calcium:phosphorus ratio. The proper calcium: phosphorus ratio is
1.2:1 for dogs and 1:1 for cats. Diets composed primarily of organ
meats may contain 60% or more phosphorus compared to skeletal
muscle diets. The calcium:phosphorus ratio of organ meats ranges
between 1:20 to 1:50. The imbalance leads to hypocalcaemia,
which results in secondary release of PTH. Continued ingestion of
the defective diet maintains the hyperparathyroid state and causes
 progressive skeletal demineralisation and consequent clinical signs.
walk, and skeletal pain. Costochondral junctions appear swollen,
and bone fractures can follow relatively minor trauma. Decreased
bone density and thin cortices are present on radiographs. Growth
plates are normal but metaphyses may be mushroom shaped.
Affected animals should be confined for the first few weeks of
treatment to reduce the risk for fractures and deformity. A good
quality, nutritionally complete commercial diet should be fed.
Oversupplementation with calcium should be avoided.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
273
RICKETS
Rickets is rarely seen in the dog and cat. Causes of rickets include
hypovitaminosis D (dietary deficiency), inborn errors in vitamin D
metabolism, or low availability of minerals in the diet. Affected
animals usually present for lameness or reluctance to walk.
 Enlargement of costochondral junctions and metaphyses may be
present on exam. Characteristic radiographic findings include
include thickening of growth plates and flaring of adjacent
 metaphyses. Osteopaenia, thinning of bone cortices and bowing of
 diet is appropriate when dietary deficiency is suspected.
Underlying inborn errors in vitamin D metabolism have been
reported in the dog and cat. These are differentiated from
of normal serum 1,25(OH)D2 and PTH levels, respectively.
 Reported examples include the following:
(i) Hypophosphataemic rickets
The biochemical hallmark is hypophosphataemia. The serum
calcium is usually normal. PTH concentrations are usually within
the normal range, but serum concentrations of 1,25-(OH)2D are
     n   
1,25(OH)2Ds (calcitriol) and phosphate salts results in radiographic
improvement in the bone lesions and decreased ALP. Treatment
with active vitamin D prevents the development of
(ii) Vitamin D dependent rickets type 1
 The underlying molecular cause of VDDR type 1 is defective
25(OH)D2 1α hydroxylase leading to poor conversion of
25(OH)D2 to 1,25(OH)2D3. Low serum 1,25(OH)2D; results in
feedback inhibition of 1,25(OH)2D; on PTH secretion. Treatment
is with standard doses of 1,25(OH)2Ds (calcitriol).
(ili) Vitamin D dependent rickets type 2
Normal to increased 1,25(OH)Ds differentiates VDDR type 2 from
nutritional deficiency rickets and VDDR type1. The molecular
defect for VDDR type 2 is one or more mutations within the
vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene that can result in varying degrees
of inefficient binding of 1,25(OH)D3 to vitamin D receptors. In
some cases the defect can be compensated for by high doses of
1,25(OH)D (calcitriol) therapy.
214
Ch 16: Medical Disease of Bones and Joints
RETAINED CARTILAGE CORES
Disease of large and giant breed dogs typically recognised at 3 to 4
months of age. Affected dogs present with mild lameness due to
delayed mineralization of the growth plate during the active phase
of bone growth. Histologically the lesions represent delayed
endochondral ossification in which hypertrophied chondrocytes
and their associated extracellular matrix fail to be replaced by
vascularized bone. These abnormalities are identical to those
observed in the osteochondrosis of the articular portions of
a   pands si l inq uoun si sas s yn a
the same as for the more familiar articular osteochondroses
Commonly bilateral, the lesions almost exclusively affect the distal
ulna producing a characteristic radiographic "flame" extending
 from the distal ulnar physis and tapering proximally into the
metaphyseal bone. Retained cartilage cores have less commonly
been observed in the distal radius and tibia.
Delayed ossification results in variably retarded longitudinal bone
growth. For clinically affected dogs retarded ulna growth results in
relative shortening of the ulna which may result cranial bowing of
the radius, valgus and external torsional deformity of the carpus 
and elbow subluxation. Retained cartilage cores are a not
uncommon incidental radiographic finding in giant-breed pups.
Serial radiography has documented spontaneous resolution cores
with skeletal maturity. Clinically affected dogs present between 4
and 8 months of age for bilateral weight bearing forelimb lameness
that can be localized to the distal ulnar with pain and or swelling
sometimes evident.
  ss  si s   r 
occult cases. Treatment of limbs with deformity should include
distal ulnar ostectomy and fat grafting with or without correction of
angular, torsional and length deformity. A recent study in Great
Dane pups documented retained cartilage cores in the distal ulna
and tibia with feeding diets containing calcium levels three times
recommended levels.
PANOSTEITIS (ENOSTOSIS, EOSINOPHILIC PANOSTEITIS)
Reported as a common condition causing lameness in young dogs.
The disease is a primary degeneration of the fatty bone marrow
with replacement by fibrous tissue in the region of the nutrient
foramen followed by secondary endosteal and periosteal
proliferation can affect any or all of the long bones. Panosteitis is
most common in medium, large and giant breed dogs with German
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
215
Shepherd Dogs, Basset Hounds and males being overrepresented.
Occurrences are within the first 2 years of life, with most cases
 presenting between 6 and 18 months, however affected dogs as old
 as 5 years have been reported. The most commonly clinically
affected bone is the ulna, followed by the radius, humerus, femur
and tibia. The cause of panosteitis is unknown however viral or
bacterial infection, stress, metabolic disease, vascular abnormality,
 allergy, immune-mediated disease, parasitism and genetic causes
have all been proposed. Etiologies other than viral are
accompanied by scant evidence.
  a n ss aas n sn d s
limbs. Palpation of the long bones of the affected limb will elicit
focal pain. Anorexia, pyrexia, tonsillitis, muscle wasting and
leukocytosis or eosinophilia have been reported as inconsistent and
 non-specific findings in affected dogs In the clinical setting
radiography usually establishes a definitive diagnosis. The three
radiographic stages of the disease are; the early stage characterized
by loss of trabeculation and cortical/medullary contrast, the middle
stage characterized by patchy, mottled sclerotic densities and the
late stage in which sclerotic densities resolve and cortical
remodelling may be evident. This cycle occurs over 60 - 90 days.
Both the episodes and the disease of panosteitis are self-limiting.
Local signs and individual limb lameness usually abate within 3
weeks (in contrast to the radiographic cycle). Treatment should be
symptomatic with client education, nursing care and analgesia for
affected individuals. It is essential to clinically and
radiographically examine the associated joints in affected dogs as
concurrent juvenile arthropathies are common.
METAPHYSEAL OSTEOPATHY (HYPERTROPHIC OSTEODYSTROPHY)
Breeds at particular risk include the Great Dane, Weimaraner, Irish
setter, German shepherd and Labrador and golden retrievers. Most
dogs present with pain and lameness associated with swelling of
the metaphyses of the long bones. Fever and anorexia are also
commonly associated with clinical disease. A severe form of HOD
disease is seen in some breeds, with systemic manifestations
including fever and multiple body organ inflammation.
Radiographic changes are dependent on the stage of disease, with
an irregular radiolucent zone present within the metaphysic noted
in earlier stages. Later changes include metaphyseal enlargement
with irregular periosteal new bone formation. Diagnosis relies on
radiographic changes in the metaphyses.
276
Ch 16:Medical Disease of Bones and Joints
The cause of metaphyseal osteopathy remains unknown, with
earlier speculations of a vitamin C deficiency or over-nutrition
largely discounted in more recent times. Disease has been linked to
calcium content of the diet in the Great Dane, with Great Dane
 pups fed on a high calcium diet showing bone changes and those
 on a low calcium diet not showing disease. There is also evidence
that viral infection may be important in the disease, with Distemper
virus detected in the metaphyses of dogs with metaphyseal
osteopathy. Several authors have also noted a temporal association
with Distemper vaccination and onset of disease. However, to our
knowledge no one has been able to experimentally reproduce
metaphyseal osteopathy with Distemper Virus infection,
suggesting that there are other important factors leading to
expression of this disease. In such a scenario, the Distemper virus
would act as a trigger for the initial immune response but
 expression of the disease would depend on other immune
regulatory factors.
Treatment depends on the severity of clinical signs, with mild
cases responding to rest and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
medications. Moderate mortality rates are seen in breeds of dog
with more severe clinical signs, and treatment with short acting
intravenous corticosteroids may be required to control the signs.
Corticosteroid treatment can retard physeal growth and short
duration therapy is important in young dogs.
CRANIOMANDIBULAR OSTEOPATHY
Disease that occurs mainly in young West Highland white,
Scottish, Cairn, Boston, and other terriers. The disease is
 characterized by bilaterally symmetrical irregular proliferation of
the mandibles, tympanic bullae and zygomatic arches. Affected
 dogs will have difficulty with prehension and show pain on
opening of the mouth. Diagnosis is straightforward with typical
clinical and radiographic findings. Craniomandibular osteopathy is
The disease is rarely fatal, but euthanasia may be requested in
severely affected dogs due to pain and poor body condition.
IMMUNE-MEDIATED POLYARTHRITIS
Immune mediated arthropathies are divided into two broad
 categories based on whether bone erosion is present or absent on
radiographs. Erosive forms of polyarthritis are characterised by
cellular and humoral responses, whereas non-erosive polyarthritis
involves a type IH1 hypersensitivity reaction resulting in immune
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
277
be difficult to differentiate erosive from non-erosive polyarthritis
 Radiographic signs of erosive arthritis tend to appear later in the
disease course.
Erosive arthropathies include canine rheumatoid arthritis,
idiopathic erosive polyarthritis, and a semierosive polyarthritis of
 greyhounds. Non-erosive arthropathy may be differentiated into
four subgroups according to the absence of identifiable associated
 disease (type I), association with infectious or inflammatory
disease remote from the joint (type II), association with
gastrointestinal or hepatic disease (type II1), and association with
neoplasia remote from the joint (type IV). Other causes for non-
erosive arthropathy include systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
 polyarthritis/meningitis syndrome, breed specific polyarthropathies
(such as seen in the Akita and Chinese Shar Pei dogs), drug
induced polyarthropathy and vaccine induced polyarthropathy.
The main obstacle to the diagnosis of immune-mediated
 polyarthritis is a failure to include the disease as a differential.
Artrocentesis is the most important diagnostic test, and cytologic
evidence of suppurative inflammation should be present in 2 or
more joints. Synovial fluid from the carpi, tarsi, stifles, and rarely
the elbows is typically evaluated. Once synovitis has been
identified, collection of the minimum database is accompanied by
specific tests to identify SLE or other concurrent systemic disease
and to differentiate erosive from non-erosive forms of immune-
 mediated polyarthritis. Culture of synovial fluid is performed if 
sepsis is suspected, but blood and urine cultures are usually more
rewarding. Viral serology for feline leukaemia virus can be
positive in 60% of cats with progressive polyarthritis associated
with feline syncytium-forming virus.
Systemic lupus erythematosus is a multisystemic disease, and
concurrent diseases such cytopaenia (haemolytic anaemia or
thrombocytopaenia), dermatological lesions, proteinuria, myositis,
myocarditis/pericarditis, pleuritis and glossitis should also be
noted. A diagnosis of SLE cannot be justified without positive
ANA test, although false positive ANAs are seen in a variety of
chronic inflammatory conditions. Rheumatoid factor is present in
25 to 75% of dogs with erosive rheumatoid polyarthritis. Erosive
bone changes may be absent for rheumatoid arthritis on initial
presentation but generally appears within 6 months if the disease
persists.
Identification of any underlying causes for the immune disease is
vital, particularly underlying infectious and neoplastic causes.
Antimicrobial, antiparasitic, antineoplastic, and nutritional
278
Ch 16:Medical Disease of Bones and Joints
therapies are prioritised. Initial treatment for both erosive and non-
erosive canine immune-mediated polyarthritis involves
immunosuppressive levels of corticosteroids ( 1mg/kg PO twice
daily) and azathioprine (2mg/kg PO every other day).
Arthrocentesis should be repeated within two weeks of initiation of
therapy to document adequate response to therapy. Corticosteroid
signs and normalisation of synovial fluid while maintaining the
same dose of azathioprine
INFECTIVE ARTHRITIS
Differentiating an infectious arthritis from other causes of arthritis
is critical for proper case management. Aggressive treatment with
immunosuppressive agents is usually necessary to induce
remission, and such treatment could be disastrous in the presence
of infection. Bacteria usually gain entry to a joint by the
haematogenous route, although direct inoculation by penetration of
aspiration, or through road accidents is also seen. Direct
inoculation tends to affect a single joint, whereas several joints
may be involved in haematogenous infections. Diagnosis is
confirmed by culture of the organism from synovial fluid or
synovial membrane. Culture of joint fluid is not always successful,
and incubation of synovial fluid in blood culture medium has been
suggested to improve success.
 A variety of organisms have been isolated in septic arthritis, and
the most common isolates are gram positive bacteria such as
staphylococcus and streptococcus. The mainstay of treatment is a
prolonged course of systemic antibiotics. A broad spectrum
bactericidal antibiotic is used, and suitable empiric choices pending
culture/sensitivity results include clavulonate-potentiated
amoxicillin and cephalosporins. Joint lavage and drainage may also
be indicated. Gentimicin impregnated polymethyl-methacrylate
(PMMA) beads or sponges have been highly effective in the
 management of localised infections, allowing for high tissue
Systemic antibiotic therapy should continue for at least 4-6 weeks.
DRUG INDUCED ARTHRITIS
 Polyarthritis has been associated with drug therapy. The most
commonly incriminated agents being antibiotics. Effects from
Sulphonomides,lincomycin, erythromycin, cephaloporins,
fluorquinolones and penicillins have been stated . Only
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
279
 antimicrobial Sulpha drugs and Fluorquinolones appears represent
a clinically significant concern.
Antimicrobial Sulphonomides: Idiosyncratic toxicity to potentiated
sulfonamides occurs in both humans and dogs, with considerable
 clinical similarities. The syndrome in dogs can consist of fever,
arthropathy, blood dyscrasias (neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, or 
 hemolytic anemia), hepatopathy consisting of cholestasis or
necrosis, skin eruptions, uveitis, or keratoconjunctivitis sicca. In a
recent study of 40 dogs spayed female dogs were overrepresented
as were Samoyeds (and Miniature Schnauzers. Fever and immune
mediated thrombocytopenia were the most common manifestations
with athropathy only occasionally seen in combination with other
signs.
Polyarthopathy associated with sulpha drugs is described as an
idiosyncratic event directly analgous to Sulpha sensitivity in
people. An increased risk has been documented in Doberman
pinscher dogs than in other breeds. Caution should be exercised in
treating this breed with Sulpha drug. Clinical signs of painful
joints, pyrexia, lymphadenopathy, skin rash, focal retinitis and
glomerulonephritis are noted 10 - 21 days following the initiation
of sulpha drugs. Hematological abnormalities of leukopenia and
thrombocytopenia may occur. Cytological changes are as elevated
synovial fluid leukocyte count, predominantly neutrophils.
Histologically there is synovial hypertrophy with inflammatory
infiltrate of mononuclear cells and neutrophils as perivascular
cuffing. The pathogenesis of these reactions is not completely
understood, but may be due to a T-cell-mediated response to
proteins haptenated by oxidative sulfonamide metabolites resulting
in type IHI hypersensitivity. Treatment other than discontinuation of
o s pou aq pious h Asson se pis si saa
antimicrobial sulpha drugs contain the responsible chemical
moiety. The Non-antimicrobial sulpha drugs such as furosemide,
thiazides, glipizide and some NSAID agents have not been
 associated with arthropathy in either dog or man.
Fluorquinolones: Polyarthropathy associated with the
administration of fluorquinolone antibiotics has been documented.
Most information is from ex perimental drug studies; however
individual clinical reports for dog occur in the literature. The
macroscopic lesion is vesiculation progressing to fissuring of the
middle zone of the weight bearing articular cartilage. Lesions are
dose related and are almost exclusively observed in skeletally
immature animals. Cartilage injury occurs rapidly with vesiculation
always resulting with 1 or 2 administrations (24 - 48 hours).
220
Ch 16: Medical Disease of Bones and Joints
Comparison between ex perimental species and human and equine
ds   ais si a  s s a
susceptibility with the dog most affected. There is also a lesser
variation in adverse affect of agents within the drug group.
however specific comparison for veterinary registered products
was not found. The proposed toxic mechanism is inhibition of
chondrocyte metabolism and matrix production. More recently an
 inhibition of matrix production caused by quinolone chelation of
Magnesium has been identified.
DISKOSPONDYLITIS
Vertebral infections are common in the dog and rarely seen in the
cat. Infection involves adjacent vertebral bodies and their
interposed disc. Staphyloccus intermedius is the most common
bacterial species cultured in dogs with diskospondylitis. Other
frequently isolated bacteria include Streptococcus species, Brucella
canis, and Escherichia coli. Actinomyces species are often
associated with cases of grass awn migration. Fungal infections are
isolated less frequently. Haematogenous spread of bacteria or
fungus is the most common cause for diskospondylitis, and
infection can originate from many sources. Organisms localise in
the vertebral body because subchondral vascular loops in the
vertebral epiphysis slow circulation, allowing colonisation of
blood-borne bacteria. Potential primary sites of infection in dogs 
with diskospondylitis include the urinary tract, skin and heart.
Diskospondylitis most frequently affects large and giant breed
dogs. Males are affected twice as often as females. Signs can vary
from those of systemic infection (fever, depression, inappetance) to
those of musculoskeletal dysfunction (hyperaesthesia, lameness,
abnormal gait). Neurological deficits imply more advanced
destruction with signs related to extradural compression of the
spinal cord. Diskospondylitis should always be considered with
concomitant signs of spinal cord and systemic disease. The
diagnosis is confirmed by survey radiographs. Collapse of the
intervertebral disc is noted first, followed by bone lysis centred at
the vertebral endplates, sclerosis and spondylosis. Lysis is not seen
with benign condition of spondylosis deformans. Most vertebral
tumours did not involve adjacent vertebrae, and lysis is confined
with the vertebral body, pedicle or spinous process rather than the
endplate. Any intervertebral disc space may be affected, but the
L7-S1 disc, caudal cervical area, and midthoracic spine are
affected preferentially. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the
most sensitive and specific imaging modality for diskospondylitis
in people, but tends to be used in veterinary medicine when survey
and contrast radiography are not definitive.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
221
Culture and sensitivity of blood and urine specimens are important
when diskospondylitis is suspected. Bacterial blood culture results
are positive in about 40 to 75% of affected dogs. Urine culture
results have been reported to be positive in about 25 to 40% of
affected dogs. Pecutaneous needle aspiration of the disk space is
indicated in patients that do not respond to initial antibiotic
 therapy, in cases of suspected neoplasia or where the diagnosis is
unclear. Brucella canis serological screening should be performed
if indicated.
Diskospondylitis is usually treated medically, and the key to
and sensitivity testing. If an organism is not cultured, the causative
organism is assumed to be Staphylococcus intermedius. Empiric
antibiotic therapy effective for this purpose includes first
β-lactamase resistant penicillins (e.g. amoxicillin-clavulonate
 20mg/kg PO bid to tid). Dogs that fail to respond within the first 5
days should be reassessed. More aggressive treatment may be
required in dogs with marked neurological deficits. Antibiotic
therapy should continue for a minimum of 6-8 weeks. Vertebral
radiographs every 4-6 weeks during treatment allow for monitoring
of progression or regression of lesions.
References available on request.
222
Ch 16: Medical Disease of Bones and Joints
Chapter 17
Wound Management and Bandaging
Sarah Goldsmid
AIMS:
 Understand principles of wound healing
1.
2.
 Be aware of factors affecting healing in order to minimize
them
Gain knowledge of available products and techniques
4.F
 Have the ability to advise clients appropriately
STAGES OF WOUND HEALING:
Wound healing begins immediately after injury or incision. It is a
dynamic process and several phases can occur simultaneously.
Inflammatory phase
immediately post injury
 hemorrhage cleans and fills wounds initially
 fibrinogen and clotting elements then leaked
 extrinsic coagulation mechanism (activated by thromboplastin
released from injured cells)
 fibrin and plasma transudates form and a blood clot stabilizes
wound edges, as it dries it becomes a scab which prevents
further hemorrhage, protects wounds and allows healing to
progress underneath
inflammatory mediators (histamine, serotonin, proteolytic
enzymes, kinins, prostaglandins, complement, lysosomal
enzymes, thromboxane, growth factors) cause inflammation
Debridement phase
 6-12 hours post injury
exudate = white blood cells, dead tissue, wound fluid
neutrophils prevent infection and initiate debridement by
phagocytosis
monocytes become macrophages and remove necrotic tissue,
bacteria and foreign material and are chemotactic for
 mesenchymal sells, stimulate angiogenesis and modulate
matrix production within wounds
 chemotactic factors (complement, collagen fragments.
bacterial endotoxins, inflammatory cell products) direct
macrophages to injured tissue
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
223
 platelets release growth factors important for fibroblastic
activity
lymphocytes improve the rate and quality of tissue repair
Repair phase
begins 3-5 days post injury
 macrophages stimulate DNA and fibroblast proliferation
fibroblasts migrate into the wound and synthesize and deposit
collagen, elastin and proteoglycans that eventually form
fibrous tissue
collagen synthesis increases wound tensile strength
capilleries invade
 granulation tissue forms and is a barrier to infection, provides 
a surface for epithelial migration and a source of
myofibroblasts
 wound contraction and epithelialisation
Maturation phase
17-20 days postinjury - up to years
collagen fibers remodel with alteration in orientation and
increased cross-linking, improving wound strength (orient
along lines of stress)
decrease Type IlI, increase Type I collagen.
only regain 80% original strength
number of capillaries decrease in a scar
FACTORS AFFECTING WOUND HEALING:
LOCAL - moisture, debris and foreign bodies, infection, sutures
and implants, temperature, exposure, mechanical stress, chemicals
(eg antiseptics), blood supply, oxygen tension
 SYSTEMIC - general health, diabetes, hyperadrenocorticism,
hypoproteinemia, anemia, liver disease, uremia, age, obesity,
nutrition, drugs, radiation, immune status
TYPES OF WOUNDS:
 Acute - trauma / contaminated, surgical wounds, bite wounds, burn
wounds
 Chronic wounds- pressure wounds, neoplasia
 Wound creation forces include abrasion, avulsion, shearing,
laceration, incision, penetration or bite
Classification
 clean (eg surgical - GIT, RT or genitourinary
 tract not entered)
clean contaminated (eg GIT, RT or
genitourinary tract entered)
224
Ch 17: Wound Management and Bandaging
contaminated (eg fresh traumatic wound,
 gross GIT spillage)
 dirty (eg traumatic wound with devitalized
tissue, FBs, fecal contamination and/or
delayed treatment)
GOALS OF WOUND THERAPY:
1
 Improve systemic conditions
 protect against further trauma
maintain a clean wound bed
 preserve the physiological environment
 remove necrotic tissue
 protect against infection
 minimize pain
produce good cosmetic results
 minimize costs
DRESSING CONTAMINATED WOUNDS:
1.
 Aim to initially cleanse and remove necrotic debris and
discharges, then encourage healthy granulation tissue and in
most cases re-epithelialisation
2.
 Inflammatory stage - hydrocolloids, hydrogels, wet-to-dry,
polymeric foams, calcium alginates
3.
Granulation - moist, warm environment eg hydrocolloids,
hydrogel or non-adherent semiocclusive dressing
4. Reepithelialisation - non adherents
WHAT SHOULD I CLEAN THE WOUND WITH?
 Before cleaning the wound it is important to clip the surrounding
hair. The wound should be protected with saline soaked swabs or
KY lubricant.
 Initial wound management begins with copious lavage using warm
sterile saline or balanced electrolyte solutions. Tap water can be
used but can cause some hypotonic tissue damage (but is better
than sterile water or distilled water). Chlorhexidine (<0.05%) or
iodine (0.1%) may reduce bacterial numbers but can be harmful to
tissue and should be avoided if possible. Do not use detergents,
hydrogen peroxide, Dakin's solution or alcohol in open wounds.
How should I irrigate the wound? Lavage is preferable to
 scrubbing which inflicts more tissue damage. High pressure lavage
using a 50ml syringe and 18# needle (7-8psi) can effectively
remove bacteria from the wound surface. The syringe can be
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
225
 connected to a bag of fluids and a three way tap to speed the
  sssd  aa a u p ssg
bacteria and debris into loose tissue planes and damage underlying
tissue.
Devitalized/necrotic tissue can be surgically debrided. It may not
be obvious immediately which is devitalized. If in doubt leave it
until the next bandage change and reassess for viability. A wound
may need to be enlarged to visualize the depths of the wound
adequately (eg bite or puncture wounds).
Enzymatic debridement agents should be used with care as they
 may cause local tissue irritation. They should not be used on
extensive burn wounds because they may cause pain and may be
toxic if large amounts are absorbed.
WHAT ANTIBIOTIC SHOULD I CHOOSE?
A clean surgical wound may not require the use of any antibiotics
or prophylactic use only (perioperatively). A contaminated wound,
or one with significant soft tissue trauma will require the use of
antibiotics. If an established infection is present it may be
necessary to culture a wound. Systemic antibiotics are most
commonly used. Generally a broad spectrum cover such as
amoxicillin/clavulinic acid (20mg/kg bid) or a cephalosporin
(20mg/kg tid) would be appropriate. In a severely compromised
 patient, intravenous antibiotics would be preferable (eg
cephalosporin or timentin 50mg/kg tid).
 s a  d - an s   sn
should be used as the powder acts as a foreign body. Ointments
may be occlusive and encourage anaerobic bacteria.
THE IDEAL WOUND DRESSING?
An ideal wound dressing should:
 Encourage moist wound healing
control infection
 help to remove necrotic tissue
 not traumatise the wound on removal
 not contain toxic chemicals, particles or fibres
 maintain optimum temperature
226
Ch17:Wound Management and Bandaging
REASONS FOR BANDAGING
1.
 Support for fractures or immobilization of injured tissue
2.
 Protection from further trauma and infection
3.
Control of wound environment
4.
 Pressure to reduce hemorrhage and edema and eliminate dead
space
5.
. Minimize scarring
BANDAGE LAYERS
Contact layer dressings
These may be adherent or nonadherent and occlusive or semi-
occlusive. An adherent contact layer is used when wound
debridement is required. A nonadherent contact layer is used when
 granulation tissue has formed. Semiocclusive bandages allow air to
penetrate and exudates to escape from the wound surface.
Occlusive bandages are impermeable to air and are used on
 nonexudative wounds to keep tissues moist.
Dry adherent eg dry gauze (painful to remove, may remove
viable cells)
Wet adherent dressings eg saline soaked swabs (wet-to-dry),
Curasalt (should be changed once or twice daily)
 Non adherent dressings, most are semiocclusive and are used
when wounds are in the repair phase of healing or if necrotic
debris is absent, they retain moisture to promote
epithelialization and prevent wound dehydration. They allow
excess fluid to drain to prevent tissue maceration.
Tulle dressings, often with petrolatum +/- antibiotics eg
Jelonet, Adaptic, Bactigras, Sofra-tulle (petrolatum delays
 epithelialisation)
cotton non adherent film dressings eg Melolin, Release,
 Telfa, Curity (good once epithelialisation begins, can be
used in combination with hydrogels)
foams eg Allevyn, Curafoam (useful when there is a large
amount of wound fluid)
Occlusive dressings are not permeable to air, used on
healthy wounds they accelerate epithelialization and
collagen synthesis, require less frequent changes
Examples include:
film dressings eg Opsite, Bioclusive, Polyskin (used
on flat, granulating surfaces)
hydrogels eg Solugel, Intrasite gel, Curafil, Curagel
(encourage moist wound healing and reduce scarring)
hydrocolloids eg Duoderm, Ultec (used when
established granulation tissue be, advanced
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
227
 contraction, minimal fluid production and initial
epithelialisation, good for dermal ulcers, burns and
abrasions)
Calcium Alginate dressings eg Aigoderm, Aigisite,
Curasorb (good when there is excessive discharge)
hydroactive dressings eg Tielle (do not adhere to
wound and able to absorb wound fluid, can be
changed less frequently)
 Biological dressings
 growth factors, collagen and more eg Vet Biosist
(Cook, derived from the submucosal layer of pig SI),
equine amnion
NB: My preference is to use a wet-to-dry dressing for the first day
or two, and then switch to a hydrogel in combination with a non
adherent dressing (such as melolin or telfa) for a typical
contaminated open wound such as a shearing injury. In the
maturation phase I usually stop using the hydrogel. In difficult to
bandage areas such as digit wounds, I find jelonet more easy to
conform, but can also combine this with a hydrogel.
Frequency of bandage changes for contaminated wound starts at
once or twice daily (for about a week, depending on the progress of
the wound) then every 2-3 days and so on. Ultimately weekly
changes are usually sufficient. Sedation/pain relief/ or full
 anaesthesia is usually required initially for each bandage change.
Intermediate layer
padding material eg cotton wool, soffban, combine, velband, webril
11
Tertiary layer
 outer bandaging materials eg gauze, cohesive, crepe, elastoplast,
bodyplast
CASTING MATERIALS
Fibreglass, polyurethane-based or thermoplastic polymer casts; vs
 Plaster of Paris
SPLINTING MATERIALS
 Remouldable (sansplint, orthosplint)
 premoulded (spoon, Kirshner splints)
 PVC tubing with foam padding
$1
wooden and metal splints
fibreglass casting material
 Plaster of Paris
228
Ch 17: Wound Management and Bandaging
SPECIALISED BANDAGING TECHNIQUES
Ehmer Sling, Velpeau sling, Robert Jones bandage, Tie-on
dressing, Pressure relief bandages
FUTURE TRENDS?
 The role of cytokines in wound repair is currently being
researched. The effectiveness of exogenous cytokines is dependent
on a complex set of interactions with other cytokines, and timing of
the application and method of delivery are significant. The use of 
exogenous cytokines to accelerate wound healing clinically has
 been discouraging at this stage.
SUMMARY
 Many choices now exist for the veterinary profession to improve
current wound management practices.
Be aware of the recent advances in products and techniques.
Think about the wound you are managing - the processes going on,
what stage(s) it is in and what the ideal dressing is for that wound.
Minimise detrimental factors to wound healing.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
229
NOTES:
230
Ch 17: Wound Management and Bandaging
Chapter 18
Management of Osteoarthritis -
instead of surgery, or after surgery
Rick Read
INTRODUCTION
 Osteoarthritis (OA) is now recognised as a significant cause of lost
productivity in the human population. As we are faced with a
gradually ageing population, the importance of this disease in man
is increasing. OA is a progressive condition in which the articular
cartilage is slowly eroded and the surrounding bone reacts by
producing osteophytes, which thicken the joint and frequently
The major problem with OA in both humans and animals is that
most cases are not diagnosed until the end stage of these
pathological processes is reached, so that the treatment options are
often limited to suppression of the clinical signs (particularly pain)
by the use of analgesics or surgical salvage procedures such as
 arthrodesis, excision arthroplasty or joint replacement.
Joints affected by arthritic diseases have a limited range of ways
 that they can express the presence of disease in the form of
 physical signs. These include:
1.
Pain on local manipulation or pressure
2.
Thickening of joint capsule/osteophyte production
3.
Increased synovial fluid production (effusion)
4.
 Change in range of movement 
5.
 Crepitus on manipulation
6.Heat
These physical signs may or may not be associated with clinical
 ae p as si n a n p sis s
lameness or weakness. Because of these limitations, the various
different joint diseases (OA, inflammatory joint diseases etc) can
be very difficult to differentiate on physical signs alone. The
 problems association with making a specific diagnosis of the type
of arthritis that is present will be discussed here.
Although the range of clinical and physical signs is limited, the
variation in severity of these signs can create problems with
diagnosis. For example, many severely arthritic joints may exhibit
marked physical signs such as thickening and reduced range of
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
231
 motion, but the correlation with clinical lameness is very poor.
Thus a major issue that impacts decisions about management of
OA is the presence of a significant level of subclinical arthritic
disease.
Radiography is an important diagnostic tool in clinical
orthopaedics and in particular in arthrology. However, it must be
remembered that radiographs best demonstrate bony changes and
that changes in the cartilage and synovial membrane (two very
arthritis) cannot be accurately demonstrated on plain radiographs.
Regardless, even the ability to detect and quantify the degree of
bony changes (osteophyte development, subchondral sclerosis,
change in congruity of articular surfaces) is of questionable
importance when assessing the clinical significance of the
pathology in a particular joint because the correlation between
these changes and the level of physical dysfunction is very poor.
 Radiology should always be regarded as merely an aid to
diagnosis, and radiographic data needs to be taken back to the
patient and correlated with physical signs before any significant
decisions regarding diagnosis and treatment are made.
Pain is a prominent clinical feature of OA. However the cause of
pain is sometimes hard to determine. Cartilage itself is devoid of
 nerve endings so cartilage erosion per se should not be painful
'ansdeo of a u ssupua aarau snoranu are ara raaamo
ligaments and bone and these can be stimulated by a number of
types of mechanisms.
1.
Nociceptor pain (eg due to inflammation)
potentially harmful stimuli or situations to the central nervous
system. In the region around joints they are located in the
joint capsule and ligaments, articular fat pads, perivascular
sites, bone, periosteum, muscles and tendons. Nociceptors in
the joint capsule respond to intense mechanical strain such as
heavy local pressure or joint movements beyond the normal
 s  s q  aq  s 
the intraosseous pressure. Nociceptors in muscle respond to
intense mechanical stimuli and to excessive muscle
contraction. Endogenous chemical stimuli such as bradykinin,
 prostaglandins, leukotrienes, potassium ions, serotonin and
interleukin-1 all play a role in the persistent pain of OA.
232
Ch18:Management of Osteoarthritis
Nociceptors are present in :
joint capsule
 ligaments
fat pads
 perivascular tissue
bone/periosteum
01
muscles/tendons
BUT NOT IN CARTILAGE
Neuropathic pain (eg due to nerve compression)
 It has been postulated that during arthritis, many normally
inexcitable nerve endings are sensitised by the chemical
substances produced during intermittent inflammatory
episodes and that this recruitment of sensory fibres augments
the pain in OA. Most NSAIDs act on pain by inhibition of
cyclooxygenase which controls the synthesis of
prostaglandins. However it has been shown that there is no
correlation between the degree of inhibition of prosta glandins
 and analgesic efficiency. It is therefore assumed that these
drugs also have a direct inhibitory action on the nociceptor.
These drugs may also have additional effects on the central
 nervous system which are relevant to their analgesic
efficiency.
Although normal axons are not easily excited by mechanical
stimuli, persistent compression can alter their functional
as d  ssi ansd  e ns s
 discharges. The proliferation of soft tissue and bone
associated with OA could result in chronic nerve pressure and
 subsequent pain.
3.
ReactivePain and MuscleHypertonus.
It is well known that pain associated with musculoskeletal
disease is often associated with hypertonicity of muscles.
However it has also been suggested that this muscle
hypertonus may be the cause rather than the consequence of
 some pain states. It has been proposed that pain coming from
muscles, joints and tendons may be induced, aggravated or
 perpetuated by a state of muscle hypertonus that is the result
of a disregulation of the motor control system. Trigger points
in muscles are now recognised as a significant cause of pain
and dysfunction in both humans and animals and various
 anssi sn ssapn on pasn aq o ar pisard yo so
 part of the management of OA
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
233
 The primary nociceptive stimulus for formation of trigger
the joint capsule may increase the reflex excitability of various
anta gonist muscles involved in the movement of the joint and
produce immobility of that joint and although this is a type of
guarding mechanism to try to reduce pain, it can also
aggravate joint pain. NSAIDs should be effective in blocking
the afferent nociceptive drive as should local anaesthetic
infiltration of either the trigger point or the afferent nerve.
It is also important to realise that other nerve endings are
present in and around joints and these can also have important
input into the central nervous system. Particularly important
 capsule. If normal joint function is complicated by mild
instability, the nociceptive receptors may not be stimulated but
the proprioceptive receptors may well be. This phenomenon
may be one reason why we get a poor response to analgesic
therapy in some cases of OA.
As clinicians, it is important for us to remember that
and lameness and dysfunction may be due to factors other than
pain.
CURRENT OPTIONS FOR THE TREATMENT OF OA - WHEN IS SURGERY
INDICATED?
Osteoarthritis remains a disease that we can at best hope to control
rather than cure. Control in this context refers to both the control of
the clinical signs of OA and control of this chronic, progressive,
debilitati ve condition.
Henderson (1993) suggested the following list of aims of treatment
of OA:
provide pain relief
improve quality of life
be well tolerated (incl long term)
decrease inflammation
decrease rate of joint damage
easy tailoring of dose to
body wt
Surgery plays an important part in the overall management of OA,
but major benefits of surgery are seen only in a number of select
groups of arthritic patients:
 to address gross joint instability (eg ligamentous injury)
 to remove bone fragments and/or cartilage flaps and address
the cartilage defect
234
Ch18:Management of Osteoarthritis
 0 corrective osteotomy to alter load bearing
Aoloued yuof alnis-pue 1oy sanpaooid aaea res
This leaves a very large group of arthritic patients for which
surgery will not offer much hope of benefit, and for these patients
non-surgical management will remain the mainstay of achieving
the goals of pain relief and improved quality of life.
However, many of the non-surgical therapies used to assist arthritic
patients can play a very important role in reducing inflammation
and restoring normal function in the perioperative period after joint
surgery - this specific topic will be addressed at the end of these
notes.
as well as four distinct groups of agents - non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids, Disease-modifying
osteoarthritic drugs (DMOADs) and nutraceuticals.
THERAPEUTIC AGENTSIN THE MANAGEMENT OF OA
1. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
NSAIDs belong to a group of drugs which act predominantly by
blocking the inflammatory effects of prostaglandins through
 inhibition of the breakdown of arachidonic acid by cyclo-
oxygenase (and in some cases lipoxygenase). Recent research has
shown that two forms of cyclo-oxygenase (Cox) exist - an
endogenous form known as COx-1 and an inducible form known
as COX-2. The endogenous form is responsible for the production
the gastric mucosa and vascular endothelium. The COx-2 form of
the enzyme is produced as part of the inflammatory response and is
responsible for the production of the inflammatory prostaglandins.
The recognition of these two distinct forms of COX explains the
occurrence of side effects such as gastrointestinal bleeding and
renal failure associated with NSAID use in all species. Many
commonly used NSAIDs significantly block COX-1 rather than
COX-2, leading to a higher incidence of side effects.
 NSAIDs remain the first line of approach for many veterinarians
treating dogs with OA. Historically, the choice of drug has been
very much a matter of personal preference with aspirin,
phenylbutazone and ibuprofen all being used extensively. The
 incidence of side effects such as gastrointestinal bleeding is
variable and occurs mainly in dogs on higher than normal dose
rates. Some NSAIDs have the potential to exacerbate OA through
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
235
inhibition of proteoglycan synthesis in cartilage. In addition, by
uf pasnp a jo asn aena ad Ae a ued suaai
and therefore increase wear and tear.
Recent additions to the veterinary market under the general
category of NSAIDs and recommended, among other things, for
 the treatment of OA include ketoprophen, carprofen, meloxicam,
etodolac and tepoxalin. Ketoprophen (trade name Ketofen,
marketed by Websters) is a propionic-acid derivative NSAID
which is claimed to have more powerful anti-inflammatory activity
because it blocks both arms of the arachidonic acid breakdown
pathway. Carprofen (trade name Rimadyl, marketed by Pfizer) is
again a propionic acid derivative NSAID (similar to ketoprophen)
but in contrast, shows variable inhibition of both cyclo-oxygenase
and lipoxygenase.
The importance of CoX inhibition by carprofen continues to be a
matter of some debate. There is no doubt that carprofen is a
 powerful analgesic drug, but its effect in vitro on COX varies
significantly depending on the cell type being tested and the
species from which these cells were derived. In some studies,
carprofen seems to inhibit COX-2 selectively, while in others, the
inhibition of both COX-1 and COX-2 seems relatively weak. This
raises the possibility that carprofen may act to provide analgesia
and anti-inflammatory effects by other mechanisms, which as yet
remain unclear.
In my experience, carprofen is a very effective NSAID for the
treatment of OA, and is associated with a low level of side effects.
There has been an increased awareness of side effects caused by
carprofen recently, especially in the USA where the drug has been
used extensively. Apart from gastro-intestinal side effects, there
 sis doaap a sop o aad s e aq i see
liver toxicity while on carprofen. However, the incidence of both
types of side effects in Australia and New Zealand appears to be
much lower.
Meloxicam (trade name Metacam, marketed by Boehringer
 Ingelheim) is an oxicam NSAID which has been shown to
selectively inhibit COX-2 rather than COX-1 and therefore should
be associated with less gastrointestinal and renal side effects than
most other NSAIDs. Meloxicam offers some additional
advantages over other NSAIDs because it has a much longer
plasma half life, allowing once daily dosing rather than twice daily
which is required at least initially for most other NSAIDs.
Because it is supplied as a liquid suspension, dosing by body
236
Ch18:Management of Osteoarthritis
weight can be much more accurate, particularly in small dogs and
cats.
 Etodolac (marketed by Fort Dodge as Etogesic) has also been
marketed for dogs in Australia. It comes from the
 pyranocarboxylic acid group of NSAIDs. Studies support
Etodolac's claim to be a COX-2 selective inhibitor, and it also has
a longer plasma half-life in dogs, permitting once daily dosing.
Tepoxalin (marketed by Schering Plough as Zubrin) is a once daily
NSAID that has a unique lozenge form of administration. The
lozenge sticks readily to the oral mucous membranes and rapidly
dissolves.
Firocoxib (marketed by Merial as Previcox) is a highly COX-2
selective NSAID recently launched on the Australian veterinary
market with claims that it is the most highly selective COX-2
inhibitor of all the available NSAIDs for dogs.
We now have at least 5 effective NSAIDs registered for use in
dogs in Australia which should have reduced incidence of side
effects, thus allowing safer long-term therapy, which of course is
desirable in the management of a chronic progressive disease such
as OA. However, it is important to recognise that the potential for
serious side effects remains, and the owners of all patients on
NSAID therapy should be informed about this risk and advised to
  s  sis    n
vomiting or diarrhoea are seen. Recent research suggests that the
COX-1/COX-2 story is not really black and white - COX-2 may
also be produced by some cells constitutively and be involved in
the protection of endothelial and mucosal surfaces. This may
explain why some cases still show side effects even on these newer
COX-2 selective drugs. In addition there is some evidence
supporting a role for a new isoenzyme CoX-3.
NSAID therapy in cats is improving in Australia, with Metacam
and Tolfedine (Vetoquinol) registered for oral use in cats, albeit
for a restricted dose period. Carprofen is registered for a single
injectable dose in cats.
 Finally, be aware of the greatly increased chance of side effects
when NSAID therapy is combined with corticosteroid therapy.
This combination should be avoided.
The concept of tailoring NSAID dosage to the pattern of activity of
the patient is now being used by some veterinarians to help in
reducing the potential for side effects and to decrease the total cost
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
237
of long term therapy. This concept takes into account that for
many older arthritic animals owned by people who work long
hours the weekdays (Monday to Friday) are spent lying around
doing very litle and activity such as walks, playing etc occur only
sporadically. For these patients, administration of NSAIDs can be
limited to the days around a known period of activity (eg Friday to
Monday if weekend activity is the usual pattern) with a break from
therapy during the weekdays. The product leaflet for Tolfedine
2 ioy suisop uo paseq aq ssop u Ade1eui leo uai Buoi sisenans 
consecutive days per week. However, this form of therapy is not
compatible with our understanding of the role of regular exercise
in the overall management of joint disease (see below under
physical therapy) so pulse dosing should only be used when a
regular daily exercise program cannot be instituted.
 2.  Disease modifying osteoarthritic drugs (DMOADs):
The theories on the aetiopathogenesis of OA all concur that the
abnormal loading of articular cartilage (through a variety of
 postulated mechanisms) is a crucial step in the development of OA.
The fact that a net loss of cartilage proteoglycan occurs reflects the
fact that the ability of the chondrocytes to manufacture new matrix
 components is unable to keep pace with the rate at which the
matrix is being degraded. This is despite the fact that the
stages of OA.
It has been suggested therefore that a rational approach to drug
therapy in OA is to perfuse cartilage with molecules that slow
 down the degradative processes and suppor the biosynthetic
functions of the chondrocyte. In addition, the therapeutic agent 
should promote the synthesis of macromolecular hyaluronic acid,
 decrease synovial inflammation (if present) and relieve pain. Such
an agent would be acting to preserve the cartilage and therefore
could be termed "chondroprotective".
Although "chondroprotective drugs" was the original term coined
to describe this new group of agents, further study has shown that
some of these agents may have other effects apart from those
acting to preserve/restore cartilage matrix. To take account of this,
a new classification of therapeutic agents has now been developed
- Disease Modifying Osteoarthritic Drugs(DMOADs)
The drugs formerly referred to as chondroprotective (eg pentosan
polysulphate/Cartrophen Vet/Pentosan Vet) now are included in
the DMOADs.
238
Ch18:Management of Osteoarthritis
The only agent available in Australia and New Zealant that fits
Vet, Pentosan Vet)
PPS is a heavily-sulphated polysaccharide composed of semi-
synthetic polysulphated xylan. PPS has been shown to modify the
processes and stimulating synthesis of new matrix. PPS stimulates
HA synthesis in synovial fibroblasts in vitro.
Other claimed beneficial effects include:
 anti-inflammatory activity - inhibition of oedema and
chemotaxis of white cells (although this required much higher
dose rates than those used for clinical OA)
binds to diseased cartilage
fibrinolytic activity - through the release of plasminogen
activator from the endothelium
 antilipidaemic effects - reduces lipid and cholesterol levels in
r  ss dodn n san p s
These last two effects may be important in the improvement of
subchondral blood flow in OA, thereby reducing pain. It would
appear that PPS can legitimately claim to be chondroprotective, at
least in vitro.
Therapeutic trials using experimental models have again showed
encouraging results as for PSGAG. In a study using the cruciate-
deficient dog knee model, PPS treated joints developed less severe
OA than controls. However, when PPS was given with fibroblast
growth factor (FGF), the joints remained near normal despite the
 e q   n   s  
preventing the degradation of growth factors, thus allowing them to
better exert their stimulatory effects on chondrocytes and therefore
possibly on cartilage healing.
Clinical trials have again been conducted in an uncontrolled
manner, particularly in racing greyhounds. Results with the
systemic formulation appear to be as good as those achieved with
 PSGAG. A scientifically constructed double-blind dose response
with hindlimb stiffness/weakness due to chronic hip dysplasia and
other osteoarthritic conditions of the hindlimbs (Read et al 1996).
injection at dose rates of 0, 1, 3 or 5 mg/kg depending on treatment
group. Clinical responses were assessed weekly and again 4 weeks
after treatment ceased. The 3 mg/kg group showed significant
 improvement in the dogs ability to exercise, willingness to *get up
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
239
and go' and levels of joint pain and stiffness. My own clinical
impression from using the drug in other uncontrolled trials is that
70% of dogs with severe disability due to chronic OA respond to
pentosan polysulphate treatment. The response may be less
favourable in the early stages of OA (e.g. in the 9 month Rottweiler
with early elbow OA due to FCP). However, the results of a study
by Bouck et al (1995) comparing surgical vs PPS treatment for
elbow dysplasia suggest some benefits can be expected.
Surveys of veterinarians at meetings over the past 3 years have
shown that around 80% of practices are using Cartrophen Vet on a
regular basis for the treatment of OA. Most practitioners report
that 70% of treated dogs respond favourably, usually between 2-3
weeks after the commencement of therapy. However, there is also
    as  sd  d s n
12-24 hours of the first injection. These cases have been reported
by a number of veterinarians.
PPS remains a mainstay of the management of OA in dogs in
Australia and New Zealand after nearly 15 years on the market
Side effects are minimal and the response rate and acceptability by
both veterinarians and their clients has stood the test of time.
 3.  Nutraceuticals (oral glucosamine/chondroitin
sulphate/green lipped muscle extract etc)
These products are representative of a group of products which
appeared on the veterinary market around 10 years ago, close on
the heels of their entry into the human health market. They are
referred to as *nutraceuticals', indicating their place as somewhere
above products are marketed Cartiflex and Cosequin were the first
to enter the Australian veterinary market and were promoted as
'connective tissue supporting nutrient supplements'. Many
additional products have entered the market over the past few
years, accompanied by claims regarding the benefit of these
products and backed by scientific argument which emphasises the
role of the various components in connective tissue metabolism.
However, because they are classified by drug registration bodies as
nutritional supplements, they are not subjected to the same degree
of rigorous testing and documentation as that required for
registration of a pharmaceutical agent. It is therefore imperative to
look carefully for objective evidence of a clinically-proven
beneficial response to such products.
many health-food shop preparations marketed for relieving the
240
Ch18:Management of Osteoarthritis
 symptoms of OA, sometimes for both themselves and their pets.
Some of these are simple products with only one ingredient,
whereas others are mixtures of a large number of compounds
There seems to be two concepts behind the *'multiple-compound"
nutraceuticals:
a）
 That synergism exists between the components resulting in an
improved benefit to the patient over that achieved by the
individual components.
 b)  Simple additive benefits from the different components,
perhaps acting by different mechanisms (or influencing
 different pathways in the complex pathophysiology of OA).
Some products coming from New Zealand have incorporated
green-lipped mussel extract with glucosamine and other cartilage
matrix products, in the belief that both can play a role in managing
the signs of OA. There is no doubt that with an ageing human
 population which includes a significant proportion of people
 sa o  ru, a  p
remain up with the play in this field so that we can objectively
 advise clients of the best alternatives for treating OA in their pets.
o dn s m od an o pd o p s
 therapeutic agents is the lack of scientific evidence of efficacy
derived from well-constructed trials. Another area of concern is
quality control in manufacture. Some products are produced in
Australia from imported ingredients and in some cases concerns
have been raised about the reliability of quality control in the
country of origin of the raw ingredients.
Questions as to the efficacy of absorption of glucosamine and
chondroitin sulphate across the gastrointestinal tract barrier remain.
Some studies have detected significant plasma levels of both
glucosamine and chondroitn sulphate in dogs (Adebowale et al
2002) while other studies have questioned whether therapeutic
concentrations are ever reached in serum and synovial fluid after
oral dosage with clinically relevant doses of glucosamine to horses
(Laverty et al 2005).
Evidence for the efficacy of nutraceuticals in the relief of
symptoms of OA in both humans and animals remains equivocal. I
have spoken with many practitioners who are convinced of the
benefits of their favourite nutraceutical based on extensive
experience in uncontrolled trials within their practice. Most
veterinarians will also have friends or family members who swear
by the benefits of this type of medication for their own arthritic
ailments. Many of the early studies assessing the benefits of
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
247
nutraceuticals were poorly constructed, with a common problem
being the duration of the study was too short. The mechanism of
action of these compounds requires weeks or months to show
beneficial effects -- hence the manufacturers’ recommendation that
 dogs should be trialled for at least 2 months on a particular product
 before an assessment of the efficacy is made.
 The slow rate of change in symptoms raises another problem with
assessing the efficacy of these compounds - OA is a chronic
 progressive disease with a clinical course which is marked by
waxing and waning of clinical signs, so it is difficult to separate a
 true beneficial effect from a change in the natural course of the
disease.  There is significant interest in the medical field over a
 u p q   a a ara
 A g oi  s yo rq  si 
number of patients. The results of this study are due for release
soon.
for arthritic dogs have arrived on the market in Australia and New
 Zealand. There are two significant types of ingredients in these.
diets:
 glucosamine and chondroitin sulphate, which act the same
way as orally dispensed nutraceuticals
n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, which alter the substrates for
the arachidonic acid inflammatory cascade, resulting in a shift
consequently a reduction in synovitis in arthritic joints (Curtis
et al 2002).
 In my opinion, these diets should become an integral part of the
 management of OA in canine patients.
4.  Corticosteroids:
Corticosteroids tend not to be commonly used in pet practice
 although they are favoured by some greyhound practitioners to
help extend the racing life of a dog. The disadvantages of
intra-articular steroid therapy include:
 osteoporosis of the underlying bone,
 decreased protein and proteoglycan synthesis in cartilage
(known as steroid arthropathy)
increased chance of septic arthritis
 periarticular osseous metaplasia
steroid preparations)
242
Ch 18:Management of Osteoarthritis
overuse of the damaged joint due to pain reduction.
exacerbates cartilage lesions associated with OCD and in cases
of joint instability.
The deleterious effects of intra-articular steroids on the articular
cartilage metabolism have been questioned recently with some
studies claiming a significant reduction in cartilage damage in
treated joints, using a variety of experimental models of OA 
However, with the many other available choices of therapeutic
agents for management of OA in dogs and cats, the use of intra-
articular corticosteroids is likely to remain limited to palliation of
end-stage joint disease which is non-responsive to other therapies
 and in patients for whom surgery salvage procedures are not an
option. In addition, the morbidity associated with intra-articular
injection remains a significant barrier to this form of treatment.
PHYSICAL THERAPY -ITS ROLE IN THE MANAGEMENT OF OA
 Physical therapy is a very significant part of the management of
OA in humans. Veterinarians have probably neglected this aspect
 of the management of joint diseases in our animal patients,
justifying this neglect by claiming poor patient and owner
cooperation. While there is some validity in this excuse, many
weight loss, controlled exercise, heat/cold and massage therapy and
passive joint manipulation. In addition, specific strengthening
activities/exercises can be very beneficial to some arthritic patients.
These aspects of patient management should be discussed with
every client with encouragement to use these modalities in addition
 to the medical and surgical methods for managing OA.
The increasing recognition of the importance of physical therapy in
the management of OA in dogs is beginning to appear in the
literature in the form of clinical studies. A comparison of the post-
without post-operative rehabilitation has been published. Using
force-plate analysis of gait, the group that received rehabilitation
were shown to be weight-bearing equally on both hind limbs 6
months post surgery whereas the dogs in the group managed by
rest and exercise-restriction still showed reduced limb-function in
the operated leg (Marsolais et al. 2002).
There is other evidence of the growing recognition of the
a number of clinical problems in pets (not just OA). Tertiary
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
243
 training courses in animal physiotherapy are available in many
countries, including Australia. In some cases such as the Master of
Animal Studies at University of Queensland, the course is
produced by the School of Physiotherapy and enrolment is limited
to qualified human physiotherapists. Graduates from this Masters
program have recently established animal physiotherapy practices
in major Australian cities and are available to consult on cases,
sometimes in general practice clinics but more often by working
through surgical referral practices. Veterinarians can no longer
justifiably deny this service to their clients who are interested and
 motivated to help their arthritic pets in this way.
Potential benefits of physical therapy for the arthritic patient
include:
 Improved joint nutrition through passive joint compression
and passive and active stretching
 Stimulation of proprioception through specific balancing
exercises
Pain relief through heat/cold, acupuncture, massage, TENS
 Maintenance/restoration of range of movement by active and
passive stretching, specific exercises, trigger point therapy to
release muscles
 Strengthening exercises to provide resistance so that muscles
work a little harder
 Lifestyle management (change activities that exacerbate the
condition, address bedding etc).
Physical therapy in the perioperative period
The recognition of the importance of early mobilisation and rapid
return to weight bearing has revolutionised the post operative
management of patients undergoing joint surgery. While rest is
 important, passive mobilisation has replaced immobilisation as the
major focus for physical therapy in the perioperative period.
While medications such as opioids and NSAIDs will always play a
role in providing pain relief in the immediate postoperative period,
evidence is mounting that the consumption of these medications
decreases on average when a well-constructed physical therapy
 program is instituted.
significantly reduce postsurgical synovitis. Maintaining range of
movement using passive and active stretching can avoid the pain
and delayed return to function associated with joint contracture.
244
Ch18:Managementof Osteoarthritis
 Early ambulation limits disuse atrophy associated with extensive
periods of joint immobilisation.
SUMMARY AND KEY POINTS - TREATMENT OF OSTEOARTHRITIS:
1. The primary aim is to restore as much pain-free function as
 possible to the affected limb.
 2. DMOADs such as Cartrophen Vet may provide a satisfactory
level of improvement which avoids long term daily NSAID
therapy, and are the first line of treatment.
3. NSAID therapy can provide good results and newer
medications are associated with less side-effects. Individual
dogs respond differently to different NSAIDs so a number of
 products should be trialled in non-responding cases.
4. Despite little sound evidence to support the benefits of their
use, nutraceuticals are likely to remain very popular with a
large section of the population of pet owners and veterinarians
particularly those who have experienced benefits from their
use for their own arthritic problems.
 5. Prescription diets including those for weight reduction and
those with additives such as glucosamine and n-3 PUFA's can
 play a significant role in the overall management of joint
disease.
 6. Intra-articular corticosteroid therapy is a viable treatment for
end-stage joint disease in cases where surgery is not planned,
but is associated with significant patient morbidity of intra-
articular injection.
7. Other causes of limb dysfunction apart from joint pain (eg
proprioceptive abnormalities and myofascial pain) need to be
 ex plored in cases which fail to respond to medical therapy.
 8. Physical therapy should be encouraged as an adjunct to
medical and surgical therapies. Physical therapy has a
particularly important role to play in the perioperative period
 to assist rehabilitation following joint surgery.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
245
REFERENCES
1.  Adebowale A, Du J, Liang Z, Leslie JL, Eddington N (2002). The bioavailability and
pharmacokinetics if glucosamine hydrochloride and low moleculary weight chondroitin sulfate
after single and multiple doses to beagle dogs. Biopharmaceutics and Drug Disposition 23:
217-225.
2.  Anderson MA (1999). "Oral Chondroprotective Agents. Parts 1 and 2." Compendium on
Continuing Veterinary Education. 21: 601-609 and 861-865.
3. Curtis C, Rees S, Cramp J, Flannery C, Hughes C, Little C, et al.(2002). Effects of n-3 fatty
acids on cartilage metabolism. Proc Nutr Soc 61:381-389.
4. Laverty S, Sandy JD, Celeste C, Vachon P, Jean-Francois Marier, Plaas AHK (2005).
 n   n   sd s  n  
with oral glucosamine at clinically relevant doses. Arthritis and Rheumatism 52: 181-191.
cruciate ligament repair in dogs.J. Am. Vet Med. Assoc. 220: 1325-1330.
246
Ch 18: Management of Osteoarthritis
Chapter 19
Management and Reconstruction of Severe Soft Tissue
and Skin Deficits of the Pelvic Limb
Geraldine Hunt
Soft tissue injuries to the hind limb of dogs and cats may result
from trauma or following oncologic surgery. The feet are a
of reasons. There is little loose skin on the extremities, making
creation of local flaps problematic. The subcutaneous tissues
(largely bone and tendon) are not well vascularized, interfering
with the ability to apply free grafts to recent wounds. The presence
of specialized structures such as the digital and
metacarpal/metatarsal pads, and the necessity to preserve limb
function must also be taken into consideration. Closure of wounds
with tension often results in abnormal lymphatic drainage and
edema of the foot. Interference with cutaneous innervation leads to
parasthesias that may prompt self-trauma. Furthermore, the
s a   sss os  sd ps o as
without loss of function means that it is difficult to obtain surgical
 margins when undertaking oncologic surgery. Any reconstruction
of the distal extremity must preserve reasonable function,
otherwise the value of undertaking reconstruction is debatable.
METHODS AVAILABLE FOR RECONSTRUCTION OF THE SKIN OF THE
DISTAL LIMB
Free grafting
Free skin grafting of the distal limb may be extremely effective,
but is dependent on the presence of healthy granulation tissue
covering the deeper structures. Grafting directly onto tendon and
bone is inadvisable, as the graft is unlikely to absorb sufficient
nutrients and oxygen to survive the first few days. Free grafting is
 usually successful when performed directly onto excision sites
 proximal to the carpus and tarsus, as long as the recipient site
contains healthy, vascularized muscle. Free grafting is the
procedure of choice for reconstructing large wounds of the distal
limb when granulation is complete. Portions of the digital and
 sa ay se pdde aq oe  spd eseiedrea
weight bearing areas.
Free grafts usually take the form of a mesh graft. The area and
shape of the deficit to be covered is plotted using sterile surgical
paper, which is cut to form a template. A region of mobile skin on
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
247
the lateral thorax or flank is chosen as the donor site and excised
around the edges of the template. Care should be taken to try and
match direction of hair growth in the graft and the surrounding
limb. The donor site is closed routinely. All subcutaneous tissue is
then dissected from the skin graft, to the level of the hair follicles,
which will usually appear as dark spots in the dermis. The skin is
then meshed by making multiple small incisions with a scalpel
blade. Meshing facilitates drainage of blood from beneath the flap
and improves compliance of the skin flap with an uneven recipient
bed. The recipient bed must be clean and free of infection, with a
covering of healthy granulation tissue or healthy muscle. Free
d yo s q sp     a sa
imbibition, whereby fluid from the wound bed is absorbed,
 providing nutrients and oxygen. Linkage of capillaries within the
graft and the wound bed then occurs (inosculation), producing a
disorganized blood supply that is subsequently superseded by
organized rev ascularization.
Free grafts may also take the form of pinch or strip grafts, whereby
smaller pieces of skin are implanted into the granulation tissue bed.
 This is the mechanism by which pad tissue might be grafted.
Rotation and advancement flaps
Due to the absence of loose skin below the carpus and tarsus,
creation of local subdermal plexus flaps is difficult.
Wounds at the level of or just below the carpus may be closed
using a transposition flap or V-Y advancement flap exploiting the
loose skin of the antebrachium.
Wounds of the metatarsus may be closed using the reverse
 a   ss   d  
from the fenoral vessels in the distal thigh and travel superficially
on the medial aspect of the tibia. The saphenous artery then joins
the caudal tibial artery at the level of the calcaneus, completing an
 a e  s   s don r
occur in either an anterograde or retrograde direction, depending
 on which end of the saphenous artery is patent. If the proximal end
of the artery is ligated, blood flow occurs by way of the caudal
tibial artery in a retrograde direction, hence the description of the
axial pattern flap as a 'reverse saphenous flap".
The most useful local flaps, in the author's experience, are those
created by the phalangeal fillet technique. In this procedure, the
digit closest to the wound is sacrificed and the boney structures
removed to enable harvesting of the skin for use as an
advancement flap. The medial or lateral digits are best for this
248
Ch 19:Management & Reconstruction of Severe Soft Tissue & Skin Deficits of the Pelvic Limb
 purpose as their removal usually has minimal impact on function.
If well developed, the dew claws will also yield a reasonable
amount of skin. Care must be taken when making the incisions to
perform the fillet that blood supply to the digital skin is not
impaired and that the skin will move in the required direction.
Use of phalangeal fillet to close skin defect left after excision of an
hemangiopericytoma in a German Shepherd. The digital pad from
the filleted toe has been transposed into the defect in the
metacarpal pad.
Pouch flaps
Elevation of the distal limb and insertion into a pouch created on
the lateral thorax or flank of the dog has been utilized as a method
 of applying vascularized skin grafts. Success of this technique is
dependent on maintaining the limb in a suspended position for the
time taken for the flank skin to heal onto the limb and develop
sufficient local blood supply to permit division from its site of
origin. The author has not needed to use this technique but it is
certainly effective in the hands of others.
Tube grafts
Tube grafts may be developed on the upper limb or trunk and
gradually 'walked’ down to the defect in a sequence of procedures
whereby the tube develops a local blood supply and is then divided
from its point of origin. It is then rotated and one end sutured to a
distal location, where it is given time to develop a blood supply
 before division of the proximal end and rotation to sequentially
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
249
more distal sites. As with pouch grafts, the author has not seen it
 necessary to use this technique, however, it may be useful in some
circumstances.
Neurovascular island flap
vein and nerve has been described for treatment of animals
suffering trophic ulceration as a result of nerve injury to the upper
limb. Two dogs (a Border Collie and a Bull Terrier) seen at the
University Veterinary Centre, Sydney, had almost identical
histories of a traumatic event (falling off the back of a trailer) six
and 12 months before presentation. Temporary lameness was
noted, but no other physical abnormalities were recognized.
Lameness resolved quickly after the injury but both animals
rann pue uoisuaixaradayq ledreo piu padonaaap Auanbasqns 
of the lateral aspect of the metacarpal pad. Muscle atrophy and
sensory deficits suggestive of ulnar nerve damage were present in
both patients. An island flap, consisting of skin from the dorsal
metacarpal area, connected to a neurovascular pedicle, was
transported into the deficit on the caudo-lateral portion of the foot
in one dog. There was partial clinical response; the ulcer did not
 recur but the region had a permanently abraded appearance.
Microvascular tissue transfer
Grafting of flaps incorporating muscle and skin, skin alone, and
even omentum, have been described and are well utilized in human
medicine for reconstruction of distal limb wounds.
LIMITS OF RECONSTRUCTION
adequate function if motor innervation remains intact, and the
weight-bearing properties of the limb are preserved. This includes
integrity of the bony and ligamentous structures, muscle action and
the shock-absorbing and protective action of the pads.
Reconstruction of skin of the distal limb in the absence of pad
tissue may lead to traumatic ulceration of the weight-bearing
surface of the foot in heavier patients. Grafting the foot with haired
skin is acceptable in smaller patients and in cats, especially where
the owners are able to moderate their pet's exercise and restrict
 exposure to hard and abrasive surfaces.
There is contention amongst surgeons as to how many and which
digits must be preserved to maintain weight-bearing function.
The author has had excellent results in two cats with crush injuries
to the paws, in which all the digits were removed and the
250
Ch 19: Management & Reconstruction of Severe Soft Tissue & Skin Deficits of the Pelvic Limb
metatarsal pads preserved. Results were also good in a medium-
sized (22 kg) dog with a similar injury, in which the lateral two
digits of a hind limb were removed.
In two additional cases, an Australian Cattle Dog and a Bull
Terrier, the middle two digits of one hind limb were excised for
treatment of soft tissue neoplasms with minimal effects on
ambulation.
The author has also performed resections of soft tissue sarcomas
from the medial aspect of the metacarpus in two large breed dogs,
  s      o 
wound using phalangeal fillet of digit 2, with very good clinical 
results. Finally, a number of cases have been treated in which soft
tissue tumours of the caudal metatarsal or metacarpal area have
been removed, using subcutaneous tissue and the superficial digital
flexor tendons as a deep margin, with good functional results
PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
If the reconstruction is major and visualization is imperative, a
tourniquet is applied by wrapping multiple layers of a broad
bandage around the limb. Bandaging is commenced at the foot and
o aoeidsip oi snsren no sndrno aul aaoqe oi spieadn sassaroid
from the distal vessels. The bandage is then unwrapped or cut from
the distal limb to enable surgical access. Tourniquets should not be
left in place for more than two hours and it is the author's
anecdotal experience that animals having tourniquets applied for
s      s   
inflammation.
All animals having a tourniquet placed intraoperatively should
 be identified in some immediately recognizable way and the
unique identification not removed until the tourniquet is
removed.
 Following surgery, the tourniquet is released and a soft, absorbent,
incorporated into the bandage if required. Some surgeons like to
extend the splint beyond the toes to transfer weight-bearing to the
proximal limb until foot healing is complete. The bandage is
changed 24 hours after surgery, except in the case of free grafts,
where the bandage is not disturbed for at least 48 hours to avoid
disruption of the graft-wound bed adhesion. Once discharged from
hospital, the clients should be advised to keep the bandage clean
and dry and return the animal immediately should the bandage
become wet, smelly, or if the animal seems distressed by it.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
257
COMPLICATIONS OF FOOT RECONSTRUCTION
Complications of reconstructive surgery include wound breakdown
and infection. Self-trauma is a common event, particularly of
wounds of the feet, and steps should be taken to prevent this. Self-
trauma may result from normal surgical irritation, pain due to
lymphedema or parasthesias resulting from trauma to the sensory
nerves. Disruption to blood supply is uncommon in the forelimb,
due to the multiple sources of arterial supply, but may occur with
trauma around the hock region. Integrity of the vascular and neural
supply must always be evaluated prior to surgery for animals with
 traumatic injuries to the distal limb.
Complications arising as a result of changes in load during weight-
bearing may also be encountered. These include lameness as a
result of abnormal toe movement following disruption of the
normal webbing, and lameness as a result of fusion of adjacent
digits. Ulceration of the pads and abrasion of skin near the pads if
paw posture changes may be seen.
Complications may also be seen as a result of tourniquet
application during surgery and tight bandages following surgery.
These range from inflammation as a result of reperfusion injury to
vascular thrombosis and necrosis.
Owners should be warned of the potential disadvantages of foot
reconstruction when weighed against amputation, for instance.
Ultimately, however, the surgeon must make a decision as to
whether the risk of complications outweighs the benefits of foot
surgery and reconstruction.
REFERENCES
1.  Pavletic MM. Atlas of small animal reconstructive surgery, 2" Edn, WB Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, 1999.
2.  Swaim SF, Henderson RA. Wounds on limbs. In, Small Animal Wound Management, 2"d Edn,
Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, 1997, p 295.
252
Ch 19: Management & Reconstruction of Severe Soft Tissue & Skin Deficits of the Peivic Limb
Chapter 20
Hip Dysplasia: A Clinical Approach to Diagnosis
Mark Glyde
Canine hip dysplasia is defined as abnormal development of the
coxofemoral joint characterised by coxofemoral joint laxity or
 instability with consequent subluxation progressing to secondary
Hip dysplasia is a common cause of hind limb lameness affecting
many breeds. Certain breeds are more commonly affected than
others, as are certain lines within breeds. Larger breed dogs are
breed dogs and cats.
The aetiology of hip dysplasia is multifactorial and is not well
understood. There is a strong genetic component as well as
environmental and nutritional factors. It has a heritability index
ranging from 0.1 to 0.68. This means that 10 to 68% of the
 phenotypic variation may be atributed to genetic factors.
Coxofemoral joint laxity is the key feature in the pathogenesis of
hip dysplasia. Coxofemoral joint stability is a complex and
combined function of joint morphology, joint capsule, round
ligament, synovial fluid hydrostatic forces and dynamic muscular
forces. The cause of the laxity remains unclear.
Coxofemoral laxity results in dorsolateral subluxation of the
femoral head on weight-bearing. This concentrates loading on the
dorsal acetabular rim with consequent microfractures and cartilage
damage leading to further subluxation. Stretching of the joint
capsule leads to synovitis with release of inflammatory mediators.
Synovial fluid viscosity decreases reducing the synovial fluid
hydrostatic tension. These biomechanical and biochemical changes
are synergistic and self-perpetuating leading to worsening of the
condition and clinical manifestations of pain and lameness.
Coxofemoral joint remodelling, osteoarthritis and periarticular
Signalment, history and physical examination are an essential part
of any orthopaedic diagnosis and aid in localisation of the site of
lameness and assessment of severity. Combining these with
radiography will increase the accuracy of the diagnosis of hip
dysplasia and will provide a more accurate basis for treatment
decision making.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
253
Remember that clinical signs do not always
correlate with radiographic findings
Diagnose and treat the animal not the
radiograph
HISTORY/SIGNALMENT
The incidence of hip dysplasia is greatest in the medium, large and
giant breeds, particularly the German Shepherd, Labrador
Retriever, Golden Retriever, Saint Bernard, Rottweiler, Old
English Sheepdog, Bulldog etc. There is no apparent gender bias.
Two distinct populations of dogs are affected. The first group are
immature dogs, aged between 4 months and 12 months of age,
whose symptoms are consequent coxofemoral joint laxity. These
animals generally present with a sudden decrease in exercise
intolerance, intermittent or persistent unilateral or bilateral hind
limb lameness, difficulty rising after rest and difficulty jumping.
The cause of the pain and lameness is due to stretching of the
round ligament, acetabular microfractures, synovitis and joint
effusion.
Depending on the severity of the dysplasia, radiographic evidence
rdde saosq nsn (ara) aseasip iuo aaneauaap jo
 some time after 6 months of age.
 Clinical signs in young dogs will commonly appear to resolve at
maturity. This usually coincides with the reduction in laxity
consequent to remodelling of the coxofemoral joint and thickening
of the joint capsule.
The second group of dogs are adult animals of variable age with
evidence of chronic DID. They display progressive symptoms
similar to those seen in the younger group although stiffness after
rest is a consistent feature. Onset is usually insidious but may occur
acutely as a result of minor trauma to the abnormal joint.
 Radiographic evidence of DID is always present in these animals.
254
Ch 20: Hip Dysplasia
OBSERVATION OF GAIT
Observation of gait aids in localisation of the lameness, assessment
of severity and identification of other abnormalities. Dogs ideally
should be observed outdoors on a hard non-slippery surface at
walking and trotting pace. Abnormality in some cases may be more
easily demonstrated observing the dog over a flight of stairs, over
obstacles, or after rest following exercise. It is also useful to
observe the dog moving around the exam room while a history is
taken.
Young dogs may display a swaying or waddling or “loose" hind 
 limb gait at a walk and a bunny-hopping gait at a run or on steps.
 Older dogs will vary in gait from normal to a waddling stiff gait
with a shortened stride. At rest they may stand with the hind limbs
positioned more cranially to distribute their centre of mass more to
the forelimbs. The hind limbs may appear poorly developed
 relative to the forelimbs.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Physical examination should be performed while the animal is
conscious and repeated under general anaesthesia. Physical
examination findings will vary depending on the age of the animal
 and the presence of degenerative joint disease.
It is important to note that the clinical signs of hip dysplasia are not
  s q  sns r as n  oon
orthopaedic or neurologic diseases. A full orthopaedic examination
should be performed to rule out other possible causes of the
lameness. If you are suspicious of the possibility of neurological
disease, a neurological examination should be performed.
Immature animals will typically display poorly developed pelvic
    sxa  d  s  
hip. The normal hip should be able to be extended to
approximately 170 degrees without pain. Gluteal muscle atrophy is
usually readily palpable. If marked coxofemoral joint subluxation
is present prominence of the greater trochanter is a feature although
is often missed if the subluxation is bilateral. Crepitus is usually
 not detected in immature dogs.
Under sedation or general anaesthesia increased laxity of the hip
is usually demonstrable (see below under joint laxity).
Mature animals will usually have physical examination changes
consistent with DJD. There is a decreased range of motion of the
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
255
hip joint (extension is less than 170 degrees), often with crepitus
 apparent throughout the range of motion. Pain is apparent on 
extension of the hip. The musculature of the pelvis and thigh is
atrophied to a degree dependent on severity.
Under sedation or general anaesthesia there is usually no
 d  d      
and coxofemoral joint remodelling.
Immature dogs
Mature dogs
poorly developed hind limb
poorly developed / atrophied hind
musculature
limb musculature
 pain on extension / abduction
 pain on extension / abduction
joint laxity
 decreased range of motion
crepitus
absence of joint laxity
JOINT LAXITY
There are a number of tests for passive hip joint laxity. There is no
known method of measuring functional or weight-bearing hip joint
laxity. Testing for laxity is most relevant in immature animals
a on anp sop an u juadde ou Ansn si Aixi suon
remodelling changes associated with secondary DID.
accurate predictor of the risk of developing DJD. Breed variations
in this risk of developing DJD have also been shown between
 Rottweilers and German Shepherds. The reason for this is not
known but may be related to the greater degree of pelvic muscle
mass in Rottweilers that may limit the degree of functional laxity
that is experienced during weight-bearing. Some "normal" dogs
(approximately 10% ) with palpable hip joint laxity have been
reported to not display clinical or radiographic evidence of hip
dysplasia however (Puerto 1999).
It should be noted that palpation of laxity in puppies less than 10
weeks of age is not a reliable indicator of hip dysplasia.
 rpun pad sq si aixn s d aaissd n susa
anaesthesia. The absence of pain and the presence of muscle
relaxation allow greater sensitivity than in the conscious animal.
256
Ch 20: Hip Dysplasia
ORTOLANI SIGN
Ortolani's sign is an objective test for subluxation of the femoral
head, which implies excessive laxity of the coxofemoral joint. It
was originally developed as a test for hip laxity in human babies
and is still used in paediatric orthopaedics as a screening test.
The test can be performed with the animal in either lateral or dorsal
recumbency. Most people find having the animal in lateral
 recumbency is easier.
 If the dog is in lateral
recumbency, place
one hand over the
stifle and the other
hand dorsally over
the pelvis. Exert
 pressure proximally
up the shaft of the
femur, with the femur
parallel to the
tabletop and
 perpendicular to the
spine. Apply counter
 pressure with the hand
Ortolani test on left pelvic limb viewed from caudal 
 position. Dog is in right lateral recumbency.
over the pelvis. This
simulates weight-
bearing and if laxity is present, will subluxate the femoral head.
Gradually abduct the stifle joint, maintaining the force directed
 proximally up the shaft of the femur. If laxity is present a distinct
"clunk" will be felt and possibly heard when the femoral head
 reduces into the acetabulum.
The angle of the femur from the horizontal or sagittal plane when it
reduces is known as the angle of reduction.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey,Proc.No.363
257
Dysplastic hip
Dysplastic hip.
Dorsally directed
Dorsallydirected
forcewithabduction
force results
ofthestiflejointresults
in subluxation
in reduction of the
femoral head
Reverse the procedure by adducting the stifle joint. A “clunk" will
be felt when the femoral head subluxates from the acetabulum.
This is known as the Barlow Sign. The angle of the femur from the
horizontal when it subluxates is known as the angle of
subluxation.
BARDENS' SIGN("HIP LIFT TEST)
Bardens’ sign should be tested with the dog in lateral recumbency.
Stand behind the dog and place one hand over the pelvis with the
thumb of that hand on the greater trochanter of the femur. Place the
other hand cranially around the proximal femur and apply lateral
pressure to the femur while keeping it parallel to the tabletop.
Normal hip joints should have a few millimetres of laxity.
Movement of more than 5-6mm is a positive Bardens'sign.
 Bardens reported an accuracy of 83% in predicting dysplasia in
 puppies evaluated with this test at six to eight weeks of age. Most
of this age is not a reliable predictor of hip dysplasia. Bardens’ sign
is a subjective test that relies on considerable practice to achieve a
high degree of accuracy. The Ortolani sign is less subjective than
the Bardens’ sign in that it is either present or absent. Most
clinicians find Ortolani's sign more useful than Bardens' sign.
RADIOGRAPHY
Radiography is an essential and relatively reliable aid in the
diagnosis of and treatment decision making in hip dysplasia.
Reliance on radiography as the primary determinant in diagnosis
258
Ch 20: Hip Dysplasia
and treatment decision making rather than as an aid may lead to
errors. At eight months of age 60 - 70% of dysplastic dogs show
radiographic evidence of hip dysplasia. At one year of age 80% of
dogs with hip dysplasia will have radiographic evidence of the
condition.
Coxofemoral subluxation is considered to be one of the earliest
radiographic indicators of hip dysplasia. At least 50-60% of the
femoral head should be medial to the dorsal acetabular rim.
Secondary changes include acetabular and femoral head and neck
remodelling, acetabular sclerosis, filling of the acetabular fossa
with osteophytes and periarticular osteophytes.
The standard radiographic view is an extended ventrodorsal view.
This remains the most widely used radiographic projection for hip
dysplasia and can reliably detect moderate to severely affected
 dogs. It lacks sensitivity for detection of hip dysplasia in younger
animals and lacks sensitivity for detection of joint laxity.
Sensitivity increases with age and the most reliable age for
detection of hip dysplasia has been reported to be 2-3 years. An
 orthogonal lateral view should also be obtained.
dysplasia. 1 = wedging / incongruency in cranial 1/3, 2 = flattening of cramial acetabular edge, 3 =
 Osteophytes in acetabular fossa
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
259
The University of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program
(PennHIP) method uses static distraction to produce passive hip
laxity which is quantified as the distraction index (a ratio of
lateral femoral head displacement divided by the femoral head
radius). The distraction index may be compared with a breed
standard and the “risk" of an individual dog developing DJD can
be calculated. This method has been reported to be reliable in dogs
from four months of age. Dogs with an index less than 0.3 rarely
 develop radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis.
Modified distraction methods also exist (Farese et al 1998,
Fluckiger et al 1999) and the relative benefits of the three
distraction methods is controversial.
Dynamic ultrasonographic measurement of passive joint laxity has
been reported in six to eight week old puppies (O'Brien et al 1997)
although is not considered to be currently reliable (Adams et al
2000).
ARTHROSCOPY
Arthroscopic assessment of the coxofemoral joint has been
 dogs as providing more sensitive diagnostic information than
available through radiography (Cook 2005, Holsworth 2005),
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Differential diagnoses for hip dysplasia include both orthopaedic
 and neurologic diseases and vary depending on the age group.
 Immature dogs
Mature dogs
·Panosteitis
 Cruciate disease
Cruciate disease
Patella luxation
Patella luxation
Polyarthropathy
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
 Neoplasia
 OCD of the stifle or hock joints
 Neurologic disease
 Neurologic disease
*
Degenerative myelopathy
*
Lumbosacral disease
*
Disc disease
Spinal tumours
260
Ch 20: Hip Dysplasia
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.  ADAMS, W. M., DUELAND, R. T., MEINEN, J., O'BRIEN, R. T., GIULIANO, E. &
NORDHEIM, E. V. (1998) Early detection of canine hip dysplasia: Comparison of two
palpation and five radiographic methods. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
34,339-347
2.  ADAMS, W. M., DUELAND, R. T., DANIELS, R., FIALKOWSKI, J. P. & NORDHEIM, E.
V. (2ooo) Comparison of two palpation, four radiographic and three ultrasound methods fol
early detection of mild to moderate canine hip dysplasia. Veterinary Radiology & Ultrasound
41, 484-490
 3. COOK JL. (2005) Arthroscopic Assisted Decision Making In TPO. Proceedings of 2005
ACVS Congress, San Diego, USA. pp 297-298
 4. COUGHLAN, A. (1996) Decision making in the management of canine hip dysplasia. In
Practice 18, 2-8
5. FLUCKIGER, M. A, FRIDRICH, G. A. & BINDER, H. (1999) A radiographic stress
technique for evaluation of coxofemoral joint laxity in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 28, 1-9
6.  HOLSWORTH IG, SCHULZ KS, KASS PH, SCHERRER WE, BEALE BS, COOK JL,
HORNOFF WJ. (2005; in press) Arthroscopic correlation to radiographic findings in canine
juvenile hip arthroscopy. Veterinary Surgery
7.  KEALY, R. D., LAWLER, D. F, BALLAM, J. M., LUST, G., SMITH, G. K., BIERY, D. N. &
  og  o s   ( t ' o
development of osteoarthritis in coxofemoral joints of dogs. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 210, 222-225
8.  LUST, G., TODHUNTER, R. J., ERB, H. N., DYKES, N. L., WILLIAMS, A. J., BURTON-
WURSTER, N. 1. & FARESE J. P. (2001) Comparison of three radiographic methods for the
diagnosis of hip dysplasia in eight-month-old dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association 219, 1242-1246
9.  MEOMARTINO, L., FATONE, G., POTENA, A. & BRUNETTI, A. (2002) Morphometric
assessment of the canine hip joint using the dorsal acetabular rim view and the centre-edge
angle. Journal of Small Animal Practice 43, 2-6
       n       
Veterinary Medical Association 210, 1446-1450
11. O'BRIEN, R. T., DUELAND, R. T., ADAMS, W. C. & MEINEN, J. (1997) Dynamic
ultrasonographic measurement of passive coxofemoral joint laxity in puppies. Journal of the
American Animal Hospital Association 33, 275-28 1
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
267
12. POPOVITCH, C.A., SMITH, G.K., GREGOR, T.P. AND SHOFER, F.S.(1995): Comparison
of susceptibility for hip dysplasia between Roftweilers and German Shepherd Dogs. JAVMA,
206 (5), 648-650.
13. PUERTO DA et al. (1999) Relationships between results of the Ortolani method of hip joint
 palpation and distraction index, Norberg angle and hip score in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
214:497.
14. SLOCUM, B. & DEVINE, T. (1990) Dorsal acetabular rim radiographic view for evaluation of
the canine hip. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 26, 289-296
15. SMITH, G. K., BIERY, D. N. & GREGOR, T. P. (1990) New concepts of coxofemoral joint
stability and the development of a clinical stress-radiographic method for quantitating hip joint
laxity in the dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 196, 59-70
16. SMITH, G. K. (1997) Advances in diagnosing canine hip dysplasia. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 210, 1451-1457
262
Ch20:HipDysplasia
Chapter 21
Early Intervention for Hip Dysplasia
Anthony Black
 saa pu xaid si iseshp d go ja a so
understanding of the pathogenesis. Hip dysplasia was first
described by Schnelle GB 'in the mid 1930's and was defined by
Henricson et al' in 1966 as a varying degree of laxity of the hip
joint permitting subluxation during early life, giving rise to varying
degrees of shallow acetabulum and flattening of the femoral head,
 and finally inevitably leading to osteoarthritis. These authors
stated:
"Joint laxity as the causal factor of hip
 dysplasia is firmly established'.
Hip dysplasia is an inherited disease. The heritable nature has
been recognised and studies demonstrate a polygenetic inheritance
(Multiple genes [number of genes is unknown] spread throughout
the genome), which is continuously changing. Willis? in 1989
summarised the results of a number of breeding programs and
concluded that in various dog populations, between 64 and 81% of
the progeny of normal dogs (based on standard radiographic
examinations) would be normal and between 19-36% would be
dysplastic, whereas 17-37% of the progeny of dysplastic dogs 
would be normal and between 63 and 93% would be dysplastic.
Canine hip dysplasia is classed as a developmental, multifactorial
disorder and as such, the expression of the disease (phenotype) is
influenced by both genetic heritage, breed and environmental
factors, (primarily nutrition). The architecture of the newborn hip
joint is genetically predetermined. The osseous and soft tissue
components of the hip, which are normal at birth, develop under
the influence of multiple genetic, environmental and biomechanical
factors. Early developmental findings of hip dysplasia, including
joint laxity and coxofemoral anatomical changes, have been
documented within 2 weeks of birth. Some of the other
 environmental factors established as important are size of the dog
( q d u nn)  mo s 
THE ROLE OF NUTRITION
The relationship between growth rate and the associated weight of
the dog has been shown to influence canine hip dysplasia
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
263
phenotype (Kealy* and Lust'). The exact mechanism of the dietary
effect on the development of the hip joint is unknown, although
greater wear of cartilage would be expected in heavier dogs with
incongruency of the joint.
 Overfeeding in the early growth period (first 6 months) has been
shown to shorten the time to first appearance and the severity of
hip dysplasia. (Corley* and Lust *) In addition, in a controlled
study, limited food consumption fed between the ages of 6 weeks
and 2 years has been shown to reduce the frequency and severity of
HD in Labradors (Kealy*) and this has been shown to be generally
true, throughout the life of these dogs.
Longer-term studies, primarily assessing the beneficial effect of
lean body weight on longevity (25% less food intake fed from 8
weeks to end of life, compared to normal intake) have also shown
the following findings:
Hip joint laxity (measured by serial radiographs) could be
significantly reduced by feeding 25% less over a 2 year period
when comparing the two groups, each of 24 Labradors (Kealy * et
al 1992)
The severity of osteoarthritis (measured radiographically) ws
to severe coxofemoral osteoarthritis (OA) was present in 43% of
the control dogs, compared with 9% among the lean fed dogs' In
addition, as the dogs were followed until their end of life, thirty-
five of the 43 dogs that developed osteoarthritis (19 in the
controlled feeding group and 16 in the restricted feeding group)
eventually required treatment. There was also a significant
difference in the age at which treatment was necessary. The mean
age to which 50% of the dogs survived without long term treatment
for OA was 10.3 years for the restricted group compared with 13.3
 years for the control group&.
In addition , weight reduction in adult dogs with clinical signs of
hip pain (dogs were fed a weight reduction diet providing only 60
% of the needed calories to maintain current weight) has been
shown to have a beneficial effect on reducing the severity of
symptoms of hip osteoarthritis. 
Hip joint laxity does not seem to be affected directly by dietary
energy levels and no statistically significant effect was noted on
the incidence of hip dysplasia when carbohydrate as a source of
energy was included or excluded from an otherwise nutritionally
balanced diet. Other than when overall food consumption is
264
Ch 21:Early Interventions forHip Dysplasia
reduced by restricted intake, dietary energy has minimal to no
influence on the production or prevention of hip dysplasia
Similarly, a high protein intake has not been proven to influence
the development of the hip joint.
It has, however, been shown that there is an association between a
reduction in the electrolytes Na+, K+ and Cl- in food and a
reason for this reduction has not been shown, but suggested that it
 may be related to lowering joint fluid osmolality to.
It is imperative that juveniles be fed with a diet, which is
 adequately balanced and suitable for their rapid growth. In
general, puppy foods for large breed dogs should be assessed on
their nutritional balance and a low calorie diet should be chosen.
 Diets, which are promoted as being beneficial for the treatment/
lou sop nnpe oi pan isq are 'soiso yo juaue
juveniles.
THE ROLE OF HIP JOINT LAXITY.
Hip dysplasia can be experimentally induced by the administration
of oestrogens and cutting the muscles of the hip joint.
The precise pathogenesis of laxity of the canine hip remains
unknown but laxity and degenerative changes are worsened by
overfeeding.
A developmental disorder of connective tissue is supported by the
findings that the ratio of collagen II: I in the hip joint capsules of
adult hip dysplasia free greyhounds differs significantly from
breeds commonly affected with hip dysplasia. The difference
 (x   a d i  s
dysplastic dogs. Adult dysplastic dogs were shown to have a
significantly higher Collagen 111:1 ratio than greyhounds,
although conversely there was no difference in the collagen ratio of
these dogs when compared to non dysplastic dogs of the same
breed "'.
 Joint laxity (sub luxation) has been recognised as a constant factor
 of hip dysplasia in the juvenile and can be measured by palpation
(Ortolani sign) or stress radiographs
 Hip joint laxity usually but not always results in progressive
degenerative joint disease, and in general, the greater the laxity,
the greater the severity of OA later in life.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
265
The degree of laxity of the hip joint (assessed by the PennHip'6
Distraction Index [DI]) in the juvenile at 4 months of age has been
shown to relate to the severity of degenerative joint disease in the
24-month-old dog. The 16-week laxity determination was
predictive of joint laxity later in life and in general, passive hip
joint laxity has been shown to be the primary risk factor for
 developing degenerative joint disease (DJD) when assessed using a
distraction- radiography technique to calculate a distraction index
(DI) $2.53. Disease susceptibility (based on DI) was also shown to
be breed specific in this assessment of 15,742 dogs'3. For 
example, German Shepherds were more susceptible for developing
radiographic evidence of DJD than Labradors, Golden Retrievers
and Rottweiler breeds with the same degree of laxity. The reason
that some breeds develop more radiographically evident
 degenerative hip joint disease than others is unclear but suggested
to be due to conformational differences between breeds.". It was
suggested that the *folded up"' stance of the german shepherd and
the lower muscle mass may permit greater transfer of passive to
functional laxity during weight bearing, in turn increasing stresses
on the joint cartilage .
Some breeds of dog, particularly giant breeds seem to also tolerate
hip joint laxity and probably degenerative joint disease later in life
than others. This may relate to their “relatively sedentary existence
" or greater pain tolerance.
 In addition, hip joint laxity, as measured by the Ortolani test and
quantitated by measuring the hip reduction angle, has a strong
o se tie ass d aaaqns a e s t ie n
age in the German shepherd'2. However, neither the hip reduction 
angle or the DI measured at 4 months of age in Labradors were
strong predictors of the presence of osteoarthritis (measured
radiographically by standard VD extended view) or the subjective
hip score( subluxation and degree of OA on standard VD
radiographs) at 12 months of age. 13 In the same study , the
measurement of the degree of subluxation (hip reduction angle) has
been shown to be accurate between observers, and the electronic
goniometer was more accurate than manual measurement.
Many surgical treatments are aimed at reducing hip laxity by
altering the biomechanics during the first 9 months, prior to the
onset of degenerative joint disease. Recently, pubic
symphysiodesis from the age of 3 months has been shown to
improve the dorsal coverage of the femoral head as a result of
increased acetabular ventroversion. The early detection of hip
dysplasia must be a priority in treatment.
266
Ch 21:Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
 Early diagnosis and appropriate education of all available options
is important in satisfying the requirements of our clients,
particularly with the potential role of juvenile pubic
symphysiodesis and triple pelvic osteotomy in reducing the
 severity of degenerative joint disease.
DIAGNOSIS.
Physical examination is very important in establishing the severity
of hip dysplasia in the young dog. Abnormalities of gait should be
 assessed at the walk and run. Classic severe signs such as "bunny
hopping " will not be seen in the consultation room. Mild
 generalised muscle atrophy may be difficult to detect when
bilateral. The thigh muscles, particularly the biceps and gluteals
atrophy more than the quadriceps as the disease progresses and is
pusy au umop suyooi pue sop aul reao supuis Aq panalap isaq
leg when the animal is standing.
The degree of laxity both when awake and anaesthetised
coupled with the presence or absence of restricted range of
motion and crepitus influence clinical judgement and the
choice of the appropriate treatment.
A complete orthopaedic and neurological examination of the
hindquarters is required to rule out other diseases causing abnormal
gait.
The hip should be examined for full extension, flexion and
abduction. Full extension of the dysplastic hip most frequently
elicits pain. Laxity in severe cases may be palpated by simply
rocking the dog from side to side with the hands held over the
region of the greater trochanters. The absence of pain and or laxity
when awake obviously does not rule out hip dysplasia and all
animals presented with gait abnormalities should be palpated under
general anaesthesia or heavy sedation. Radiographs should always
be performed.
ORTOLANI SIGN.
 The Ortolani sign is a subjective, physical palpation method to
detect laxity and must be performed under anaesthesia to improve
accuracy. Hip joint laxity can be determined by this reliable,
simple palpation method. A positive finding confirms coxofemoral
subluxation in dogs, prior to restriction in movement by
periarticular fibrosis and degeneration of the joint. Laxity can be
 oa  d s
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
267
The amount of laxity (as measured by the distraction index (DI)
 measurement of the PennHip method) measured at 6-10 and 16-18
weeks old is the most accurate objective predictor of later
 development of DJD. Distraction index radiography at this age
is the most reliable predictor of hip dysplasia. The Ortolani
technique is, however, also an accurate method of predicting hip
 dysplasia but it is related to the age of the patient (increasing age
 increases the likelihood of degenerative joint disease, joint capsule
fibrosis and a resultant lowering of the likelihood of a positive
 Ortolani sign). Puerto DA et al VCOT 1998 assessed 459 dogs
over a 6 year period (1991-1997) and reported that the Ortolani
sign had a significant linear relationship with the magnitude of
measurement of passive hip laxity by Dl. However, wide variation
of DI measurement in the Ortolani groups made it difficult to
 predict the DI for individual dogs from hip palpation. The
quantitative measurement of the Ortolani method by use of the
 dorsal acetabular slope measurement and the hip reduction angle
measured with an electronic goniometer at 6 months of age have
been shown to be the most accurate method of predicting the
development of hip dysplasia in one study of 49 guide dogs
(Labradors and Bernese Mountain dogs) followed between 6
months and 24 months's. Eastley 14 also showed a strong
  s t  l    a s
 DI at 4 and 12 months of age in the German shepherd breed.
 Rutland et al′2 (2003) in the same group of dogs as Eastley
the subjective hip score at 4 years of age. Further study by Corfield
et al I3 in Labradors has shown that the Ortolani sign has a
significant inter-examiner repeatability for HRA, the electronic
measurement (goniometer) was more accurate than a manual
method of measurement and there was a strong correlation between
DI and HRA in this breed.
In one study48, Ortolani and Bardens tests have a high false
negative rate in young pups (6-10 week old and 16-18 week old
 puppies) Ortolani false positive rates, however, are low at these
ages. A positive Ortolani test at these ages is abnormal. In the 6-
month-old dog, as the angle of reduction increases, so does the
likelihood of degenerative joint disease at 24 months of age.
 The detection of laxity is an important finding in selecting cases
for surgical correction in juveniles and the assessment must also
 consider the radiographic changes.
The Ortolani procedure must be performed under general
anaesthesia. The dog is placed in lateral or dorsal recumbency.
With the dog in dorsal recumbency, the femur is held
268
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
 perpendicular to the spine. Whilst holding the opposite femur to
steady the dog, push down on the stifle to subluxate the joint. The
femur is then moved laterally whilst maintaining downward
pressure. As the joint is reduced [HRA]( you will palpate a
"'clunk" or grating as the femoral head rides over the dorsal
acetabular edge. Grating or crepitus may indicate degeneration of
 the dorsal acetabular rim and is helpful in your clinical appraisal if
the radiographs are normal. Microfractures in the acetabular rim
 and degeneration of the cartilaginous labrum are considered to be
causes of pain in young dogs and these will not be detectable
radiographically. The severity or degree of subluxation can be
 assessed from this manoeuvre.
A negative Ortolani sign does not rule out hip dysplasia,
absence of palpable laxity in adults may be due to periarticular
fibrosis or the joint may be subluxated and unable to be reduced.
 In addition, inadequate technique or depth of anaesthesia may yield
a negative result.
 Both Ortolani and stress hip radiographs must be performed to
 accurately assess hip joint laxity.
RADIOGRAPHY
The most important diagnostic criteria in canine hip dysplasia are
subluxation, shallowness of the acetabulum and degenerative joint
disease of the acetabulum and the femoral head. Some or all of
It is very important to understand that the standard (V-D view)
 patient positioning for the radiographic diagnosis of hip dysplasia
 may result in the elimination of joint laxity and lead to a false
 negative diagnosis, in the absence of degenerative changes of the
hip joint. The necessity to palpate for laxity as part of the complete
examination must be stressed in light of this fact. The standard
radiographic method (Extended VD view) has been shown to be
reasonably diagnostic in its accuracy (92-95%) but only after 2
years of age, when evidence of degenerative joint disease is likely
to appear. Stress radiographic techniques such as PennHIPl6,
Fluckiger et al' and Farese et al '8, which are more accurate in the
detection coxofemoral laxity, should be used. These methods,
permit a quantitative measurement of this laxity and have been
ad ut eisedsap d upp jo sisou a u ssisse oi pasiap
dogs and breeding stock. These stress radiographic measurement
techniques have been designed because of the inaccuracy of the
standard extended VD view. When the hip is placed in full
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
269
extension (standard V-D position) there is a spiral tightening of the
joint capsule resulting in reduction of joint laxity. Maximal joint 
laxity is considered to occur when the limb is in neutral weight
bearing position and hence this is the position used in the stress
radiographic techniques. A quantitative assessment of laxity
(relative displacement of femoral head centre from acetabular
centre) is used in conjunction with these techniques as an objective
 measure of joint congruity.
Dogs with a DI value of 0.30 or lower are truly hip dysplasia
negative. Contrary to this, however, is the fact that not all dogs
with DI > 0.30 develop degenerative joint disease for the reasons
already discussed in relation to breed specificity. The Fluckiger
method (SI index) may be as accurate as the PennHip method in
equipment. All of these techniques require accuracy and an
understanding of the exact procedure.
It is imperative that excellent radiographic technique be used to
detect early signs of degenerative joint disease, which may
 preclude the option of surgical osteotomies.
The severity of degenerative joint disease assessed
radiographically does not correlate with the severity of clinical
signs.
TREATMENT
 and surgical options and when best to use each for an individual
 patient.
We need to be aware of what is expected from the conservative
treatment of young medium and large breed dogs with hip
dysplasia, prior to recommending a surgical procedure with which
it must be compared.
There are surprisingly few studies, which have recorded the
conservative management of immature dysplastic dogs. Barr et al
with clinical and radiographic evidence of hip dysplasia. They had
follow up information on 50 dogs over a 10 year period.  At the
p pn y   sop ai 'dn moy yo a
radiographic evaluation. Seventeen of the 19 dogs showed either
authors commented that as normal walking and trotting does not 
 necessitate a full, pain free range of hip movement, simple
270
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
subjective gait assessment might not be a particularly sensitive test
 of overall joint function. Of the 19 dogs subjected to a full clinical
examination, 63% exhibited no discomfort even on forced
extension of the hip and 79% had a normal range of motion.
 Smith GK et al2° reported on 7 dogs treated conservatively, with 
follow up ranging from 8 months to 6 years after the diagnosis of
severe hip dysplasia. They were assessed by orthopaedic
examination and radiographs. Six dogs had clinically normal gaits
 and range of motion of the hip joint. Four dogs had no pain on hip 
 during the period of follow up.
canine hip dysplasia is between 7% and 35%. One hundred and
sixteen military working dogs were studied over their working life
and the cause of death and loss of working time was calculated 2.
Of the 116 dogs, 22 (19%) had signs of hind limb lameness, which
required treatment. Fifteen (12.9%) were euthanased because of
this lameness and inability to work because of hip dysplasia.
38/116 dogs (32.8%) were mildly dysplastic and of these 17
(44.7%) each developed a moderate to severe degenerative hip
joint disease. Six (35.3% )of these 17 dogs were euthanased as a
result of their lameness. 19/116 (16.4%) were moderately
dysplastic with 12 (63.2%) each developing a moderate to severe
degree of DJD. 8 of these 12 dogs ((66.7%) were euthanased as a
result of their lameness. Interestingly, there was no difference in
the number of months worked when comparing normal to
dysplastic dogs in this study.
nu Aueu noy Aouapuan pnu e aq oi sreadde areu
 dysplastic dogs to overcome acute hip pain as they mature. This
may in part be due to the development of fibrosis of the joint
 capsule and acetabular remodelling which increases stability.
Healing of micro fractures of the acetabulum, may also contribute
 to a reduction in pain.
 There can be a natural tendency for spontaneous improvement in
clinical signs as animals mature. The veterinarian must inform
clients of this fact and take into account the age, the severity of the
clinical signs and the use of the dog when recommending treatment
options.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
271
 Examination of puppies considered to be high-risk breeds for hip
dysplasia, at 2-3 months of age should be considered for proactive
clients. Palpation, and radiographs under anaesthesia or sedation is
recommended. Owners should be given the option of an early
 evaluation of their dogs' hips
THE ROLE OF NSAIDS IN THE TREATMENT OF HIP DYSPLASIA IN THE
JUVENILE.
Many dogs with hip dysplasia exhibit little or no gait abnormalities
and many show lile hip joint pain on examination. The
observation of lameness and clinical signs obviously varies
significantly between owners.
In my ex perience, the worst period of clinical signs ( pain) in the
juvenile is the 6 to 12 months age period. This is the period of
acute inflammation, which differs from the chronic inflammatory
 process in intensity, pathology and often the response to therapy.
The acute inflammatory response in the young dog coincides with
 increased exercise and growth and is reflected in the pathology of
the joint where there may be early cartilage degradation,
ligamentous injury and maximal inflammatory process (synovitis).
 With increasing age, during this period, the incongruent joint
remodels with bone deposition and resorption typical of secondary
degenerative joint disease. The rate of change varies between dogs
significantly. The acetabulum changes from the normal spherical
shape and becomes shallow and elongated in the classic
 degeneration of hip dysplasia. This process, in general, continues if
incongruity is not corrected. Anti-inflammatory drugs may be of
benefit in alleviating pain during this period.
There are many NSAIDs on the market. All have been tested and
labelled as suitable for use in dogs as young as 10 weeks except
tepoxalin (Zubrin), which, is listed in the prescription leaflet as not 
having been evaluated in dogs under 6 months of age. In my
experience, it is very rare for dogs with hip dysplasia to show
 painful hip joints less than 3 months of age, but some will be
 painful between 3 and 6 months of age.
NSAIDs need to be effective as antiinflammatory and analgesic
agents and have minimal systemic side effects including any
deleterious effect on articular cartilage. This latter effect, if any,
becomes important if young dogs are being treated for significant
periods of time for hip pain.
272
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
 The actions of NSAIDs within articular cartilage occur
independently of any action on cyclooxygenase(COX) and matrix
 turnover appears unrelated to prostaglandin levels within cartilage.
In vitro and ex vivo studies have demonstrated that NSAIDs have
the potential to inhibit proteoglycan synthesis in a concentration
 dependent fashion. This action is most likely due to a direct action
on the chondrocyte. Some human NSAIDs (aspirin,
shown side effects of accelerated canine cartilage degeneration by
inhibition of cartilage synthesis and these effects are particularly
relevant in long term treatment. These effects have been associated
with a reduction in proteoglycans and synovial fluid.
 There are no published studies of the effect of NSAIDs on juvenile
articular cartilage.
Of all the clinical trials in the public domain, the youngest animal
tested for cartilage effects in osteoarthritic models was
approximately one year. Carprofen has been loosely classed as
chondroneutral. The results of carprofen studies 2 23
on the
 morphological changes to cartilage and subchondral bone together
with those of in vitro studies on its effect on glycoaminoglycan
(GAG) production by canine cartilage explants by Benton
indicates that this side effect is dose dependent and unlikely to
occur when carprofen is used at therapeutic levels to treat
 osteoarthritis. Carprofen has been shown to stimulate GAG
synthesis at therapeutic levels. Very limited data, however, exists
for other canine registered NSAIDs. The effect of Meloxicam on
canine proteoglycan metabolism and GAG synthesis (in vitro and
 ex vivo) has been studied 2 and in one report showed no inhibitory
effect on its synthesis, when given at 0.2 mg/kg on only three
occasions 8 hours apart.
Recent evidence has shown that some NSAIDS also have an effect
on bone and soft tissue healing. Prostaglandins are important
regulators of bone metabolism and in bone, osteoblasts appear to
 promotes bone formation 2?. Historically, conventional NSAIDs,
such as ibuprofen, aspirin and indomethacin have a deleterious
effect on bone healing by reducing callus strength, but some
 NSAIDs have a positive effect on soft tissue healing by stimulating
collagen synthesis and can increase strength in the early phases of
repair during skin and ligament healing. There is significant debate
in the literature about the effect of COX 2 inhibitors on bone
healing. COX 2 specific inhibitors celecoxib and valdecoxib have,
however, been shown to have no effect on fracture healing in
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
273
 animal studies 27, 28. It appears that the early effects on fracture
healing are drug dependent. It is unclear if these effects are
relevant in the treatment juvenile hip dysplasia.
It is wise to use NSAIDs in the juvenile with precaution and on an
as needed basis.
Chondroprotective agents or disease modifying osteoarthritic drugs
(DMOAD) such as pentosan polysulphate (Cartrophen) and
polysulphated glycosaminglycans (Adequan, no longer available in
Australia) have been shown to be experimentally and clinically
effective in retarding the degradation of articular cartilage and have
the potential to improve chondrocyte metabolism (proteoglycan
    s      is
the progression of osteoarthritis.
The role of these drugs in the juvenile with hip dysplasia is,
however, limited. Laxity of the hip joint is most likely to negate
 any effect that the drug may have on cartilage metabolism. The
drugs may have a positive effect once stability has been achieved
juvenile pubic symphysiodesis.
THE ROLE OF NEUTROCEUTICALS
The role of chondroitin sulphate and glycosamine for the treatment 
of osteoarthritis in humans is at best speculative. Proponents of
their use suggest that these drugs stimulate proteoglycan synthesis
inflammation. These contentions have never been proven and
advocates of their use have not presented scientifically documented
explanations of their effects in humans. Having said this,
 McAlindon et al 29 assessed the scientific quality of controlled
clinical studies on the effects of chondroitin sulfate and
glucosamine in humans with osteoarthritis and performed a meta-
analysis of fifteen studies that met specific criteria. They
 concluded that glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate improve
function and relieve pain more effectively than placebos do but
noted that the magnitude of effects is marginal. Additional studies
also support these results .
The role of these drugs in the juvenile with hip joint laxity is likely
to be negated by the laxity itself but the true effecacy of these
drugs in the juvenile canine hip dysplastic patient is unknown.
274
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
SURGICAL TREATMENT.
Making decisions about the surgical treatment of hip dysplasia
requires an understanding of the following Client, Patient and
Surgical factors. The veterinarian must consider all of these
factors during consultation with owners of young at risk canine
breeds. Having a suitable handout about canine hip dysplasia to
 give to clients during the consultation can help with this process of
inquiry and dissemination of information.
Client factors
1.
 The client's financial status.
2.
 The intended use of the dog. Pet versus show versus working
dog.
3.
The ability of the client to care for the dog in consideration of
the suggested method of treatment. This requires a
consideration of the presence of other pets in the household,
which may interfere with recovery post operatively. The
capacity of the owner to confine the patient. The presence of
of the patient post op. The type of house, in consideration of
 postoperative confinement.
4.
 The acceptance or willingness to have surgery versus
conservative care.
5.
 The owners interest in considering a proactive evaluation at a
young age.
The clients level of understanding or prior experience with the
disease.
Patient factors
1.
 The age of the patient at presentation. The age in part
determines the possibility of a treatment choice.
2.
The breed of the dog. High risk large breed dogs should be
du puaoai pinom I -aissod se Kea se pauxa
palpation and stress radiograph examination at 8 -12 weeks of
age for keen clients. Remember that small breeds simply have
a lower incidence of clinical signs of hip dysplasia.
 The nature of the dog/breed. How difficult is it going to be to
keep a crazy Labrador quiet in the postoperative stage for
example?
4.
The presence of other abnormalities. Consideration must be
given to the presence/ likelihood of elbow dysplasia in high-
risk breeds such as Labrador, Golden retriever, Rottweiler
where a high incidence of both hip dysplasia and elbow
dysplasia exists.
 5.  The severity of the clinical signs.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
275
Surgical factors
The decision of the surgical procedure of choice requires an
 understanding of the nature of the procedure and its results and
complications. The ultimate decision is based on a consideration
 of all of the above factors. This is most likely to be a decision
made by a specialist surgeon.
SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR DOGS WITHOUT DEGENERATIVE JOINT
DISEASE.
Canine juvenile pubic symphysiodesis. (JPS)
An experimental study by Mathew KG, et al 30 in 1996, revealed
significant narrowing of the caudal aspect of the pelvis, narrowing
and shortening of the pubic bones and outward rotation of the
acetabulae. The result of the pubic fusion is greater dorsal
coverage of the femoral head. It was considered likely that this
effect would have a positive effect in improving hip joint
33 have demonstrated a similar effect in the immature canine pelvis.
 proven superior to the use of staples. This outward rotation of the
acetabulae results in a similar effect to pelvic osteotomy of the
degree of rotation of the acetabulum is naturally time dependent on
the growth of the pelvis. The younger the patient at the time of the
 procedure, the greater the effect.
 pn sdnd a u ele  s aaodsd 
12-24 weeks of age at the time of JPS surgery and followed until
137 weeks of age has shown:
 The pubis fused in all treated puppies.
 Greater acetabular rotation was related to surgery at younger
ages.
$1
The procedure was not beneficial for dogs older than 24 weeks
 at the time of surgery.
There was minimal surgical morbidity.
There was significant ventrolateral acetabular rotation and
 increased acetabular coverage as measured by acetabular angle
and dorsal acetabular rim angle.
There was diminished hip joint laxity measured by Ortolani
test, stress radiography (Distraction index and Norberg angle)
 d q pansa se julxa sim touny n o
pain, range of motion and gait analysis (force plate analysis)
276
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
 Patricelli AJ et al 3 2002 reported on 18 puppies in a randomised
old puppies with hip dysplasia. 6 dogs were operated in each
group with 3 sham surgeries in each group. All puppies were
adopted to homes after surgery. Dogs were followed for 2 years
postop.
Results: JPS resulted in significant changes in Acetabular Angle,
Hip Reduction Angle (measured during Ortolani testing), Dorsal
Acetabular Rim Angle and conversion to Ortolani negative status.
Larger and more rapid changes were seen in the 15-week group.
25% of JPS dogs developed degenerative joint disease whereas
83% of control dogs developed degenerative joint disease. JPS
resulted in significant improvement in hip joint conformation and
hip laxity in both 15 and 20 week old puppies. The greatest
improvements occurred in the 15-week group. There were no
significant changes in any measurements in the control dogs.
Sdr Aq palean st) saop ts uo patiodai so0z u sgle na La puelang
[12-24 weeks of age] and 9 controls) assessed at 1 and 2 years of
age. Compared to controls, JPS treated dogs showed marked
improvement in all measurable aspects at one and two years of
age (assessed by transverse CT, laxity by palpation, limb extended
and stress radiography, Ortolani palpation, HRA, hip extension
with pain scoring, force plate gait analysis, radiology DJD scoring,
 Norberg angles, DI index, acetabular angle (AA), and DARA) The
authors interpreted the JPS decreased laxity over time as a result of
improved conformation with resultant diminished forces acting on
the hip joint. Severe hip laxity (DI>0.70) and delay in surgery >
24 weeks will have less or no improvement in conformation.
At one year of age all dogs (JPS and controls) had a normal
gait by force plate analysis.
An additional clinical study by Vezzoni A et al36 in 2002, reported
on clinical responses to JPS and the results were less successful.
 Fifty-four dogs (28 treated surgically and 26 conservatively) were
assessed preoperatively and at 2 and 6 months post treatment. They
were assessed by Ortolani signs, AR (angle of reduction - HRA),
Angle of subluxation (AS) standard VD radiographs and a
distraction view and DAR view. The 28 treated JPS dogs were
placed into 3 groups based on their response. 8 dogs (28.6%)
improvement and 9 (32.9% )in the worsened group.  All puppies
in the worsened group had pre-treatment DI of between 0.6 and 1.0
and DAR slope of >12 degrees. In the conservatively treated
group, all puppies were divided into two groups on the basis of 
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
277
their results. Moderately worsened (14 dogs) or severely worsened
Laxity (measured by AS and DAR values) was more important
than DI (measuring passive laxity) in assessing the likelihood of a
poor outcome. When AS and DAR angles are increased the
femoral head is pushed dorsolaterally by weight bearing forces
acting on the inclined plane of DAR slope. When the AS was
greater than 15 degrees and the DAR slope greater than 12 degrees,
a poor result was almost always achieved. This study did not assess
the cases on their clinical outcome (pain, lameness)
The authors commented that their results showed that severe
hip dysplasia [assessed by As and DAR slope] at 12 -16 weeks
were not corrected by JPS. They recommended that all dogs be
reassessed at 6 months of age so that additional procedures could
be done if required.
 Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis is an important, safe surgical
procedure for the treatment ofdysplastic puppies and has
preliminary clinical results similar to TPO. JPS is the least
invasive of all hip dysplasia surgeries, which have been shown to
alter the course of thedisease and should only be performed in
 mild - moderate cases of hip dysplasia.
Triple Pelvic Osteotomy.
pd ns d g si (o) iso ald aid
where the ilium, ischium and pubis are osteotomised so that the
 acetabulum can be rotated and stabilised in a position, which will
improve hip joint congruency and reduce articular carilage stress.
The major aim of triple pelvic osteotomy is to correct functional
hip joint laxity, which should limit the progression of degenerative
joint disease in juvenile dogs with hip dysplasia.
Over the last 25 years this procedure has been investigated
experimentally and clinically in small animals. When the
procedure is technically performed well, it has been shown to be
effective in limiting but not completely preventing the progression
 of degenerative joint disease in dysplastic dogs. The rate of
progression of osteoarthritis following a TPO may be influenced
by the selection criteria used by the surgeon, the technical
application, the choice of technique of the TPO and the
development of complications. I have been using the various
techniques of this procedure for the last 25 years and can highly
recommend that all small animal veterinary surgeons be informed
 about the indications and results of triple pelvic osteotomy.
278
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
Indications for Triple Pelvic Osteotomy.
Many puppies with hip dysplasia do not develop overt clinical
signs of hip lameness/pain until they are 6-8 months of age. Yet, at
this time many of these dogs will no longer be candidates for TPO
surgery because of advanced osteoarthritis.
 It behoves us to educate the clients of high risk breed puppies
about hip dysplasia and be proactive in offering an accurate early
 diagnosis and discussing all treatment options.
 It has been shown that stress radiographic techniques (eg PennHIP
or Fluckiger methods) are reliable methods for determining hip
laxity and that the degree of distraction (Distraction/Subluxation
 Index), though not perfect, is a reliable phenotypic factor for
 determining susceptibility to osteoarthritis. A positive correlation
exists between the degree of femoral head laxity and the grade of
hip dysplasia, yet the standard vendor dorsal extended leg
radiograph view does not reliably evaluate coxofemoral joint
laxity. This method causes overextension of the hip joint and
spiral tensioning of the non-elastic joint capsule. In one study,
evaluating the standard extended leg view, over 50% of hips which
 developed osteoarthritis by one year of age were assessed as not
being dysplastic at 16-18 weeks of age. Radiographic stress views
should be used to demonstrate hip joint laxity. These views define
the degree of laxity and certainly help demonstrate to the client
obvious evidence of hip dysplasia, which may not be present
with the standard ventrodorsal view. These stress views should
replicate the forces acting on the joint during locomotion. Both the
 PennHIP and Fluckiger techniques do this best. The Fluckiger
 under anaesthesia is similar to the Ortolani manoeuvre. It must be
borne in mind that in young dogs, the degree of laxity correlates
well with the likelihood of the development of osteoarthritis.
Having said this, not all dogs, even mature dogs with hip joint
laxity will develop radiographic signs of osteoarthritis. Passive hip
joint laxity without evidence of osteoarthrosis has been recorded
commonly in adult Bernese Mountain dogs, Rottweilers and
Labrador and Golden Retrievers but not in the German Shepherd.
impossible to know if their dog will develop osteoarthritis and
 pain, however, the greater the laxity the greater the likelihood of
clinical signs. Dogs with painful hips, which meet the selection 
criteria, are most deserving of TPO.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
279
The most common indication for TPO is a young (juvenile) large
 s a iss  a (i o   
or no radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis. Smaller breed dogs
may also be suitable for TPO. Age is not necessarily a definite
contraindication, although, in general the progression of the disease
is age related.
The ideal dysplastic candidate will meet all of the following
criteria:
A)  Normal conformation.
 B)  Under anaesthesia the Ortolani manoeuvrer will be positive
xns d a yo an o, ,  d  a
This may indicate an intact dorsal acetabular rim/ labrum.
C)  Radiographic evidence of hip dysplasia with no radiographic
evidence of osteoarthritis. The Dorsal Acetabular Rim (DAR)
radiographic view is normal. In an unstable hip joint, the
femoral head subluxates in a craniodorsal direction and the
a  s a ss d r s oa s
craniodorsal acetabular edge. The DAR view assesses this
 anatomical landmark.
The intermediate dysplastic candidate exhibits:
A)  Normal conformation.
 B)  The Ortolani manoeuvrer is present but with a dull "click ",
probably indicating wear of the dorsal rim/ labrum.
C)I
Radiographic evidence of hip dysplasia with early (mild)
evidence of osteoarthritis and probably a worn dorsal
acetabular rim (DAR View indicates wear).
The unsuitable dysplastic candidate exhibits:
A) Poor conformation.
 B)  The Ortolani manoeuvrer is dull or absent indicating severe
wear of the dorsal acetabular rim and or severe joint fibrosis or
remodelling.
C)  Radiographic evidence of hip dysplasia with severe
subluxation and /or moderate or severe osteoarthritis and a
shallow acetabulum.
I will operate on both ideal and intermediate candidates but advise
clients of dogs in the intermediate group that although definitely
 unproven by clinical assessment, there may be a higher risk that
these dog will not do as well as those which have no radiographic
evidence of osteoarthritis.
 In general, surgeons must assume that evidence of radiographic
degenerative joint disease indicates significant articular cartilage
280
Ch 21: Earty Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
damage, but whether this truly relates long term to a poorer
outcome is unknown.
 Pre operative arthroscopy to assess the degree of injury to the
teres ligament, hip joint arthrosis and state of the articular cartilage
is currently being investigated as an additional method of
have shown that there is a poor correlation between radiographic
and arthroscopic signs of moderate cartilage lesions in juveniles.
 Radiography is a crude indicator of cartilage damage. Hopefully,
with time there may be a proven association of the state of the
articular cartilage with clinical outcome in canine TPO cases and
may make the selection criteria more objective. This appears to
 be the case in humans *s, where damage to the articular cartilage
of the femur or the acetabulum, affected the outcome following
rotational acetabular osteotomy , when patients were followed 2 to
5.5 years. In this study, the greater the degree of articular damage
 at the time of surgery (assessed by preoperative arthroscopy) the
 greater the likelihood of progression of the disease after surgery.
 Occasionally, I have been presented with young, mature dogs
(about 12months of age) with hip pain and lameness due to hip
dysplasia yet there is little or no radiographic evidence of
osteoarthritis. These dogs in my opinion can be suitable candidates
on pouau pooa e aq Aeu Adoosore dy pue lam se OdL 1o
assist in the decision between selecting TPO versus THR in these
cases. . I have only operated on a handful of these dogs and it
seems that when carefully chosen they benefit from the improved
joint congruency, which obviously reduces hip joint inflammation.
These dogs must be carefully chosen as they may be best served by
a total hip replacement rather than a TPO. This is particularly true
as uncemented hip replacements with their projected greater
8 se BunoA se sdeured) ssop Bunox ol pans Alleapi are AlAabuol
months) Frankly, the decision for TPO in most of these cases has
been based on financial grounds as there is a significant cost
difference between the two procedures.
 For most people, if there were a choice (outcomes the same)
Aa - sisasoid e buaeu pue d umo siop a sudaay uaamiq
 would choose keeping the hip joint intact
Clients should be informed that the aim of TPO surgery is to
improve the congruency of the hip joint so that the development of
future degenerative joint disease is minimised. I explain to clients
that it is very unlikely that the dog will require medication or
further surgery for hip pain and the dog will have a high chance of
pain free normal activity. The reason that the procedure is best
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
287
suited to immature dogs is that these dogs have the best chance that
improving the congruency of the joint will prevent progressive
osteoarthritis. We know that many dogs in this category that
have a successful TPO performed wil stil have radiographic
and histological evidence of progressive osteoarthritis but the
 rate of progression is minimised. Support for this statement has
who assessed 11 dogs by arthroscopic examination pre operatively
and up to 3 years post TPO. Nine of the 11 dogs had minimal to
 no progression of intraarticular pathology.
In my practice, generally, the procedure is performed on one side
and the other side is operated 10 days later. This allows some
union at the osteotomy site and minimises the risk of further
degeneration of the second side in this time. One group of
surgeons has advocated the use of a new plate with both sides
being operated at the one time. The published results* are
promising in the short term for the majority of dogs with a small
number followed long term radiographically, although there is the
likelihood of greater surgical morbidity with non-staged bilateral
surgery.
Surgery
I have successfully used the Slocum technique and TPO plate for
many years. Experimental in vitro evidence suggests that 20
degrees or less of rotation is ideal. Greater rotation may result in
impingement of the neck on the dorsal acetabular rim resulting in
the possibility of pain or wear. In addition, a recent study by
 Tomlinson JL and Cook JL4 confirmed that greater than 20
 degrees of rotation had no benefit in Norberg Angle or percentage
 op.  There are many plates available for stabilisation of the ilium.
Results of Triple Pelvic Osteotomy.
Long term results support the use of rotational osteotomy in
 n s    s n  s
6'0s Ara31ns yo ane ueau) ssiuaned aplo pue (sreak gz ase ueau)
years ). The results showed that the surgery gave satisfactory and
reproducible long term clinical results and was very good at
 preventing the progression of osteoarthritis.
Experimental evidence 42 in the canine showed that following TPO,
the reductions in the magnitude of the forces acting on the hip in
conjunction with increased coverage of the femoral head resulted
in beneficial clinical results. Force plate analysis is a reliable
282
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
method of evaluating limb function in animals and one comparison
of treated (TPO) and untreated dysplastic dogs has shown that:
1. The force transmitted through the hips of dysplastic dogs is
less than normal controls
 2. The force transmitted through the hips increased after TPO
and was greater in treated limbs than in untreated limbs.
This study also showed that 92% of the dogs were no longer lame
at 28 weeks after TPO but none of the untreated dogs improved.
These experimental studies are supported by clinical studies. In
 one study by Plante43 , they compared dogs managed either
conservatively, by TPO or by femoral head and neck excision
(FHNE). These dogs were compared using locomotor, physical
and radiographic examinations and the owner's evaluations. The
cases were followed for a minimum of 20 months. The results for
 conservative care were not as good as that recorded by Barr et al l9.
The conservatively treated group had the worst lameness scores
with 93% of the dogs being lame and 71% exhibiting atrophy of
the hind limb musculature. They had lower extension angles of the
hip and all exhibited hip pain on extension of the joint. The TPO
group performed better than both the excision arthroplasty and
conservatively managed group of dogs.
The locomotor, physical and owners’ evaluations demonstrated the
superiority of the triple pelvic osteotomy. Femoral head excision
was also more efficient than conservative care. The triple pelvic
e   n   
  ro s  t   s  As  r
year period has shown that approximately 40% of dogs had
 progression of the radiographic signs of osteoarthritis. Seventy
five percent (75 %) received an excellent or good physical
examination score and 76% received excellent or good, at home
activity scores. Interestingly there was no association between pre
operative osteoarthritis (demonstrated on radiographs) and
 postoperative osteoarthritis but there was an increased risk of 
osteoarthritis with increasing age at surgery, narrower Norberg
 angles and lower percentage head coverage.
In a more recent study , however, Bevan JM and Beale BS in
2004 3, assessed 11 dogs by arthroscopic examination pre
operatively and up to 3 years post TPO. Nine of the 11 dogs had
minimal to no progression of intraarticular pathology and these
results are similar to many human studies.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
283
 Further support for improved congruency was published by Hara
 Y et al $ in 2002 who showed by CT examination that canine joint
TPO surgery, further providing evidence of the clinical usefulness 
 of this procedure.
Triple pelvic osteotomy will at least slow the progression of
degenerative joint disease and may stop it in many cases.
Surgery should be performed early.
 Triple Pelvic Osteotomy has an excellent chance of reducing the
Complications of TPO include loss of fixation secondary to
complications, urethral obstruction and constipation. The most
common post operative complication is screw loosening which
occurs in 16-62.5% of TPO's and 19.5-70 % of dogs that had a
 TPO. There is still no common agreement about the best method
of avoiding this complication. Recent studies suggest greater sacral
screw purchase and even radiographs at 10 days and retightening
 all loose screws 46 (most screws in this study did not loosen again
suggesting that only early implant loosening occurs). It is unclear
Sn n    s n nd  
 Complete loss of fragment fixation is rare but Fitch R.B. et al 44
reported on the use of an additional ventral ilial plate to help
Slocum plate alone and Slocum plate and an additional ventral
 plate there was a 9.2 times greater chance of implant loosening
without the additional plate. They reported only minor loosening
in one of eight unilateral and none of 7 bilateral TPOs with the
additional plate.
The use of cement techniques to augment implant holding in the
pelvis has not been reported but in my opinion deserves
assessment.
REFERENCES.
 1. Schnelle GB: Congenital subluxation of the coxofemoral joint in a dog. Univ Pa Bull
1937:65:15-16
2.  Henricson B, Norberg I, Olsson SE: On the eitiology and pathogenesis of hip dysplasia: a
comparative review J Small Anim Pract 1966; 7: 673-687.
3. Willis MB: Willis MB, Genetics of the dog. Howell book Home Inc.New York 1989: 144-179
284
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
4.  Kealy Rd, Olsson SE, Monti KL et al: Effects of limited food consumption on the incidence of
hip dysplasia in growing dogs. J. Am . Vet Med Assoc: 1992;201: 857-863
5. Lust G, Hip Dysplasia in dogs: In Slatter D, ed. Textbook of small animal surgery 2"d edition 
Philadelphia : WB Saunders 1993 : 1938-1944
6.  CorleyEA; Role of the Orthopaedic Foundation for animals in the control of canine hip
dysplasia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 579-593
7.  Kealy RD , Lawler DF, Ballam JM: et al: Five year Longitudinal study on limited food
consumption and Development of osteoarthritis in dogs: J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997: 210: 210-
222
8. Kealy Rd, Lawler DF, Ballam JM et al: Effects of diet restriction on life span and age related
changes in dogs: J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002: 220: 1315-1320.
9. Impellizeri JA ,Tetrick MA , Muir P : Effects of weight reduction on clinical signs of lameness
in dogs with hip osteoarthritis 2000: J Am Vet Med Assoc 7: 1089-1091.
10. Kealy RD et al : Effects of dietary electrolyte balance on subluxation of the femoral head in
growing dogs. Am J Vet Res. 1993;54: 555
11. Madsen JS, Oxlund H, Svalastoga E et al: Collagen type 111:1 composition in hip joints of
dogs susceptible to hip dysplasia J Small Anim Pract 1994 35: 625-628
12. Rutland B, Read R, Richardson J et al : Early diagnosis of hip dysplasia. In proceedings
ACVSc Scientific Presentations, 2003
13. Corfield GS, Read R , Eastley KA et al: Is the Ortolani Sign a clinically relevant tool for early
o yo a  o ss  asi sa aes y a u  s 'i
hip dysplasia in growing German Shepherd dogs Honours thesis 200o, Murdoch University ,
Perth , Australia.
15. Beauregard G, Dupuis J , Charette B et al : Evaluation of the reduction angle and the dorsal
acetabular slope for early detection of canine hip dysplasia. Proceedings ACVS 1999. and Vet
Comp Orthp Traumatol 2001 : 14: 125-32
16. Smith, G.K. Biery, D.N. Gregor, T.P.: 1990, New concepts of coxofemoral joint stability and
 the development of a clinical stress-radiographic method for quantitating hip joint laxity in the
dog. JAVMA 196: 59-70.
17. Fluckiger MA, Friedrich GA and Binder H: 1999: A Radiographic Stress technique for
1    o  ix  xo yo 
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
285
18. Farese JP, Todhunter RJ, Lust G et al: 1998: Dorsolateral subluxation of hip joint in dogs
measured in a weight bearing position with radiography and computed tomography. Vet Surg:
27: 393-405
19. Barr, A.R.S. Denny, H.R. Gibbs, C. :1987. Clinical hip dysplasia in growing dogs: Results of
conservative management. J. Small. Anim. Pract. 28, 243
: sdsp d aaas o  ns  6i d o Hh ah '  s 0
Long term results, Abstracts Vos
21. Banfield CM, Bartels JE, Hudson JA et al. 1996: A retrospective study of canine hip dysplasi2
in 116 Military working dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32: 423-430
22. Dvorak LD , Cook JL, Kreeger JM et al: 2002: Effects of carpofen and dexamethasone on
canine chnrocytes in a tree dimentinal culture model of osteoarthritis Am J vet Res 63: 363-369
23. Pelletier JP, Lajeunesse D, Jovanovic DV et al: 2000: Carprofen simultaneously reduces
 progression of morphological changes and subchondral bone in ex perimental dog osteoarthritis.
J Rheumatol 27: 2893-2902.
24. Benton HP, Vasseur PB, Broderick - Villa GA et al: 1997: Effect of carprofen on sulfated
glycosaminoglycan metabolism , protein synthesis and prostaglandin release by cultured
osteoarthritic canine chodrocyte. Am J Vet Res 58: 286-292
25. Rainsford KD, 1999: Potential effects of NSAIDs ( Meloxicam) on joint / cartilage
metabolism in various species. In proceedings: Recent advances in non steroidal
antinflammatory therapy in small animals , Paris June 1999
26. Kawaguchi H, Pilbcam CC, Harisoin JR et al: 1995: The role of prostaglandins in the
regulation of bone metabolism Clin Orthop Relat Res 313: 36-46.
27. Gerstenfield L, Thiede M , Seibert K et al : 2002. Differential inhibition of fracture healing by
Tran Orthop Res Soc, 27: 239.
28. Mullis B, Copeland S, Weinhold P: 2002: Effect of Cox 2 inhibitors and NSAIDs on fracture
healing in a mouse model. Trans Orthop Res Soc 27: 712
29. McAlindon TE, LaValley MP, Gulin JP, Felson DT; 2000: Glucosamine and chondroitin
JAMA 283:1469-75
30. Mathew KG, et al: 1996: Effects of pubic symphysiodesis on acetabular rotation and pelvic
development in guinea pigs Am J Vet Res 57: 1427-1433,
31. Dueland RT et al 2001: Effects of pubic symphysiodesis in dysplastic puppies. Vet Surg 30:
201- 217,
286
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
32. Patricelli AJ et al 2001:Canine pubic symphysiodesis: Investigations of electrocautery dose
i g n  ns an  xa os  sodss
  si   ss i ssss n  o      
weeks of age . Vet Surg 31: 435-444 .
34. Dueland, R.T., et al: 2001: Effects of Pubic Symphysiodesis in Dysplastic Puppies, Vet Surg.
30:201-217
 35. Dueland R T et al: 2003: Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis in dysplastic puppies abstracts
ESVOT-VOS
congress Munich Sept 2002
37. Holsworth IG, Schulz KS, Kass PH et al: 2005: Comparison of arthroscopic and radiographic
abnormalities in the hip joint of juvenile dogs with hip dysplasia. J. Am Vet Med Assoc 1: 227
:1087-94
38. Yasunaga Y, et al: 2001: The state of the articular cartilage at the time of surgery as an
indication for rotational acetabular osteotomy JBJS Vol 83 B No 7 10011004
39. Bevan JM , Beale BS 2004 Arthroscopic evaluation of the canine coxofemoral joint following
triple pelvic osteotomy : VOS abstracts
                
pelvic osteotomy with an eight hole iliac bone plate in dogs :95 cases (1996-1999) JA VMA
222: 54-60
d         : r   r  1
osteotomy on the position of the femoral head in relationship to the acetabulum. Vet Surg:31:
398-403
42. McLaughlan, R. Miller, C.W. et al; 1991. Force Plate analysis of triple pelvic osteotomy for
the treatment of canine hip dysplasia . Vet Surg: 20: 5, 291-297
 s s     ss   h   5  
triple pelvic osteotomy for the treatment of hip dysplasia in the immature dog. VCOT 1o: 101-
110.
44. Fitch RB , Kerwin S, Hosgood G et al 2002: Treatment of mechanically failed triple pelvic
osteotomy in four dogs. VCOT 3: 172-176,
minimizes screw loosening in canine triple pelvic osteotomy. Vet Surg: 33, 609-614
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
287
46. Bogoni P, Rovesti GL: 2005 Early detection and treatment of screw loosening in triple pelvic
osteotomy. Vet Surg: 34: 190-195.
47. Rasmussen LM , et al: 1998: Preoperative variables affecting long term outcome of triple
pelvic osteotomy for treatment of naturally developing hip dysplasia in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc : 21 80-85.
48. Adams WM , Dueland RT , Meinen J et al: 1998: Early detection of canine hip dysplasia 
  ss d    s    d   s
347.
49. Van hellemondt GG, Sonneveld H , Schhreuder MH, et al: 2005: Triple pelvic osteotomy for
acetabular dysplasia :Results at a mean follow up of 15 years. JBJS Br: 87: 911-915
-9 : 7  58 ar suad 1asuo ym uosdu : 1pio 1o ag jo sien xis A
d          1  1  1  
osteotomy in the dog with hip dysplasia: J Vet Med Sci 10: 933-6
52. Smith GK. : 1990 Hip joint laxity as an early predictor of canine hip dysplasia. Abstract VCOT
1990: 48
53. Smith GK, Mayhew PD, Kapatkin AS, et al: 2001:Evaluation of Risk factors for degenerative
joint disease associated with canine hip dysplasia in German Shepherd dogs, Golden
Retrievers, Labrador Retrievers and Rottweilers. 219: 1719-1724
288
Ch 21: Early Interventions for Hip Dysplasia
Chapter 22
Obtaining Surgical Training in Australia:
Review and Personal Comment
Bruce Smith
BACKGROUND:
The evolution of companion animal practice and the place of the
surgical services both from the public and the profession
Historically interest in developing surgical skills has been high in
both undergraduate and graduate veterinarians.
In the past the professional standard was considered to be the
undergraduate degree. This consisted of didactic and basic
practical training. Veterinarians developed these skills by "hands
on" clinical experience and individual professional development.
More recently however as a result of increasing sophistication of
clinical practice and public demand, statutory changes have created
an additional higher professional standard of specialization. The
specialist is recognized to have significantly more knowledge,
science. The practice of a specialty requires registration, the
criteria for which are common to all states, territories and New
Zealand.
Unlike undergraduate training, specialist training has not been
 most specialist training has occurred within universities it has
followed an system similar to resident training in medical
specialties with qualifying requirements and certifying
differ from tertiary institutions in that they are certifying not
educational bodies. The recent and continuing withdrawal of public
funding from universities and the emergence of financially
lucrative private specialty practice have severely limited the ability
of veterinary schools to continue to support training in the clinical
specialties.
REGISTRATION AS A SPECIALIST SURGEON:
All Australian States and territories and New Zealand have.
certification standards required for registration as a veterinary
specialist. The administrative body is the Australian Veterinary
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
289
Boards Council (AVBC), and the certification standard is the
Minimum Standards Document (MSD). The MSD consists of:
1.
Minimum time from graduation
2.
Minimum time working in the specialty
3.
Suuma pasaiadns
4.
The period of supervised training
5.
The certifying body
6.
The selection and role of supervisors
7.
Prerequisites of an approved centre
'8
Scholarship
9.
Higher Degrees
10. Examinations
11. Specialty subjects
Currently a specialist must be a graduate of an approved veterinary
al u aadxa sa g is re m sie g ui aro yo los
clinical disciplines; including small animal surgery. Examinations
must be rigorous and include written, practical and oral portions
that encompass the scientific basic as well as the clinical
 application of the specialty.
The italicized MSD requirements (3,4,5,6,7,8) define the training
 program that must be applied across all specialties.
3. Supervised Training: May be "Formal" or an "Alternative" to
"Formal" training. The example of "Formal" training provided is a
 university residency.
4. The period of supervised training: This is 96 weeks for the
"Formal" training but is more complex for "Alternative” training.
However for at least 76 weeks *Formal" training must be
completed in blocks of not less than 6 weeks. If the remaining 20
weeks is completed without direct supervision, 5 unsupervised
weeks are considered the equivalent to 1 supervised week. Thus
"Alternative” training will take 176 weeks, and required a large
ue Aq paaoidde aq isnu sueioid suuiei :poq uian ai '
(approved) certifying body: Australian College of Veterinary
Scientists (ACVSc), American College of Veterinary Surgeons
(ACVS), European College of Veterinary Surgeons (ECVS)?
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCvS)
6. The selection and role of supervisors: Specialists within the
discipline, chosen by candidate and approved by the certifying
290
Ch 22: Obtaining Surgical Training in Australia
body. Supervisors are responsible for the instruction and must
provide a written assessment to the certifying body.
7. Prerequisites for an approved centre: Adequate workload,
facility, access to other professional ex pertise as assessed by the
certifying body.
meetings, research as assessed by the certifying body.
Summary: A program complying with defined standards must be
completed with an approved College for registration as a specialist
small animal surgeon in Australia or New Zealand. Approved
Colleges are the Australian College of Veterinary Scientists.
American College of Veterinary Surgeons, European College of
Veterinary Surgeons and the Royal College of Veterinary
Surgeons.
REQUIREMENTS OF THE CERTIFYING BODIES:
College / Qualification
Duration of Supervised
Publication/Scholarly
Other Requirements
Training
 Requirements
ACVSc
96 weeks
 4 Publications, 1
Member of ACVSc by
 Fellowship in Small
(176 weeks)
primary authored
examination, 5 years
Animal Surgery
"*major” work, 2 primary
working in field
authored peer reviewed,
1 coauthored.
ACVS
156 weeks
 1 primary authored
1 year rotating
 Diplomate in Small
"major" work
 internship or equivalent
Animal Surgery
ECVS
156 weeks
 1 primary authored
？
 Diplomate in Small
"major"’ work
Animal Surgery
 RCVS
52 weeks
2 Primary authored
 Member of RCVS
 Diploma in Small
(104 weeks)
publications & 1 case
graduated and working
Animal Soft Tissue OR
report
in field for 4 years
Orthopaedic Surgery
Notes:
s a, s oa   o no o
training programs within Australia or New Zealand.
The ACVSc recognizes "outside" special qualifications from
ACVS and ECVS for Fellowship Training purposes.
 All Colleges have certification requirements for "Approved
Training Facility"
All Colleges require training in "Associated Disciplines"
"Primary Case Responsibility"
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
1
REVIEW OF REGISTERED (PRACTICING?) SPECIALISTS IN AUSTRALIA
AND NEW ZEALAND:
 Distribution
Country and State
Number
Australia
39
NSW
12
Victoria
8
PIO
8
SA
2
WA
3
 New Zealand
5
Certifying Body
Number (? = may be additional)
ACVScFellow
29
ACVS Diplomate
6
 ECVSC Diplomate
4?
 RCVSC
？
None "Grandfathered"
4?
SURVEY OF ACVSC FELLOWS:
(2004 Postal survey of 36 Fellows in Small Animal Surgery 21
respondents, no all responses were complete. Non ACvSc
 registered specialists were not surveyed)
 Country in which training program undertaken 
Australia Only
8
Australia and Other
6
Other
7
 Type of training program
University Only
16
 University and private practice
3?
 Private Practice Only
2
Current Employment (those within Australia / NZ)
University
5
 Multispecialty Referral Practice
9
On the question of "in principle" involvement with resident
 training: 14/15 respondents affirmative and all supported paid
residencies.
Additional Comments / Common Sentiments:
 Important for University involvement whether training is
aimed at academia as well as practice
292
Ch 22:Obtaining Surgical Training in Australia
 US experience of private practice based residencies is that
there is difficulty completing scholarly activity (research and
publication) and training in related disciplines
d  sd  sq s) m
Universities are not keen to be perceived as a "free” resource
for alternate training programs
DYNAMICS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY SPECIALIST PRACTICE:
● Increase in newly qualified surgeons: ACVSc Fellows: Of 39
Small Animal Surgical Fellows 21 have qualified in the last 10
years, 12 in since 2000.
· Increase in private practice surgeons: Registered Small Animal
 Surgeons in Private Specialist Practice in Sydney.
1997
4
2005
10
CONCLUSIONS:
 Specialty is expanding and currently the supply of Surgeons is
a least commensurate with professional / public demand.
●
 Current certification of new Surgeons has mainly been through
ACVSc Fellowship, however components of overseas
training/qualification are common.
can provide complete training outside the Universities.
●
 University caseload and retention of surgeons have been
 negatively affected economies of private practice.
STRATEGIES TO ENSURE SUFFICIENT / SUSTAINABLE SUPPLY OF
SURGEONSWITHINAUSTRALIAANDNEWZEALAND:
 Support of ACVSc Fellowship by provision of single or more
likely multicentre “"Formal Training Programs" - Chapter
 Discussion Paper presented by Dr. Thomson to AGM 2004 
 Fulfilling training requirements (through universities) is
increasingly difficult and there is little likelihood that this
will improve
 ACVSc (Fellows in small animal surgery) must provide
adequate training opportunities in all states / NZ OR
recommend training be acquired overseas.
 Proposal of private practice / university partnership
 Private practice caseload and supervision / university
scholarly activities and exposure to related disciplines.
· Support of ACVS, ECVS (or less applicable RCVS) training
 programs within domestic Universities and private practices.
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
293
●Support reasonable access to North American or European
training programs.
STAKE HOLDER INCENTIVES FOR INVESTMENT IN SPECIALIST
TRAINING: ("WHAT'S IN IT FOR US?"")
●Public: Access to service
 Problem: will only invest as fee for service
· Profession: Access to service
 Problem: Resources limit action to the level of
professional association (AVA / NZVA) however these
organizations have no record in this regard
●Small Animal Surgical Specialty: Strong membership base
0 Limited Resources for the Domestic College (compare
<40 ACVSc Fellows to >500 for ACVS Diplomates)
0 Limited Relevance for the External Colleges
●
 University: Undergraduate training, clinical skills, research
Undergraduate teaching and research focus
Currently under resourced public / private sector
Lack of Caseload
 Surgical training programs are not conducive to research.
● Private Practice: Case management, employee or succession.
"Primary Case Responsibility” referral to an individual
 Training is time intensive.
Trainee absenteeism. Program cannot be completed "in
house"
No assurance of "return on investment"
· Candidate: Primary beneficiary, professional goal, financial
security
Cannot "Create" opportunity
0  May be excluded on financial or practical grounds.
Summary: There are currently insufficient easily accessible surgical training opportunities
within the region to cope with candidate demand. Irrespective of the question of supply
and demand, provision of additional opportunities (regionally) will require involvement by
the specialty itself.
A POSSIBLE SOLUTION?:
● Training responsibilities must be considered part of what
 defines a “specialist" in Small Animal Surgery
Voluntary (Interested parties work at individual solutions
within the current system).
Statutory
Ch 22: Obtaining Surgical Training in Australia
Veterinary Boards be made aware of the problems
 particular to small animal surgery. "'Directly
Supervised Training” and "Primary Case
Responsibility”" be defined and provision made to
allow this to occur.
Veterinary Boards require all registered specialists to
be active in training. This may be in the form of a
 credit system; participation in training, examining or 
defraying the costs thereof.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc.No.363
295
NOTES:
296
Ch 22: Obtaining Surgical Training in Australia
Chapter 23
Late Surgical Intervention for Hip Osteoarthritis
Femoral Head Excision and Total Hip Replacement
Kenneth Johnson and Marvin Olmstead
OVERVIEW
 In the surgical management of the chronically painful,
osteoarthritic coxofemoral joint, there are several options including
femoral head excision, so-called denervation, and total hip
replacement. The latter procedure comes closer than any other
technique in the restoration of a painfree and anatomically
functional joint. However this is a highly demanding, specialized
procedure and the consequences of complications can be disastrous
for the patient. Therefore it is critical to known the correct
indications for this procedure. Furthermore, dogs with neurological
disease, concurrent cruciate disease, pyoderma and other problems
must be recognized as being potentially unsuitable candidates.
A fully cemented prosthetic joint was first developed for
osteoarthritis and other painful conditions of the human hip by Sir
 John Charnley. More than twenty years ago, canine total hip
 replacements appeared, and numerous modifications have evolved.
Currently there are two main types of commercially available hip
implants, the traditional cemented (Figure 1) and the porous
coated, non-cemented bone ingrowth prostheses (Figures 2 and 3)
The advantages and disadvantages of each will be discussed. The
ultimate goal is to better understand what to expect in terms of 
post-operative rehabilitation, likely complications and long term
results from this procedure, so that informed advice can be given to
clients.
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
167
Figure 1: Modular cemented canine total hip replacement implants (CFX, Biomedtrix)
The acetabular component is made of polyethylene and the wire serves as a radiographic
marker, to evaluate positioning of implants postoperati vely.
Figure 2: Modular non-cemented canine total hip implants (BFX, Biomedtrix). The
proximal half of the femoral stem and the metal shell of the acetabular component have a
porous coating to promote bone ingrowth.
298
Ch23:LateSurgical InterventionforHipOsteoarthritis
 Figure 3: The non-cemented Kyon or Zurich canine total hip prosthesis. The femoral stem
is secured with taper lock bolts.
PATIENT EVALUATION
Goals of evaluating dogs that are being considered as candidates
:e  a   n 
1. To ensure that the clinical signs and coxo-femoral joint
pathology are both valid indications, and are likely to be
surgical procedure.
2.
 To detect concurrent diseases that would make the dog an
unacceptable anaesthetic or surgical risk
3.
 To rule out concurrent neurologic or musculoskeletal lesions
or diseases that are currently contributing to the dog's
complaint or clinical signs, and that would not be controlled
by a total hip replacement.
4.
To detect concurrent lesions or diseases that may adversely
affect the longevity of the prosthesis.
PRESENTING COMPLAINT AND HISTORY
 Dogs with hip pain due to hip dysplasia often have a history of
intermittent signs, difficulty in getting up stairs, or into a vehicle.
Also they may have apparent reluctance to exercise or go on long
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
299
walks, sitting down after a relatively short distance. Owners may
report clicking or crepitus with walking or getting up onto the sofa.
Age of onset of signs may have been as young as 6 to 12 months,
 or may have gone unnoticed until later in life.
Lameness that is unilateral, acute in onset, or severe and none
dysplasia. The cause of lameness may be due to a traumatic
disorder of the hip, but in many cases is due to a lesion elsewhere
such as cranial cruciate ligament rupture or bone tumor.
SIGNALMENT
 Dogs should be skeletally mature at the time of surgery. The
youngest age for the procedure will be nine to ten months, and the
trochanteric growth plate should be closed, to reduce risk of
trochanter avulsion during surgery. Body weight is not reliable
indicator to decide if the procedure can be performed, because the
 diameter of the femoral diaphysis is not correlated with body
weight. For example, Labradors tend to have smaller diameter
femora, while German shepherd dogs have large femora, with a big
medullary cavity. There is no maximum size or age of dog for the
procedure.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
After completing a physical examination, careful orthopaedic and
neurologic examinations are performed. At the walk some dogs do
not have any obvious gait abnormalities, while others have a
swaying gait, are hunched and putting more weight forward, and or
are bunny hopping at the trot. To begin, the hip is examined with
the dog standing up, checking for symmetry, range of extension,
 pain and crepitus. Special attention is paid to palpation of the
lumbosacral spine and the stifle joint. Approximately 25% of dogs
that are presented for total hip replacement that have radiographic
evidence of hip dysplasia, will actually be lame because of cranial
 cruciate ligament rupture. Also be careful that apparent pain on
 manipulation of the hip joint may be actually coming from a
painful bone lesion such as neoplasia or panosteitis.
SPECIFIC INDICATIONS
1.Hip dysplasia
2.
 Hip osteoarthritis secondary to other problems such as
ischemic necrosis
3.
 Acute traumatic luxation in medium and large breed dogs as a
primarily procedure. This is particularly indicated in cases of
008
Ch 23:Late Surgical Intervention for Hip Osteoarthritis
bilateral traumatic luxation, or dogs with other injuries such
that an Ehmer sling would not be tolerated.
4.
Chronic traumatic and non-traumatic coxo-femoral luxation
5.
 Fractures of the femoral head - may be associated with an
acute coxo-femoral luxation
 6. Malunion of femoral head/neck fracture with secondary
osteoarthritis
7.
 Malunion of an acetabular fracture - often complicated by
secondary osteoarthritis. If a previous open reduction and
internal fixation of the acetabular fracture has been performed
- then the implications of implants removal, bone stock and
infection have to be assessed.
 8.  Failed FHO - difficult and not always feasible.
9.Failed TPO
SPECIFIC CONTRAINDICATIONS
1.
 Infectious or neoplastic diseases of the hip
2.
ruptured cranial cruciate ligament
3.
 Acetabulum or femoral shaft too small
4.
Skeletally immature
5.
 Neurologic disease: discospondylitis, cauda equina syndrome,
peripheral neuropathy secondary to hypothyroidism,
paraneoplastic syndrome etc.
6.
Systemic illness
7.
 Infection: systemic or localized to the region of the hip, or
elsewhere such as prostate, teeth etc
8.
 Bacterial pyoderma both locally to the region of the surgery,
but also elsewhere due to risk of hematogenous dissemination
 9. Nonpainful hip lesions
OTHER REASONS TO NOT PERFORM THR
1.Cost
2.
 Non-compliance with post-operative management
3.
Non-acceptance of the risk of complications
 4. Satisfactory response to NSAID
TOTAL HIP REPLACEMENT SURGERY
In general this surgical procedure is not recommended as a
treatment for hip dysplasia in dogs that are having their first
episode of lameness. Surgery may be recommended if the signs of
hip pain are not controlled by a course of NSAID, or the dog
ex periences significant side effects with one or more of NSAID
(carprofen, etadolac, meloxicam). Femoral head and neck is an
An Orthopaedic Ooyssey, Proc. No. 363
307
alternative, but not an equally good one. If FHO is going to be
performed, then it should be done with the understanding that it 
will be the final procedure and that subsequent revision to a THR is
often NOT possible.
Although objectives of performing a triple pelvic osteotomy are
different to those of THR, there will be group of dogs in which a
decision will have to be made between these two procedures. This
will often be the 6-9 month old dog that has painful subluxation,
and minimal radiographic signs of osteoarthritis (osteophytes on
neck) In these “borderline' cases, the alternatives will need to be
discussed.
Surgery is performed through a cranio-lateral approach. After 
opening the capsule, the hip is luxated and the head removed with
a saw. Reaming of the acetabulum and femur is followed by
insertion of methylmethacrylate bone cement and the polyethylene
 acetabulum and femoral stem. A femoral head is impacted onto
 the stem and the joint reduced. Immediately following surgery
activity is limited to allow the sutured capsule to regain strength.
Luxation is the most common complication. Others include
infection, implant loosening, sciatic neuropraxia, and fracture of
the femur. Infection is the most devastating because the implant
 may need to be removed. However, the risk of a serious
complication is around 2%. Depending on the study, 85-90% of
dogs will have good to excellent function. Only 20% of dogs
require bilateral THR.
302
Ch 23:Late Surgical Intervention for Hip Osteoarthritis
Index
A
abrasion trochleoplasty, cats 
53
amabolic failure
190
achondrodysplastic dog breeds
211
catabolic overactivity
161-061
acute wounds
224
bone transport
125-126, 182-183
ADAMTS aggTecanases in osteoarthritis
33
 bones and joints, medical diseases
211-222
ADAMTS inhibiion
33-34
congenital hypothyroidism
213
adjuvant therapies, osteosarcoma
121-124
craniomandibular osteopathy
217
mmunotherapy
122-123
diskospondylitis
221-222
molecular targeted therapies
123-124
drug induced arthritis
219-221
121-122,127-128
immune-mediated polyarthritis
217-219
survival probability
122
infective arthritis
219
aggrecan in osteoarthnitis
30, 31, 32-34
 metaphyseal osteopathy
216-217
aggtec anase enzymes
33
mucopolysaccharidosis
211-213
124
nutitional secondary hypothyroidism
213
anabolic and catabolic responses, bone epai
188-196
panosteitis
215-216
anabolic and catabolic responses, modulation
191
retained cartilage cores
215
anabolic failure, bone repait
061
nickets
214
anabolic responses, bone repait
188-196
skeletal dysplasias
211
anabolic treatments in bone repair
190, 191-192
brain injury
103
angle of teduction in hip dysplasia
257,266
bucket handle teat, meniscus
11, 12
anbibiobc therapy,tibial fractures
113
buttress plating
137
antibioics in wound management
226
antibiotics, role in drug-induced arthritis
219-221
anti-catabolic therapies, bone epair
191, 192-195
C
antimicobltheapystmyel
181
ep ut oei snonoqdsoqdntoies
213
area moment of inertia, implants 
139
callus fommation
180, 187-195,200
arthrodesis
115-116
callus size
561^161-061
arthroscopy
21-26, 260, 281
cancellous sctews
173-174
advantages
21
122
s
21-22
canine juvenile pubic symphysiodesis
276-278
elbow disease
24-26
clinical trials
276-278
hip dysplasia
260, 281
canine osteosarcoma
119-134
sterilisation of equipment
22
adjuvant therapies
121-124
22-24
age, size disposition
611
articular cartilage
30
chemotherapy protocol
121
articular catilage in osteoarthntis
30-34
conventional surgery
124
atraumatic humeral condylar fracture, arthroscopy
26
120
Australian College of Veterinary Scientists
290, 291, 292-293
metastasis
119-120, 131-132
Australian Veterinary Boards Council
289-290
non-apendicular
128-129
autogenous cancellous bone grafts
112, 204
novel surgery
125-130
132-134
Tadiographs
120
B
survival rates
120-121, 122
bandage layers
227-228
treatment
120-130
contact layer
227-228
carboplatin
121, 129
intermediate layer
228
carpal collateral ligament injury
207
tertiary layer
228
conservative treament
207
bandagingin distal limb recons
251
evaluabion
207
bandaging, reasons
227
surgical stabilisation
207
Barden's sign
258
treatment
207-209
biological osteosynthesis
146
carprofen
236, 273
biphosphonates for osteosarc oma
123, 134
carpus, anatomy
206-207
block recession sulcoplasty, cats
52
carpus, ligament injuries
206-209
bone cement, effects
811
cartilage breakdown
30, 31, 32-34
112,114, 180,
cartilage composition
30-31
181-182, 204
cartilage damage, detection
21
bone morphogenetic proteins
191-192
cartilage damage, evaluation
21
bone pain in osteosarcoma
132-134
cartilage elevation chondroplasty
70-71
bone plating
162-165
Aedoeod ut Aint ee
220
customised hook plating
162-163
Cartrophen Vet
239,240,245,274
dynamic compression plates
162
casting materials
228
Teconstruction plates
163-164
catabolic overactivity, bone repair
161-061
se[d renoway ie[puoseidns
165
catabolic esponses,bone epair
188-196
bibial head plates
164-165
caudal cruciate ligament
bone reconstructive techniques in patellar luxation 
63, 66-75
caudal tear, meniscus 
11,12
bone repair
187-188, 195
cephalosporin
113-114
200
291, 292
bone repait, anabolic and catabolic tesponses
188-196
chondrocytes
31,32, 187,238
bone repair, failure
189-191
chronic wounds
224
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
303
circular external skeletal fixation
83-92,125-126
culture and sensitivity, osteomyelitis
181
biomechanical studies
87
customised hook plating
162-163
clinical applications
06-68
complications
92
design
83, 84-86
D
76-16
deAngelis surgery
45-48
cisplatin
120-121, 122
debridement, wounds
226
clamp rod internal fixator
143-144
degenerative joint disease
172,266
clamps
143
degenerative joint disease and hip dysplasia
254,256
144
delayed ossification
215
rod component
143
desmotomy
65
classifcation of wounds
224-225
dexniguldipine in osteosarcoma
123-124
coaptahion
153
diet, calcium:phosphorous ratio
213
Eise[dsp dy pue uese[os
265
disease modifying osteoarthritic drugs
238-240,245, 274
collagen breakdown in osteoarthritis
31, 32
diskospondylitis
221-222
collateral ligament injury, carpal
207
culture and sensiti vity
222
collateral ligaments
13, 41, 43-44
221
injury repair
44
implicated organisms
221
collateral ligaments,phalanges
205
treatment
222
Combi hole
146, 147, 149
distal femoral fractures, cats
55-56
comminuted fractures
103, 136, 137,
adult cats
55-56
152,162
goals of trealment
55
compartment syndrome
107
immature cats
55
complex fractures
136
distal limb, reconstruction of skin defects
247-252
computed tomography
26
complications
252
condylar fssure, elbow
26
limits
250-251
condylar fracture
159
methods
247-250
condylar fracture,humeral, arthroscopy
26
251
condylar fractures, femoral
160-167
217
condyle, lateral
168, 174
distraction index in hip dysplasia
266,268,270,279
condyle, medial
174
distraction osteogenesis
83, 86, 88, 89,
congenital hypothyroidism
213
125-126, 182, 192
physical features
213
Jatency period
68-88
skeletal abnormalities 
213
rhythm
89,92
 contaminated wounds, dressing
225
docking in bone transport
182
75, 77-81
doxorubicin
121, 122
Ccortical screws
173-174
dressing contaminated wounds
225
corticosteroids, intra-articular, in osteoarthritis
242-243, 245
dressings
227-228
COX-1
235-237
biological
228
COX-2
124, 132,
dry adherent
227
235-237, 273
frequency of changes
228
60
non adherent
227
cranial cruciate disease, feline
45-47
occlusive
227-228
aetiology and pathogenesis
45
wet adherent
227
diagnosis
45
dressings, ideal qualities
226
surgery
45-48
drug induced arthritis
219-221
treatment
45
clinical sigms
220
cranial cruciate ligament
1-3, 43, 45-47
pathogenesis
220
cranial fractures
103
role of antibiotics
219-221
cranial tibial thrust
17-18, 19
dwarfism in dogs
211
craniormandibular osteopathy
217
breed s eported
211
breed
217
concomitant disorders
211
diagnosis
217
dynamic compression plate
144
crimps, stifle surgery
47-48
dynamic compression plates
162
CTossed K wites
162
cruciate ligaments
1-5, 7,10
bands
E
biomechanics
4-5
elbow disease,arthroscopy
24-26
blood supply
4
electrolytes, dietary, and hip dysplasia
265
3
emergencies, orthopaedic
97-118
cTanial
1-3, 43, 45-47
98-102
extension and flexion
3, 4-5
head trauma
103-104
insertion points
luxabions
117
ligament-bone interface
4
open fractures
108-114
mechanoreceptors
4
sepsis
117
microscopic anatomy
3
sheaning injunies
115-116
2
endochondral ossi fication
187, 188, 193
Tepair
43, 243
enostosis
see panosteitis
rupture/injury
16-19, 22, 23,45-47
enzymatic debridement
226
cTuciate Tupture
22, 23
see panosteitis
cruciate rupture, treatment
16-19
erosi ve polyarthritis
217-219
extra-articular techniques
16, 17
etodolac
237
intta-articular techniques
16, 17
extemal coaptation
200
Index
external skeletal fixation, circular
83-92,125-126
fragmented medial coronoid
biomechanical studies
87
process, arthroscopy
24
clinical applications
06-68
free grafting
247-248
complications
92
design
83, 84-86
91-92
gamma knife therapy
G
extracellular matrix of cartilage
30-31
129-130
exttaskeletal osteosarcoma
131
Gelpi retractor
13, 39, 40
giant breed dogs, ligament repait
208
274
F
glycosaminoglycan, cartilage
30, 31
fabella
15
glycosaminoglycans
212
fabella to patella tendon suture, cats
54
grading scale, open fractures
108
fascial imbnication, cats
54
grading, patellar luxation
48-49, 61-62,
fat embolism
118
63-64, 77-78
femoral condylar fractures
160-167
growthplate
187
femoral condyles
15
Gustillo and Anderson grading
femoral deformities in patellar luxation
61
scale, open fractures
108, 113
femoral fractures, distal 
160-167
methods of fixalion
161
repair diffculty
161
H
fermoral osteotomy
79,80,81
half-pin fixation
88
choice of plate
79
hard palate injury
104
femoral physeal fractures, distal
159-160
Hard-backed orthopaedic saw
66-67
femoral supracondylar fractures
160-167
head trauma
103-104
methods of fixabion 
161
Ainfu ueg
103
repair diffculty
161
cranial fractures
103
femorotibial sacs 
14
hard palate
104
femur, diaphyseal fractures
151-155
jaw fractures
104
decision to anatomically reconstruct
152
high-rise syndrome, cats
105-106,206
extemal fixation
152,153, 154-155
high-rise syndrome,dogs
106
interlocking nails
153
hip dysplasia
253-260, 263-284,
Suuutd Aie [npameiu
151-153, 154
299,300
plate fixabion 
153-154
aebiology
253
plate-rod fixabion
154
 and degenerati ve joint disease
266
surgical approaches
151
271
femut, muscular attachments
151
 and osteoarthritis
264
FefTetti, Antonio
83-84
 and restricted food intake
264,265
froxocib
237
breeds commonly affected
253,254, 266
fixators, external
111,115, 116, 152,
definition
253, 263
153,154-155,
early intervention
263-284
167-168, 201
heritability
263
circular
83-92
pain
272, 299
linear
91
pathogenesis
253
flexion bandage, 90/90
153
palient history
299-300
Fluckiger method, hip dysplasia
279
254, 258-260,
fluorquinolones and polyarthropathy
220-221
279, 281
fracture delayed union
189
tole of NSAIDs
272-274
fracture non-union
179-183, 189,200
tole of nutrition
263-265
fracture over-reduction
152
surgery
266, 275-284,
fracture plarnning
136-137
297-302
biomechanics
136
treatment
270-284
fracture biology
136
hip dysplasia diagnosis
253-260, 267-270
patient
136
arthroscopy
260, 281
fractures, bone deficient 
181-182
Barden's sign
258
fractures, comminuted
103
260
fractures, cranial
103
gait observation
255, 267, 300
fractures, humeral condylar
167, 168-176
history and signalment
254, 299-300
fractures, humeral supracondylar
167
joint laxity
256,267-268,
fract ures, infected
179-181
269-270, 277, 279
debridement 
180
muscle atrophy
267
restabilisahion
180
Ortolani sigm
257-258,266,
fractures, jaw
104
267-269, 277, 280
fractures, metacarpus and metatarsus
199-204
physical examination
255-256,267,300
fractures, open
108-114
Tadiography
258-260, 269-270,
assessment, grading
108
279, 281
bone grafting
112, 114, 204
hip dysplasia, adult dogs
254, 255-256,260
debridement and lavage
109, 203
hip dysplasia, immature dogs
254,255,256,260,
fracture management
111-011
272-274
human literature
112-114
hip dysplasia, treatment 
270-284, 297-302
wound immigation
011-601
conservative treatment
270-271
wound management
011-601
neutraceuticals
274
fractures, tibial,in childen
112-114
NSAIDs
272-274, 301
Surf Sun & 16 Speakers, Proc. No. 361
305
surgery
266,275-284,
joints, nerve endings in
234
297-302
hip impl ants
297-299
Eise[dsAp deu pue Airxe[ sutof dy
253,255,256,263,
264,265-266
K wining
55, 57,74, 159,
267-268, 274, 279
162, 175
hip replacement, total
297-302
ketoprophen
236
complications
302
contraindications
301
indications
300
L
patient evaluation
299-300
Jatency period following osteotomy
88-89
surgical procedure
301-302
Jateral arthrotomy, cats
50-51
Hohmannretractor
12, 39,40
Jateral capsular imbrication in
hoop mechanism, meniscus
patellar luxation
64
humeral fractures, condylar
167, 168-176
lateral condyle
168, 174
age and gender
171
64
breed incidence
170
lateral meni scus
6,7
causes
169-170
lavage solutions
225
fixation failure
175
Javage, wounds
225-226
fracture repait
173
ligament injuries, carpus
206-209
histopathological examination
170
AWOEUE
206-207
history of trauma
169
collateral ligament injury
208
incidence in immature dogs
169, 170
treatment
207-208
incidence in mature dogs
169-170
ligament injury
41
lameness prior to fracture
175-176
ligament epait, giant breed dogs
208
radiographic findings
171-173
ligament, meniscofemoral
6
reported incidence
168
ligaments, cruciate
1-5, 7, 10
humeral fractures, supracondylar
167
bands
2
humoral condylar frac tures, bilateral
171
biomechanics
4-5
hypertrophic osteodystrophy
see metaphy seal
blood supply
4
osteopathy
caudal
3
hypochondrodysplastic dog breeds
211
cranial
1-3, 43, 45-47
hypophospahataemia
214
extension and flexion
3, 4-5
hypophospahataemic nickets
214
insertion points
ligament-bone inter face
mechanoreceptors
4
I
microscopic anatomy
 Ilizarov, Professor Gavnil A
83, 84, 87, 88
origin points
2
IMEXTM extemal fixation system
84-86
Tepair
43, 243
217-219
immune-mediated polyarthritis
rupture/injury
16-19, 22, 23, 45-47
218
ligaments, meniscotibial
6
erosive foTms
217-219
limb reconstruction, limits
250-251
non-erosive forms
217-219
limbsparing procedures, osteosarcoma
124, 125-128, 129
treatment
218-219
129
underlying causes
218
intraoperative exttacorporal radiation
127
implants and bacterial adherance
180-181
longitudinal bone transport osteogenesis 
125-126, 182-183
infected fractures
179-181
 metal endoprosthesis
125
infective arthritis
219
pasteurised tumoural autograft
125
antibiotic treatment
219
progmostic factors
130-132
diagnosis
219
sueds qu uosodsuen eurn
126-127
differentiation from other causes
219
liitedcontact-yamccmpresonlate
145
infrapatellar fat pad
15
linear fixators
16
insulin-like growth factor, role in osteosarcoma
123
lineat-circular hybrid fixators
16-06
intensity modulated radiation therapy
129-130
liposome-encapsulated muramyl tripeptide.
interlocking nailing
135,137-142,
phosphatidylethanolamine
122-123
153,167
L-MTP-PE, trial in children
122-123
afterc are
142
Jocking compression plate
146-147
dimensions and design
138-139
locking plates
146-149
evolution
138
complications
148
locking bolts
142
long bone fractures, managerment 
135-149
nail strength
139
biological management 
135
scTew insertion
141-142
luxation, metacarpophalangeal
selection
139
and phalangeal
205-206
surgical technique
140
205
intramedullary pinning
151-153, 154,162
treatment
205-206
involucrum
180
luxation, stifle
41-44
isolated limb perfusion in osteosarcoma
128
collateral ligament repair
43-44
42
pain
41, 42
J
surgical repait
42-44
jaw fractures
t01
Juxations and hip replacement
300-301
joint capsule, stifle
13-14
luxations, emergency
117
joint mice
306
index
M
N
magnetic resonance imaging and diskospondylitis
221
neurovascular island flap
250
 matrix metalloprotein ases
32, 33
274
medial condyle
neutraceuticals in osteoarthritis
240-242,245,274
medial desmotomy in patellar luxation
65
efficacy
241-242
medial desmotomy, cats
quality control241
medial meniscus
6,7
no contact plate
146
medial release technique in patellar luxation
65
non-erosive polyarthritis
217-219
meloxicam
236-237, 273
causes
218
meniscal click
subgroups
218
meniscofemoral ligament
6
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
meniscotibial ligaments
6
drugs, osteosarc oma
133-134
meniscsal injury
8-13,46
normograde pin placement
152
arthroscopy
9,10, 22, 23, 24
NSAIDs in hip dysplasia
272-274, 301
breed disposition
NSAIDs in osteoarthritis
233,234,235-238,
8-10
244, 245
9
carprofen
236
healing ability
8
combination with corticc
237
inspection
12-13
etodolac
237
orthopaedic examinabion
froxocib
237
types
11-12
ketoprophen
236
meniscus
5-13, 43, 46
meloxicam
236-237
6-7
side effects
235, 236, 237
biomechanics
8
tepoxalin
237
blood supply
6-7
therapy in cats
237
injunies
8-12, 42
NSAIDs, side effects
235,236,237,272,
injury after cruciate rupture
273, 301
ligaments
6,7
nutritional secondary hy pothyroidism
213
mechanics and function
5-6
clinical signs
213
meniscus,bucket handle tear
11, 12
213
meniscus, caudal tear
11, 12
213
meniscus, lateral
6,7
treatment
213
meniscus, medial
6,7
meniscus, transverse or longitudinal tear
12
247
metacarpal bones
199
octreotide pamoate
123
205-206
olive wires
86, 87, 90
metacarpus and metatarsus, anatomy
661
open fractures
108-114, 203
 metacarpus and metatarsus, fractures
199-204
assessment, gTading
108
indications for surgical stabilisation
200-201
bone grafting
112, 114, 204
surgical techniques
201
debridement and lavage
109,203
surgical timing
201-202
fracture management
110-111
treatment options
200-203
human literature
112-114
metaphyseal osteopathy
216-217
wound inmigation
011-601
breed
216
wound man agement
011-601
causes
217
open fractures, human
112-114
diagnosis
216
114
distemper virus as trigger
217
sepsis rates
112, 113-114
radiographic findings
216
bibial fractures, children
112-114
treatment
217
121-122, 127
metastasis and progmosis, osteosarcoma
131-132
Orthofix pins
173
micrometastasis in osteosarcoma
123
orthopaedic emergencies
97-118
microvascular tissue transfer
250
examination
98-102
military working dogs and hip dysplasia
271
head trauma
103-104
Minimum Standards Document (AVBC)
290
luxabions
117
mucopolysaccharidosis
211-213
open fractures
108-114
212
sepsis
117
syndromes
212-213
shearing injuries
115-116
mucopolysaccharidosis I, clinical features
212
orthopaedics,challenging cases
199-209
mucopolysaccharidosis I, radiography
212
Ortolani sign
257-258,266,
mucopolysaccharidosis I
212
267-269,277, 280
mucopolysaccharidosis VI
212
false negati ves
268
clinical features
212
osteoarthritis
29-34, 231-245
radiography
212
aetiology in humans
30
skeletal disease
212
and hip dysplasia
264, 297-302
mucopolysaccharidosis VII
212-213
atticular catilage in
30-34
radiography
212-213
cartilage failure in
32-34
multiple drug resistance gene
132
cellular and molecular mec hanisms
31
musculoskeletal abnormalities and
clinical features
29-30, 231
patella luxation
60-61
231-232
 musculoskeletal system, clinical exarmination 
101-102
financial costs
29
101
importance in human population
231
radiographs
102
management
234-245
Surf Sun & 16 Speakers, Proc. No. 361
307
232-234
examination
50
pathological changes
30
Tadiographic sigms
50
 pre valence in Australia (human)
29
treatment options
50-55
29
patellectomy, cats 
55
radiography
232
paw injuries
202-204, 206
osteoarthritis treatment
234-245
PCfix
146
indications for surgery
234-235
PennHIP
260,266,268,
non-surgical management
235-245
270, 279
physical therapy
238, 243-245
 pentosan polysulphate
239-240, 274
therapeutic agents
235-243, 274
beneficial effects
239
osteochondral wedge
68, 69
therapeutic trials
239-240
osteochondritis dissecans, arthroscopy
25
P-glycoprotein
132
osteochondrodysplasias
211
phalangeal fllet technique
248-249
osteochondrodysplasia in cats
211
phal anges, anatomy
205
osteochondrosis dissecans
215
133-134
osteomyelitis
179-180, 181
physical therapy in osteoarthritis
antimicrobial therapy
238, 243-245
244-245
181
perioperative period
diagnosis
179-180
pin fixation
107
radiography
179-180
 plate fixation, conventional
144-145
osteosarcoma, canine
119-134
loss of reduction
144-145
121-124
 plate fixation, evolution
144-146
age, size disposition
119
plate-rod fixation
143, 154
chemotherapy protocol
121
 plates, fracture management 
135, 137, 153-154,
conventional surgery
124
201
diagnosis
120
dynamic compression plate
144
metastasis
119-120, 131-132
important factors
154
e (nuadle-uou
128-129
limited contact-dynamic
novel surgery
125-130
compression plate
145
132-134
locking compression plate
146-147
radiographs
120
locking plates
146-149
survival rates
120-121, 122
no contact plate
146
120-130
PC fix
146
osteosarcoma, non-appendicular
128-129
Zespol extemal plate fixator
146
hemipelvectomy
128
polyinsaturated fatty acids and osteoathritis
242
mandibulectomy and maxillectomy
128, 130-131
121-122, 127-128
scapulectomy
128
polymethylmethacrylate, effects
811
thoracic wall resection
128
pouch flaps
249
vertebrectomy
128-129
primary spongiosa
187
osteotomy
126, 127
primary trabeculae
187, 191
prognosis in osteosarcoma
130-132
metastasis
131-132
P
molecular indices
132
pain, hip dysplasia
272
serum alkaline phosphatase
132
pain, osteoarthritis
232-234
tUmoUT size
131
neuropathic pain
233
 Progmostic factors in osteosarcoma
130-132
nociceptor pain
232-233, 234
235, 273
reactive pain, muscle hypertonus
233
therapeutic agents
235-243
pamidronate therapy, osteosarcoma
134
Q
panosteitis
215-216
oexn eed ut wsueqou sdasupenb 
60
216
quadriceps muscle
60
215-216
clinical sigms
216
radiographic findings
216
R
treatment
216
Tadial nerve
167
 patellar changes
15
tadiation therapy, osteosarcoma
132-134
patellar fractures in cats
56-57
tadiographic stress views
279
patellar luxation
59-75,77
120
anatomy and pathophysiology
60-61
radiographs, humoral condylar fractures
171-173
bone Teconstruchion
63, 66-75
degenerative joint disease
172
breed disposition
59
fiagmented medial coronoid process
173
choice of surgical methods
63-64
 periosteal proli feration
172
conservative vs surgical management
62-63
Tadiolucent line
172, 175
cofTective osteotomy
77-81
Tadiographs,thoracic
167
diagnosis
61-62
radiographyhidylasi
258-260, 269-270,
48-49, 61-62, 63-64,
279,281
77-78
Tadiography, osteomyelitis
179-180
radiography
61
Tadiography, patellar luxation
61
Tec uTTence
59
radiogra phy, stifle
14-16,21,42,50
soft tissue Teconstruction
63, 64-66
fabella
15
surgical cofTechion
78-81
femoral condyles
15
patellar luxation, n cats
48-55
infrapatellar fat pad
15
breed disposition
48
joint mice
15
308
index
patellar changes
15
specialist colleges
289
15
specialist training, Australia
289-295
bbial plateau
15
investment in
294
Tadioisotopes in osteosarcoma
130
specialists in Australia, review
292
Tadiolucent line in humoral condylar fractures
172
splinting materials
228
tadiopharmaceubicals
133
41
reconstruction methods, skin defects, distal limh
247-250
stereotactic Tadiosurgery
129-130
free grafting
247-248
sterilisation, arthroscopy equipment
22
mesh graft
247
stifle
microvascular tissue tansfer
250
anatomy and biomechanics
1-19
neurovascular island flap
250
anatomy, feline
39
 phalangeal fllet technique 
248-249
arthroscopy
22-24
pouch flaps
249
biomechanics
4-5
rotation and advancement flaps
248-249
collateral ligaments
13, 41, 43-44
tube grafts
249-250
feline surgery
39-57
reconstruction of skin defects, distal limb
247-252
joint capsule
13-14
complications
252
luxabion
41-44
limits
250-251
radiography
14-16, 21,42, 50
247-250
stifle luxation
41-44
251
collateral ligament repait
43-44
Teconstruchion plates
163-164
42
Tegistration as specialist, Australia
289-293
pain
41,42
retained cartilage cores
215
surgical repait
42-44
histological findings
215
stife surgery, Feline
39-57
radiographic findings
215
cranial cruciate disease
45-47
treatment
215
distal femoral fractures
55-56
nib resechion
131
instrumentation
39 -40
rickets
214
patellar luxation
48-55
causes
214
surgical approaches
40-41
hypophospahataemic ickets
214
stifle, extensor mechanism
60
radiographic findings
214
subperiosteal osteotomies
88
vitamin D dependent nickets type I
214
sulcoplasty
51-52
vitamin D dependent rickets type II
214
sulcus
51,52
ngid fxabion
161-061
sulphonamides, toxicity
220
Totation and advancement flaps
248-249
supracondylar femoral plates
165
supracondylar fractures, femoral
160-167
repair difficulty
161
S
surgery, hip dysplasia
275-284,297-302
Salter-Harris fractures
159, 160
canine juvenile pubic symphysiodesis
276-278
samarium
130, 133
client factors
275
saphenous artery
248
patient factors
275
Schroeder-Thomas splint
153
surgical factors
276
sciatic nerve, risk during pinning
151-152
total hip replacement 
297-302
Scotish fold cat, osteochondrodysplasia
211
triple pelvic osteotomy
278-284
scTew holes, implants
139
surgical training, Australia
289-295
screw placement
174-175
systemic lupus erythematosus
218
inside-out method
174-175
 systemic platinum
121
outside-in method
175
252
Senn retractor
12-13, 39, 40
T
sepsis
117
tendon, long digital extensor 
14
sepsis Tates, human open fractures
112, 113-114
tendon, popliteus muscle
14
serum alkaline phosphatase in osteosarcoma
132
tepoxalin
237
shaft fract ures
thalidomide in osteosarc oma
124
bone plate fixation
137
therapeutic agents, osteoarthritis
235-243
clamp rod intemal fixator
143-144
corticosteroids
242-243, 245
interlocking nailing
137-142
disease modifying osteoarthntic drugs
238-240, 245
locking plates
146-149
health-food shop preparations
240-241
plate-rod fixaion
143
neutraceubicals
240-242, 245, 274
stabilisation
136-137
NSAIDs
233, 234, 235-238
shearing injunies
115-116, 203
special diets
242, 245
Singleton's gading system, patellar luxation
48-49, 61-62, 63-64
tibial compression mechanism
17-18
211
tibial crest transposition
71-74
skin defects, distal limb, reconstruction methods 
247-250
choice of instruments
72
skin flap wound closure
203-204
common mistakes
72,74
skin grafing, distal limbs
247-250
size of osteotomy
72
skin grafting, recipient bed
248
 tibial deformities in patellar luxation
61
small animal surgery practice
293
bibial fractures, children
112-114
sne ut Ainut anssg yos
202,203
bibial head plates
164-165
softissuereconstructive techniques
tibial intemal rotation
61
in patellar luxation
63, 64-66
ibial plateau
15
soft hissue swelling
15
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
16, 18-19
sainieiy ie[Apuos [eieunq pue ssop [erueds
170
tibial tuberosity transposition
Surf Sun & 16 Speakers, Proc. No. 361
309
tibial tuberosity transposition, cats
53-54
Tomotherapy?
130
toumiquets in distal limb reconstruction
251, 252
transaricular pinning
4243
transpostion of origin of fectus femoris
65-66
transverse or longitudinal tear, meniscus
12
traumatic injuries, distal limbs 
199-207
traumatised animal, clinical examination
98-100
auscultabion
98
blood tests
66-86
urinary system
99
triple pelvic osteotomy
278-284
278, 281
candidates for
279-282
clinical studies
282-284
complications
284
Tesults
282-284
surgical technique
282
trochlea resection
66
trochleaer wedge recession
66-69
choice of saws
66-67
trochlear block recession
69-70
69-70
complications
70
trochlear depth
66
trochleat recession
66-69, 69-70, 78
trochleoplasty
66-71
tube grafts
249-250
tumour size and progmos
131
U
25
A
vertebral osteosarcoma
131
vitamin D dependent nickets type I
214
vitamin D dependent rickets type II
214
M
wedge recession sulcoplasty, cats
51-52
wound healing, stages
223-224
223-224
inflammatory phase
223
maturation phase
224
repair phase
224
wound imigation, open fractures
011-601
wound management
225-229
choice of antibioic
226
225-226
dressings
226-228
goals of therapy
225
specialised bandaging
229
wound types
224-225
acute
224
chronic
224
clean
224
clean contaminated
224
contaminated
225
225
wounds, classi fication
224-225
wounds, factors affecting healing
224
X
X-Acto saw
66-67
Z
 Zespol extemal plate fixator
146
zoledronic acid
192-195
370
index
Additional Notes:
Page Ref
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
Additional Notes:
Page Ref
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
Additional Notes:
Page Ref
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
Additional Notes:
Page Ref
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363
Additional Notes:
Page Ref
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No. 363
Additional Notes:
Page Ref
An Orthopaedic Odyssey, Proc. No.363