EXOTICANIMAL
SECONDEDITION
MEDICINE
FORTHE
VETERINARYTECHNICIAN
BONNIE BALLARD AND RYAN CHEEK
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Exotic Animal Medicine
forthe
Veterinary Technician
Second Edition
Exotic Animal Medicine
for the
Veterinary Technician
Second Edition
Edited by
Bonnie Ballard, DvM
and Ryan Cheek, RVTg VTS (ECC)
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
First edition first published 2003
1. Exotic animals-Diseases. 2. Wildlife diseases. 3. Pet
Second edition frst published 2010
medicine. 4. Veterinary nursing. I Ballard, Bonnie
@ 2010 Blackwell Publishing
M. II. Cheek, Ryan.
[DNLM: 1. Animal Diseases. 2. Animals,
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in
Wild. 3. Animal Technicians. 4. Veterinary Medicine-
February 2007. Blackwells publishing program has been merged
methods.
SF 997.5.E95 E96 2010]
with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business 
SF997.5.E95C44 2010
to form Wiley-Blackwell.
636.089'073-dc22
2009035848
Editorial Office
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.s. Library
of Congress.
For details of our global editorial offces, for customer services,
and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse
the copyright material in this book, please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Disclaimer
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use,
 The contents of this work are intended to further general scien-
or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by
tific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not
Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly
intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or
to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive,
 promoting a specifc method, diagnosis, or treatment by practi-
Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been
tioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author
granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of pay-
make no representations or warranties with respect to the
 p sas r sa a a a aq su s
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and spe-
Transactional
Reporting
Service
are
ISBN-13:
cifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any
978-0-8138-2206-8/2010.
implied warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. In view
of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in gov-
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products
ernmental regulations, and the constant flow of information
 are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product
relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the
names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trade-
reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided
marks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The
in the package insert or instrucions for each medicine, equip-
 publisher is not associated with any product or vendor men-
ment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the
toned in this book. This publication is designed to provide
instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and
accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where
matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher
appropriate. The fact that an organization or Website is referred
is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional
to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further
advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
information does not mean that the author or the publisher
competent professional should be sought.
endorses the information the organization or Website may
provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers
Library of Congress Catatoging-in-Publication Data
should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may
have changed or disappeared between when this work was
Exotic animal medicine for the veterinary technician / edited
written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or
by Bonnie Ballard and Ryan Cheek. - 2nd ed.
extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither
p.；cm.
 the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
arising herefrom.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2206-8 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8138-2206-8 (alk. paper)
12010
Table of Contents
Preface
xili
Acknowledgements
XV
Contributors
xvi
Disclaimer
xxi
Section 1 Introduction
3
Chapter 1
The Role of the Veterinary Technician in Exotic Animal Medicine
5
Bonnie Ballard
Section 2 Avian
9
Chapter 2
Psittacines and Passerines
11
Cheryl B. Greenacre and Lillian Gerhardt
Introduction
11
Anatomy and Physiology
12
Comparative Clinical Pathology
16
Nutrition
17
History, Restraint, and Physical Examination
18
Common Diseases
24
Radiology
30
Anesthesia and Analgesia
30
Surgery
32
Parasitology
33
Gender Determination
33
Grooming
34
 Emergency and Critical Care
35
Techniques
37
Administration of Medications
38
 Diagnostic Sampling
42
Wound Care and Bandaging
42
Euthanasia
43
References
43
Chapter 3
 Psittacine Behavior, Husbandry, and Enrichment
45
Tarah Hadley
Introduction
4.5
Behavior of Common Pet Psittacine Species
4.5
Husbandry
49
Normal Behavior of Psittacine Bird Species
51
Abnormal Behavior
52
 Additional Reading
54
See the supporting companion Web site for this book: www.wily.com/go/ballard.
V
V1
Contents
Chapter 4
 Aviary Design and Management
55
April Romagnano
Introduction
5.5
Aviculture
5.5
Quarantine
5.5
 Examinations and Diagnostic Testing: Neonates, Juveniles, Breeders, and
New Acquisitions
56
Disinfection and Disease Prevention
57
Pediatrics for the Aviculturist
58
Conclusion
59
 Additional Reading
60
Chapter 5
Sex Differentiation and Reproduction
61
April Romagnano and Tarah Hadley
Introduction
61
Sex Differentiation
61
 Reproduction
62
 Reproductive Medicine and Surgery
63
Additional Reading
65
Section 3 Reptiles
67
Chapter 6
Lizards
69
Brad Wilson
Introduction
69
 Anatomy and Physiology
69
Husbandry
78
Quarantine
83
Nutrition
83
Common Disorders
87
Behavior
93
 Toxicity and Miscellaneous Nutritional Disorders
94
Zoonoses
94
History, Restraint, and Physical Exam
96
Radiology
100
 Anesthesia and Surgery
101
Parasitology
103
Emergencies
106
Techniques
110
Euthanasia
116
References
116
Chapter 7
Snakes
119
Ryan Cheek, Shannon Richards, and Maria Crane
Introduction
119
Captive-Bred Versus Wild-Caught
119
Behavior
119
 Anatomy and Physiology
120
 Reproductive Biology and Husbandry
126
Egg Anatomy
128
 Egg Incubation and Management
128
Housing
130
Contents
vii
Quarantine
137
Nutrition
138
Transportation
140
Diseases and Clinical Conditions
140
Taking a History
14.5
Preparing For the Physical Exam
146
Restraint
146
The Physical Exam
148
Radiology
1.50
Anesthesia
150
Surgery
1.53
Parasitology
154
Common Parasites of Snakes
1.54
 Emergency and Critical Care
15.5
Emergency Conditions
156
 Critical Care Monitoring
1.57
Sex Determinination
158
 Clinical Techniques
1.59
Venomous Snakes
163
Euthanasia
164
 Being a Responsible Snake Owner
164
References
165
Chapter 8(
Chelonians
167
Samuel Rivera
Introduction
167
 Anatomy and Physiology
168
Husbandry and Nutrition
169
Common Diseases
171
Zoonoses
174
 Obtaining a History and Performing a Physical Examination
174
 Restraint
175
Radiology
175
Anesthesia
175
Parasitology
176
Emergency and Critical Care
176
Clinical Techniques
177
Administration of Medications
179
Euthanasia
180
References
181
Chapter 9
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
183
David Martinez-Jimenez
Introduction
183
 Captive-Bred Versus Wild-Caught
183
Quarantine
183
Managing Large Collections
184
Managing Large Collections Of Dangerous Species
188
 Methods Of Sex Determination
188
Reproductive Behavior
191
Follicle and Egg Development
193
Clutch Dynamics
193
 Oviparous, Ovoviviparous, Or Viviparous
194
See the supporting companion Web site for this book: www. wily.com/go/ballard.
vili
Contents
Egg Incubation Versus Maternal Incubation
194
Egg Incubation Methods
194
 Diagnosing Egg Problems
198
Caring For The Newborn
199
References
200
Section 4 Amphibians
203
Chapter 10 Amphibians
205
Brad Wilson
 Introduction, Taxonomy, and Natural History
20.5
 Anatomy and Physiology
209
Husbandry
214
Enclosure Design
218
Amphibian-Environment Interaction
219
Amphibian-Amphibian Interaction
219
Quarantine
220
Nutrition
221
Food Items
222
Common Disorders
224
Larval Amphibians
228
History and Physical Exam
229
Radiology
232
 Anesthesia and Surgery
232
Techniques
233
Euthanasia
236
References
237
Section 5 Mammals
239
Chapter 11 Ferrets
241
James R. McClearen, Julie Mays, and Tarah Hadley
Introduction
241
Anatomy
241
Behavior
243
Husbandry
244
Nutrition
244
Common and Zoonotic Diseases
24.5
History and Physical Examination
246
Preventive Medicine
247
Restraint
247
 Radiology and Ultrasound
247
 Anesthesia and Surgery
248
 Parasitology
248
Urinalysis
248
 Emergency and Critical Care
249
Sex Determination
250
Techniques
250
References
253
Contents
1x
Chapter 12 Rabbits
255
Douglas K. Taylor, Vanessa Lee, Deborah Mook, and Michael J. Huerkamp
Introduction
25.5
Behavior
25.5
Anatomy and Physiology
256
 Biologic and Reproductive Data
259
Husbandry
2.59
Nutrition
261
Common and Zoonotic Diseases
262
Taking a History
269
 Physical Examination and Preventive Medicine
271
Restraint
273
Radiology
274
Anesthesia
275
Common Surgical Procedures
280
Parasitology
281
Urinalysis
282
 Clinical Techniques
282
Sex Determination
287
 Emergency and Critical Care
287
Euthanasia
289
References
289
Chapter 13 Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters 
293
Anne Hudson and April Romagnano
Introduction
293
Anatomy and Physiology
293
 Biologic and Reproductive Data
29.5
Husbandry
29.5
Nutrition
296
 Common Parasites, Diseases, and Zoonoses
296
Behavior
300
 History and Physical Examination
301
Restraint and Handling
301
Radiology
302
 Surgery and Anesthesia
302
Bandaging and Wound Care
303
 Emergency and Critical Care
303
 Sex Determination
303
Techniques
303
Euthanasia
308
 Additional Reading
309
Chapter 14 Chinchillas
311
Trevor Lyon and Bonnie Ballard
 Taxonomy/Common Species Seen in Practice
311
 Anatomy and Physiology
311
Reproduction
313
Husbandry
313
Nutrition
313
 Common and Zoonotic Diseases
313
Behavior
31.5
 Taking the History and Performing the Physical Exam
31.5
See the supporting companion Web site for this book: www.wiley.com/go/ballard.
Contents
Handling and Restraint
31.5
Radiology
316
 Anesthesia and Surgery
316
 Parasitology
316
Urinalysis
316
 Emergency and Critical Care
317
Sex Determination
317
Techniques
317
Euthanasia
318
References
318
Chapter 15 Guinea Pigs
319
Anne Hudson and Maria Crane
Common Types
319
Behavior
319
 Anatomy and Physiology
319
 Biologic and Reproductive Data
319
Husbandry
320
Nutrition
320
Common and Zoonotic Diseases
321
History and Physical Examination
321
Restraint
322
Radiology
322
 Anesthesia and Surgery
322
Parasitology
322
Urinalysis
323
 Emergency and Critical Care
323
Sex Determination
323
Techniques
323
Euthanasia
325
References
32.5
Chapter 16 Hedgehogs
327
Michael Duffy Jones
Taxomony, Anatomy, and Physiology
327
Biologic and Reproductive Data
329
Behavior
329
Husbandry
329
Nutrition
330
Common Diseases
330
 Obtaining a History and Physical Examination 
331
Radiology
331
 Anesthesia and Surgery
331
Urinalysis
332
Parasitology
332
 Emergency and Critical Care
332
Sex Determination
332
Techniques
332
References
334
Chapter 17 Skunks
335
Samuel Rivera
Introduction
335
 Anatomy and Physiology
335
Contents
xi
Husbandry and Nutrition
33.5
Common Health Problems
33.5
Amyloidosis
336
Zoonotic Diseases
336
 Physical Examination
337
Vaccinations
337
Restraint
337
Radiology
337
Anesthesia
337
Parasitology
337
Clinical Techniques
337
Administration of Medications
339
References
339
Chapter 18 Sugar Gliders
341
Samuel Rivera
Introduction
341
Anatomy
341
 Husbandry and Nutrition
341
Common Diseases
342
 Physical Examination
342
Restraint
342
Radiology
343
Anesthesia
343
Parasitology
343
Clinical Techniques
343
References
344
Chapter 19 Prairie Dogs
345
Samuel Rivera
Introduction
34.5
Anatomy and Physiology
34.5
Husbandry and Nutrition
34.5
Common and Zoonotic Diseases
34.5
 Restraint
347
Radiology
347
Anesthesia
347
Clinical Techniques
347
References
348
Section 6 Wildlife Rehabilitation
349
Chapter 20 The Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
351
Melanie Haire
 Introduction
351
Getting Started
3.51
Rehabilitating Wildlife in a Small Animal Veterinary Hospital
3.52
Clinic Protocols
352
Intake Procedures
35.5
Ethical Considerations and Reducing Stress in Captive Wildlife
356
Initial Exam
3.56
 Choosing Treatment Routes
357
See the supporting companion Web site for this book: www. wiley.com/go/ballard.
xii
Contents
Release Criteria Versus Euthanasia
3.58
 Imprinting and Taming
359
Transporting Wildlife
360
Raptor Care
362
 Altricial Orphan Songbirds
368
Caring for Adult Passerine (Song) Birds
373
 Precocial Bird Basic Care
376
Adult Precocial Birds (Including Waterfowl and Wading Birds)
377
General Orphan Mammal Care
378
Species Care Sheets
382
Acknowledgments
382
References
383
Section 7 Hematology
385
 Chapter 21 Avian and Reptile Hematology
387
Denise I. Bounous
Introduction
387
 Blood Collection
387
Blood Smear and Assessment
388
Leukocytes
388
Erythrocytes
391
Thrombocytes
392
References
392
Appendices  1. State/Federal Wildlife Permit Offices
39.5
2. Wildlife Admission/Exam/Care Forms
399
3. Handling and Restraint of Wildlife Species
403
4. Tail Wrapping
409
 5. Guide to Identification of Hatchling and Nestling Songbirds
411
6.
 Average Body Weights of Selected North American Songbirds
417
7.
 Species Care Sheets
419
 8. Biological Data of Selected North American Wild Mammals
427
 9. Glossary of Medical Conditions and Treatments
429
10. Wildlife Product Sources
433
11. Additional Resources
437
12. Supplies Necessary for an Exotic Practice
441
Index
443
See the supporting companion Web site for this book: www. wiley.com/go/ballard.
Preface
The second edition was written to provide the veterinary technician with important information about a variety
of species commonly seen in exotic practice, reflecting changes in this branch of medicine that have occurred
since the frst edition. This text is beneficial to the technician who would like to work with these animals but
may have graduated years ago, before this area of medicine was popular. This text is also helpful to the techni-
cian who works for a veterinarian who would like to add exotic species to his/her practice. While it was not
written for veterinarians, they may find it beneficial as well.
With the help of this book, the technician will know what questions to ask to obtain an adequate history, be
able to educate the client about husbandry and nutrition, be able to safely handle and restrain common species,
and be able to perform necessary procedures when needed. Because the feld of exotic animal medicine is a
dynamic one, new knowledge is constantly emerging about many of the species kept as pets, and new informa-
tion can, in some cases, contradict what was thought to be true before. For many species, exotic animal medicine
can be said to be in its infancy. We realize that for some of the species featured in this book, the information
presented may need to be modified in the future. Further, because what we know about exotic animal medicine
is forever changing and much has not been scientifically proven, it is common to find contradicting information
from one reputable source to the next. This can create frustration but also provide the challenge of working in
a cutting edge area of medicine. This is the major reason why it is paramount to attend continuing education in
this area of medicine. Veterinary technicians working in exotic medicine must engage in lifelong learning to be
up to date on the latest information.
New contributors as well as new chapters have been added to this edition. Although some of the contributors
realize that while technicians do not make decisions about what drugs to use in any animal, they are required
to be familiar with different pharmaceuticals, know where to find a dosage, and know how to calculate it.
This book was written with the assumption that the technician already is educated in topics such as anatomy,
physiology, medical terminology, pathology, and pharmacology. We present only what is unique to the species
featured here.
We hope this book proves to be beneficial to all technicians interested in exotic animal medicine.
Xxili
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all of our new contributors who gave their time to provide additional information to
enhance this edition. Appreciation also goes to the original contributors who took time to update their original
chapters. I would like to thank my husband Brian Kershaw for continually being supportive and understanding
when I had to take my precious little free time to work on the book!
Bonnie Ballard
This second edition has seen many changes. I would like to thank my family and friends for the support they
have given me throughout this entire process. I would also like to acknowledge the many technicians working
 patience. Your commitment to this field is truly inspiring.
Ryan Cheek
XV
Contributors
Bonnie Ballard, DVM, has worked in veterinary medicine since 1974, starting as a veterinary assistant, becoming
a technician in 1979, and earning a DVM in 1994. In 1997, she started the veterinary technology program
at Gwinnett Technical College. The program has been AVMA accredited since 2000. Dr. Ballard currently is
the program's director and one of two full time faculty members. She has won numerous teaching awards
and has received many accolades for the program. She also practices small animal and exotic medicine at
Winder Animal Hospital in Winder, Georgia.
Denise I. Bounous, DVM, PhD, Diplomate ACVP, was a professor of clinical pathology at the University of
Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine before her move into the pharmaceutical industry. Her academic
interests included avian and reptilian clinical pathology, and her research was in avian immunomodulation.
Ryan Cheek graduated from Gwinnett Technical College in 1999 with an Associate's Degree in Applied
 Technology in veterinary technology, where he focused his studies on exotic animal medicine. He worked at
Zoo Atlanta and then at a small animal/exotic animal practice for four years. He has worked in emergency
and critical care for the past eleven years. He completed his Veterinary Technician Specialist in Emergency
and Critical Care in 2005 and his Bachelor's of Applied Science Degree in veterinary technology from St.
Petersburg College in 2007. He has taught full time at Gwinnett Technical College since 2007; he teaches
many subjects including exotic, wildlife, zoo, and laboratory animal medicine.
Maria M. Crane, DVM, received her MS in exercise science from Georgia State University and her DVM from
the University of Georgia in 1994. She worked as a veterinarian at Zoo Atlanta, providing clinical and surgi-
cal care, and later as vice president of animal health, managing veterinary and nutritional services. She has
also practiced small and exotic animal medicine.
Lillian Gerhardt, LVT, graduated from the State University of New York. She has been a technician at the
University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine in the Avian and Zoological Medicine Service for
eighteen years. She has presented seminars at the Avian Veterinarian Annual Conferences several times. She
has always had a special interest in birds and has shared the last twenty-three years of her life with a sulphur
crested cockatoo named Sugar.
Cheryl B. Greenacre, DVM, Diplomate ABVP-Avian, graduated from the University of Georgia College of
Veterinary Medicine in 1991 and taught avian and exotic animal medicine at UGA for ten years and at the
 University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine for nine years. Dr. Greenacre is the immediate past
chair for the UT Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and is currently a professor at the University
of Tennessee. She divides her work time between teaching veterinary students and residents, providing clients
and referring veterinarians with service, and studying thyroid testing in birds and pain relief in reptiles.
Tarah Hadley, DVM, Diplomate ABVP-Avian, is a graduate of Dartmouth College and Tufts University, where
she received her DVM. She completed an internship in small animal medicine and surgery at Rowley Memorial
Animal Hospital in Massachusetts and a residency in avian medicine and surgery at the University of
Tennessee. During her residency, Dr. Hadley was also trained in exotic animal and zoological medicine. She
currently serves as director of the Atlanta Hospital for Birds and Exotics and is a member of the veterinary
staff at Zoo Atlanta.
Melanie Haire, VMT, received an AS degree in veterinary technology from Wilson College in 1987 and worked
for six years in an Atlanta small animal clinic following graduation. She has spent the last fifteen years on the
veterinary staff at Zoo Atlanta, where she is the senior veterinary technician and hospital manager. She is
Xvii
xviii  Contributors
federally licensed to rehabilitate migratory bird species and raptors and has a state permit to rehabilitate wild
mammals, including rabies vector species. She volunteers at the local wildlife rehabilitation center, Atlanta
Wild Animal Rescue Effort (AWARE), where she is also a board member.
Anne E. Hudson, LVT, LAT, graduated from Blue Ridge Community College with an AAS in veterinary technol-
ogy and received AALAS certification. She has worked as a biological laboratory technician for the Department
of Defense's Clinical Investigation and Research Department. She teaches veterinary assisting to high school
students interested in pursuing careers in the veterinary feld.
Michael J. Huerkamp, DVM, Diplomate ACLAM, earned his DVM from The Ohio State University and did
a professor of pathology and laboratory medicine in the Emory University School of Medicine, where he also
        s        is
the medical care and management of laboratory animals, including rabbits.
Michael Duffy Jones, DVM, received a BS from Notre Dame and DVM from Tufts University. He completed
an internship at Georgia Veterinary Specialists. He worked for five years at Bells Ferry Animal Hospital before
opening his own practice, Peachtree Hills Animal Hospital, in Atlanta in 2oo5. He has a particular interest
in the use of ultrasound as a diagnostic tool, which he uses regularly in his practice and which he teaches to
Other veterinarians.
Vanessa Lee, DVM, obtained her veterinary degree from the University of Georgia in 2005. She was an associate
  i     d         
 a laboratory animal medicine residency at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia.
Irevor Lyon, RVT, graduated from Maple Woods Community College with an AA in veterinary technology.
Focusing on internal medicine, he has lectured at several veterinary conferences around the country. He is a
technician supervisor and co-owner of Bells Ferry Veterinary Hospital. He has worked with wildlife rehabilita-
tion programs and participated in programs to educate the public about wildlife.
David Martinez-Jimenez, DVM, was born in Spain, where he completed his veterinary degree in 2002. After
graduation, he performed several externships in exotic pet, zoo, and wildlife medicine. In 2004, he completed
a Master's Degree in Wild Animal Health at the Royal Veterinary College and Institute of Zoology of London.
He then moved to the USA, where he completed an internship in exotic, zoo, and wildlife medicine at the
University of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine. Dr. Martinez-Jimenez is currently practicing in zoo,
wildlife, and exotic medicine
Julie Mays, LVT, graduated from Snead State Community College with an AA in veterinary technology. She has
long had an interest in exotic animal medicine and surgery.
James R. McClearen, DVM, graduated from the University of Georgia with a BS in agriculture. He received his
DVM from the University of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine, where he worked for several years in
raptor rehabilitation. He sold Bells Ferry Veterinary Hospital, his small animal and exotic pet practice, in
2007, although he still works there. He is active in the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association and served as
its president in 2008.
Deborah Mook, DVM, Diplomate ACLAM, received her DVM from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in
1998 and became board-certified in laboratory animal medicine in 2004. She worked with pet rabbits in the
clinical setting and rabbits as research models in the medical school setting. Her primary expertise lies in the
field of laboratory animal medicine, with a focus on murine infectious disease.
o a   si pe d as e e aan e sd   n
providing educational programs related to these wonderful creatures
Contributors
X1X
Samuel Rivera, DVM, Diplomate ABVP-Avian, graduated from Kansas State University College of Veterinary
Medicine. He later received a Masters of Science in veterinary pathobiology. After practicing in an avian and
exotic practice for several years, he now serves as an associate veterinarian at Zoo Atlanta.
April Romagnano, PhD, DVM, Diplomate ABVP, obtained her PhD from the Universit2 de Montr2al in 1987,
and a DVM from the University of Florida in 1992. She completed an internship in wildlife/small animal
medicine at the University of Florida in 1993, a residency in non-domestic avian medicine at North Carolina
Medical Institute Research Lab at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1988. In 2001 she opened
 an animal clinic and serves as the avian specialist there. She also serves as the fulltime director of animal
resources at Scripps Florida, a consultant veterinarian for Lion Country Safari in Loxahatchee, Florida, and
a courtesy clinical assistant professor at the College of Veterinary Medicine at the University of Florida.
Douglas K. Taylor, DVM, MS, Diplomate ACLAM, received his Veterinary Degree from Michigan State
University in 1995 and practiced small animal medicine for five years afterward. He received his specialty
training in laboratory animal medicine at the University of Michigan, where he also earned his MS. He is
currently the director of surgery and anesthesia services and the assistant director of the residency training
program at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia.
Brad Wilson, DVM, is a veterinarian and partner in two private practice veterinary clinics in north Atlanta. He
received his BS in zoology and his DVM from the University of Georgia. He is the consulting veterinarian for
the largest wholesale importer and distributor of fish, reptiles, amphibians, pocket pets, ferrets, and birds in
north Georgia as well as for the Atlanta Botanical Garden, which has an extensive collection of dendrobatid
 and Central and South American hylid frogs. He has personally maintained and captively bred many species
of snakes and frogs.
Disclaimer
Because exotic animal dosages are based largely on empirical data and not researched facts, the editors and
contributors make no guarantees regarding the results obtained from dosages used in this textbook.
X?i
Exotic Animal Medicine
forthe
Veterinary Technician
Second Edition
Section 1
Introduction
CHAPTER ONE
The Role of the Veterinary Technician in
Exotic Animal Medicine
Bonnie Ballard
Welcome to the world of exotic animal medicine! For
required. Because husbandry and nutrition are
those who practice it, it is the variety that provides the
typically the two most common causes of illness in
spice to veterinary life. In a practice that sees exotics,
exotics, a thorough history in these areas is essential.
 it is not uncommon to see a dog for vaccines, a diabetic
 Furthermore, more time may be required to perform
cat, an iguana with metabolic bone disease, a ferret for
a physical examination due to the delicate nature of
a physical examination, a rabbit with hair loss, and a
some of the species. In many cases it is necessary to
feather-picking cockatoo all in one day. The challenge
allow adequate time to educate the owner about how
for those in this field lies in the vast differences in the
to keep his/her pet healthy.
species seen (Figure 1.1).
The front office staff must be knowledgeable and
 In the world of veterinary medicine, an exotic
interested in exotic pets because they will be the first
animal is any animal that isn't a dog, cat, horse, or
 people the pet owner sees in the office. The worst thing
cow. Exotic animals include wildlife species, animals
that can happen for a snake owner, for example, is to
commonly used in research that are kept as pets, and
step up to the front desk and see the receptionist recoil
animals native to various regions of the world such
in horror. Not only is this behavior unprofessional, but
as South America, Australia, and Africa. Owners of
it also calls into question the knowledge of the doctors.
" pocket pets" such as mice, rats, gerbils, and hamsters
Likewise, if a receptionist does not know the difference
 commonly seek veterinary care for their pets.
between a macaw and a cockatoo, it may give the
There are several scenarios in which a technician
impression that the clinic doesn't see many birds.
faced with exotics may find this book helpful. For
Housing is another consideration in the decision to
 instance, a technician might take a job in a practice
treat exotic pets. Because many pocket pets are prey
that sees exotics but she knows little about them
 because she graduated before exotics became popular
pets. Another technician may work for a veterinarian
who wants to add exotics to the practice but doesn't
have hands-on experience with them. Alternatively, a
 technician who finds employment at a zoological park
or works with a wildlife rehabilitator may want to
brush up on current ideas about exotics. While this
book does not cover zoo species specifically, knowl-
edge of exotic animals, their treatment, and their care
is desirable in the zoo environment.
It is essential that a technician who works for a
veterinarian who would like to add exotics to the
practice help the veterinarian understand how the
practice will need to change to accommodate these
species. One must accept the fact that a fifteen- or
twenty-minute appointment will not suffice. In many
Figure 1.1. A technician drawing blood from a
cases appointments of thirty minutes or longer are
skunk. (Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
Chapter 1
animals, their housing in relation to that of dogs and
their veterinary clinic should be the source of that
cats must be considered. For example, a rabbit should
information.
not be caged where a cat patient can watch it. This
The technician can also provide valuable informa-
alone can create undue added stress for a rabbit
 tion about what type of exotic pet a client should buy.
 patient, which is already stressed by being in the hos-
For example, an iguana is considered to be a difficult
pital environment. An exotic pet should not have to
reptile to keep because its housing and nutrition
add the fear of being eaten to its worries during a
 requirements are demanding. A bearded dragon may
hospital stay.
be a better choice. A parakeet may be a better choice
While the average animal hospital has most of the
than a macaw for a first-time bird owner, because
necessary equipment needed to treat exotics, some
macaws can be noisy and messy. The topic of conser-
items will need to be purchased. For example, a gram 
vation of species is important here as well. New exotic
scale is required to weigh many of the very small
 pet owners should be encouraged to acquire captive-
 patients. Microtainer blood collection tubes are also
raised species rather than wild-caught if possible. In
essential. A list of equipment that is useful in exotic
many exotic species, the numbers in the wild are
 practices appears in Appendix 12.
diminishing.
This is especially true of many avian
The technician's role in exotic animal medicine is
species. Most exotic species that are desirable as pets
the same as it is in small or large animal medicine. One
 can be obtained from captive-raised sources.
of the most important roles is that of a meticulous
 One should never underestimate the strength of the
history taker. As each chapter illustrates, a simple
human-animal bond that exists between owners and
history will not do. Detailed questions must be asked
their exotic pets. An owner can be as bonded to a
about how and where the pet was acquired. Wild-
mouse or a snake as another owner is to a dog or
caught species can have different health problems than
 horse. Just as one should never assume what an owner
those raised in captivity. How the pet is housed is
is willing to spend for medical care on dogs, cats, and
vitally important, and this means not only asking what
horses, one
should never assume what exotic pet
it is housed in but the cage size, construction, substrate
owners will spend for their pets. It is not uncommon
used, and where it is kept in the house. If the animal
to see a devoted owner spend hundreds of dollars for
is not brought in the cage it is housed in, the techni-
a surgical procedure for a pet rat.
cian, after gathering the history, should be able
to
Some veterinary practices see primates and venom-
create a mental picture of what the cage at home looks
ous species. Because of the dangers to humans, these
like.
veterinarians
typically
set
"rules of engagement"
The same is true for gathering adequate information
regarding the care and treatment of these animals. For
about the pet's diet. It is not good enough to ask what
example, the veterinarian may only see a primate or
is fed, because that may not be what is consumed. For 
venomous snake after hours, when all employees and
 example, an owner may report that his Amazon par-
clients are gone. Likewise, a veterinarian may require
rot's daily diet is made up of fruits, vegetables, and
that an owner of a venomous snake provide in-date
seeds. When asked how much of each is consumed
antivenin along with the snake.
each day, the answer may be mostly seeds, which is an
Some veterinarians will not see large exotic cats due
inadequate diet.
to safety concerns. And yes, there are people who have
In many cases, owners of exotics may have been
 permits to keep them. Others will see these animals on
sous ad an aq aro siad n noe pa
the owner's premises as long as handling equipment,
where the pets were purchased. Although some pet
such as squeeze cages, is provided. It is important that
shop employees are knowledgeable, many simply
1do
 all employees know the clinic's protocol for seeing
 not know the correct information about the species
 primates, venomous species, and large cats.
they sell. In addition, an owner may have read infor-
Every state has different laws regarding which
mation from a less than reputable source. The veteri-
species are legal to keep as pets and which are not. It
 nary technician should be able to give owners the
is up to the veterinarian to decide whether she will see
correct information about husbandry and nutrition
animals that may in fact be illegal pets, and to com-
without chastising them for their mistakes. Many
municate this information to the technicians and other
 n       
staff.
doing was wrong. They may have obtained books that
Continuing education is an important part of a
are not written by reputable sources or found informa-
 graduate technician's professional enhancement, and
tion on the Internet that is inaccurate. Clients value
its importance in exotic medicine cannot be overem-
information about how to keep their pets healthy, and
phasized. What is known about the care and treatment
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Exotic Animal Medicine
of exotic animals is forever changing as more and more
In response to this challenge, we have assembled
is learned. What was described as the proper diet for
here for the veterinary technician a survey of the most
a particular lizard one year may be something different
recent practices in the area of exotic animal care.
the next. More and more drugs are being tried in
Exotic animal medicine provides a veterinary techni-
exotics. This type of cutting-edge information is often 
cian with the opportunity to use all of his skills and
presented at conferences and in professional publica-
knowledge in a way that has a direct benefit to the
tions. This presents an added challenge to practices
practice and to the patients. Enjoy!
that see exotic animals because information is forever
changing.
Section 2
Avian
CHAPTER TWO
Psittacines and Passerines
Cheryl B. Greenacre and Lillian Gerhardt
INTRODUCTION
phocytes may predominate in some species), and drug
metabolism. Avian medicine has many similarities to
The Class Aves consists of more than 8,500 species of
canine and feline medicine, as well as some definite
birds and 29 orders of birds. Two orders commonly
differences. The similarities include use of similar,
kept as pets in the United States are the Psittaciformes
albeit smaller, equipment, similar drugs, and similar
(parrots) (Table 2.1) and the Passeriformes (canaries
techniques. Most differences encountered in caring for
and finches) (Figures 2.1, 2.2). Anatomically and phys-
birds relate to the drastically different anatomy and
iologically there is no generic bird, meaning that each
physiology, especially respiratory physiology, and this
species is different in its anatomy, hematology (lym-
in turn dictates a different approach to restraint, pro-
Table 2.1. Examples of common species of birds encountered in practice.
Color
Color
plate
 plate
Common name
 Scientific name
number
Common name
Scientific name
number
Cockatoo
Conure
Moluccan
Cacutua moluccensis
 Blue-crowned
Aratinga acuticaudata
Umbrella*
Cacatua alba
3.1
Sun
Aratinga solstitialis
 Sulfur-crested
Cacatua sulphurea
Half-moon
Aratinga canicularis
Maroon
Pyrrhura frontalis
Macaw
(Red)-bellied
Blue and gold*
Ara ararauna
3.6
Nanday
Nandayus nenday
Scarlet
Aramacao
Green-cheeked
Pyrrhura molinae
Hyacinth
Anodorhynchus
3.7
Mitred
Aratinga mitrata
hyacinthinus
Lovebird,
Agapornis rosicollis
Military
Ara militaris
3.8
Peach-faced
Green-winged
Ara chloroptera
Cockatiel*
Nymphicus hollandicus
Amazon parrot
Parakeet
Yellow-naped*
Amazona ochrocephala
Standard
Melopsittacus
3.10
Red-lored
Amazona autumnalis
budgie*
undulates
 Orange-winged
Grey-cheeked
Brotogeris
Amazona amazonica
Double
Amazona ochrocephala
pyrrhopterus
yellow-headed
Quaker (Monk)
Myiopsitta monachus
Blue-fronted
Amazona aestiva
3.11
Finch
Mexican
Amazona viridigenalis
Zebra
Poephila castanotis
red-headed
Lady Gouldian
Poephila gouldiae
Lory, Rainbow
Trichoglossus
haematodus
African grey*
Psittacus erithacus
3.4
Eclectus
Eclectus roratus
3.2
Source: Forshaw and Cooper (1989).
*Most commonly encountered species.
11
12
Chapter 2
Figure 2.2.A female fawn-colored zebra finch
(Poephila castanotis). This is an example of a
passerine, or soft billed, bird.
barbs at a 45-degree angle that hook with nearby
barbules at a 90-degree angle (Figure 2.3).
The very thin skin (two to four cell layers thick in
feathered areas) is difficult to suture, usually requiring
Figure 2.1. Two scarlet macaws (Ara macao) in an
4-0 or 5-0 suture. There is very little, if any, subcutane-
outdoor aviary. This is an example of a psittacine
bird,or parrot.
ous tissue. The feet are an exception in that they
usually have thick, prominent scales in the non-
viding air to the lungs, and supportive care. Once these
feathered regions to protect them from trauma. The
differences are recognized, avian medicine is quite
wing web of a bird is called a patagium. There are only
straightforward and rewarding.
two proper glands in birds, the bi-lobed uropygial
(preen) gland that helps waterproof the feathers, which
are absent in some birds (such as in Amazon parrots),
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
and the ear gland, which is absent in most birds. Birds
have no external ear pinna and no sweat glands. Birds
The anatomy and physiology of birds is drastically
bruise green because they lack biliverdin reductase,
different from mammalian anatomy and physiology.
which converts biliverdin to bilirubin. Do not confuse
These differences are usually due to an adaptation that
a bright green bruise on a bird for gangrene.
helps enable flight or relates to development within an
egg.
Musculoskeletal System
Unlike mammals, birds can have a variable number of
Integumentary System
cervical vertebrae; they have eight to twenty-five
Feathers are made of keratin and are used for flight,
instead of seven (King 1984) (Figure 2.4). Birds use
insulation, and attracting a mate. There are various
 their long, flexible necks to gain access to food and to
types of feathers including primaries, also known as
 reach the uropygial (preen) gland to preen their feath-
wing remiges and tail rectrices (very large feathers that
 ers. The remainder of the spine is fused in many areas
originate from the carpus and metacarpus, and pygo-
 to provide a stable body part for flight. A keel along
style, respectively), secondaries (large feathers that
the sternum provides for attachment of the large pec-
originate from the radius and ulna), contour (over the
toral (flight) muscles. The notarium is a fusion of the
body), and down feathers (produce powder down).
 frst thoracic vertebrae. The synsacrum is a fusion of
Feathers lay in feathered tracts called pterylae, and the
the caudal thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and caudal verte-
non-feathered tracts are called apterylae. The main
 brae. The pygostyle is a distal fusion of the caudal
shaft of the feather is called the rachis; barbs are
 vertebrae for tail muscle attachment. The sternum has
attached to the rachis, and barbules are attached to the
 a prominent keel for pectoral muscle attachment. The
Psittacines and Passerines
13
pectoral girdle consists of the unique coracoid bone,
that acts as a strut enabling flight, the clavicle, and the
scapula. Bones of the wing from proximal to distal
include humerus; radius; ulna; ulnar and radial carpal
bones; and major and minor metacarpals, phalanges,
and alula (remnants of a thumb). Bones of the hind
limb from proximal to distal include femur, tibiotar-
sus, tarsometatarsus, and phalanges.
Most important clinically is that the femur, humerus,
and some vertebrae are pneumatic bones—-bones flled
with air—which connect directly to the respiratory
tract to lighten the bones for flight. Intraosseous cath-
eters should not be placed in pneumatic bones because
any fluid administered could go directly to the lungs
Figure 2.3. The central main shaft of the feather is
and drown the bird.
called the rachis.Barbs extend from each side of
Cardiovascular System
the rachis at a 45-degree angle. Microscopically,
 Birds, like mammals, possess a four-chambered heart,
barbules extend from each side of the barb a 45
but unlike mammals, birds lack a diaphragm, therefore
degree angle. Barbules on the leading edge of a barb
hook onto the barbules of the trailingedge.When
the apex of the heart is directly surrounded by liver
birds preen their feathers,they are realigning these
(Figure 2.5). The avian heart is comparatively one and
barbules.
a half to two times larger than a mammalian heart.
Unlike mammals, the mean electrical axis of birds is
ARPUS
POLLEX
ULNARE
VERTEBRA1. RIB
SYNSACRUM
LICM
'YGOSTYLE
CORACOID
FURCULA
STERNAL RIB
STERNUM
ISCHIUM
TIBIOTARSUS
Figure 2.5. Birds, like mammals, possess a four-
chambered heart,but because birds lack a
diaphragm,theapexoftheheart is directly
Figure 2.4. Avian skeletal anatomy.
surrounded by liver.
14
Chapter 2
Table 2.2. Representative beart and respiratory rates for various species of birds.
Species
Weight (grams)
HR (rest)
HR (restraint)
RR (rest)
RR (restraint)
Cockatiel
100
200
500-600
40-52
60-80
Amazon
400
150
200-350
2.5-30
40-60
Macaw
1000
12.5
150-350
15-20
2.5-40
Source: Ritchie, Harrison, and Harrison (1994).
Note: HR = heart rate, RR = respiratory rate.
 negative 90 degrees (in dogs it is positive 90 degrees).
Birds do not possess lymph nodes, but they do have
lymph vessels. Phlebotomy sites in birds include the
right jugular vein (the right one is two-thirds larger
than the left), basilic (or cutaneous ulnar) vein, and
medial metatarsal vein. The cutaneous ulnar vein, as
it crosses the proximal ulna, is an excellent vein for
determining vein refill time; if the vein can be seen to
refill this is considered slow and suggestive of dehydra-
tion or shock. Through a renal-portal system, birds
can choose to shunt blood from the caudal half of the
body through the kidneys first before going through
the heart. Therefore, it is better to give parenteral
medications in the front half of the body (i.e. give IM
injections in the pectoral muscles rather than the in the
Figure 2.6.Birds have a well developed third eyelid
leg) (Table 2.2).
that closes over the eye in a craniodorsal to caudal
ventraldirection.
Renal System
Birds possess a renal portal system in which blood from
caudal ventral direction (Figure 2.6). A unique pig-
the caudal half of the body may pass through the
mented structure called the pecten, which is attached
kidneys first before reaching the heart. This means that
to the retina, supplies nutrients to the vitreous. Birds
any drug administered in the caudal half of the body
have no tapetum, but they have an avascular retina.
 may go undiluted directly to the kidneys before going
to the heart. Parrots have three divisions to their
Respiratory System
kidneys (cranial, middle, and caudal) and the kidneys
The cere is an area at the base of the upper beak that
are located dorsally in a concavity of the sacrum. Avian
surrounds the nostrils (nares) (Figure 2.7). Just inside
kidneys produce both urine (from their mammalian-
the nares in parrots is a keratinized flap of tissue called
type nephrons) and urates (from their reptilian-type
the operculum. Birds possess an extensive infraorbital
nephrons that lack a loop of Henle). Urates consist of
sinus; in fact, most of their head is sinus. Compared
uric acid. Therefore, uric acid concentrations and not
to mammals, birds have a very large trachea, allowing
 BUN are evaluated to determine renal function in birds.
 birds to inhale more air than do mammals. The opening
to the trachea is called a glottis (Figure 2.8). Birds have
Neurology and Ophthalmology
complete tracheal rings; therefore uncuffed endotra-
 Birds possess a large optic nerve compared to mammals.
cheal tubes must be used to avoid pressure necrosis
In fact, the two optic nerves together are larger than
 inside the trachea. Again, birds lack a diaphragm;
the bird's spinal cord. Olfactory lobes are small in
therefore, they must be allowed to move their sternum
most birds because sense of smell is not an important
up and down or they will suffocate. Old stories of
sense in most birds. The eyes of a bird constitute
 birds dying right after being restrained were probably
approximately 15% of their body weight, whereas in
due to accidental sternal compression and secondary
humans they constitute 1%. The avian iris consists of
suffocation.
voluntary, striated muscle, rather than smooth muscle
 The syrinx is responsible for sound generation in
as in mammals;, therefore, atropine is ineffective at
the bird, not the larynx, as in mammals. Because the
dilating the pupils. Birds have a well-developed third
syrinx is just past the tracheal bifurcation, birds can
eyelid that closes over the eye in a craniodorsal to
still vocalize even when intubated. The path of air
Psittacines and Passerines
15
Figure 2.7. The cere is an area at the base of the
upper beak that surrounds the nostrils (nares). In
adult male budgerigars, such as this one, the cere is
blue.In adult female budgerigars the cere is a
brownish pink.
Figure 2.9. Necropsy of a parrot demonstrating
clear, normal air sacs. Air sacs warm and store air.
Because air from the caudal air sacs shown here go
directly to the lungs, air, oxygen, or anesthesia can
be delivered through a tube (air sac tube) placed into
one of these air sacs.
Pedo spiq u asn uxo hs sundxa
to mammals.
Digestive System
 Birds lack a diaphragm, so they possess a coelomic
cavity, not an abdominal cavity. Birds do not have
Figure 2.8. The opening to the trachea in birds is
teeth; instead, they have a beak that is variable between
called a glottis. The glottis is usually located directly
 species. Parrots are sometimes called hookbills because
caudal to the base of the tongue in most birds. This
of their strong, hooked beak. The tongue is quite vari-
is the glottis of a barn owl. Also note the V-shaped
able among bird species; parrots have a muscular
opening on the roof of the mouth called the choana.
tongue. The esophagus in birds is divided into two
sections (cervical esophagus and thoracic esophagus)
through the lungs goes from the trachea or air sacs to
by an out-pouching of the esophagus called the crop
the primary bronchus to the secondary bronchus to the
(ingluvies). The ingluvies stores food and has waves of
 parabronchi to the air capillaries. Birds have air capil-
peristalsis that occur at a rate of at least one per
laries that are 3 microns in diameter, whereas mammals
minute. Birds possess a proventriculus (true glandular
have alveoli that are approximately 10 microns
stomach) and a ventriculus (the gizzard) (Figure 2.10).
in diameter. Therefore, birds have a comparatively
Some birds possess a cecum (chickens) while others
greater lung surface area than mammals. Birds also
lack one (parrots). Some birds possess a gall bladder,
have air sacs, usually nine of them, that store and
while others lack one (parrots).
warm air (Figure 2.9). Because air can go from the air
The feces of parrots contains mainly (90% or more)
al on ea an o se lm se 'su a oi s
Gram-positive organisms (purple); waterfowl, raptors,
lungs, oxygen exchange occurs on both inspiration and
 and poultry can have mostly Gram-negative organisms
16
Chapter 2
TRACHEA
ESOPHAGUS
CROP
SYAINX
LUNGS
HEART
-LIVER
LIVER-
GIZZARD
KIDNEY-
SUPRADUODENAL
LOOP
Plate 2.1. Clostridial overgrowth is apparent in this
fecal Gram stain from a parrot. Clostridium shown
PANCREAS
here is a large Gram-positive rod with no spore, a
CLOACA-
clear central spore (safety pin shape), or clear end
VENT
spore (racket shape).(See also color plates)
Figure 2.10. Avian viscera.
(pink). Typically, passerine birds have very litle bacte-
ria in their feces, and it is Gram-positive. Clostridium
Spp. should not be seen in parrot feces and is character-
ized by a septic tank smell to the feces and the charac-
teristic safety-pin or racket shape seen on a Gram stain
(Color Plate 2.1). The cloaca is the end point for three
systems: gastrointestinal, reproductive, and urinary.
The cloaca is divided into three parts: the copradeum
receives feces from the rectum, the urodeum receives
urine and urates from the ureter and sperm or eggs from
the vas deferens and uterus/vagina, respectively, and the
 proctodeum is the area just before the opening (vent).
Plate 2.2. A Diff-Quick stained blood smear from a
parrot.Note that birds have nucleated red blood
Reproductive System
cells. The cell at the twelve o'clock position is a
The male bird possesses two intra-abdominal testis
lymphocyte, the two o'cdock position is a monocyte,
and a phallus (a rudimentary fold of tissue that is
the six o'dlock position is a heterophil (like a
either intromittant or non-intromittant). The female
neutrophil), and the nine o'clock position is a
bird usually possesses only one left ovary (the right
normally occurring nucleated thrombocyte. (See also
ovary usually fails to develop). The female reproduc-
color plates)
tive tract consists of an infundibulum, magnum,
isthmus, uterus (shell gland), and a very short vagina.
COMPARATIVE CLINICAL
Parrots are not usually sexually dimorphic; therefore,
PATHOLOGY
surgical sexing or blood sexing must be performed to
determine the gender of a bird. Surgical sexing involves
The blood glucose of birds is twice that of mammals.
visualizing the gonads and reproductive tract via a
 Birds possess heterophils instead of neutrophils; they
rigid endoscope placed in the abdominal air sac. Blood
are called heterophils due to the different, eosinophilic
sexing involves evaluating 0.2ml of blood via
an
staining of the rod-shaped cytoplasmic granules. Birds,
ELISA test for a heterogamete (female is ZW) or
 like reptiles, have nucleated RBCs and thrombocytes
homogamete (male is ZZ).
(not platelets). Some parrots are lymphocytic species
Psittacines and Passerines
17
like cows (Amazon parrots, cockatiels, budgies, eclec-
Two methods are used to manufacture pelleted diets.
tus, etc.) Birds can show up to 8% polychromasia since
"Bound" pellets are not usually cooked and are finely
their RBC lifespan is so short (thirty-eight days com-
ground. The ingredients are mixed under pressure
 pared to the 120 days of most mammals) (Color Plate
with a substance that, when pressed, forms the pellets
2.2).
Much of the color and smell of the food used is retained
in bound pellets. "Extruded" pellets are made of food
 ingredients that have been cooked and mixed together.
NUTRITION
The mixture moves through a processing machine that
presses the food into various shapes. Color and vita-
Species of birds kept as pets come from all over the
mins are added afterward to the shapes and many have
world. Their diets are as varied as they are and the
a sweet smell.
environments they come from. The specific dietary
The current recommendation is to feed parrots a
requirements for all these species are not well known.
quality pelleted food that makes up 80% of their total
Historically, psittacines (hookbilled birds or parrots)
intake. Fresh dark green and dark yellow vegetables
 and passerines (canaries and finches) kept in captivity
(leafy greens, carrots, sweet potatoes) should make up
readily accepted seed diets, which then became the
the other 20%. Fruits and seeds are to be offered as
basis of diets available for pet birds. Seed-based diets
treats. Some quality nuts (preferably in their shells)
provide poor nutrition—they are low in calcium, vita-
such as almonds, brazil nuts, or pine nuts can also be
mins, and protein, and they are high in fat (Color Plate
offered. Avoid peanuts because they may contain afla-
2.3). Consequently, rather long-lived birds on all seed
toxins, which over time affect the liver. Budgerigars
diets, such as Amazon parrots (possibly 50+ years) are
and cockatiels are the exception and require seed as
seen dying from effects associated with chronic mal-
part of their daily diet (up to 50%). Pellets alone may
nutrition as young as ten to fifteen years of age. Most
provide protein levels that are too high for these species.
 nutritional research is still based on the dietary require-
Passerine birds (songbirds, i.e. canary and finches)
ments of chickens (Brue 1994).
require seed as part of their basic diet (up to 50%).
The introduction of pelleted foods for avian species
Canary/ finch diets contain millet, rape, hemp, sesame,
has made it possible to dramatically improve the
and linseed among other types of seed. These seed
overall health of companion and caged birds (Color
Plate 2.4). Balanced nutrition can be provided by
pellets with the same ease of feeding as a seed diet.
Plate 2.4. The introduction of pelleted foods for
avian species has made it possible to dramatically
Plate 2.3. Examples of seeds found in seed diets.
improve the overall health of companion and caged
The left column, from top to bottom, is oat groats,
birds.Various brands of natural and artificially
small black sunflower seed, and large white striped
colored pelleted food marketed for birds are shown
sunflower seed. The right column, from top to
here. Finely ground formulas are available to mix
bottom,is safflower seeds,red millet,white millet
with water for hand or tube feeding.(See also color
and rape seeds. (See also color plates)
plates)
18
Chapter 2
mixes, along with pellets and fresh vegetables, form a
leading to the faucet. Some owners choose bottled
complete diet. Many of the rarer species of finches not
water. Spring or drinking water can be used, but do
commonly kept as pets also require insects or fruit as
not use distilled water, because this lacks necessary
part of their regular diet.
salts and minerals.
Special need diets have been created for some
species. Lories and lorikeets from Australia and the
South Pacific Islands eat mainly nectar, fruits, and
HISTORY, RESTRAINT, AND PHYSICAL
pollen. Fresh fruits and powdered diets commercially
EXAMINATION
available for lories should be the basic diet for these
species. Toucans, mynah birds, and some lories are
 Often a bird's illness has been developing much longer
 predisposed to iron storage disease of the liver (hemo-
than the owner realized and by the time signs are
chromatosis). Diets with low iron composition have
noticed the problem may be advanced. As with all
been specially formulated for these species. Care must
species of animals, acquiring a through history is the
be taken with the choice of vegetables and fruit added
frst step. Obtaining an adequate avian history may
for these species. For example, grapes are high in iron
involve more time than that of a dog or a cat patient.
and should not be fed to mynah birds or toucans and
 Birds should always be enclosed in a carrier or travel
others susceptible to iron storage disease (Tully 2009).
cage when arriving for their appointments (Figure
Food high in vitamin C also should be avoided because
2.11). There are too many opportunities for harm to
vitamin C enhances absorption of iron.
Some foods can be toxic to birds. Do not feed
chocolate (toxic theobromine) or avocados.  Foods
high in salt, sugar, or caffeine should also be avoided.
 Peanuts should be avoided for the aflatoxins that are
invariably present.
Birds in the wild spend long hours foraging for
food. They eat a wide variety of foods that change with
each season and have many colors, textures, and tastes,
creating a diverse diet that stimulates a bird psycho-
logically and provides a lifetime of health. In the hos-
pital setting a variety of diets should be kept on hand,
such as the commonly used pelleted foods, as well as
 seed diets appropriate for various species. During hos-
pitalization is not the time to change diets. During
illness and the stress associated with a hospital stay
it is often difficult to keep a bird eating enough to
maintain weight. Having familiar diets available can
encourage the avian patient to eat. This includes fresh
vegetables and fruits.
Should a bird's appetite decrease or stop during
via gavage feeding. Gavage tubes come in a number of
sizes. There are various critical care diets available to
readily pass through a gavage tube (see the techniques
section). Hand feeding formulas designed for neonates
also work well. Weighing the bird becomes a critical
part of care to ensure that enough nutrition and calo-
ries are provided to maintain body weight. Ideally the
patient should be weighed every morning before food
or treatments are given.
Figure 2.11. Birds should always be enclosed in
Fresh clean water should be provided daily. Birds
a carrier or travel cage when arriving for their
are able to tolerate municipal tap water. Well water
appointments. A towel can be used to cover a cage,
may be clean coming out of the ground, but may be
especially a clear one such as this, to provide visual
easily contaminated by bacteria colonizing the pipes
securityfor the bird.
Psittacines and Passerines
19
come to the bird in an unfamiliar environment. Be sure
 the owner is made aware of this when the appointment
is made.
History
The following questions should be asked during the
history taking:
How old is the bird?
How long has it been owned and where was it acquired
(breeder/pet store/ bird fair)?
Have there been any previous problems?
Has the bird been tested for chlamydiosis or psittacine
beak and feather disease?
Has it been vaccinated against polyomavirus?
Plate 2.6. Normal feces. (See also color plates)
Have there been any changes in the bird such as voice
change, attitude or weight change, or a change in
 the droppings (increase or decrease, color changes,
more or less urine or urates) (Color Plates 2.5, 2.6,
2.7, 2.8, 2.9).
When was the last molt and has the bird been given
any medications or herbal supplements?
What is the problem today?
How long has the illness been occurring?
When, if at all, has the bird been to a veterinarian?
Next, move to questions about the animal's
environment:
What is the bird fed and what does it actually eat out
of what is offered?
What is the cage like: size, perching?
What materials are used to make the cage (lead/zinc)?
Plate 2.7. Normal feces. (See also color plates)
What type of substrate is used, how often is it cleaned,
and with what?
3745AtlantaHwy
across from
Ga.Square
OIL,LUBE
and EITED
Plate 2.8. Hematuria and melena (See also color
Plate 2.5. Polyuria (See also color plates)
plates)
20
Chapter 2
gsales will result in production
n the months ahead as businesses
levels of inventories.
which purchased the bonds wer
helpmarket gain br
plans S8millio
day，aided bybett
trade and domest
of30 industrial
unch a major
officials sai
president
ecr
100s
ClsChg
123194%-MBS
Plate 2.9. Undigested seeds. (See also color plates)
Does the bird spend time outdoors?
What is the temperature where the cage is kept and
are there any drafts?
 Is the bird let out of the cage and is it supervised during
that time?
What type of enrichment is used (toys)?
How much sleep does the bird get? Sleep is very impor-
tant to a bird and approximately twelve hours of
sleep each night is required for good health. This
Figure 2.12. Capturing a bird while in its cage.
should not be in a covered cage in a room where
the television is on or family members are still
talking, but somewhere quiet.
examination. Capture and restraint are perhaps the
With these questions you can also develop an idea
most traumatic events for the avian patient. If the bird
 of the general knowledge that the owner has regarding
will step up on to a perch it can be removed from the
bird care.
cage or carrier, set on the foor in a corner, and then
When a complete history has been attained move to
caught using a towel. Setting the bird on the floor
the physical exam. Begin by observing the bird from
should only be done if the bird has clipped wing feath-
afar. Birds are prey animals and they work at looking
ers and cannot become airborne. If the bird will not
normal, especially in an unfamiliar environment.
A
come out of its enclosure, the towel can be used to
bird in the hospital should never be sitting fuffed or
reach in and secure the animal. The towel is used to
with closed eyes. This indicates a very sick animal.
help protect the hands and to have the bird associate
Observe the bird's behavior, attitude, posture, breath-
being restrained with the towel, not the hands. Never
ing, skin and feather quality, and neurological status.
attempt to capture a bird when it is being held by the
 an un sdo an ie oo as ro oo
owner. The owner could be bitten and it is possible
bottom or for regurgitated food. Dyspnea in a bird
that this could affect the bond between the owner and
n aul jo uaou sqoq l, e se sisu insn
bird.
up and down with each breath. After observing the
Approach the parrot with a towel-covered hand and
bird from a distance, a physical exam can be per-
attempt to quickly wrap the fingers around the bird's
formed with the bird restrained in a towel.
neck. An ideal opportunity to grasp the neck is when
the bird is attempting to move away from the towel,
Restraint
using its beak to hold onto the cage or carrier (Figure
After the bird has been observed and deemed able to
2.12). Coming from behind, wrap the fingers around
withstand a hands-on examination it can be restrained
the neck, forming a collar. When the head is secured,
 in a towel. Restraint is needed to perform a thorough
bring the towel around the body with the other hand
Psittacines and Passerines
21
meeting the two ends of the towel across the front of
be anticipated and in place. During restraint it is com-
the bird (Figure 2.13 A and B). This controls flapping
monly the responsibility of the holder to monitor the
of the wings. Remember, birds use the muscle around
well being of the bird. When signs of excessive stress
 the sternum to move air through the respiratory system
including panting, eye closing, weakness, and generally
(they lack a diaphragm), and therefore care must be
any change from when the bird was initially restrained
taken not to put pressure on the sternum because suf-
appear the bird should be released and given the
focation can occur (Figure 2.14). Proper hand place-
opportunity to recover. Speaking to the bird in a
ment is shown in Figure 2.15. The towel can be moved
soothing voice can help reduce the stress during
to expose sections of the bird as the examination pro-
handling.
 gresses. When dealing with small cage birds (canaries,
budgerigars), it is helpful to have one person at the
Pbysical Examination
light switch while another puts his hand into the cage.
 Once the bird has been restrained the physical exami-
Make note of where the bird is just before the lights
 nation of the avian patient is no different from that of
are turned off and then grab the bird quickly before it
another animal. The examination begins at the head
has time to adjust to the darkness.
and ends at the vent. Look straight on at the head and
 Restraint time should be kept to a minimum (prefer-
 beak. Examine for symmetry and normal alignment of
ably less than two to four minutes). Before the bird is
 the beak and check for swelling or bruising, pitting on
caught up, all of the material needed for diagnostic
surface of beak, or fractures (Harrison 1994). Look at
sample collection, examination, and grooming should
the nares (nostrils) to check for symmetry and any
A
B
Figure 2.13. (A) A bird that is properly restrained within a towel. The neck and wings are under control.
(B) The towel can be manipulated to gain access to various areas while still restraining the bird.
22
Chapter 2
Figure 2.14. Restraint of a small bird.
Figure 2.16. Just inside the nares (nostril) is a fleshy
part called the operculum that warms and regulates
air.Most birds,including thisred-tailedbawk,bave
an operculum and it should not be mistaken for
something that needs to be removed because
disturbing this structure causes bleeding.
Figure 2.15. Restraint of a bird.
discharge, debris, or blood. Because most birds have
feathers near the nares, matting of the feathers above
the nares will occur with a discharge.
Figure 2.17. Birds do not have an external ear
Note: It is normal for a structure to be present just
inside the nares; this is called the operculum (Figure
pinna. The ears are located caudal and ventral to the
lateral canthus of the eye.The ears may be observed
2.16). Disturbing this structure can cause bleeding.
by moving the feathers cranially, as is shown on this
The eyes are also checked for discharge (again the
white Carneaux pigeon.
matting of feathers will be present), lens opacity,
blood, or disruption of normal anatomy. Hydration
can be assessed using ocular parameters, such as mois-
V-shaped opening on the roof of the mouth. Care must
ture of the cornea (dull appearance when dehydrated)
be taken when using a speculum to prevent iatrogenic
and the position of the globe (recessed
when
trauma to the beak (Figures 2.18 A and B). A normal
dehydrated).
choanal slit is lined with papillae (pointed projections).
While there is seldom disease in the ears of birds,
Lack of vitamin A can cause the papillae to become
the ears should still be examined. There is no external
blunted or disappear completely in severe cases. The
pinna and the ears are located caudal and ventral to
tongue is a prominent feature in the oral cavity.
the lateral canthus of the eye. The ears may be observed
The glottis is at the base of the tongue. The tissue in
by moving the feathers (Figure 2.17).
the oral cavity should be dry and smooth. Abnormal
The oral cavity and choanal slit can be viewed with
fndings can include abscesses, fungal plaques, and
the help of an avian speculum. The cloacal slit is the
excessive moisture.
Psittacines and Passerines
23
Figure 2.19. A Cooper's hawk restrained with
gloves in dorsal recumbancy showing normal
pectoral musciemasson eitherside of thebony keel,
forming a slight V-shape. This view is from the head
of the bird looking caudally. Less pectoral muscle
mass and a more prominent keel would have
suggested a thin bird.
(regular contractions occur in the crop). There should
 be at least one wave of movement across the crop per
A
minute.
Palpating the pectoral muscles can determine the
body condition of the avian patient (Figure 2.19). A
score of one to five is used; one signifies a very emaci-
ated animal and five is considered to be overweight.
Normally, the edge of the keel can be palpated between
the rounded pectoral muscles that slope slightly on
either side. The feathers should be examined over the
body. Feathers should have a bright iridescent appear-
ance. Wings and legs should be gently flexed, and
extended to evaluate joint function. Check the plantar
surface of the feet. Erosion of the bottom of the feet
may be associated with a diet deficient in vitamin A
and/or improper perches. Erosions can lead to ulcer-
ative dermatitis, commonly known as bumblefoot
(Figure 2.20). Also look for necrotic areas, swelling,
B
abscesses, or gout (an accumulation of white uric acid
under the skin). Examine the cloaca (vent), looking for
Figure 2.18. (A) A variety of speculums are
masses, irritation (hyperemic), prolapse of the tissue,
available.(B)Care must be taken when using any
and the presence of matted fecal material (the feathers
speculum in a bird because beak damage can occur.
around the vent should be clean).
The caudal coelomic cavity can be palpated. Organs
Next, palpate the thoracic inlet. Check the crop
cannot be easily palpated due to the sternum extending
for foreign objects, crop burns (in young birds being
over most of the coelomic cavity, although a large liver
handfed), distention, or crop stasis. Crop stasis can be
or the presence of an egg can be palpated and should
noted by parting feathers and watching for movement
be considered as abnormal findings. Normally the liver
24
Chapter 2
Figure 2.20. Plantar surface of a raptor foot
demonstrating ulcerative pododermatitis,as known
as bumblefoot.This lesion can start as a smooth,
Figure 2.21. Elbow area of a bird showing the
pink, erosive, or flattened area on the plantar surface
cutaneous ulnar (basilic) vein crossing superfcial to
of the foot. In psittacine birds this can be due to
the proximal ulna. This vein is used to determine
poor quality perches or vitamin A deficiency.
bydration status in a bird,for phlebotomy,and IV
injections.
does not extend past the level of the sternum. The
uropygial gland (preen gland) can be found at the
extreme caudal dorsal surface and should be examined
for symmetry and overall appearance. Remember, not
all birds kept as pets have a uropygial gland.
The bird should be ausculated to access heart health
and respiratory condition. Placing a pediatric stetho-
scope over the lateral body wall allows auscultation of
the heart. Listening over the craniodorsal body wall is
best to assess the respiratory condition. Hydration can
be assessed with a “"vein refill time" using the basilic
(cutaneous ulnar) vein. In a normally hydrated bird
this vein should instantaneously refill; by the time a
finger is off the vein to see it, it should have reflled. If
the basilic vein can be seen refilling, it is estimated that
the bird is about 5% dehydrated. If the vein requires
one second to refll, the bird is severely dehydrated
(10%) or is in shock (low blood pressure) (Figure
Figure 2.22. A digital gram scale should be used to
2.21).
Obtain the bird's weight at the end of the exam,
accurately determine the weight of birds.The scale
should be able to weigh in 1-gram increments.
before it is placed back into the carrier. Use a digital
 gram scale that has a maximum weight of 4 to 5 kilo-
 grams and weigh in 1-gram increments (Figure 2.22).
other names include ornithosis, chlamydiosis, and
chlamydophilosis. The term “psittacosis" refers to the
-esd e) noed e o suuuo aldoad u aseasp
COMMON DISEASES
cine bird), whereas the term ornithosis refers to the
disease in people originating from any species of bird.
Infectious Diseases
Note that Chlamydophila psittaci should not be con-
fused with a related organism in people, Chlamydia
Avian Chlamydiosis
trachomatis, which causes a sexually transmitted
Avian chlamydiosis is one name given the disease in
 disease, or another related organism, Chlamydopbila
birds caused by the organism Chlamydopbila psittaci;
 pneumoniae, a common mild respiratory pathogen of
Psittacines and Passerines
25
people. Changes in nomenclature in 1999 refected
A suggestive diagnosis can be made by radiographs
recent advances in DNA testing that revealed differ-
showing splenomegaly, ± hepatomegaly. A CBC
ences between organisms that were previously thought
showing a heterophilic, monocytic leukocytosis and a
to be the same. What used to be just one genus,
 mild non-regenerative anemia are also suggestive. A
Chlamydia, is now described as two, Chlamydia
plasma electrophoresis may be suggestive of either
and Chlamydophila. A word of caution, therefore,
acute or chronic disease.
when reading any literature on chlamydial organisms
 Diagnostic testing is varied. There are tests to detect
prior to 1999—the reader may not be 100% certain
antibodies in the serum (elementary body assay [EBA]
as to which of the newly categorized organisms
and immunofluorescent antibody [IFA] and tests to
was being referred to in the document. The term
detect antigen in the feces or blood (enzyme linked
Chlamydopbila psittaci is used throughout this docu-
immunofluorescent antibody assay [ELISA] and poly-
ment to refer to the organism formerly known as
merase chain reaction [PCR]). It is best to perform a
Chlamydia psittaci.
 panel of three tests including PCR of blood, PCR of
The organism has been found in more than 130
feces, and IFA of serum. In addition, a fluorescent
species of birds worldwide and a variety of mammals,
antibody (FA) test can be performed on tissue such as
including humans, and is therefore a zoonotic disease.
-nd lea o xsdoau n Asdoq e u anss ra
 Numerous potential avian species may act as a source
poses, cell culture from the feces is the best test, but
of infection for people. The most common source of
the organism does not consistently grow, and shedding
infection (70% of all cases in the 1980s) is exposure
of the organism in the feces is intermittent. There is
to a recently acquired psittacine bird. Other birds can
also risk to laboratory personnel when the organism
be a potential source of infection, such as domestic or
is grown in the laboratory.
wild pigeons, passerines (soft-billed birds), or poultry.
The Texas Medical Diagnostic Laboratory is cur-
People at occupational risk include pet store employ-
rently the only laboratory commercially offering
tes, veterinarians, veterinary technicians, laboratory
culture. Addresses and phone numbers of laboratories
workers, workers in avian quarantine stations, farmers,
that test for Chlamydopbila and definitions that have
wildlife rehabilitators, zoo workers, and employees of
been accepted by the American Veterinary Medical
poultry (usually turkey) slaughtering and processing
Association (AVMA) and the Association of Avian
plants. Occasionally exposure to wild pigeon roosts is
Veterinarians can be found in the Compendium
a source of infection to the general public.
of Measures to Control Chlamydophila psittaci
The Chlamydophila psittaci organism is transmitted
(formerly
Chlamydia psittaci) Infection
Among
 by inhalation or ingestion of the spore-like elementary
Humans
(Psittacosis)
 and
　Pet
Birds
(Avian
body phase of the organism. Shedding in birds can be
Chlamydiosis), 2004, by the National Association of
activated by stress, such as shipping, crowding, chill-
State Public Health Veterinarians (NASPHV) http://
 ing, and breeding. Person-to-person transmission has
www.avma.org/pubhlth/psittacosis.asp.
 been suggested, but never proven. Those individuals
Treatment of birds, which should be supervised by
that are immunosuppressed are more susceptible to the
a licensed veterinarian, consists of doxycycline for
disease and its effects. The organism Chlamydophila
forty-five days. A lower dose is used in macaws to
psittaci is relatively resistant, surviving in the soil for
 prevent regurgitation. Avian chlamydiosis is usually a
three months or within a bird dropping for up to one
reportable disease, but it depends on the state. Most
month.
states require that veterinarians report any diagnoses
Clinical signs can differ based on species of bird.
 of psittacosis in a bird to the state veterinarian or
 Some birds present quite ill, whereas others exhibit
public health department.
very subtle signs of disease. Generally, a parrot with
 psittacosis presents with depression, lethargy, anorexia,
Other Bacterial Infections
dyspnea, nasal or ocular discharge, conjunctivitis,
 Bacterial infections in birds can be localized or sys-
 and biliverdinuria (green urates). Rarely, birds present
temic and can involve any system, but commonly
comatose, which has been observed in sensitive species
 involve the liver or GI or respiratory systems. Usually
such as macaws. Commonly both the spleen and liver
Gram-negative organisms, such as E. coli, Klebsiella,
are enlarged. Pigeons and passerines seem to exhibit
Enterobacter, or Pseudomonas, are involved, but
little if any clinical signs of disease while infected with
infections  involving Gram-positive organisms  or
the Chlamydophila psittaci organism and therefore are
anaerobes can occur as well. Treatment is based on
sometimes referred to as asymptomatic carriers of the
culture and sensitivity and cytological findings (such
disease.
as an in-house Gram stain), but usually involves the
26
Chapter 2
use of broad-spectrum, bacteriocidal antibiotics such
Transmission of polyomavirus is through exposure to
as enrofloxacin, trimethoprim-sulfa, and cephaolspo-
excretions and secretions, especially urine.
rins. Maca ws commonly regurgitate aftertrimethoprim -
Polyomavirus is a non-enveloped virus and there-
sulfa or doxycycline administration.
fore very stable in the environment and difficult to
destroy. A DNA probe (PCR) test is available to detect
Canary Pox
viral DNA in tissue or feces. Antibody tests are avail-
 Poxviruses are the largest of viruses and the genus
able and a positive result denotes exposure has occurred
Avipoxviruses are found worldwide in more than
and that the bird probably sheds virus intermittently.
twenty families of birds. There are many species of
Many birds in aviaries are subclinically affected and
Avipoxvirus, such as psittacine pox, canary pox,
are a constant source of infection for all birds in the
pigeon pox, falcon pox, and fowl pox. Each species of
aviary and are a particular danger for young birds.
is aun Aeid nq Xads isou paa seu xod
Therefore, all birds should be vaccinated. Psittamune
severe clinical signs are seen in its natural host. Pox
(Biomune, Lenexa, KS) is a commercially available,
used to be common in recently imported Amazon
licensed vaccine for use in psittacine birds. The vaccine
parrots, especially blue-fronted Amazon parrots,
is administered SQ and has been proven to be safe
macaws and pionus, but is rarely
I seentoday.
and effective. It is an inactivated vaccine; therefore,
 Occasionally an older imported bird presents with old
 optimum protection occurs two weeks after the second
 pox scars on the eyelids, nostrils, and face.
vaccine. There is no treatment for the disease. The
Today canary pox is the most commonly seen pox.
prognosis is grave if clinical signs are present in a
The virus is transmitted via mosquito or mechanical
young bird.
means through broken skin. Birds can show blephari-
tis, ocular discharge, rhinitis, and conjunctivitis associ-
Proventricular Dilation Disease
ated with raised papules ten to fourteen days post
The causative organism of this disease has been identi-
 infection. Clinical signs can be divided into *dry”" pox,
 fied as an 89 nm virus, but of unknown type. The route
which consists of cutaneous papular lesions, and " wet"
of transmission is via fecal-oral and appears to affect 
pox, which consists of mucosal papular lesions of the
birds of many orders, including psittacine birds.
oropharynx. Occasionally birds may display neuro-
Clinical signs include severe, chronic weight loss,
logical signs.
regurgitation, delayed crop emptying, ravenous appe-
 Diagnosis is based on typical clinical signs and his-
tite, undigested food in stool, and neurological signs
tological finding of Bollinger bodies, which are intra-
(i.e. falling off perch) in an adult bird. The virus para-
 cytoplasmic inclusion bodies, of skin or mucosal cells,
lyzes the nerves in the proventriculus and the bird
and is considered pathognomonic. Treatment consists
 essentially starves to death, despite a good appetite,
of providing supportive care. Leave scabs to heal natu-
due to the inability to process its food. Suggestive
rally to lessen scarring. Vaccines have been created
diagnostic testing includes radiographs demonstrating
for chickens, pigeons, turkeys, canaries (Poximmune,
proventricular dilation and whole undigested food
Biomune, Lenexa, KS), quail, waterfowl, falcons, and
 particles or seeds in the feces.
Amazon parrots. It is recommended to vaccinate
Note that many diseases can cause proventricular
before the breeding and/or mosquito season. Maximum
dilation, including disease from parasites, yeast, mega-
protection occurs three to four months after vaccina-
bacterium, mycobacterium, foreign bodies, neoplasia,
tion. Some canary breeders vaccinate every six months.
and lead and zinc toxicosis. Definitive diagnostic
testing includes a crop biopsy demonstrating lympho-
Polyomavirus
plasmocytic ganglioneuritis. Birds usually die within
 Polyomaviruses are rather host specific and cause sub-
two years of developing clinical signs, but recently
clinical disease in mammals, but in psittacine birds
treatment with the NSAID celecoxib (Celebrex@, a
they cause severe clinical disease in a wide variety of
COX-2 inhibitor) or any other COX-2 inhibitor has 
psittacine and other species of birds. Immature psitta-
been described; however, the mechanism against the
cine birds commonly present with acute disease with
virus is unknown. Prevention currently consists of
 an approximate mortality rate of 27% to 41%. The
avoiding exposure to known infected birds.
disease is characterized by twelve to forty-eight hours
of depression, anorexia, delayed crop
emptying,
Psittacine Beak and Feather Disease (PBFD)
regurgitation, diarrhea, dehydration, SQ hemorrhage,
This disease of parrots is caused by a circovirus. These
dyspnea, and polyuria. The SQ hemorrhages are
non-enveloped viruses are among of the smallest yet
most easily seen over the crop, carpi, or cranium.
 described, at 14 to 16 nm. PBFD virus is shed in feces,
Psittacines and Passerines
27
feather dander, and various excretions and secretions.
Asymptomatic birds can shed the virus for years before
exhibiting any clinical signs. Because the virus is non-
enveloped, it is very stable and can survive years in the
environment and is resistant to destruction by common
disinfectants.
Generally the progression of the disease is dictated
by the age of the bird when clinical signs first appear.
Younger birds have a faster progression of the disease.
Most birds present with chronic PBFD, which is char-
acterized by symmetrical, slowly progressive dystrophy
of developing feathers that worsens with each succes-
sive molt. The feather dystrophy includes retained
feather sheaths, hemorrhage within the pulp, curled
feathers, and circumferential constrictions ofthe feather
shaft. Usually the down and contour feathers are
affected first, and then the primaries. Birds can go on to
Plate 2.10. Bird with PBFD. (See also color plates)
develop complete alopecia and sometimes beak abnor-
malities consisting of progressive elongation of the beak
and necrosis of the palate rostrally, near the upper beak.
These birds are often immunocompromised and die of
secondary bacterial or fungal infections.
The PBFD DNA probe tests are performed on whole
blood and detect viral DNA; therefore, a positive result
means there was PBFD viral DNA in the blood. In a
bird with no clinical signs, it is recommended to retest
the bird in ninety days to see if the viral DNA is still
 present. If so, then the bird is infected, but if not, then
the bird was transiently infected and overcame the
infection. Any bird displaying feather abnormalities
should have a feather follicle biopsy and DNA in situ
hybridization performed in addition to the DNA probe
blood test, since some clinical birds are so viremic that
they will have a negative blood test.
Figure 2.23. Clinical signs of papillomatosis (caused
This can also occur if a bird is extremely leukope-
by a herpesvirus) include wart-like masses observed
nic. A DNA probe test can be used to detect viral DNA
anywhere along the GI tract, but most commonly
 on a swab of the environment to assist in determining
in the cloaca,as seen in this Amazon parrot,and
the effectiveness of disinfection efforts. Treatment con-
oropharynx.
sists of supportive care and antimicrobials for second-
ary infections. Once clinical signs develop the disease
 hs jo ss 'ss iam ixa  s
 defecate, soiled vent, or blood in the stool. Some cases
is always fatal (Color Plate 2.10).
have GI obstruction with associated clinical signs.
Papillomatosis Caused by Herpesvirus
 Because the virus is latent, birds that have been previ-
Papillomatosis, or wart-like GI lesions caused by a
ously treated may have a recurrence of lesions and
herpesvirus, should not be confused with facial warts
signs with stress. Amazon parrots with bile duct car-
caused by papillomavirus. Species most commonly
cinoma may exhibit biliverdinuria and lethargy, and
affected include the Amazon parrots and macaws.
bile acid levels may be high. Diagnosis is suggestive
Amazon parrots are prone to developing concomitant
based on gross appearance and location. Defnitive
bile duct or GI tract carcinoma that has recently been
diagnosis is based on histology. Treatment involves
associated with PHV-1, genotype 3.
removing the wart-like growth. In the author's experi-
Clinical signs of papillomatosis include wart-like
ence it is best to apply silver nitrate to the lesion, or
masses observed anywhere along the GI tract, but most
half of the lesion if it is circumferentially involving
commonly in the cloaca and oropharynx (Figure 2.23).
the cloaca, every week under anesthesia until gone.
28
Chapter 2
Butorphanol is also administered at 1 to 2mg/kg IM
immunosupression or overexposure should also be
once before the procedure.
corrected.
West Nile Virus
Candidiasis
West Nile virus is caused by a flavivirus. West Nile
Candidiasis is caused by the yeast organism Candida
virus is endemic in other countries, but in the late
albicans. Clinical signs include regurgitation, delayed
1990s it was found within the eastern U.S. and has
crop emptying, and white plaques in oral cavity. The
since spread across the country. Crows, jays, and
crop is the most common organ affected and the crop
raptors, as well as horses, are susceptible species,
contents have a yeasty, sweet smell. Young birds/neo-
whereas poultry are considered resistant. The WNV
nates are the most severely affected. If adults have
virus is spread by mosquitoes. If people or dogs are
clinical signs of candidiasis, look for some cause of
affected they are usually older or immunosuppressed.
immunosuppression. Diagnosis is easily done by iden-
 Clinical signs range from none in resistant species such 
tifying the organism on a Gram stain of crop or fecal
as poultry to neurologic signs (ataxia, circling,
, head
 material. Treatment of mild cases consists of antifun-
tilt, and seizuring) and death in susceptible species. A
 gal therapy with oral nystatin, which acts topically in
CBC is usually normal or a lymphocytosis
s is present.
 the GI tract. If the candidiasis is severe and invading
A serum antibody test is available. Treatment consists
the mucosa, then in addition to nystatain, a systemic
 Recently the use of alpha interferon
antifungal such as one of the conazoles is necessary to
has seemed to result in better success in people. This
attack the infection from the vascular system as well
disease has already spread throughout the U.S. so it is
as topically.
too late to prevent the disease in this country. A con-
ditionally licensed vaccine is available for use in horses
Non-infectious Diseases
that is currently being used intramuscularly in birds at
the same or a reduced dose.
Heavy Metal Toxicosis
Heavy metal toxicosis is usually caused by ingestion
Aspergillosis
of lead or zinc. Sources of lead include fishing
The two most common etiological agents associated
weights, curtain weights, bullets, paint, and costume
with aspergillosis in birds are Aspergillus flavus or
 sd   ro s e
fumigatus. Predisposing factors associated with the
after 1986, Monopoly? game pieces, powder coating,
disease are immunosuppression, including hypovita-
 paint, and costume jewelry. The ventriculus (gizzard)
minosis A, and being exposed to massive quantities
of birds retains heavy particles for grinding food,
of fungal spores which can easily occur when corn
but in the case of heavy metal particles, they are
cob or wheat or pine straw is used as bedding.
retained and slowly digested, 2
allowing constant
Aspergillosis is more common in African Grey parrots,
 absorption of the toxins. Clinical signs include depres-
macaws, and raptors. The location of the infection is
sion, weakness, regurgitation, and sometimes neuro-
most commonly in the bifurcation of the trachea near
logical signs.
the syrinx or in the caudal thoracic air sac, and occa-
 Diagnosis is usually made by visualizing the metal-
sionally in the sinuses. A suggestive diagnosis is based
 dense particles on radiographs, but a definitive diag-
on a very elevated CBC (usually above 40,000), with
nosis can be made on only 0.2 ml of blood for lead or
a heterophilic leukocytosis and monocytosis. Serum
 0.2 ml of serum for zinc at the Louisiana Veterinary
 antigen and antibody tests are available, but are just
Medical Diagnostic Laboratory (Figures 2.24 A and
suggestive of the disease. A definitive diagnosis is
B).
 Toxic levels of lead in the blood are greater
 usually obtained by direct visualization and sampling
than 0.2ppm, and greater than 2ppm for serum
via endoscopy of either the trachea or the air sac,
zinc. Treatment consists of a chelating agent such as
and cytology or culture of those samples. Treatment
CaEDTA or dimercaptosuccinic acid or d-penicilla-
consists of antifungals such as the conazoles, including
mine to bind with the heavy metal, rendering it harm-
ketaconazole,
itraconazole,
and
fluconazole.
less; it then can be urinated out of the body. Stressful
Itraconazole is the best, but should not be used in
procedures such as surgery or endoscopy to remove a
 African Grey parrots (or used at very low doses). Also
large paricle should be done after some chelation
amphotericin-B is good, but can only be given IV or
therapy, because stress can cause lead to move sud-
through nebulization and it is quickly renal-toxic.
denly from the bone where it is stored to the blood
Months of treatment are necessary, so early and proper
and worsen clinical signs. Other products such as lact-
diagnosis is imperative. Any underlying cause of
ulose to assist the liver with toxicosis, lubricants such
Psittacines and Passerines
29
A
B
Figure 2.24. (A) Lateral standing radiograph in a duck showing beavy metal in the ventriculus. Later, 97
cents worth of various coins were removed endoscopically. (B) Ventrodorsal view of the same duck.
as corn oil or peanut butter, or bulking agents such as 
heated to above 540°F, the PTFE fumes are released,
 psyillium can also be given.
 r d  
death in birds anywhere in the household. Rarely,
Hypovitaminosis A
immediately supplied fresh air and steroids prevent
A diet deficient in vitamin A, such as an all seed diet, can
death.
lead to hypovitaminosis A. Clinical signs include choanal
papillae in the oral cavity that are blunted, plantar ero-
sions on the feet, and poor quality skin and feathers
Egg Binding
(darkened areas on the feathers of the wings). A diagno-
Some birds, such as cockatiels, chronically lay eggs,
sis is made based on history and clinical signs. Secondary
 and especially those on an all seed diet that is low
bacterial or fungal infections involving the respiratory
calcium can present with egg binding. The egg is stuck
tract are common. Sometimes a Gram stain of a choanal
in the uterus because the uterine muscles lack enough
swab shows increased epithelial cells and basophilic
calcium to contract and push the egg out. The egg puts 
      r
 pressure on the kidneys, causing the bird to go into
vitamin A by providing the bird with dark yellow vege-
shock, and it can die within hours to days without
tables (sweet potato, carrot, commercial bird pellets).
removal of the egg. Other birds may have egg binding
One could also give one injection of vitamin A. Avoid
due to an abnormally large egg. If the egg is normal
giving too much vitamin A because it is a fat-soluble
size and there are no obstructions such as scarring of
vitamin that can result in hypervitaminosis A.
the uterus, then hormones, such as oxytocin or
prostaglandin F2 alpha, can be given to stimulate
Hypocalcemia of African Grey Parrots
Adult African grey parrots, especially those on a low
contractions, but only after calcium has been absorbed
calcium seed diet rather than a healthy pelleted diet,
IM so the uterine muscles have enough calcium to
can present with seizures due to hypocalcemia. A total
contract. In the case of an egg that should not be
calcium level, and even better, an ionized calcium as
forced out, it can be imploded by creating negative
well, diagnoses the disease. Treatment consists of
pressure within the egg by suctioning out the contents
with a needle and syringe placed through the egg
calcium gluconate IM. Oral calcium can be adminis-
tered later in the form of calcium glubionate. Of course
exposed at the cloaca or through the celomic wall and
uterus on the ventral abdomen. This is an emergency
treatment also includes improving the diet by supple-
procedure performed under anesthesia and is not
menting with calcium and slowly changing to a pel-
leted diet.
without risk of hemorrhage or infection. If these
procedures are unsuccessful, surgery to perform a
Non-stick Cookware Toxicosis
salpingohysterectomy (removal of uterus) can be per-
Non-stick cookware, such as Teflon@, is made
formed. Supportive care with fluids, antibiotics, etc.
of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). If burned and
are also necessary.
30
Chapter 2
Crop Burns
 Juvenile birds that are hand fed by humans may some-
times be offered gruel that is too hot (above 105°F),
usually heated in a microwave, that causes a burn of
the thin crop and overlying skin. It is usually not until
ten days later that the effects of the burn are noticed
by visualizing the sudden appearance of gruel pouring
out of a hole in the crop and running down the breast 
of the bird. It is only at this ten-day point, after a scab
has formed and the body has determined dead from
healthy tissue, that surgery should be performed to
close the hole. Supportive care, including antibiotics
or the mild antifungal nystatin and fluids, etc., are
usually needed.
A
RADIOLOGY
Radiographs can be taken awake or under anesthesia
depending on the goals. Usually the bird is under anes-
thesia so that it is absolutely still and in the proper
position for accurate evaluation. This also produces
the least amount of stress. A bird can be placed in a
cardboard box awake to determine if an egg or metal
is present, or in the case of a barium series, see the
location and speed of barium travel. Most radiogaphs
are taken at 500 mAs and 50 Kvp for 1/120 of a second,
but each machine is different. Two views are taken:
the ventrodorsal, with the keel of the sternum perfectly
B
aligned with the spine, and the lateral, with the coxo-
femoral joints and shoulder joints superimposed
(McMillan 1994). This positioning allows evaluation
of the radiographs (Figures 2.25 A, B, and C and 2.26
A and B).
ANESTHESIA AND ANALGESIA
Isoflurane is the safest gas anesthetic choice in birds
(Curro 1994). Sevoflurane has been shown to be just
as effective and recovery is slightly faster (Quandt
1999). Birds are usually restrained in a towel and mask
C
induced, usually starting at 2% in healthy birds at 21/
minute oxygen flow rate. For short procedures, such
Figure 2.25. (A) A red tailed hawk properly
as immobilization for radiographs that require less
positioned for a ventrodorsal radiograph. (B and C)
than fifteen minutes, most birds are not intubated. For
Positioning of an avian patient for radiographs.
longer procedures, birds can be intubated with an
uncuffed endotracheal tube. Once intubated, the
oxygen flow rate must be reduced to 1lminute so as
not to damage the delicate air sacs.
Always keep the head and glottis above the level of the
The best method to secure an endotracheal tube in
crop, because liquid from the crop can trickle into the
yno an os yeaq onoq aun oi il adei oi st pq e
trachea and drown the bird in an instant. Birds have
can be opened to wipe out excess moisture if necessary.
complete tracheal rings, so an inflated cuffed tube can
Psittacines and Passerines
31
A
Figure 2.27. A wild turkey intubated and under
anesthesia, showing the placement of a Doppler
probe on the roof of the mouth over thepalatine
artery to monitor heart rate. This can be performed
in any species of bird.
i so aun aq rd e aeqi o Asa Ar
very forward at the base of the tongue.
Birds tend to not do well after one hour under
anesthesia due to hypothermia, hypoventilation, and
respiratory acidosis. The use of forced heated air blan-
kets has greatly improved the attempted maintenance
of normal body temperature in birds under anesthesia
(Rembert 2001). It is imperative that adequate lubrica-
m aaa Aip suaaard oi saaa au oi padde si uo
B
forced heated air blankets. In addition, the laterally
 placed eyes of birds should not be allowed to rest on
Figure 2.26. (A) An example of a parrot well
any surface or they can collapse. Although this is
positioned for a lateral radiograph. Note how the
usually temporary, it may be a permanent condition.
shoulder and hip joints are aligned. (B) An example
Common monitoring equipment includes a pulse
of a parrot well positioned for a ventrodorsal
oximeter on the leg, Doppler probe over the radial
radiograph. Note how the keel and spine are aligned
artery or palatine artery, and ECG (Figure 2.27).
(superimposed).
Simply listening with a stethoscope and CONSTANT
watch of the respiratory rate and depth are absolute
minimums in monitoring birds under anesthesia.
When assessing an avian patient for signs of pain,
exert too much pressure on the lumen of the trachea
selecting a pain reliever, or determining a dose and the
that cannot expand and thus cause pressure necrosis
frequency of administration, it must be remembered
and a subsequent diphtheritic membrane. It is impor-
that there is NO GENERIC PARROT. One must be
tant to realize that birds, especially cockatoos, have
familiar with the very limited scientific research that
tracheas that narrow a few centimeters past the glottis,
has been conducted regarding pain management in
causing an endotracheal tube to initially seem the
psittacine birds. Furthermore, each patient must be
appropriate size but then after passing it a quarter of
evaluated and re-evaluated individually and constantly.
the way down the trachea it becomes lodged, causing
Unlike mammals, birds have more kappa than mu
pressure necrosis. Therefore, pick an appropriate size
opiate receptors; therefore, a partial agonist/antagonist
tube and re-intubate if it feels as if it is lodged. It is
 such as butorphanol has been shown to provide pain
32
Chapter 2
relief, but at much higher than mammalian doses at 1
subcutaneous petechial hemorrhaging, and plucking of
to 2mg/Kg IM (Paul-Murphy 1999). Buprenorphine
 feathers under anesthesia before preparing the skin.
has not been shown to work as well (Paul-Murphy
 Plucking feathers is very painful and usually requires
2004).
a surgical plane of anesthesia and should be done one
 Pollack (2005) recommends the following analgesic
feather at a time, pulling in the direction in which it
:sasop
grows. Clear, see-through drapes are a necessity for
the anesthetist to be able to assess breathing in the
Lidocaine: 1 mg/kg at site, dilute 1:10; 4mg/kg or
m osd ea as ao sdes as d
higher is toxic
can be used.
Butorphanol: 0.5-2 mg/kg IM (1 to 2 mg/kg IM every
A radiosurgical unit is preferable to an electrosurgi-
2 to 4 hours as needed)
cal unit in birds. It can be used in monopolar or
Carprofen:  1 to 10mg/kg
IM/PO(most
use
bipolar modes. A special "Harrison tip" is a bipolar
2mg/kg)
tip used in birds (Figure 2.28). Birds should be under
Celecoxib: 10mg/kg PO (used for proventricular dila-
anesthesia for less than one hour, so having everything
tation disease)
 possible prepared and ready for use to shorten surgery
Meloxicam: 0.1 to 1 mg/kg IM/PO (0.5 mg/kg) (Wilson
time is essential in avian surgery. If the celomic cavity
2004)
is to be breeched, remember that birds do not have a
diaphragm and that anesthetic gases will escape the
It is very diffcult to assess pain in birds and there
surgery site, causing the bird's anesthetic depth to
 are no standard methods or assessments available.
lighten.
Therefore, one must rely on past experience, observa-
Also be aware that it is easier to "bag" or IPPV
tion, and anthropomorphism (If I had a fractured bone
(intermittent partial pressure ventilation) a bird once
 I would want an opiate). Birds are very stoic and do
the air sac is incised. If at any time the bird's breathing
not cry out in pain despite the fact that they can be
cannot be assessed it is the anesthetist's responsibility
very loud when they want to be. Birds have a flock
to stop the surgeon to assess breathing. Fluids, such
mentality, meaning they are a prey species and if they
as LRS or Normosol-R, are usually administered at
make their illness conspicuous to the rest of the flock
they risk being ostracized (so as not to attract the
attention of a predator). It is best to observe your
patient before it is aware that you are observing it.
When it realizes you are there, you will probably
observe it straightening up, opening its eyelids more,
and it may even turn to partially face you in an attempt
to look alert.
 Birds do not seem to become profoundly depressed
 on analgesics, therefore I tend to give analgesics at any
hint of pain in a bird. In most cases I tend to give an
opiate at surgery, then both an opiate (butorphanol)
and an anti-inflammatory (meloxicam) for the first
six to forty-eight hours, followed by only the anti-
inflammatory for about three to five days.
SURGERY
 It is best to remember to use analgesics before pain
birds.
 Preparation of the skin is similar as for mammals,
with three applications in succession of chlorhexidine
Figure 2.28. A radiosurgical or electrocautery tip
scrub, but there are some differences, including the use
Alpyoads s!.d uosuh,p papo spig ut pasn
of sterile saline or very sparing amounts of alcohol,
designed for birds with one bent tip for better access.
patting the skin rather than rubbing so as not to cause
Do not straighten.
Psittacines and Passerines
33
10 ml/Kg/hour for the frst hour and then at 5 ml/Kg/
hour thereafter. A bolus of fluids may need to be given
if blood loss is greater than 10% of the blood volume.
The suture used is typically 4-0 to 5-0 PDS.
 Common surgeries include accessing the crop for a
biopsy to definitively diagnose proventricular dilation
disease (PDD), repairing a crop burn in a neonate, or
removing a foreign body or accessing the proventricu-
lus with an endoscope through the crop. Common
surgeries requiring celomic cavity access include
salpingohysterectomy (removing the uterus, not the
ovary, in a bird), liver biopsy (either directly or endo-
scopically), proventriculotomy to remove a foreign
body, or exploratory laparatomy.
Strictly follow manufacturer's directions on clean-
ing, maintaining, and handling endoscopes to ensure
A
the long life of this expensive equipment.
PARASITOLOGY
Although ascaridosis is now uncommon, the clinical
signs are none or diarrhea; rarely a GI impaction can
occur A diagnosis is easily made on fecal flotation.
The treatment can be with ivermectin, fenbendazole,
or piperazine. Giardiaisis is caused by the protozoal
organism in the Giardia spp. Clinical signs can be none
or diarrhea and weight loss. A diagnosis can be made
on a fecal Gram stain in severe cases, but the motile
protozoa are easier to visualize on a direct saline
smear, especially with the addition of iodine. An ELISA
B
for giardia Ag is the best current test. Treatment is
with metronidazole.
Figure 2.29. (A) Knemidokoptes infestation in a
Trichomoniasis is caused by the Trichomonas spp.
canary, manifesting as flaking of skin on feet.
of protozoa and is called “canker”" in pigeons and
(B) Deformed beak from Knemidokoptes. (Courtesy
"frounce" in raptors eating pigeons. It is associated
of Cheryl Greenacre.)
with white plaques in the oral cavity. Diagnosis is
based on demonstration of the protozoal organisms on
direct saline smear of the oral cavity. Treatment is
typical appearance of the skin and beak, a scraping of
metronidazole. Syngamus is also known as "gape
the affected area onto a slide with mineral oil reveals
worm" because affected birds gape their mouths open
the round-shaped mites. The treatment is topical
trying to breathe around the physical presence of the
Ivermectin, or similar product, given twice ten to four-
large worm in their trachea. The worms are thick
teen days apart. Do NOT give ivermectin IM in birds,
bodied and dark red, and the male and female join to
especially small birds, because they commonly die
-m u uo si il 'adeus A, suuad e 
from an anaphylactic reaction, presumably from the
fowl and robins, and it is treatable with antiparasiti-
propylene glycol in the product.
cides. Some have even used endoscopy to retrieve the
worms.
Knemidokoptes pilae, or the scaly leg and face mite,
GENDER DETERMINATION
causes pitting and scaling of the keratin of the skin and
beak of parakeets and other birds, but causes scaling
Most parrots do not exhibit obvious signs of sexual
on the legs and feet of canaries and finches (Figure 2.29
 dimorphism. The gonads in both males and females
A and B). Although the diagnosis can be made by the
are internal. If a client wishes to know the gender of
34
Chapter 2
her pet bird, a blood test should be recommended. This 
Beak
involves taking a small amount (0.2ml) of blood or 
 Knowing the normal beak shape and length for various
 pulling a feather, which are DNA checked for chro-
species is a must before any trimming takes place.
mosomes. Several companies offer this test. Surgical
 Some species of parrots possess a longer beak than
sexing should only be offered to owners who plan on
others (i.e. compare a macaw to an Amazon parrot).
breeding their birds. The gonads are visualized with a
 Beak trims can be performed when the bird is awake.
sterile rigid endoscope. Any abnormalities of the 
 A roto-tool (larger parrot) or nail fle (birds smaller
 gonads or other structures can then be identifed. This,
than a cockatiel) can be used. The tip can be blunted.
of course, carries the low risk of anesthetic complica-
If the bill tip organ becomes visible (as a row of white
tions, hemorrhage, and infection.
dots on the occlusal surface of the beak) do not trim
further or hemorrhage and pain will occur. The flaking
on the external surface of the beak can be removed
GROOMING
with the roto-tool/nail file. When using the power tool 
be sure to never stop moving, using long, gentle strokes
Nails
to avoid going too deep and cutting into bone. The
Often when a bird presents for a nail trim, the nail is
beak is a bony structure covered with keratin. Some
not overgrown but the points have begun to trauma-
individual parrots maintain their beak length and
tize the skin of the owner's arm. A stone tip on a
 never need a trim. A bird with a maloccluded beak
roto-tool or an emory board can be used to quickly
 needs corrective trimming on a regular schedule. A
round and dull the points. If nails are overgrown,
bird with a fast growing beak that is constantly in need
human nail clippers or guillotine-type nail trimmers 
of trimming may have underlying liver disease that
can be used to take the length back. This should then
needs to be addressed (Figure 2.31).
be followed with the roto-tool or emory board to
round off any sharp edges created during clipping. If
Wing
the nail extends in an arc that is more than half a circle
Wing trims are performed to prevent the bird from
it is probably too long (Figure 2.30). The quick differs
flying freely. Indoors, free flying birds have encounters
in length between individuals. Always have silver
with ceiling fans, windows, being squeezed into doors,
nitrate sticks or ferric subsulfate powder available to
and flying out through an open door or window. An
stop hemorrhage if it occurs.
ideal wing trim is symmetrical and allows the bird to
gently glide to the floor. Too severe a wing trim can
Figure 2.31. Most birds do not need to have their
beaks trimmed.The severe macaw on the right has a
normal beak,while its clutch mate on the left has an
Figure 2.30. A clipped and unclipped nail.
abnormal,thickenedbeak.
Psittacines and Passerines
35
trauma (hit by ceiling fan, toe closed in door, big bird/
little bird incidents, dog/cat attack, burns), toxins
(lead, zinc, PTFE fumes from Teflon?), metabolic dis-
orders (chronic hypovitaminosis A, hypocalcemia in
African grey parrots), or infection (due to bacteria,
virus, fungus, or Chlamydophila usually involving the
liver or GI or respiratory tract). Egg binding (dystocia)
due to low total body calcium from a long-term cal-
cium-deficient diet (such as a seed diet) is a common
Figure 2.32. Wing trim.
avian emergency.
Unlike mammals, birds usually present with a ter-
cause trauma, most commonly resulting in damage to
minal manifestation of chronic disease that has just
the keel.
recently showed overt acute signs. Subtle clues of
A correct wing trim depends on the weight (i.e.
 disease often go unrecognized by the owner because
obese compared to a normal weight bird), body type
birds hide signs of disease to avoid being ostracized by
(i.e. heavy bodied bird compared to an elongated, long
the flock (i.e. the flock doesn't want to be around a
tailed bird), and the number of pin (blood) feathers
bird that is attracting a predator). The first approach
that are growing in at the time of the trim. Only
 to an emergency should include, if possible, obtaining
primary feathers (consisting of the first ten wing feath-
se paredand se aq oi se os auoud aui iaao Aioisy e
ers counting from the tip) should be trimmed.
possible when the bird arrives. Be familiar with
Therefore, depending on the body shape of the bird, a
common species problems (i.e. hypocalcemia should
wing trim consists of cutting four to ten primary feath-
be at the top of the rule-out list for a seizuring African
ers on each side (Figure 2.32). If, for example, one
 grey parrot). Evaluate the history, cage and husbandry,
were trimming an Amazon parrot, which is a heavy
and droppings, and observe the bird for clues about
bodied, short tailed bird, approximately four or five
the etiology before pursuing stressful restraint.
feathers would be trimmed on both wings. A cockatiel,
Perform a rapid but thorough physical exam and
built very differently than an Amazon, most likely
 diagnostic collection (±CBC, profile, radiographs, fecal
would need all ten primary feathers removed.
Gram stain). Sometimes the bird may be so stressed
To clip the feathers, the wing must be gently
that the examination may need to be performed in less
extended, and a firm grip should be used, incorporat-
than one minute or in stages. Obtain an accurate
ing the carpus and patagial ligament in the hold. This
weight with a gram scale so drugs can be dosed and
will support the wing if the bird should struggle and
administered accurately. Provide therapy to stabilize
help to avoid injury to the wing. Before cutting, check
the patient: warmth (85° to 90*F), a stress-free envi-
for pin feathers—those that have not finished growing
ronment (no barking dogs), and ±O, (Figure 2.33).
and still have a blood source. If pin feathers are present
Offer familiar/favorite foods and water at an elevated
leave a mature feather on either side of the pin feather
level right in front of the bird, provide ten hours
 to protect the growing feather. If several blood feathers
of daylight and fourteen hours of dark, and provide
are present it is best to reschedule the trim when they
a low perch or none at all (birds insist on perching
have finished maturing. The feathers are trimmed just
 on the highest available perch, even when severely
behind the tips of the lateral coverts. Care should be
debilitated.
taken not to clip the covert feathers because this will
 During the examination for an emergent bird, frst
leave an unsightly cut line. Always use sharp scissors
check to see that the patient has a patent airway. Is
and be sure not to cut toes straying into the field of
the airway patent or is there a mass or foreign body
the scissors. Birds with properly trimmed wings live
in the trachea? Examples of a mass include an aspergil-
safer lives indoors. Owners must be made aware that
lus granuloma, neoplasia, or diptheritic membrane. A
even a bird with properly trimmed wings can fly away.
 millet seed in a cockatiel trachea (this can be directly
visualized in the trachea with a rigid 1-mm endoscope)
is an example of a foreign body.
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
Second, check to see if the animal is breathing; if
not, intubate with an uncuffed endotracheal tube and
The causes for a bird to have an emergency visit to the
provide intermittent partial pressure ventilation (IPPV)
veterinarian are similar to those for mammals, but may
in birds at one breath/five seconds. Due to the unique
vary slightly. Examples of emergency cases include
respiratory system in birds an air sac tube can be
36
Chapter 2
from the kidneys via the renal portal system to increase
blood flow to central areas. Therefore, an equilibrated
PCV < 15% or an immediate PCV < 20% are similar
and serious enough to contemplate a blood transfu-
sion. Fluids, hetastarch, oxyglobin, or a blood transfu-
sion (5% of BW) help a bird with severe blood loss.
The anemic patient may require vitamin B complex,
iron dextran, and vitamin K,.
Debydration
Most sick birds are 5% to 10% dehydrated. Severe
dehydration is usually > 10%. Clinical signs of dehy-
dration include depression, reduced skin elasticity over
digits, sunken eyes, cool digits, and decreased refill
time of the basilic (cutaneous ulnar) vein. A general
rule of thumb is that a normally hydrated bird has a
Figure 2.33. Hospitalized owl in warmed cage. The
 basilic vein refill time that is instantaneous, such that
owl is receiving supplemental oxygen and fluids
you cannot see the vein refill after applying digital
through an intraosseous catheter.
 pressure to it. If you can see the vein refil, the bird is
at least 5% dehydrated, and if the vein takes one
second or more to refill, the bird is more than 5%
placed in the caudal thoracic or abdominal air sac and
dehydrated.
oxygenated air will flow through the lung. An air sac
Maintenance fluids are the same for birds as they
tube can be connected to Oz or anesthesia and left in
are for mammals: 50 ml/kg/day. For example, mainte-
place for five days.
nance fluid calculations for a 500-gram Amazon
Third, check to see if there is a heartbeat. If a bird
parrot are 0.5 kg × 50 ml/kg/day = 25 ml/day. The
experiences cardiac arrest, the prognosis for reversing
dehydration fluid replacement needed for a 500-gram
this situation is poor/grave due to a bird's high meta-
Amazon parrot that is 6% dehydrated is as follows:
 bolic rate and oxygen demands. The following treat-
dehydration replacement in liters is BW (in kg) x %
ments can be attempted to reinitiate heart beat: rapid
dehydration
  (expressed
as a decimal amount),
heart massage and ventilation (100 beats/minute
0.5 kg × 0.06 = 0.030 liters = 30 ml. The calculated
and one breath/five seconds), epinephrine IV or IT
dose for dehydration replacement (30ml) should be
(intratracheally), atropine (usually used to prevent
administered over forty-eight hours.
bradycardia, though), doxapram IV or IT (stimulates
The schedule for administration of maintenance
respirations), or bolus IV fluids ±2.5% to 5%
 and dehydration fluids given to the above bird in forty-
dextrose.
eight hours is as follows: Day 1: 25 ml for mainte-
nance
+15mlfor
half the dehydration
Blood Loss
replacement = 40ml; Day 2: 25ml for mainte-
The average blood volume of a bird is approximately
nance + 15ml for the second half of dehydration
10% of its body weight (BW). For example, a 1-kg
replacement = 40 ml.
blue and gold macaw has an average blood volume of
 Fluid therapy is a critical component of emergency
about 100 ml. A healthy bird can lose up to 10% of
therapy. The most commonly used fluids are lactated
its blood volume (or 1% of BW) without any adverse
 Ringer's solution or Normosol-R because they most
side effects. Therefore, a healthy 1-kg blue and gold
closely resemble the fuid lost. Warm fuids (about
macaw could lose up to 10 ml without any adverse side
100*F) are imperative. Keep in mind that the body
effects. Unlike mammals, a healthy bird can usually
lose up to 30% of its blood volume without dying due
2.5% dextrose is added to the SQ or IV fluids.
to compensatory mechanisms. Because of these com-
Mild dehydration may only require conservative
pensatory mechanisms, it is important to realize that
management such as oral or SQ fluids. SQ fluids are
the packed cell volume (PCV) in a bird is not accurate
 generally administered into the inguinal area in birds.
(i.e. not equilibrated) for twenty-four hours after a
 Severe dehydration or shock requires rapid circulatory
hemorrhagic incident because birds can shunt blood
expansion with IV or intraosseous (IO) fluids; oral or
from large skeletal muscle capillary beds and away
SQ fluids are inadequate in these cases due to lack
Psittacines and Passerines
37
of absorption at the administration site. Peripheral
 indwelling catheters have been avoided in birds because
birds have small, fragile veins that easily form hema-
tomas, their dermis is highly mobile (causing difficul-
ties in stabilizing the catheter), and they have refractory
temperaments and a powerful beak. Repeated IV
bolusing can be attempted, but it is stressful to the
birds to be repeatedly restrained and it is damaging to
the veins. Switching to oral fluids should be done as
 soon as possible.
TECHNIQUES
Catheter Placement
Intraosseous Catheters
A
IO catheters allow continuous access to peripheral cir-
culation, and they provide the ability to administer
drugs, fluids, or total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Their
use is safe, rapid, and practical. IO catheters are most
commonly placed in the distal ulna or proximal tibio-
tarsus. They should not be placed in a pneumatic bone
 because pneumatic bones communicate with the respi-
ratory system; therefore, this may drown the bird
when fuids are administered. Likewise, intracoelomic
fluids should not be administered because this may
also drown the bird if fluids get into an air sac. To
 place the IO catheter, pluck and aseptically prepare the
carpus. Position the needle in the center of distal ulna.
Support the ulna and rotate the catheter. Once past
 the cortex, the catheter passes easily. Aspiration should
 produce a small amount of blood. Anchor the catheter
to the soft tissue of the carpus and apply a figure-8
B
bandage (Figure 2.34 A and B).
Figure 2.34.(A and B) Intraosseous catheter
Air Sac Tube
placement into the distal ulna of a Cooper's hawk.A
To place an air sac tube, make a skin incision over the
22-gauge needle or spinal needle can be used. A
sternal notch area (borders are the last rib, the femur,
cathetercapfits on theend.Sterile technique should
and the lateral processes of the vertebrae) and use a
be used to place a catheter.
 pair of hemostats to penetrate body wall, and then
insert an ET tube.
cockatiel: 0.120 Kg × 0.01 = 0.001 liters = 1ml
Blood Collection
macaw: 1 Kg x 0.01 = 0.010 liters = 10 ml
 The blood volume of birds is approximately 10% of
their body weight. The amount of blood that can be
There are a variety of sites from which blood can
e  p  e  s 
be collected in the avian patient. These include the
1% of the body weight (1 ml/100 grams of body weight
right jugular vein, basilic vein (also called the cutane-
in a healthy bird). This amount should be reduced with
 ous ulnar vein), and the medial metatarsal vein. The
a sick patient. For example, a maximum of 1.2ml of
size of the bird influences the site chosen.
blood can be removed from a healthy 120-gram
(0.12Kg) sun conure without adverse effects. For a
Jugular Vein
1,000 gram (1Kg) healthy macaw a maximum of
The right jugular vein is the vein of choice for parrots
10 ml can be removed. For example:
kept as pets. The right jugular vein is chosen over the
38
Chapter 2
left because it is two-thirds larger. To collect from the
must also realize that drug excretion is rapid in birds
jugular vein the bird must be restrained in right lateral
 compared to mammals. Antibiotics can cause immu-
xa   p ea a m 
 nosuppression and change normal flora, producing a
The vein should be visible when collecting blood. The
secondary fungal infection. Therefore, antibiotics
jugular vein is found in a featherless tract or aptera
 should only be used when indicated to avoid upsetting
(featherless area) on the ventrolateral aspect of the
the delicate balance of normal flora in birds. Choose
cervical area. The vein can be seen by lightly wetting
bacteriocidal instead of bacteriostatic antibiotics.
the feathers with alcohol. Bird veins are mobile under
the skin and have very elastic vessel walls, which can
Water Additives
make needle punctures a challenge. Light digital pres-
The advantages of adding medication to the drinking
sure at the level of the thoracic inlet should be used
water are ease of administration, the bird medicates
when holding off the vein. A 1-ml or 3-ml syringe with
itself, restraint isn't required, and specific water borne
a 22- to 25-gauge needle is commonly used.
diseases may be reduced. The disadvantages, which far
out weigh the advantages, include inexact dosing, poor
Basilic Vein
palatability that reduces water and drug intake, insta-
The basilic vein (cutaneous ulnar vein) is also a choice
bility of some medications in water the likely possibil-
for blood collection on medium to large birds and
 ity of under-dosing, increasing organism resistance,
courses over the medial surface of the proximal ulna.
and medication being poorly or slowly absorbed.
This vein is superficial, lacking support tissue to dis-
 perse a hematoma, and often small, making it prone
Food Additives
to collapse. To collect from this vein the bird should
The advantages of adding medication to the food
be restrained on its back. The wing should carefully
 include ease of administration, food consumption may
be extended, and it should be supported by grasping
be fairly consistent, and ease of treating hand-fed nest-
the carpus and patagium.
lings. The disadvantages again outweigh the advan-
 tages and include the same reasons discussed above for
Medial Metatarsal Vein
adding medication to water. One must also realize that
The medial metatarsal vein is another venipuncture
sick birds are often anorectic.
choice. The larger the bird, the more developed the
vein is. This vein lies in a groove on the medial side of
Direct Oral Medication
the tibiotarsus, near the tiobtarsal-tarsaometatarsal
 The advantages of giving medications orally include
joint (hock joint). This vein is a good choice for small
the fact that a precise dose is given (unless the bird
amounts of blood, an IV injection, or IV catheter
spits the drug out or doesn't swallow), many pediatric
placement. The bird can be restrained in a towel, held
suspensions are available, and these medications can
upright, and the leg gently extended. Poultry and water
be given simultaneously when a bird is gavaged or tube
fowl have a large metatarsal vein, making it an excel-
fed. The disadvantages include the stress of capture
lent choice for blood collection in these birds. Small
and restraint, the risk of aspiration of the drug, the
blood tubes, including serum separator tubes, are
drug may be poorly or slowly absorbed through the
available for use in small patients (Figures 2.35, 2.36).
 gastrointestinal tract of very ill birds, or malabsorption
(if, for example, the bird is in shock or has a GI dis-
order) (Figure 2.37).
ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS
Intramuscular Injection of Medication
 Most infections in parrots are due to Gram-negative
 The advantages of giving medication via an intramus-
organisms. Most drugs are used empirically, since very
cular injection into the pectoral muscle of a bird
few if any pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
include the knowledge that the bird will receive an
studies have been performed in any species of bird, or
exact dose, it is quick and easy to administer (meaning
 in just a few species of birds. Remember that there is
less stress of handling), and it is quickly absorbed.
no generic bird; different parrot species react differ-
Among the disadvantages, not all drugs are available
ently to different drugs so, research on each species
for IM use, and pain and necrosis may occur at the
would take forever.
injection site. In critically ill birds that cannot initially
The goal is to achieve antimicrobial tissue levels at
absorb oral medications, the bird can be started on IM
the site of infection that are greater than the MIC, but
medications and then switched to oral forms later
one must realize that tissue penetrations vary. One
(Figure 2.38).
The jugular vein.
The ulnar vein crosses the ventral surface
of the elbow.
The medial metatarsal.
Figure 2.35. Venipuncture sites.
Figure 2.36. Small blood collection tubes are
Figure 2.37. Oral medications being given to a
available for small patients.
Quaker parakeet. One drop at a time should be
given under the tongue to avoid aspiration.
39
40
Chapter 2
Figure 2.38. Intramuscular injection given into the
Figure 2.39. Subcutaneous fluids being given to a
left pectoral muscle of a bird. The pectoral muscles
bird with a 22-gauge needle into the left inguinal
arefound to either side of the bony keel.Use a 25-
area. The left leg is gently pulled caudally. Care
to 26-gauge needle.
should be taken to not abduct (pull laterally on) the
leg because bird legs do not abduct much.
Intravenous Medications
severely debilitated birds may not absorb SQ fluids or
The advantages of intravenous medications via the
drugs. If fluids pool in the SQ space and are not
jugular or medial metatarsal or basilic vein are that
absorbed within one to two hours then IV or IO fluids
an exact dose is given, it is rapidly absorbed, and it
are necessary (Figure 2.39).
rapidly reaches therapeutic levels. The disadvantages
of IV medications are the stress of prolonged restraint
Topical
while giving a bolus, the risk of the bird chewing the
 In birds, greasy topical compounds should be avoided
IV line if it is on an IV drip, and the fragile veins of
because this reduces the insulation of the feathers. If
birds.
 ointments must be used, then they should be used spar-
ingly. It is better to use water soluble creams.
Intraosseous Medication
The advantages of giving medications via an intraos-
Nebulization
seous catheter in the distal ulna or proximal tibiotarsus
 Nebulization is used to deliver medications for respira-
include the fact that a precise dose is given (and like
 tory infections. Nebulization is a process in which
IV administration it is rapidly absorbed) and the cath-
 atomization of a liquid into small (<3 microns) drop-
eter can be left in place up to five days. The disadvan-
lets occurs so that it can be inhaled. Usually nebuliza-
tages of IO administration include discomfort or, if not 
tion is performed for ten to thirty minutes by forcing
 bolus treating, the bird chewing the IV line.
oxygen through a solution containing antibiotics or
antifungals, etc.
Subcutaneous Medication
The advantages of giving medications via the subcuta-
Sinus/NasalFlushing
neous route in the inguinal region include the fact that
 Sinus flushing can be diagnostic (cytology, culture)
a precise dose can be given and it is quick and easy to
 and/or therapeutic. Warm saline should be used. It is
administer. The disadvantages include the fact that
 imperative to hold the bird completely vertically upside
some drugs are irritating when given SQ and some
 down to avoid aspiration of fluid into the trachea.
Psittacines and Passerines
41
Flushing can be performed in an awake bird or an
 anesthetized, intubated bird (Figure 2.40)
Tube Feeding
Tube feeding is controversial in critically ill patients
(will they process it?). The bird must be hydrated first.
Usually one should start with a thin carbohydrate
supplement (such as Emeraid) and later use a juvenile
parrot hand feeding formula or specially made avian
critical care diet (high calorie, easy to digest).
 Birds have a high basal metabolic rate with very
little in reserve; therefore, if a bird is losing weight, it
needs to be tube fed. While hospitalized, a bird is
weighed daily in the morning on a gram scale. Tube
feeding is necessary if a bird is not maintaining or
gaining weight in the hospital. Generally birds are tube
fed one to four times/day. The technique consists of
Figure 2.41. A variety of sizes of stainless steel ball
restraining the bird in a normal upright position to
tipped feeding needles used to gavage food directly
avoid regurgitation and aspiration. Some prefer a
into a bird's crop.
stainless steel feeding needle with ball tip; others use
a red-rubber catheter and a speculum to prevent the
bird from biting the tube in two (Figure 2.41).
The tube is aimed from the left commissure to the
right crop area (Figure 2.42). Care must be taken to
avoid the large trachea and excessive force must be
avoided to prevent puncturing the esophagus and
depositing food into the neck of the bird. Confrm
 placement of the tube by palpating/visualizing the tube
in the crop before administering the formula. If the
bird regurgitates at any time, then set it down and let
 go immediately to allow the bird to concentrate on not
aspirating.
Figure 2.42. A metal ball tipped feeding or gavage
tubeis held external to the bird toshow the proper
placement of the tube internally. The tube should
gentlyenter from the bird'sleft commissureand aim
for theright shoulder area.The crop of a bird is on
the right side of the neck and is very thin and subject
topuncture.
Figure 2.40. Nasal flush. (Courtesy of Cheryl
Greenacre.)
42
Chapter 2
Approximate Feeding Quantities (Start with
Figure-8 bandages are used to immobilize the wing
Small Amounts, Then Increase to Amount
distal to and including the radius and ulna. They are
Below)
 not used for humeral fractures unless a wrap about the
body is included. This bandage is usually for tempo.
 Budgie: 1 ml
rary use because the propatagial ligament that extends
Cockatiel: 3 to 5 ml
from the shoulder to the carpus becomes severely con-
Amazon parrot: 15 to 30 ml
tracted after five to seven days (Figure 2.44).
Cockatoo: 20 to 40ml
Macaw: 30 to 60ml
DIAGNOSTIC SAMPLING
Blood is drawn from the right jugular vein because it
is two-thirds larger than the left. No more than 10%
of the blood volume, or 1% of the body weight, can
be removed from a healthy bird without adverse
effects. If a bird is sick or debilitated in any way, less
must be taken. Generally, whole blood is placed in a
lithium heparin tube for a CBC, but a CaEDTA tube
can be used. Plasma from a lithium heparin separator
tube is ideal, but other tubes producing plasma or
serum can be used. Microtainer tubes that hold less
than 1 ml are ideal for small bird patients. Nasal flush
 and other techniques are covered in the techniques
section.
Figure 2.44. Figure-eight bandage.
WOUND CARE AND BANDAGING
Wound care is very similar to that of mammals, except
that birds are very sensitive to steroids; thus, topical
or parenteral steroids should be avoided. Bandaging is
also similar except for those below pertaining to the
special anatomy of birds. Typical bandage materials
simply need to be cut smaller.
Ball or snowshoe bandages are used to protect the
plantar surface of the foot and evenly distribute the
bird's weight in cases of ulcerative pododermatitis, or
bumblefoot. The interdigitating bandage is wrapped
around the entire foot between the toes (Figure 2.43).
The ball bandage is more ball shaped, and the snow-
shoe bandage is flatter.
Figure 2.45.Examples ofElizabethan and tube
collars used in birds. Generally they are not
recommended for use in birds because they are
invariably heavy,make eating and preening diffcult,
and they stress thebird.Exceptions are madefor
collar use when a bird self traumatizes,i.e.bites its
Figure 2.43. Ball foot bandage.
own flesh and bleeds.
Psittacines and Passerines
43
Elizabethan or tube collars about the neck are not
Harrison GJ, Ritchie BW. 1994. Making distinctions on the physical
examination. In: Avian Medicine: Principles and Application,
edited by Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR, Lake Worth:
heavy, make eating and preening difficult, and stress
Winger's Publications.
the bird. Exceptions are made for collar use when a
King AS, McLelland J. 1984. Birds, Their Structure and Function.
bird self traumatizes, i.e. bites its own flesh and bleeds
2nd edition. Eastbourne, England: Bailliere Tindall
(Figure 2.45).
McMillan MC. 1994. Imaging Techniques. In: Avian Medicine:
Principles and Application, edited by Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ,
Harrison LR, Lake Worth: Winger's Publications.
EUTHANASLA
Paul-Murphy JR, Brunson DB, Miletic V. 1999. Analgesic effects of
butorphanol and buprenorphine in conscious African grey
 Any animal should be rendered unconscious prior to
parrots (Psittacus erithacus erithacus and P erithacus timneh).
Amer J Vet Res, 60(10): 1218-1221.
euthanasia, regardless of the species. Birds are easily
Paul-Murphy J, Hess JC, Fialkowski JP. 2004. Pharmacokinetic
masked under anesthesia with isoflurane and then once
properties of a single intrammuscular dose of buprenorphine in
unconscious, the euthanasia solution can be given via
African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus erithacus). J Avian Med
the intravenous or intracardiac route or in the cisterna
Surg, 18(4): 224-228.
 Pollack C, Carpenter JW,
magna. AVMA Euthanasia Guidelines 2007 include
Antinoff N. Birds. 2005. In: Exotic
birds and can be found at http://ww w.avma.org/issues/
Animal Formulary,
, 3rd edition, edited by Carpenter JW. St.
Louis: Elsevier, pp. 135-346.
animal_welfare/euthanasia.pdf.
Quandt JE, Greenacre CB.
1999. Sevoflurane anesthesia in
psittacines. Journat of Zoo and Witdlife Medicine 30 (2): 308-
309.
REFERENCES
Rembert MS, Smith JA, Hosgood G, Marks SL, Tully TN. 2001.
Comparison of traditional thermal support with the forced air
Brue RN. 1994. Nutrition. In: Avian Medicine: Principles and
Application, edited by Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR.
tratis). Assoc. of Avian Vets Annual Conf, 215-217.
Lake Worth: Winger's Publications.
Ritchie B, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR. 1994. Avian Medicine:
Curro TG, Brunson DB, Paul-Murphy J. 1994. Determination of the
Principles and Application. Lake Warde: Winger's Publishing.
 EDso of isoflurane and evaluation of the isoflurane-sparing effect
Tully TN. Birds. In: Mitchell MA, Tully TN. 2009. Manual of
of butorphanol in cockatoos (Cacatua spp.). Vet Surg, 23:
Exotic Pet Practice, St. Louis: Elsevier, pp. 250-298.
429-433.
Wilson GH, Hernandez-Divers S, Budsberg SC. 2004. Pharmaco-
Forshaw JM, Cooper WT. 1989. Parrots of the World. 3rd ed.
kinetics and use of meloxicarm in psittacine birds. Proc Annu
Willoughby, Australia: Landsdown Press.
Conf Assoc Avian Vet, 7-9.
CHAPTER THREE
Psittacine Behavior, Husbandry,
and Enrichment
Tarab Hadley
INTRODUCTION
attractive as pets. However, they may also be extremely
territorial, which may contribute to unwanted biting
exe r e sds pq a
behavior.
of the 9,700 known avian species. These birds, which
are primarily found in tropical regions of the world,
Cockatoos
are classified into three families: the Loriidae (includes
Like all birds, cockatoos are very intelligent (Color
lories and lorikeets), the Cacatuidae (cockatoos), and
Plate 3.1). Most cockatoos, especially the larger variet-
the Psittacidae (includes parakeets and parrots). Birds
ies, also tend to be very sweet-natured. This behavioral
in each of these families demonstrate distinct physical
and behavioral characteristics. Keep in mind that what
 like babies or small children instead of birds. Likewise,
constitutes normal and abnormal behavior may be
many of these same birds become very attached to
heavily influenced by the species, the individual bird,
their owners, contributing to the development of
and the environment. In many situations, behavior in
 abnormal behavior, such as feather picking.
captive birds does not always equate with the behavior
 Smaller cockatoos tend to bite even their owners
of those in the wild.
but some may be sweet-natured. Cockatoos are decent
talkers. They are also prone to screaming loudly at
certain times of the day, such as dusk or dawn, when
BEHAVIOR OF COMMON PET
they are tired and ready for sleep, or when they become
PSITTACINE SPECIES
excited. If left unattended or sometimes in plain view,
their curiosity may get the best of them and lead to
Lories and Lorikeets
 damaged baseboards or other broken items.
 These birds are extremely energetic and intelligent.
Cockatoos cannot distinguish between safe and
 They are not good talkers but when excited or stressed
unsafe items so it is essential to bird-proof the
they may emit an ear-piercing, high-pitched screech. In 
home environment from electrical cords or metallic
the home environment these birds tend to be very
items such as jewelry. The cockatoo species most com-
curious and may get into trouble going into places they
monly kept as pets include the umbrella cockatoo,
shouldn't. Many of these birds do well in a group of
salmon-crested cockatoo (also known as the moluccan
at least two. As individual pets, they can attach them-
cockatoo), galah (also known as the rose-breasted
selves to one favorite owner and be very nippy toward
cockatoo), sulphur-crested cockatoo (including the
anyone else.
lesser variety),(
Goffin's cockatoo, and Ducorp's
 In general, due to their wet diet of fruit, nectar, and
cockatoo.
pollen, these birds are also very messy eaters and it is
 In general, the temperament of these pet birds may
not unusual to see food splashed around the cage or
quickly change from very quiet and observant to very
on floors and walls. Species from this family com-
noisy and active. These birds also produce a large
monly seen in the pet trade include the black lory, red
 amount of dander which coats the beak with a visible
lory, rainbow lory, and chattering Lory. The brilliance
 layer of fine white powder. In addition, a large amount 
and beauty of their plumage have made these birds
of feces is produced daily by these birds.
4.5
46
Chapter 3
Plate 3.2. Pair of eclectus parrots, one of several
sexually dimorphic psittacine species. (Photo
Plate 3.1. Umbrella cockatoo. (Photo courtesy of
courtesy of Dr. April Romagnano.) (See also color
Dr. Tarah Hadley.) (See also color plates)
plates)
Budgerigar
These small birds are very active and social, especially
when grouped with other birds. It is not unusual to
see preening or food sharing behavior between birds.
 s on p q    o m s
and obey other commands. If they are not trained they
tend to be very flighty when approached and can some-
times be a challenge to capture. These birds may also
become nippy during restraint. In most other areas, the
behavior of budgerigars is similar to that of other
birds. Therefore, it is important to avoid promotion of
these birds as “starter birds" for new enthusiasts
because their intelligence requires enrichment equal to
that of other birds.
Eclectus
Plate 3.3. Bright orange cheek patches are often
These birds are one of the few sexually dimorphic
more prevalent in male cockatiels, such as the one
species (males are green and females are red) (Plate 3.2).
pictured bere. (Photo courtesy of Dr. Tarah Hadley.)
The male eclectus tends to have a sweeter and calmer
(See also color plates)
disposition compared to the female eclectus, whose
behavior seems more cautious and suspicious, espe-
vocal at times and can be good talkers and singers.
cially toward people she does not know. The females
They are very trainable to the hand and make good
also have a reputation for being more aggressive in
 avian pets for first-time bird owners. They enjoy inter-
some situations and more likely to bite than the males.
 acting with other cockatiels or people. Female birds
 In general, eclectus birds are quieter and less active
-a ouoo oi uod aq eu auoe ro dnoa e u ida
than other birds. Like most birds, however, they are
laying, which can be detrimental to their overall health.
very intelligent and curious about their surroundings.
As pets, these birds thrive with owners that have a
African Grey
patient hand. With time and practice, they may become
These birds are extremely intelligent and also very
adequate talkers. Like the cockatoos, these birds may
 good talkers. (Color Plate 3.4) They tend to be friendly
also develop feather destructive behaviors.
but also may be somewhat cautious depending on the
environment. African grey parrots are also one of a
Cockatiel
few species that commonly present for feather destruc-
Cockatiels are sweet, feisty birds with very active
tive behaviors. Respiratory diseases such as sinusitis
social lives (Color Plate 3.3). They may also be very
and aspergillosis also seem to be prevalent in this
Psittacine Behavior, Husbandry, and Enrichment
47
Plate 3.6. Blue and gold macaw that has chewed its
way partly out one side of a cardboard box. (Photo
Plate 3.4. Congo African grey parrot. (Photo
courtesy of Dr. Tarah Hadley.) (See also color
courtesy of Cherie Fox.) (See also color plates)
plates)
the owner. They are fairly good speakers and may also
 be trained to perform small tricks.
Lovebird
 Owners may form close and friendly relationships with
these birds on an individual basis. The birds may learn
to vocalize some and tend to be fairly active singers.
When paired with one or more other lovebirds, these
birds may sometimes become less friendly with the
Ao aoq Ae p u jo sd ai oi raumo
 protective of their cage mates.
Macaws
These birds make up some of the largest members of
the Psittacidae family. They are very active and vocal
Plate 3.5. Congo African grey parrot with an
m sian o y on ae aq A p
enlarged left nare, most likely caused by chronic
encouragement. Sometimes their vocalizations can be
upper respiratory infections and sinusitis.(Photo
ear-piercing. Behavior of these birds may range from
courtesy of Dr. Tarah Hadley.) (See also color
friendly to cautious or unfriendly, depending on the
plates)
background of the bird. (Color Plates 3.6, 3.7, 3.8)
On occasion, macaws in stressful environments
species (Color Plate 3.5). Hence, many of these birds
 may exhibit feather destructive behaviors. Due to their
 may be more sensitive to aerosolized toxins and other
large size and particularly long feathers, large cages
agents. Like other birds, interaction with the owner
that permit activity are required to house these birds.
and environmental enrichment are just some of the
 Owners should also be aware that they produce large
ways these birds may be kept stimulated. These birds
amounts of feces on a daily basis. Their large beaks,
normally produce a small amount of feather dander
another common characteristic of these birds, are
that lightly coats their beaks with a fine white powder.
used to crack open nuts with the largest and hardest
of shells. Many species exist in the pet population,
Senegal
including the hyacinth macaw, blue and gold macaw,
These smaller parrots make good pets and seem to
scarlet macaw, green-winged macaw, and military
thrive in an environment supported by interaction with
maca w.
48
Chapter 3
Plate 3.9. Cuban Amazon in outside aviary on a
Plate 3.7. Hyacinth macaws. (Photo courtesy of
Cherie Fox.) (See also color plates)
natural wood perch. (Photo courtesy of Dr. April
Romagnano.) (See also color plates)
the best households are those that can tolerate the loud
vocalizations. They may form close relationships with
an ui anq no Addu aq osie ueo Aaun pue siaumo
situations. Common species seen in the pet industry
include the mitred conure, sun conure, maroon-bellied
 conure, and green-cheeked conure.
Parrotlet
Parrotlets include some of the smallest species in the
Psittacidae family. They are also extremely intelligent
birds with a feisty temperament that belies their body
size. They have been known to challenge or defend
their territory from birds that are many times larger,
which can sometimes get them into trouble. They are
not considered very good talkers but will vocalize with
encouragement. Parrotlets lead very active lives and
tend to be very good fliers. Owners should always be
aware of the location of non-caged birds because they
can sometimes get underfoot.
Plate 3.8. Military macaw. (Photo courtesy of
Amazon
Cherie Fox.) (See also color plates)
Amazon bird species are big-bodied birds that are
medium in size (Color Plates 3.9, 3.10, 3.11). They
Conure
may be trained to become very good talkers and may
These species of birds comprise some of the small to
be friendly pets, depending on the individual bird and
medium-sized parrots. They are extremely active birds
the environment. They enjoy the interaction with
and very active singers or talkers. They may sing or
 owners as well as playing on their own with toys in
screech for several minutes at a time or longer. Hence,
their environment.
Psittacine Behavior Husbandry, and Enrichment
49
prevent damage when the bird moves around. Likewise,
smaller birds require cages that are proportional to
their wingspans and sizes.
Other considerations include the thickness of the
bars and the width between bars. Whereas larger birds
may be safely enclosed in cages with wide spaces
between bars, owners of small birds need to be careful
that the width is not so great that the bird may be able
to easily slip through. Precautions should also be taken
to ensure that the cages are properly manufactured and
 do not contain materials such as lead that may harm
birds.
Cages should have the ability to separate birds from
fecal droppings so that birds that like to go to the
-ds jo ys 1um os op Ae seo un jo oq
Plate 3.10. Yellow-naped Amazon. (Photo courtesy
ping in their feces. Ideally, the grate above the bottom
of Dr. Sam Rivera.) (See also color plates)
of the cage is removable for ease of cleaning.
Placement of food bowls within cages should also
be considered. Some cages have built-in brackets that
hold food and water bowls. Others are flexible and
allow the owners to decide where they should be
located. Keep in mind that many smaller birds do a
better job of leaving the food bowls alone and not
trying to remove them from their holders. However,
bowls from their holders. For these birds, a system in
which the bowl sits in a permanent bracket and cannot
be removed when the bowl is inside the cage is a good
solution. This also prevents birds from creating more
cage mess by wasting food or water on the floor.
There are a tremendous variety of cage styles and
designs to choose from. The actual style chosen may
depend on multiple factors. Owners should consider the
space available for the cage. The shape is also a major
consideration because some birds prefer dome-shaped
Plate 3.11. Blue-fronted Amazon. (Photo courtesy of
cages over flat-topped cages. The shape of the cage also
Dr. Sam Rivera.) (See also color plates)
affects the inside space available to the bird. Owners
should wisely choose the preferred height of the cage so
that birds on top of cages are not unreachable by the
HUSBANDRY
owner. Owners may choose from a variety of cage designs
that may include external play and perching areas.
The Cage Environment
After—-and sometimes before—the acquisition of a pet
Percbes
bird, many owners consider the habitat that the bird
 The appropriate choice of perches is often poorly
will live in when it is inside the cage. One of the most
understood by many owners. There are also many
important considerations will be the size of the cage.
 opinions about the best type and size of perch. Many
The size should be appropriately matched to the size
owners forget that birds stand on their feet all day
of the bird. If the cage is for a large parrot species,
while they are awake and all night while they sleep.
such as a macaw, the cage should at least be as wide
Hence, what the bird stands on may have a serious
as the wingspan of the bird. An even wider cage pro-
impact on its overall well being in addition to its
vides plenty of room for play and other antics. The
 health. That said, owners may choose from a variety
height of the cage must also be evaluated such that the
of perch sizes and types. A few considerations for
long feathers of perched birds have adequate space to
choosing the best perch:
50
Chapter 3
As a general rule, the best perch allows the bird's
Not all birds do this. Some birds are completely terri-
toes to wrap around about three-fourths of the diam-
fed of the bottom of the cage. Do not force them to
eter of the perch. The best perches are also typically
go to the cage bottom.
made out of natural wood. Owners often ask whether
 It is important to provide birds that do play on the
wooden dowels or concrete perches are acceptable
cage bottom with appropriate toys or enrichment. If a
types of perches. The answer is likely that most birds
bird likes to shred newspaper, place a layer of news-
will do fine with them as long as they are not the only
 paper on top of the grate so the bird has access to it.
 perches in the cage.
Do not scold birds that like to play with newspaper
Although they are made out of wood, the downside
for making a mess. That is just part of being an active
of wood dowels is that they are flat, sometimes slip-
bird. Some birds may also enjoy paper balls or card-
pery, and lack good texture for gripping. They are a
board boxes. Birds that were previously scolded for
reliable form of transport for birds that travel between
shredding newspaper may enjoy accidental access to
water and food bowls at mealtimes. They are not
newspaper. In this scenario, owners may make it a
comfortable for long-term perching. Pet stores also
little easier for birds to grab newspaper through the
sell plastic dowels which fit nicely inside pre-fabricated
grate while the birds still see it as a challenging and
cages; however, they tend to be more slippery
forbidden activity.
than wood dowels. Smaller and lighter-weight birds
Upkeep of the cage bottom is especially important
do better on plastic dowels but also likely encounter
 to the overall cleanliness of the cage. Substrate options
the same problems with discomfort after a period of
 include newspaper, butcher paper, recycled cardboard,
time.
wood shavings, and corn cob bedding. Ideally, the
Concrete perches are often touted as a good alterna-
substrate on the cage bottom should be changed daily.
tive to nail trimming in birds of any size. Based upon
This is easier to do when newspaper or butcher paper
experience, these perches dull the nails of a select few
are used as the substrates. Daily cleaning limits growth
birds; many more still need to be trimmed regularly. For 
 of bacteria or fungus and formation of maggots.
many birds, particularly those with foot or ankle prob-
Daily cleaning is not so easy or cost efficient when
lems and heavier birds, the concrete may wear away the
shavings or corn cob bedding are used. Many owners
normal skin layer on some parts of the foot. In its place
 e dooss n rrd ss as  i
the skin may become calloused, worn, and unnaturally
piles on a daily basis rather than replace the substrate.
smooth. This may also lead to extreme discomfort.
The likelihood that bacteria or fungus will grow in
Natural wood perches, such as manzanita,
may
these scenarios is higher. Wood shavings with added
provide the best source of comfort to a bird's feet.
treatments, such as cedar wood shavings, can be
These perches come in varying diameters. As long as
harmful to birds. Young birds that don't know any
part of the perch length is an appropriate diameter for
 better or older birds that have a tendency to eat things
the foot size of the bird, changes in the diameter within
they shouldn't have been known to ingest the sub-
the same perch provide the best opportunity for a bird
strate, so it is essential that it be relatively safe.
to exercise its feet. Foot problems may lead to poor
health and increased risk for systemic disease. Healthy
Toys and Non-toy Enrichment Items
feet lead to healthy skin, allow for increased activity
 Birds are extremely intelligent animals that need an
and movement, and permit the bird to get better
active, fulflling environment to match their intensity.
quality rest in the evenings. The number of perches
 Toys tend to be the most common way of providing
provided is affected by the size of the cage. Avoid
fulfllment to the inner and outer environment of birds'
cages. Toys come in a variety of shapes, sizes, colors,
and decreases the available space.
and noise options.
 The best toy for a bird depends on its size and per-
The Cage Bottom
sonality and available space. Many birds are afraid of
Bird owners far and wide have all received a similar
 new additions to their cages and may need time to get
warning: when your bird goes to the bottom of the
 used to new toys. Owners should also avoid the temp-
cage, it is extremely sick. While that is true in some
tation to crowd the cage with several toys. Crowded
cases, it is not always true. In fact, the cage bottom is
cages do not allow enough room for birds to stretch
just another place where birds may play. Many birds
  d   so  d 
routinely go to the bottom of the cage to play with
hazard. Toys should be individually assessed for prac-
toys or shred newspaper, and this is completely normal.
ticality and safeness.
Psittacine Behavior Husbandry, and Enrichment
51
Toys may also be created from safe household
bird is self-bathing it is not uncommon for it to dunk
items, such as cardboard boxes, cereal boxes, rope,
its head, beak, feet and legs, or parts of its tail in the
     h d 
water bowl. After dunking parts of its body, the bird
cheap to create and are easily replaced. They may also
usually shakes off the water and then the behavior is
be tailor-made to suit the activity level of the
repeated. A bird that is allowed more free flight in
bird. Toys that encourage curiosity on the part of the
the home may fy to the sound of running water
bird, particularly those that encourage foraging or
 and immerse itself underneath the running spout or
searching for food, may provide great stimulation
sprayer.
to the bird's environment. Other items of enrichment
that birds may enjoy include music, television, or
Playing on the Cage Bottom
videos.
Some birds actually enjoy spending time on the cage
bottom as much as they do on perches near the top of
Cage Location
the cage. The cage bottom is where "illegal" access to
The location of the cage is also important. Owners
 newspaper or other substrate may be obtained, which
should choose a location for their bird that will allow
seems to be thrilling for many birds.
daily interaction with owners and provide quiet in the
 Owners are encouraged to place toys, newspaper,
evening for rest. It is not simply enough to cover a
 or other items on the bottom grate so birds have activi-
bird's cage in the evening and expect that complete rest
ties. The healthy bird that plays on the cage bottom
will occur. As long as activity, noise, and bright light
may still vocalize and will continue to be very active
occurs in the environment, birds may also continue to
all normal behaviors for birds.
stay awake and not sleep. For this reason many owners
Pq nui nd oi aoeid nanb e ui aeo aeedas e aaey
Preening and Molting
at night.
s i e n pu e si 
 As a general rule, birds usually need between ten
perform on a daily basis. Birds use their beaks to
and twelve hours of sleep each night to be well rested
smooth down erratic-looking  feathers  all  over
the following day. Birds that don't get enough sleep
their body. Oten, owners may see birds reaching to
may become anxious or nippy or may resort to feather
the hidden preen gland at the lower back near the
destructive behaviors. Safety should also be a consid-
base of the tail. The material taken from this area is
eration. For instance, a kitchen location for a cage may
 q sra u i o s a  pas
expose birds to undesirable fumes.
shape. As part of the normal preening behavior, it is
not usual to see a few old or loose feathers drop from
the body.
NORMAL BEHAVIOR OF PSITTACINE
 Molting is another behavior that occurs in birds. As
BIRD SPECIES
new feathers come in, old feathers are pushed out.
Newer feathers may come in singly, as in the case of
What constitutes normal behavior tends to be similar
large wing and tail feathers, or in groups, such as is
across many psittacine bird species, with some minor
the case with head feathers. Newer feathers may be
differences. Many of these behaviors are particular to
surrounded by an opaque sheath that the bird removes
birds in captivity, although some may be exhibited by
during the preening process. When a large tail or wing
birds in the wild that have not had the influence of a
feather molts on one side of the body, the same feather
captive experience. Bird owners also come to learn
on the opposite side of the body usually molts at the
that differences in behavior, activity level, and tem-
same time. In general, it is normal for large feathers to
perament occur among their individual pet birds.
molt twice yearly and small feathers such as those
 Environment and husbandry likely have strong influ-
covering the chest and head to molt several times
ences on the development of certain behaviors.
yearly.
Bathing
Sleeping
 Some birds enjoy bathing themselves in their water
Many birds sleep through the evening for about nine
bowl. Bathing may be triggered by loud noises, such
to twelve hours, depending on the environment and
as music or a vacuum, or the appearance of natural
lighting conditions. Birds also take naps periodically
sunlight on certain portions of the cage, or it may just 
during the day. Most birds that are sleeping for an
occur at some time known only to the bird. When a
extended period of time usually sleep on their
52
 Chapter 3
most comfortable perch with one foot clenched and
ABNORMAL BEHAVIOR
held up near their abdominal area. Their heads
are often turned backward a full 180 degrees and
Veterinary staff may pick up on some very obvious
their beaks are tucked into the feathers of their
signs to determine whether a bird is not feeling well.
back near their wings. Any loud noise or other distur-
More subtle clues are usually detected by the owner.
bance may disrupt a bird from this position. Some
 That is why it is so important to get a thorough and
birds, such as cockatoos, may get upset about disrup-
complete history, which should include asking the
tions to their sleep time and may vocalize loudly until
same background questions of every avian owner.
their environment quiets down. Many birds respond
well to having a cover placed around their cages at
Feather Destructive Behaviors
 sleep time.
Feather destructive behaviors include medical and non-
medical causes of injury to the feathers and surrounding
Regurgitation
tissue. Birds may destroy parts or all of a feather. They
 Parents that raise chicks in the nest provide nutrition
also may directly cause trauma to the underlying skin
to them in the form of regurgitated food. However,
and muscle. Some birds just pull out feathers. Behaviors
juvenile and adult birds have been known to
that involve feather and tissue destruction are not
regurgitate to their owners. Often no food material is
 normal and potential causes should be investigated as
expelled but the birds go through the motion of regur-
early as possible to try to minimize trauma. Any trauma
gitating food into their mouths and re-swallowing it.
that causes excessive bleeding and/or tissue damage
This may simply be a sign of a bird's close attachment
needs immediate attention (Color Plate 3.12).
with an owner and not necessarily mean that the bird
is sick.
Sitting on the Cage Bottom
Birds that are extremely ill are often too tired or weak
Eye Movements
to perch and go to the bottom of the cage. These birds
 Owners often marvel at how quickly and easily birds
 may be distinguished from their healthy counterparts
are able to change the way their eyes look. In most
 by their dull attitude and overall depression. Sometimes
other animals, the size of the colored iris is affected by
 they lean against the side of the cage and keep their
the amount of light coming into the eye. Hence, these
 eyes closed for extended periods of time, even when
animals have involuntary control of their iris muscles.
attempts are made to stimulate them. This is consid-
 Birds are uniquely able to directly control the move-
ered a medical emergency and requires immediate
ment of their irises due to the presence of voluntary
attention by a veterinarian.
muscles. Birds that are excited or angry often make the
openings of their irises smaller. This is often referred
Fluffed Featbers and Shivering
to as "flashing” their eyes.
 Often one of the first signs of illness that owners notice
is when their bird's feathers become fluffed and they
Body Shivering
Many birds give the appearance of being cold when
their bodies start to quiver or shake. Although this is
a possibility for birds exposed to cold weather, birds
usually quiver or shake when they are nervous or
exposed to new environments or people. Some birds
they have been completely comfortable.
Vocalizations
The time of day or situation during which a bird vocal-
izes depends upon many factors. The species of bird
and the personality of the individual bird usually play
a role. Stimuli that cause vocalizations by birds may
be natural or artificial in origin. Common stimuli for
vocalization by birds include bathing time, loud noises
such as music or the vacuum cleaner, feeding time, or
Plate 3.12. A feather picker. (Photo courtesy of
during dawn and dusk.
Dr. Sam Rivera.) (See also color plates)
Psittacine Behavior, Husbandry, and Enrichment
53
Plate 3.13. Yellow-headed Amazon that presented
Plate 3.14. Cockatiel with fecal staining of vent
lethargic with eyes closed andfluffed feathers.
area secondary to egg binding. (Photo courtesy of
(Photo courtesy of Dr. Tarah Hadley.) (See also
Dr. Tarah Hadley.) (See also color plates)
color plates)
a good idea for owners to change the substrate at the
look puffy (Color Plate 3.13). Many birds often shiver.
bottom of cage frequently so that the amount of fecal
These are signs that the bird is unable to properly
production may be regularly evaluated. A bird that is
regulate its body temperature and the bird is doing
anorexic or has decreased appetite will have scant or
everything it can to trap heat for warmth. Birds in this
no feces in its droppings. Some birds may also have
condition should be evaluated as soon as possible by
multiple droppings stuck to the underside of their tails,
a veterinarian.
which is usually caused by general weakness and an
 inability to properly release feces away from the body
Regurgitation and Vomiting
(Color Plate 3.14).
Regurgitation can be a sign of illness in a bird. Birds
often make bobbing motions with their heads as food
is moved from the lower gastrointestinal tract to the
Open-mouth Breathing and Tail Bobbing
beak. If the food material is unable to be swallowed,
A bird that is breathing abnormally breathes with its
the bird will vomit the contents. A sick bird makes
mouth open and often its tongue moves in and out of
 these motions repetitively. Causes of regurgitation and
the mouth as it inhales and exhales. Many birds having
vomiting include an obstruction in the gastrointestinal
 difficulty breathing also bob their tails up and down
tract, inflammation, infection, heavy metal toxicosis,
 as they struggle to bring air into their bodies. These
and cancer.
signs should also be treated as medical emergencies
and oxygen supplementation may be required as part
Mean Bird Turned Friendly
of the initial treatment.
This is a classic sign observed by owners who notice
that their bird is not acting like it usually does. Owners
who inquire further will interact with a usually mean
Falling Off Perch
bird and are surprised to see that the bird will come
It is not unusual for most birds to fall of their perches
out of its cage and onto the owner's hand easily. These
at some point while they are sleeping. However, birds
birds are likely sick and tend to be more quiet and
that do this consistently while asleep or awake are not
docile than usual. In addition, some previously unap-
normal. This may actually be a sign of neurologic
proachable birds may permit you to touch them.
disease, a nutritional abnormality, or some other
illness. Causes of falling off the perch may need further
Decreased or No Fecal Production
investigation. Until then, it may be safer to lower the
Stool production is one of the best indicators of how
ul aeo ralus e asn ro saeo spiq asaui ul saunad
well or how poorly a bird is eating. That is why it is
 which the perches are closer to the bottom.
54
Chapter 3
Inappropriate Molting
ADDITIONAL READING
Most birds should molt their large wing and tail feath-
ers at least twice yearly while their small covert or
Bays TB, Lightfoot T, Mayer J. 2006. Exotic Pet Behavior.
covering feathers usually molt more frequently. Birds
 Philadelphia: Saunders.
that fail to molt these feathers on a regular basis may
Forshaw JM. 1977. Parrots of the World. Neptune: Doubleday and
Company.
have issues with their nutrition or some other illness
Manuat of Parrot Behavior, edited by Andrew U. Luescher, 2006.
affecting their metabolism. Long-standing feathers
Australia: Wiley-Blackwell.
may become tattered, broken, or dull. Regular baths 
should be part of the hygiene for all birds to assist
them in maintaining their feathers.
CHAPTER FOUR
Aviary Design and Management
April Romagnano
INTRODUCTION
· Implement proper management and nutrition
(Figures 4.1 and 4.2).
The avicultural veterinary team, consisting of the avian
· Routinely practice good hygiene and impeccable
technician and avian veterinarian, must know the
sanitation (Figure 4.3).
avian collection, including its size and culture, and be
aware of the importance of avicultural management
Infectious disease prevention is best achieved by
and pediatric care. Good hygiene and impeccable sani-
following the principles mentioned above. Hence, the
tation are important for successful pediatrics and
avicultural veterinary team must first make sure that
breeding of adult birds, but sound avicultural manage-
good medicine, management, husbandry, and hygiene
ment must precede it.
 practices are in place. The team must then implement
This primarily includes good sanitation, effective
proper quarantine, vaccination, disinfection, necropsy,
nutritional protocols for birds of all ages, and preven-
and histopathology procedures. The latter two proce-
tive avicultural and pediatric medicine. This is a greater
 dures are important because a complete preventive
challenge in larger aviaries. Second, proper quarantine
for new acquisitions is imperative, as are necropsy
evaluation.
 and histopathology of those lost to the collection. The
latter procedures, necropsy and histopathology, are
important because a complete preventive medicine
QUARANTINE
program incorporates a thorough pre- and post-
mortem evaluation.
Newly introduced birds should undergo strict quaran-
tine in a separate designated quarantine building where
AVICULTURE
The avicultural veterinary team must first be aware of
the importance of cleanliness, husbandry, avicultural
and pediatric medicine, and common sense in aviary
 management to ensure a successful avicultural collec-
tion. The best way to achieve the above is to follow a
strict set of rules in the aviary to protect the entire
avicultural collection as a whole.
· Consider in advance the number of birds to be
acquired.
· Consider in advance the species of birds to be
acquired.
 Acquire birds from a reputable source.
 Follow strict quarantine at all times.
· Require extensive testing at pre- and post-purchase
Figure 4.1. High-quality pelleted brands of feed are
examination, as well as yearly for the health of the
commonly part ofthe nutrition for birdsin an
collection
aviary. (Photo courtesy of Dr. April Romagnano.)
5.5
56
Chapter 4
Figure 4.2. Aviary watering system that constantly
Figure 4.3. Longitudinal aviary cage design permits
provides fresh waterfrom a central system into
quick visualization of multiple cages. The cage
individual cages.Aviary birds learn to operate and
design provides barriers between individual cages to
drink water from the nozzle,which minimizes
minimize contact. Mesh cage bottoms permit release
bacteria buildup. (Photo courtesy of Dr. April
of unwanted food, water, and feces away from
Romagnano.)
the cage and onto the ground where appropriate
removal may take place. Wooden nest boxes, located
extensive testing and a minimum quarantine period of
for easy access by the veterinary team, may be easily
forty-five days are required. Although testing can be
replaced as needed. (Photo courtesy of Dr. April
cost prohibitive to some, an outbreak would be dev-
Romagnano.)
astating to all. Management must decide if new acqui-
sitions are worth the risk.
other birds or general staff who are at the end of their
Quarantine is indeed one of the best methods of
day and about to leave the property should enter this
 infectious disease control. When a separate building is
building.
unavailable an alternative plan must be instituted.
 Further, before entering, employees must gown and
Hence, regardless of the collection size, location, or
put on booties, masks, and gloves. The building
value, a separate quarantine facility, even if it is a
should be self-sufficient with its own caging, nets,
friend's bird-free home, is imperative.
towels, protective clothing, water source, bowls, and
Collections vary and may include large or small
washing facilities. Nothing should ever leave the quar-
psittacines, soft bills, and passerines. All collections 
antine building to be re-introduced into the main col-
warrant constant consistent f
flock management. A
lection because it may act as a fomite. The only
complete health history of all breeding birds in a col-
exception should be garbage going directly off the
lection, including baseline blood work and endoscopy,
property.
is imperative  for  ensuring proper reproductive
management and optimal reproductive performance.
Consideration for maintaining an open or closed
EXAMINATIONS AND DIAGNOSTIC
aviary is important in the health of the collection.
TESTING: NEONATES, JUVENILES,
 Open aviaries are defined as those in which new birds
BREEDERS, AND NEW ACQUISITIONS
(thus new potential diseases) can be introduced into
the collection.
Neonates and juveniles are examined daily and tested
The “closed aviary concept," in which strict quar-
on a case-by-case basis (Figure 4.4). A crop and cloacal
antine procedures are practiced, is a must in an effec-
culture and fecal Gram stain are considered routine
tive preventive medicine program. A closed aviary
tests in young and very young birds. Yearly examina-
means no new introductions, with birds only leaving
tion and testing of breeders and immediate testing of
the collection. Traffic within the aviary should be
 new acquisitions should include a CBC, serum chem-
managed and controlled, and new introductions must 
istries, fecal float, fecal direct exam, fecal Gram stain
immediately be put into the separate quarantine build-
and cytology, cloacal culture, polyoma virus swab
ing. Only dedicated staff that has no contact with
 DNA probe test, PBFD whole blood DNA probe test,
Aviary Design and Management
57
Figure 4.5. Metal traps and hot-wire fencing are
just some of the methods used to minimize the
introduction of disease into an aviary via indigenous
vectors such as opossums and raccoons. (Photo
courtesy of Dr. April Romagnano.)
Figure 4.4. Young byacinth macaw during
examination by the veterinary team. (Photo courtesy
Dr. April Romagnano.)
diately if an infectious disease is suspected (Figure 4.3).
Enveloped viruses are the most easily inactivated
and are susceptible to quaternary ammonia products.
chlamydophila serology, and indirect and direct screen-
Note that chlorhexidine has limited activity against
ing for PDD. Additional or alternative testing may be
some bacteria, especially Pseudomonas spp. and
performed and is determined on a case-by-case basis.
certain Gram-negative bacteria, and although it can
Again, although testing can be cost prohibitive to
kill some enveloped viruses, it cannot be considered a
some, an outbreak would be devastating to all.
reliable viricide. Non-enveloped viruses require pheno-
Vaccination
protocols
are
limited
avian
lic compounds and sodium hypochlorite (bleach) or
medicine, because very few vaccines are available, safe,
stabilized chlorine dioxide for inactivation.
and effective in psittacine birds. Presently only the
 Glutaraldehydes inactivate most bacteria, including
polyoma vaccine (Avian Polyoma Virus vaccine,
mycobacteria, many viruses, and chlamydophila, even
Biomune) is recommended for routine use and is
in the presence of organic debris. As a result, this
USDA-registered.
product is particularly useful for endoscopy disin-
fection and sterilization. Overall, the most widely
recommended and economical disinfectant in avian
DISINFECTION AND DISEASE
establishments is bleach (at the dilution of one part
PREVENTION
bleach to twenty parts of water). Bleach, in any
strength, should never be sprayed around birds,
 Disinfection and infectious disease prevention are very
because it can be fatal. However, bleach is often used
important in an effective preventive medicine protocol
to disinfect floors and bowls in aviculture, once they
because organic matter inactivates most disinfectants.
have been pre-washed with hot water and soap.
A disinfectant is defined as an agent that destroys
 The geographic location and whether the birds are
many disease-causing microorganisms present on the
housed in or out of doors reflect disease potential
surface of inanimate objects. Hence, first clean the area
and susceptibility. For example, sarcocystosis and
by removing all organic debris prior to disinfectant
 sss  xod s  s
application. The easier an object is to clean the more
are introduced by indigenous vectors such as rats,
likely it can be adequately disinfected.
mosquitoes, opossums, raccoons, cockroaches, and
Wood is the perfect example of a diffcult-to-clean
snakes in southern states such as Florida. An effective
object; therefore, all wooden perches, nest boxes, and
Aee Aue u Paban si od uouand-isad
toys should be destroyed and replaced yearly, or imme-
(Figure 4.5).
58
Chapter 4
PEDLATRICS FOR THE AVICULTURIST
body mass by palpation of elbows, toes, and hips,
because keel muscle mass is an unreliable indicator of
Pediatric History Evaluation
weight in the very young.
Note that a chick's health depends on many historical
Crops should be examined visually for size and
factors, such as its parent's health and breeding history,
color, and carefully palpated for thickness, tone, burns,
the condition of its siblings, and any problems the
punctures, or the presence of foreign bodies. Skin
chick may have had during its incubation and hatch-
should be evaluated for color, texture, hydration, and
ing. The pediatric diet, its preparation, and the amount
the presence of SQ fat. Normally, psittacine chicks
and frequency of feedings delivered are also part of the
should have beige-pink, warm, and supple skin.
history. Whether the chick's crop is empty for each
Dehydration causes a chick's skin to become dry,
feeding, especially the first feeding of the day, is also
hyperemic, and tacky. In juveniles, feathers should be
part of the history. It is important to know whether
examined for stress marks, color bars, hemorrhage, or
the chick's environment, housing, and substrate were
 deformities of shafts and emerging feathers.
and are clean, safe, and warm choices. A chick's
The musculoskeletal system should be palpated and
behavior, especially its feeding response, and the
assessed for skeletal defects or trauma in chicks of all
colors, consistency, and volume of its feces, urine, and
ages. Until weaning, cockatoo chicks sit back on their
urates are all important historical factors
hocks and are balanced forward on their large abdo-
mens; macaws prefer to lie down. Chicks normally
Frequent Examination of Young Birds
have prominent abdomens due to a food-filled proven-
Physical examination of the chick entails evaluation of
triculus, ventriculus, and small intestine. Beaks should
available weight charts for daily gain, assessing overall
be examined for malformations at rest. Examine the
appearance, proportions, and behavior In neonates,
beaks pump pads for wounds.
this examination should be performed in a warm
Eyes should be examined for swelling, discharge,
room with pre-warmed hands. Knowledge of different
crusting, or blepharospasm. Normally a clear discharge
species growth rates, development, and behavioral
m suado is ae au uaum saa au u pau st
characteristics is helpful.
typically occurs unilaterally. Nares and ears should be
Psittacine neonates are altricial (hatched with eyes
examined for discharge and aperture size. The oral
closed, down minimal to absent, and limited mobility),
cavity should be examined for plaques, inflammation,
hence nourishment, warmth (93° to 98*F), and a safe
or injuries. Generally, a healthy chick or baby bird
place must be provided (Figure 4.6). Neonates nor-
should elicit a vigorous feeding response when stimu-
mally have a visible liver, duodenal loop, yolk sac,
lated at the beak's lateral commissures or pump pads.
ventriculus, and occasionally lung through their body
Pediatric Diagnostics
skin. The lungs and heart should be ausculted. Assess
Clinical pathology:
PCV, TP = lower
WBC = higher
Albumin, uric acids = lower
ALP, CPK = higher
Microbiology
 Gram-positive bacteria normal:
Cloacal cultures
Crop cultures
Gram stain
Radiology
 Gastrointestinal tract enlarged—endoscopy:
Foreign body retrieval
Figure 4.6. Psittacine neonate. (Photo courtesy of
Syrinx examination
Dr. April Romagnano.)
Surgical sexing
Aviary Design and Management
59
Common Pediatric Problems
 Unretracted yolk sac
Stunting
 Leg and toe deformities
 Constricted toe syndrome
 Beak malformations
Regurgitation
 Esophageal or pharyngeal punctures
Crop stasis
Crop burns
 Foreign body ingestion or impaction
Less Common Pediatric Problems
 Intestinal intussusception
Hepatic hematomas
Figure 4.7. Healthy Congo African grey chick (right)
and parent in nest box. (Photo courtesy of Dr. April
Gout
Wine-colored urine
Romagnano.)
Hepatic lipidosis
Diseases in the Nursery
Viral diseases:
 Polyoma virus
Psittacine beak and feather disease
Proventricular dilatation disease
Pacheco's disease
Poxvirus
Microbial Diseases—Microbial Alimentary
and Respiratory Infections
Gram-negative or yeast infections are abnormal
Microbial Diseases-Chlamydopbila
Figure 4.8. Psittacine embryo deceased in egg.
Zoonotic disease
Necropsy often includes assessment of the embryo's
position in the egg, evaluation of anatomy, and
culture when infection is suspected. (Photo courtesy
CONCLUSION
of Dr. April Romagnano.)
The aviculture care of breeders and pediatric patients
are tightly associated disciplines. A neonate that gets
off to a good start has the best chance of becoming a
condition. Immediate intervention should include a
thriving juvenile, and eventually a reproductively suc-
thorough history, physical examination, medical and
cessful adult (Figure 4.7). The majority of pediatric
mechanical therapy, and blood work to help reverse
problems are associated with avicultural husbandry
this condition. Fluids (± whole blood) are critical in
and hand feeding. Nursery management and veteri-
this reversal process, and lactobacillus and acetic acid
 nary preventive medicine are equally important in the
may be helpful.
production of healthy baby birds.
Antibiotic and antifungal medications, although
Crop stasis is the most common pediatric problem
important, should be used cautiously in baby birds.
seen, and if managed correctly, it need not be a fatal
When used correctly, antimicrobials can halt infection
60
Chapter 4
and decrease the chance of sepsis. Along with dehydra-
Thus, pre-mortem tests are chosen on a case-by-case
tion, sepsis is the most common killer of pediatric
 basis, but post-mortem examination is imperative and
patients.
should be performed in all cases. Hence, necropsy and
Preventive avicultural medicine and pediatrics are
histopathology are also necessary for infectious disease
 ongoing interactive processes that incorporates thor-
 prevention, as are quarantine, vaccination, and disin-
 ough routine avicultural team visits as a method of
fection (Figure 4.8).
data collection. The aviculturist and the avian veteri-
narian and technician must know the pet bird and/or
ADDITIONAL READING
the collection (large or small) intricately, and be aware
of the importance of psittacine husbandry and man-
Romagnano A. 2006. Mate Trauma. In: Manual of Parrot Behavior,
agement. The team must evaluate, diagnose, and treat
edited by AU. Luescher, Australia: Wiley-Blackwell.
the individual pet bird, as well as the entire collection.
 Romagnano A, Wolf S, Garner MM. 2000. Management of diseases
The necessity of diagnostic testing and therapeutic pro-
and syndromes in a closed psittacine nursery. Proceedings of the
tocols are established based on the patient's history,
21st Annual Conferenceof the Association of Avian Veterinarians,
Portland, Oregon.
the veterinarian's overall observations of the collec-
Schubot RM, Clubb KJ, Clubb SL. 1992. Psittacine Aviculture.
tion, and the physical examination of the individual
Loxahatchee: Avicultural Breeding and Research Center.
patient.
CHAPTER FIVE
Sex Differentiation and Reproduction
April Romagnano and Tarah Hadley
INTRODUCTION
Eclectus parrot: Male is green and female is vibrant
red and purple.
Veterinary clinics that see birds as patients are likely
White-fronted Amazon parrot: Male has red versus
to have owners who want to know if their pet is male
green feathers on the upper wing coverts, the edge
or female, if it isn't visually obvious. Veterinary techni-
of the carpus, and the alula.
cians must be educated in the methods of sexing a bird
Pileated parrot: Males have red feathers on head;
and able to discuss these options with owners.
 females have green.
Veterinary technicians also must be knowledgeable
Red-tailed black cockatoos: Females have spots on
about normal reproductive anatomy and problems
head, body, and wing feathers, and tail is barred
that can arise. These topics are addressed in this
with yellow-orange feathers. Males lack spots and
chapter.
the tail has red bars.
White-tailed black cockatoos: Females have white ear
coverts and light horn-colored beak. Males have
SEX DIFFERENTLATION
gray ear coverts and dark gray beaks.
Gang gang cockatoos: Males have red head and crest
Most psittacines are sexually monomorphic-the male
m pq   i are s s
and female are visually indistinguishable from each
grayish white (Color Plate 5.1).
other. Although a few general characteristics may help
White cockatoos: In some of the white cockatoo
the aviculturist guess a bird's sex, they are only indica-
species iris color is red at maturity in females and
tors that are incapable of accurate sexual determina-
dark brown to black in males.
tion. Such indicators include the size of the head and
Pesquet's parrot: Males have red feathers behind the
beak, overall size of the bird, feather color, and aggres-
eye, which are absent in females.
sive behavior.
 Australian king parrot: Males have scarlet red feathers
Sexual differentiation is paramount for successful
h d a  au ea a u
psittacine aviculture because the frst requirement for
has green feathers on the head and chest and red
successful captive breeding is a heterosexual or true
feathers on the lower abdomen. The beak is red-
pair. Sexual differentiation is also important for the
 orange and black tipped in the male and black in 
client who is struggling with his pet bird's identity-
the female.
should “it" be named Jack or Jill? Whatever the
reason, accurate sexual differentiation is important
Vent Sexing
because the clinician is making a diagnosis when pro-
Vent sexing is an accurate sexing method for some
viding the veterinary service of sexing. Various options
avian species, such as the vasa parrot, poultry, water-
for sexing are now available, so the avian veterinarian
fowl, ratites, and canaries during the breeding season.
can choose the method most suitable to the patient,
the client, and her practice.
Surgical Sexing
Surgical sexing was frst performed in the 1970s. The
Visual Sexing
fasted bird is masked down with isoflurane. The endo-
A handful of psittacine species are sexually dimorphic
scope is inserted through an incision in the left flank
and can be definitively sexed by visual examination.
between the ribs and the femur. Typically the caudal
Among these species:
thoracic air sac is entered frst; the lungs are straight
61
62
Chapter 5
defects significantly reduce fertility. Disadvantages of
feather sexing include a two-week turn-around time
and the remote possibility of culture failure.
DNA or Blood Sexing
 DNA and blood sexing tests, the newest means of non-
surgical sex determination in avian medicine, became
commercially available in the 1990s. This technique
involves acquiring and submitting a very small amount
of whole blood preserved in saline and EDTA or blotted
on paper to a sexing laboratory. The DNA is run on an
electrophoretic gel (southern blot) and the resulting
bands are probed and compared with male and female
controls. The main disadvantages of blood or DNA
sexing are the one-week turn-around time and the
requirement of species-specific probes in some cases.
REPRODUCTION
Female
Plate 5.1. Pair of gang gang cockatoos. Note the
 In most species, the female reproductive tract
distinction between the male (left) and the female.
(Photo courtesy of Dr. April Romagnano.) (See also
consists of a left ovary and oviduct because the right
side regresses before hatch. Exceptions include some
color plates)
raptors and the brown kiwi. In raptors the right ovary
and oviduct may be present and even active post-
ahead, the abdominal air sac is to the right, and the
hatch. In the kiwi, both ovaries are active, but only the
cranial thoracic air sac is to the left. The abdominal
 left oviduct receives the ovum by spanning the width
air sac is entered next, and the gonads are visualized
of the coelomic cavity with its fimbria.
and evaluated, sexing the bird immediately.
The avian ovary is located at the cranial pole of the
The standard protocol is to tattoo the ventral wing
kidney, and is flat and small in young birds and
web of the sexed bird; males are tattooed on the right,
bumpy and large in mature birds. Normally it contains
females on the left. In the abdominal air sac,
the
numerous follicles when active and it may be melanis-
kidneys, adrenals, spleen, and gastrointestinal (GI)
tic depending on the species. During lay, the left
tract should also be examined. Organs visible through
 oviduct enlarges and occupies most of the left abdomen;
the caudal thoracic and cranial thoracic air sacs,
 in the non-breeding season it shrinks considerably in
including the proventriculus and liver, and the heart
size.
and great vessels should be assessed respectively. The
The oviduct consists of five microscopically distin-
main disadvantage of surgical sexing is the inherent,
guishable regions: infundibulum, magnum, isthmus,
though minimal, surgical risk.
uterus (shell gland), and vagina. Peristaltic activity
moves the ovum down and the sperm up. The infun-
Featber Sexing
dibulum has a funnel shape near the top. Fertilization
Feather sexing was first performed in the 1980s as a
occurs in the lower tubular part of the infundibulum
non-surgical alternative for sexing birds. Blood feath-
as does the production of the chalaziferous layer of the
ers are plucked and placed in media for overnight
 albumen and the paired chalazae, which suspends the
mailing to a cytogenetic laboratory. Chromosomal
 yolk at both ends of the egg.
analysis is performed on cells cultured from the
In the magnum, the largest part of the oviduct,
 growing blood feathers.
the egg takes on albumen, sodium, magnesium, and
Advantages of cytogenetics include complete karyo-
calcium. In the isthmus, it acquires the inner and outer
type evaluation and identification of chromosomal
shell membranes. The uterus, or shell gland, produces
defects. Cytogenetic defects identified in psittacines
the egg's shell and its pigment. It also gives the egg
include chromosomal inversions, chromosome trans-
salts and water. The vagina is the thickest portion of
locations, triploidy, and ZZ ZW chimerism. These
the oviduct and terminates in the cloaca.
Sex Differentiation and Reproduction
63
Male
also play a role, including the lack of a proper
The male reproductive tract consists of paired "tic tac"
nesting area and proper temperature and humidity.
shaped internal testes located ventral to and near the
The requirements vary between avian species. Some,
cranial border of the kidney and the abdominal air sac.
such as cockatoos, may experience heightened repro-
 Both testes are functional, although one may be larger
ductive behavior due to an inappropriate relationship
than the other. Like the ovaries, the testes may
be
with the human caretaker.
melanistic depending on the species. During the breed-
Signs of dystocia in a bird may include decreased
ing season yellow testes may turn white and black-gray
or absent fecal production, watery or bloody drop-
testes turn gray-white. Some species of birds have a
pings, anorexia, regurgitation, difficulty breathing, tail
phallus or phallus-like protrusion. These include the
bobbing, fluffed feathers, swollen coelomic (abdomi-
vasa parrots, various waterfowl, and ratites.
nal) area, abdominal straining, leg lameness, and
sitting on the cage bottom. These signs occur for many
reasons. The egg may put pressure on the gastrointes-
REPRODUCTIVE MEDICINE AND
tinal tract, preventing the passage of ingesta. This
SURGERY
blockage may lead to regurgitation. Other times only
liquid products may pass through, resulting in watery
Normal Oviposition
droppings.
Oviposition includes the processes that occur when the 
A large egg may also put pressure on the air sacs,
 egg is expelled from the body. The muscular uterus
making it difficult for the bird to breathe. Likewise,
pushes the formed egg into the vagina. The bearing
pressure from the egg on the sciatic nerve unilaterally
down reflex is started when the vagina “senses" the
 or bilaterally can cause lameness. Similar pressure on
presence of the egg, forcing the egg into the cloaca and
 the kidneys may lead to life-threatening renal compro-
then out of the body.
mise. Abdominal straining may lead to prolapsed
The length of time for oviposition and the time of
tissues, such as a prolapsed cloaca or prolapsed oviduct
day when oviposition occurs is different between bird
(Color Plate 5.2). Other signs seen in these patients
species. However, in most birds the egg laying interval
may be due to general illness. A basic blood panel can
ranges from twenty-four hours to five days. The brown
 provide the first step in determining the underlying
kiwi lies at the opposite end of the spectrum with a
health status of the patient.
laying interval up to forty-four days.
Palpation of the abdominal area often reveals skin
that is stretched and edematous. A firm egg-shaped
Post Incubation and Hatching
swelling can usually be felt beneath. Care must be
At the end of incubation, the beak of the embryo
taken not to stress the patient and to avoid cracking
breaks through the inner shell membrane into the air
what may be a fragile egg. Radiographs of the bird
cell. The lungs start to work at this time. After several
usually show the outline of an egg in the area of the
hours, the beak "pips" or cracks the outer shell mem-
pelvic canal. The egg may also be just cranial to the
brane and shell to begin the active part of hatching.
pelvis and unable to pass through the canal because it
is over large. Sometimes the egg is soft-shelled and
Abnormal Oviposition or Dystocid
difficult to detect radiographically (Figure 5.1).
Some birds experience difficulty laying eggs. Many of
A bird in dystocia is considered a medical emer-
these birds are first-time layers. Others may be chronic
gency due to the risk that the patient may die while
egg layers. Avian species overrepresented as problem
 sd asu a a ssed on e
layers include parakeets, cockatiels, cockatoos, and
require humidity and a warm incubator heated to
eclectus. Amazon species may lay their first egg well
 87°F to 90°F The patient in respiratory distress also
into their prime and experience multiple problems as
requires supplemental oxygen. Other medical treat-
a result. Of key importance is that the presence of a
ments include nutritional supplementation, calcium
 male bird is often not required to stimulate egg laying
 supplementation, antibiotic medication, anti-inflam-
behavior in a female bird.
matory medication, reproductive muscle stimulants,
Improper diets have been partly blamed as a cause
and fluid therapy.
for dystocia. Female birds that have been on mostly
 A patient that is early in the dystocia process may
seed diets may be predisposed to vitamin and mineral
successfully pass the egg with this minimal supportive
deficiencies and have a greater risk of egg-laying dif-
care. An egg that is close to passing may also be lubri-
ficulties. These diets tend to be low in calcium and
cated with a water-based lubricant. Sometimes gentle
other needed nutrients. Inappropriate husbandry may
massage of the area may assist with passage of the egg.
64
Chapter 5
Plate 5.2. Parrot with prolapse of the oviduct.
Plate 5.3. Egg yolk peritonitis in a parrot. Note the
(Photo courtesy of Dr. April Romagnano.) (See also
yellow-tinged coelomic cavity contents caused by a
colorplates)
ruptured egg. (Photo courtesy of Dr. April
Romagnano.) (See also color plates)
More critical patients require faster intervention and
possibly more invasive therapy. Over large eggs that
will not pass on their own may be collapsed by having
their contents expelled with a needle attached to a
syringe inserted into the egg. The collapsed egg may
 be gently removed or allowed to pass on its own.
Other patients, particularly those suspected of
having severely infected reproductive tracts, may
require surgery to remove egg contents. One of the
most challenging circumstances is a patient with soft-
shelled eggs. Sometimes the back-up of soft-shelled
eggs behind a calcified egg causes parts of the repro-
ductive system to become necrotic. The breakdown of
egg components and/or associated soft tissue often
leads to peritonitis, a severe inflammation of the coe-
lomic cavity (Color Plate 5.3). The risk of sepsis, or a
systemic infection, is increased in these patients.
Many of these procedures require anesthesia, a risk
that may need to be taken to save the life of the patient
who is already in dire straits. Anesthesia should
only be used if there is no other alternative to save
the life of the patient and if all possible attempts to
stabilize the patient have been taken. The anesthetic
risk increases in patients with suspected renal
compromise.
Figure 5.1. Radiograph showing dystocia in a bird.
Care of the patient after treatment for dystocia is
(Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
just as important. These birds may need additional
Sex Differentiation and Reproduction
65
supportive care to help them feel better prior to dis-
Chapter 8. Loxahatchee: Avicultural and Breeding Research
charge from the hospital. In particular, a plan of action
Center.
Clubb SL. 1986. Sex Determination Techniques. In Clinical Avian
must be formulated for chronic egg layers to break
 Medicine and Surgery, edited by Harrison GJ and Harrison LR.
the reproductive cycle. Some birds have experienced
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
successful treatment with human reproductive hor-
Harrison GJ. 1986. Reproductive Medicine. In Clinical Avian
mones used to create a negative feedback mechanism.
Medicine and Surgery, edited by Harrison GJ and Harrison LR.
 Modifications in diet, light cycle, and relationship with
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
the human caretaker may also go a long way toward
Joyner KL. 1994. Theriogenology. In Avian Medicine Principles and
Application, edited by Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, and Harrison
improving the bird's reproductive function.
LR. Lake Worth: Wingers Publishing.
King AS, McLelland J. 1984. Female Reproductive System. In Birds:
Their Structure and Function, Philadelphia: Bailliere Tindall.
ADDITIONAL READING
Abramson J, Speer BL, Thomsen JB, eds. 1995. The Large Macaws:
Their Care, Breeding, and Conservation. Fort Bragg: Raintree
Clubb K, Clubb S, Phillips A, Wolf S. 1992. Intraspecific Aggression
Publications. Chapters 3 and 17.
in Cockatoos. In Psittacine Aviculture: Perspectives, Techniques,
Orosz S, Dorrestein GM, Speer BL. 1997. Urogenital Disorders. In
and Research, edited by Schubot RM, Clubb KJ, and Clubb SL,
Avian Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Section 3
Reptiles
CHAPTER SIX
Lizards
Brad Wilson
INTRODUCTION
avid reptile pet owners, however, a quote from de
s a, idde isou si (6h) is
From the seemingly impenetrable spines of Moloch
philosophy in herpetoculture strives towards establish-
 horridus, the gliding pseudo-wings of Draco spp, the
ing viable self-sustaining captive-breeding populations
color-changing chromatophores of Chamaeleo spp.,
through managed feld culture and/or through more
the cryptic cutaneous fimbriations of Uroplatus spp.,
controlled systems of indoor and outdoor vivaria."
the venomous bite of Heloderma spp., to the bipedal
water-walking Basiliscus spp., the adhesive glass-
climbing Gekkonidae, and the legless snake-like
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Anguinidae, lizards, of the order Squamata in the class 
Reptilia, exhibit tremendous anatomic, physiologic,
Integument
nutritional, and behavioral variation that make them
Lizard scales commonly overlap and are created by a
the hallmark of diversity among all modern reptiles.
many-layered epidermis that is shed at regular inter-
When distributed among 3,800 known species (Barten
vals during the life of the lizard. The shedding of skin,
1996a, de Vosjoli 1992), it becomes obvious that the
ecdysis, occurs in multiple pieces in lizards, as opposed
diagnostic challenge presented to the veterinary clini-
to snakes, in which the skin is usually shed in one
cian and technician can be overwhelming (Color Plates
piece. Many lizard species eat the shed skin. Factors
6.1-6.6).
that influence ecdysis are age, growth rate, tempera-
Though the details may be overwhelming, the basic
ture, humidity, and nutrition (Barten 1996a, Goin
categories of differentiating lizards based on natural
et al. 1978). Dysecdysis is commonly associated with
history leads to a basic understanding of husbandry
low humidity and poor nutrition among other health
requirements. Technicians familiar with reptile medi-
abnormalities.
cine soon learn that many health disorders arise from
Reptilian epidermis does not have a respiratory
improper husbandry; therefore, recognizing and cor-
function and contains very few glands (Goin et al.
 recting improper husbandry techniques may hasten the
1978). The skin and scales are relatively impermeable
recovery from disease and prevent unnecessary medi-
 in normal health. The mucous membranes (oral cavity,
cating of debilitated patients.
cloaca, conjunctiva) are quite permeable, however.
Representatives of many families of lizards are com-
This consideration is important when considering
monly seen in the pet trade (Table 6.1). The green
potential absorption of topical medications applied to
iguana (Iguana iguana) is one of the most popular of
these regions (Mader 2000a, Klingenberg 1996). Some
all reptile pets and historically has been the first reptile
reptile vitamin supplements are marketed as sprays to
pet of many people new to the hobby of herpetocul-
be applied to the skin. These products, though not
ture, the care and maintenance of captive reptiles and
likely harmful, have little to no systemic physiologic
amphibians. In the past ffteen years the reptile
epet
value to reptiles.
industry has exponentially increased in popularity and
 Chamaeleo spp. and Anolis spp. have chromato-
in recent years the author has observed the popularity
phores in the skin that allow change in the reflectivity
of lizards approach, if not exceed, that (
of snakes as
of visible light, resulting in color change. These changes
reptile pets. This leads to the question: why keep rep-
are influenced by light, heat, and social influences,
tiles as pets? To the dedicated pet owner, the answer
but not by surrounding environmental color (Barten
is the same as if the question were about keeping a
1996a, Goin et al. 1978). Many herpetoculturists
spider, fish, bird, cat, dog, goat, or horse as a pet. For
who raise chameleons can predict color changes of
69
Plate 6.1. Bearded dragon. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
Plate 6.4. Chameleon. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
Cheek.) (See also color plates)
Cheek.) (See also color plates)
Plate 6.2. Mali uromastyx. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
Plate 6.5. Mangrove monitor. (Photo courtesy of
Cheek.) (See also color plates)
Ryan Cheek.) (See also color plates)
Plate 6.3. Jackson chameleon. (Photo courtesy of
Plate 6.6. Savannah monitor. (Photo courtesy of
Dr. Sam Rivera.) (See also color plates)
Dr. Sam Rivera.) (See also color plates)
70
Handling concernss
Docile, tail autotomy,
Occas. aggressive, tail
Docile, fragile, tail
Docile, fragile, tail
Occas. aggressive,
Docile, fragile to
Docile, fragile to
Docile, fragile to
Aggressive, sturdy
Docile, sturdy
Docile, sturdy
skin slough
autotomy
autotomy'
 autotomyt
Xpins
sturdy
Apnns
sturdy
sturdy
sturdy
Apinis
Rest
yes,
no
s
OU
yes
no
no
no
Feed
O/a,v,n
C/a,v
H,O/a
O/a
C/a,g
O/a,n
C/a,v
B/O
 oviparous
Repro3
 oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
 oviparous
viviparous
oviparous
 oviparous
 oviparous
oviparous
 oviparous
30C/20C
30C/20C
30C/20C
26C/20C
37C/22C
26C/20C
30C/20C
30C/20C
25C/20C
30C/20C
30C/25C
28C/22C
30C/25C
27C/20C
to 140
30-40
to 50
to 100
30-50
22IS
(cm)
to 25
to 25
to 20
to 30
100
3
3
6
 forest, arboreal
Dry, rocky forest,
Tropical savanna,
forest, arborea
Desert, terrestrial
forest, arboreal
Arid, terrestrial
Montane forest,
Montane forest,
Coastal forest,
Tropical rain
Habitat
Arid, desert,
terrestrial
Humid, rain
Arid, desert,
terrestrial
Tropical rain
Dry, forest,
 terrestrial
 arboreal
 arboreal
 arboreal
arboreal
Table 6.1. Lizards Commonly Seen in Captivity.
Madagascar
Indian Ocean
Origin
NW Africa,
Madagascar
SW Asia
Worldwide
Australia
Australia
 Islands
SE Asia
E Africa
E Africa
SE Asia
Africa
Africa
Asia
Veiled chameleon, Chamaeleo
Three-horned chameleon, Ch.
Leopard gecko, Eublepharis
Tokay gecko, Gekko geckol0
Common name/species name
 Glass lizards, Ophisaurus
Panther chameleon,
Chamaeleontidae
Gekkonidae
Agamidae
Anguidae
SPP.
 Docile, tail autotomy
 Docile, tail autotomy
Very aggressive, tail
Occas. aggressive,
 Docile, sturdy
 Docile, sturdy
 Docile, sturdy
 Docile, sturdy
autotomy
sturdy
Apunis
Apunis
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
O/a,n
O/a,n
C/a,v,e
O/a,g
H
oviparousI
H
/I
一
Repro”
viviparous
viviparous
oviparous
oviparous
 oviparous
vivi-,ovi-
vivi-,ovi-
vivi-,ovi-
vivi-,ovi-
26C/20C
31C/22C
35C/20C
26C/20C
25C/15C
26C/20C
30C/20C
30C/24C
26C/20C
30C/20C
to 50
to 140
{cm}'
to 20
to 30
to 40
to30
to 50
to 60
200
forest, arboreal
Dry, rocky, forest,
Forests, terrestrial
Temperate forest,
Forest, terrestrial,
arb/terrestrial
 occas. arboreal
Tropical rain
Forest, desert,
Tropical forest,
Habitat
Arid, desert,
Forest, fields,
terrestrial
terrestrial
 arboreal
arboreal
terrestria.
 arboreal
 Europe, Africa
N, S, Central
Origin
N America
America
Central, S
America
Central, N
America
Worldwide
Australia
Islands
Central, S
America
S America
Solomon
Green iguana, Iguana iguand?
 Jeweled lizard, Lacerta spp.10
Horned lizards, Phrynosoma 
Common name/species name
Spiny lizards, Sceloporus
 Prehensile-tailed skink,
Table 6.1. Continued
Green anole, Anolis
Iguanidae
Lacertidae
Scincidae
Teiidae
72
Does lizard seasonally hibernate or brumate? Yes = successful captive breeding may require cooling/rest period No = successful breeding does not require cooling/rest
Occas. aggressive,
sturdy
sturdy
yes
oviparous  C/a,g,e,v yes
Cle,g,v
to 200 30C/20C oviparous
to 10030C/20C
slougb: lizards with skin that tears easily when minimally restrained or touched.
temperatures for adults of species or typical of genus.
riverbank,
 terrestrial
Desert, dry
grassland,
terrestrial
Stream,
 live birth; parthen
tion.
with minimal resista nce.
henhandledforroutine
Africa
Africa
ertebrates
Average maximum adult size.
Average day and night
AIIS
.1997.
experienced staff.
1995.
1993
Varanidae
AU
Vosjoli
Vosjoli 1
73
74
Chapter 6
particular species or individuals based on a variety of
life of the lizard and are characteristic of iguanas and
environmental or behavioral influences.
monitors.
Some gecko species can autotomize, tear, or release,
Locomotion for lizards is apodal, bipedal, 
or
the entire skin in response to capture by a predator.
quadrupedal. Most lizards have four legs and five
These species include the fish-scale geckos (Geckolepis
toes, though there are species that are snake-like
spp.) and the day geckos (Phelsuma spp.) (Glaw and
with no functional legs (Anguis spp., Anniela spp.,
Vences 1994, McKeown 1993). Skin regeneration
Lialis spp., Ophisaurus spp.) and others with greatly
occurs in these species but may result in unsightly scars
reduced limbs (Chalcides chalcides, Neoseps reynoldsi,
and secondary bacterial or fungal infections.
 Chamaesaura spp.). Bipedal locomotion is observed
 Foot and toe adaptations are diverse. Integument
in basilisks (Basiliscus spp.) and frilled dragons
specialization is quite notable in the fan-like adhesive
(Chlamydosaurus kingii) when excited or during
discs of Gekkonidae. These species are capable of
escape behavior. This behavior is rarely observed in
climbing glass and inverted smooth surfaces. Large
small enclosures. Old world chameleons (Chamaeleo
 arboreal and terrestrial lizards usually possess sharp
spp.) are zygodactylous, having two toes and three toes
sturdy claws. Lizard claws are similar to those of birds;
fused into a claw-like foot, creating a strong gripping
they have a pulp containing a blood vessel and nerve
foot for climbing on limbs and branches (Goin et al.
that is sensitive to short trimming.
1978).
Tail autotomy, the loss or release of the tail,
SkeletalSystem
occurs in many species (Iguanidae, Gekkonidae, some
The general lizard skeletal system is quadruped con-
Scincidae). This adaptation (coupled with certain
sisting of an ossified skull, vertebral column, ribs, and
behaviors) creates distraction and allows the tailless
pelvic and pectoral girdles (Figure 6.1). The ribs of
lizard to escape as a potential predator investigates the
lizards connect ventrally to a cartilaginous sternum
released yet still moving tail. Transverse cleavage
that is absent in snakes and turtles (Goin et al. 1978).
plates are present in each caudal vertebrae of these
Lizard teeth are either acrodont or pleurodont.
species, allowing release of the tail at multiple loca-
Acrodont teeth attach to the masticating surface of the
tions (Barten 1996a, Goin et al. 1978). Hemorrhage is
mandible or maxilla and have no socket. These teeth
minimal with tail loss because vertebral vessels are
are not replaced when lost and are characteristic of
quick to constrict. If the tail stump is undamaged,
true chameleons. Pleurodont teeth are attached to the
 species capable of autotomy can regenerate tails that
inner or lingual surface of the mandible or maxilla and
 are usually smaller with irregular scalation and darker
have no socket. These teeth are replaced through the
color than the original tail. If species that are not
Skull
Scapula
Pelvis
Humcrus
Ulna
Fibula
Radius
Fcmul
Tibia
Figure 6.1. Lizard skeletal anatomy.
Lizards
75
capable of autotomy (Chamaeleontidae, Varanidae)
The trachea of most lizards bifurcates into the lungs
suffer traumatic tail loss, the tail usually cannot regen-
that in some lizards may more resemble air sacs of
erate completely. Some lizards (some Chamaeleontidae
birds than the familiar mammalian lung. Lizards do
and Corucia zebrata) use a prehensile tail for stabiliza-
not have a diaphragm and therefore have a common
tion or movement between branches.
coelomic cavity rather than separate thoracic and
It is important to note that touching or manipulat-
 abdominal cavities. Ventilation in lizards is accom-
ing the tail is not necessary to cause its release in some
 plished with rib expansion by contraction of intercos-
species. The leaf-tailed geckos, Uroplatus spp., can
tal muscles.
only autotomize the entire tail from the first one or
The lungs of lizards are not as highly derived as
two caudal vertebrae so the entire tail is always lost
those of mammals. The cranial portions of the lungs
(Glaw and Vences 1994). A common escape behavior
are more vascular and serve for most respiratory func-
in these species is to wave the tail to distract the
tions and the caudal lungs are more sac-like and may
 potential predator and then release it from the body
extend to the pelvis (Murray 1996). Unlike birds,
without the lizard being touched or manipulated.
lizards do not have pneumatic bones.
Similar behavior can occur in the terrestrial leopard
and African fat-tailed geckos (Eublepbaris macularius,
Digestive System
Hemitheconyx caudicinctus) (de Vosjoli 1997).
The digestive system of most lizards is quite basic and,
with the exception of the teeth, follows the design of
Cardiovascular System
higher vertebrates. The oral cavity contains several
The heart has three chambers consisting of two atria
glands that aid in the lubrication of food items for
 and one ventricle. Despite the absence of an interven-
swallowing. The Gila monster and Mexican beaded
tricular septum, the majority of deoxygenated blood
lizard (Heloderma suspectum, H. horridum) have
is directed to the lungs via the pulmonary aorta
modifed bilateral sublingual glands that produce poi-
 and oxygenated blood is directed to the right and left
sonous saliva that is chewed into the prey item rather
aortic arches to perfuse the body tissues (Goin et al.
 than hypodermically injected as with venomous snakes
1978).
(Barten 1996a, Goin et al. 1978).
Lizards, like amphibians, possess a large ventral
The tongue of some lizards serves both in scent col-
abdominal vein that is intracoelomic along the ventral
lection and swallowing. The tongue of anguimorph
a o e  p   
(legless) lizards serves almost exclusively a sensory
 This vein is secured by a thin mesovasorum and travels
function and the tongue of some Chamaeleontidae
adjacent to the ventral midline from one-fourth the
serves an exclusive food prehension and swallowing
distance from the cranial aspect of the pubis cranially
function (Goin et al. 1978). Most carnivorous lizards
to the umbilicus and then courses dorsally to join the
(Varanidae) have snake-like tongues to track prey
hepatic vein. Venous collateral circulation parallels
items and the majority of herbivorous lizards have
the ventral abdominal vein via the caudal vena cava.
thick fleshy tongues to aid in swallowing. The sensory
 The ventral abdominal vein is routinely avoided during
tongue retracts into a lingual sheath that lies ventral
coelomic surgery, though accidental or intentional
to the glottis.
transection and ligation of this vessel is compensated
The alimentary tract consists of an esophagus,
by collateral circulation (Mader 2002b),
stomach, small and large intestine, and cloaca. The
The caudal tail vein is the optimal site for blood
 alimentary, respiratory, reproductive, cardiovascular,
collection from lizards. It is located along the ventral
and reproductive tracts are not separated by a dia-
midline of the tail and is accessed approximately
phragm and are contained within a pleuroperitoneum
 one-third (or less) the distance from the cloaca to the
or coelomic cavity (coelom). The proximal portion of
tail tip.
the esophagus is the only opening to the back of the
oral cavity. Thus, by visualizing and avoiding the
Respiratory System
opening to the glottis on the floor of the mouth, feeding
The respiratory system of lizards consists of external
or sampling tubes may be safely passed into the diges-
nares, internal nares, glottis, trachea, and lungs. The
tive tract with no risk of accidental respiratory intuba-
internal nares are located rostrally in the dorsal oral
tion. The stomach in most lizards is quite large and
cavity and are contiguous with the external nares. The
does not serve as a gizzard or grinding organ (Barten
glottis, located at the base of the tongue, fits into the
1996a, Goin et al. 1978). The small intestine has his-
common opening of the internal nares when the mouth
tologically discrete duodenum, jejunum, and ileum
is closed to enable nasal respiration.
(Frye 1991). A cecum-like sacculation of the colon is
76
Chapter 6
 present in herbivorous lizards ( Corucia zebrata, Iguana
Spp., Uromastyx spp., and others). The cloaca is the
common collecting chamber of the digestive and geni-
tourinary tracts. These openings are the coprodeum
and urodeum, respectively. The proctodeum is the
 common chamber opening to the vent. (Figures 6.2,
6.3).
 The liver and gall bladder are present in lizards and
located cranial to the stomach in the cranio-ventral
Trachea
abdomen. The gall bladder in anguimorph lizards is
Rt
observed in a more caudal position, and is usually
Atrium
Heart
found in close proximity to the pancreas, as seen in
snakes. The pancreas in lizards has both endocrine and
Liver
Lt
exocrine glandular functions.
Lung
Large paired fat bodies in the left and right caudal
coelomic cavity are not digestive structures, but may
be commonly confused with pathologic lesions. These
are particularly palpable in bearded dragons and are
commonly observed in dorsoventral radiographs.
Excretory System
Gall
Paired kidneys are located in the caudo-dorsal coelom
Bladder
and the caudal poles commonly extend into the pelvic
Stomach
Rt
canal. Lizards are uricotelic; the majority of nitroge-
Pancreas
Testicle
nous waste from purine digestion is excreted from
most lizards as insoluble uric acid (Frye 1991). A
Spleen
mesonephric duct collects and transports nitrogenous
Colon
Small
wastes from each kidney to a urinary bladder. The
Urinary
Intestine
urinary bladder empties into the cranio-ventral
Bladder
urodeum. In larger lizards the urinary bladder may be
catheterized from the cloaca via this opening.
Rt
Lt
The renal portal system in reptiles is well docu-
Kidney
Kidney
mented (Barten 1996a, Frye 1991, Innis 2000). The
system allows blood to flow from the caudal portion
of the body directly to the kidneys prior to returning
to the heart. Historically, this physiology has led to the
Cloaca
Rectum
conclusion that the reptile kidney may reduce the con-
centration of chemotherapeutics injected into the
caudal body prior to their entry into the general circu-
lation, thus leading to a decreased concentration in the
blood and tissues. Also, suspicion was raised that
injections of potentially nephrotoxic drugs should be
avoided in the region. Several pharmacologic studies
 in turtles have revealed that the presence of this system
does not necessarily indicate that all blood flow follows
this theorized pathway and there may be no impact on
drug metabolism when injected into the caudal body
of tortoises (Innis 2000)
Reproductive System
Figure 6.2. Lizard visceral anatomy.
Lizards have intracoelomic paired testes or ovaries,
and oviducts. Female lizards have no true uterus, but
in live-bearing (ovoviviparous or viviparous) lizards,
Lizards
77
question is the best method to determine if external
DISTAL
COLON L
sex characteristics are applicable.
GENITAL
COPRO-
Cloacal probing, the primary technique used in sex
PORES
DEUM
determination of snakes, may be applied to monitors
URINARY
(Varanidae), but is not 100% accurate in all species.
URODEUM
BLADDER
A blunt or ball-tipped smooth metal sexing probe
designed exclusively for this purpose is used. The only
other acceptable instrument may be a sovereign red
rubber urinary catheter or feeding tube. This proce-
dure carries the risk of causing trauma to the patient;
PROCTO
therefore, proper restraint and proficiency are required.
DEUM
URINARY
PORE
The probe is inserted into the vent and directed cau-
dally just lateral to the ventral midline in a position
parallel to the surface of the tail. In males, the probe
enters the inverted sheath of the hemipenis and travel
a distance into the tail. This distance is subjective and
variable by species. In some female monitors the dis-
tance the probe travels is shorter when compared to
the male.
Figure 6.3. Lizard cloaca.
Radiographic sex determination is possible in some
monitors. This technique is based on the presence of
calcifications in the hemipenes of some species. These
mineralizations are absent in males of both Nile and
the oviduct may serve a similar function to the non-
savannah monitors.
placental uterus of mammals by providing nutrients
Surgical or endoscopic sex determination is obvi-
for the developing non-shelled embryo (DeNardo
ously definitive. Surgical scar tissue formation, difficult
1996). DeNardo (1996) refers to all ovoviviparous
visualization, and availability of equipment are poten-
reptiles as viviparous. The eggshell is secreted in the
tial complications. Sedation is required for either
oviduct of oviparous lizards and is occasionally referred
procedure.
to as the "shell gland." The eggshell of many lizards
Manual eversion of the hemipenes is advocated for
(except Gekkonidae) is somewhat pliable, as seen in
some species (Pogona spp., Corucia zebrata) (de
snakes, rather than rigid, as seen in tortoises and birds.
Vosjoli 1993, de Vosjoli et al. 2001). This method is
Male lizards have paired hemipenes that are invagi-
commonly used in juvenile snakes. The procedure
 nated into the proximal ventral tail slightly lateral and
involves bending the tail slightly dorsally distal to the
caudal to the vent. During mating one hemipenis is
cloaca while simultaneously applying light pressure
everted by relaxation of the retractor muscle and the
with the thumb in a rolling motion proximally toward
flling of vascular spaces of the hemipenes with blood.
the cloaca. This process will evert the hemipenes in
 Following mating fertilization is internal and occurs
some male lizards. Whereas this method definitively
within the oviduct. No urinary structures are present
identifies males by the presence of the hemipenes, it
within the hemipenes of lizards.
only identifies females by exclusion. Males that do not
Sexual dimorphism occurs in some species of lizards,
evert a hemipene may be mistaken for females.
while in others determining sex may be difficult. For
Hydrostatic eversion of the hemipenes is a definitive
most juvenile lizards of all species there is no reliable
method for sexing monitors, but carries moderate to
method to determine sex. For adult lizards, the tech-
great risk of injury to the lizard. Proper restraint and
nique of sex determination is determined by species
mastery of technique are paramount. The principle is
(Table 6.2).
that injection of sterile saline caudal to the retracted
 External sex characteristics may be applied to many
hemipenis everts the organ through its cloacal opening.
lizards. These characteristics include the presence of
In female lizards, with proper technique, no hemipenis
obvious sexual dimorphism such as the horns of
will evert and the oviductal papillae of the female may
Chamaeleo jacksonii, precloacal pores of many
 be visualized. This technique should be performed in
Gekkonidae, femoral pores of many Iguanidae, and
sedated patients and restricted only to those animals
 post-cloacal tail bulging of the hemipenes in many
in which no other method of sex determination is
species. Researching the anatomy of the species in
available.
78
Chapter 6
Table 6.2. Sex Determination in Selected Captive Lizards.
Species
Anatomic
Probe
Manual eversion
Hydrostatic eversion
 Bearded dragon, Pogona spp.
4
Frilled lizard, Chlamydosaurus kingi
A
Uromastyx, Uromastyx spp.
A
Veiled chameleon, Chamaeleo calyptratus
4
Three-horned chameleon, Ch. jacksonii
A,J
Day geckos, Phelsuma spp.
A,j
Leopard gecko, Eublepharis macularius
A,j
Green iguana, Iguana iguana
A,j
 Blue-tongued skinks, Tiliqua spp.
a
Prehensile-tailed skink, Corucia zebrata
a
A,i
Tegus, Tupinambis spp.
a
4
Nile monitor, Varanus niloticus
A
Savannah monitor, V. exanthematicus
A
Note: A = preferred method, adult; a = inconsistent method, adult; J = preferred method, juvenile; j = inconsistent method,
juvenile.
Nervous System
 predictable and the use of standard mammalian myd-
The central nervous system consists of a cerebrum,
riatics is not possible (Williams 1996). The pupil may
cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord. The spinal
be circular or elliptical.
cord extends to the tip of the tail as opposed to
The parietal eye or "third eye" is apparent in some
mammals, in which the cord terminates proximal to
species (Iguanidae; Tuatara, Spbenodon punctatus).
the sacral vertebrae. The peripheral nervous system
This structure is located on the dorsal head and is
 consists of twelve cranial nerves and numerous periph-
connected via the parietal nerve to the pineal body in
eral nerves to the viscera, trunk, and limbs
the brain. The parietal eye is a photoreceptor that is
Pain receptors and pain responses in reptiles are still
 integral in hormonal production and thermoregulatory
poorly understood (Bennett 1996a). It is apparent that
behavior (Goin et al. 1978).
lizards have a withdrawal response or reflex from trau-
The lizard ear consists of an external acoustic
matic wounds such as punctures, lacerations, or surgi-
meatus, tympanic membrane, middle ear cavity, and
cal incisions; however, expected withdrawal refexes
inner ear cavity. Within the middle ear cavity is the
and responses from potentially traumatic heat are
columella bone that receives vibrations from the
not observed (Mader 2000b). Captive management
tympanic membrane via the extracolumella cartilage
of lizards must take into account these apparent
(Rossi 1998b). The tympanic membrane of some lizard
behavioral and/or neurologic reflex differences from
species is clear and in others it is covered with scales
mammals with regard to cage heating (see Husbandry).
and not visible.
The vomeronasal organ or Jacobson's organ is
Sense Organs
 present in many lizards and located in the dorsal oral
The majority of lizards have movable eyelids and a
cavity ventral to the nasal cavity but not continuous
nictitating membrane. Those without movable lids
with the nasal cavity (Goin et al. 1978). Scent particles
(some Gekkonidae, and Ablepharus spp.) have a clear
collected on the tongue are transferred to sensory cells
spectacle as seen in snakes. The spectacle is a scale-like
when the tongue is retracted into the mouth. This
structure formed by the fusion of the upper and lower
sani Aad yoeni oi sprez!l Aq pasn Xed si ueio
eyelids. As with snakes, the spectacle is impermeable
and possibly to detect mates or enemies by detecting
to topical medications. True chameleons possess tur-
pheromones.
ret-like eyelids and eyes that are capable of indepen-
dent movement. Glands are present in the eyelids of
 lizards and may become swollen in cases of hypovita-
HUSBANDRY
minosis A.
The muscles of the iris are striated and under con-
Understanding the natural history (anatomy, physiol-
scious control; thus, pupillary light reflexes are not
Ogy, habitat requirements, reproductive habits, behav-
Lizards
79
ior, longevity) of the patient in question is the greatest
questions to which the technician or veterinarian may
diagnostic tool in differentiating between normal
not always know the answer. There are many similari-
health and disease. Combining this knowledge with
ties among genera, but even within the same genus
the presenting complaint, medical history, physical
there are marked differences between species in hus-
examination, and laboratory data is necessary for the
bandry requirements.
treatment and rehabilitation of the diseased patient.
 Looking again at the green iguana and the savannah
 For instance, understanding the differences in dietary
monitor: the green iguana is a tropical, arboreal,
and habitat requirements of two common similarly
diurnal, somewhat communal (though not in captivity),
sized lizard pets, the green iguana (Iguana iguana) and
 generally non-seasonal, and non-hibernating lizard (de
savannah monitor ( Varanus exanthematicus), is essen-
Vosjoli 1992, Obst et al. 1988), whereas the savannah
u si in Aos aedode ue uqo oi uaa i
 monitor is a temperate, semi-arid, terrestrial (and bur-
possible for even the most educated zookeeper to
rowing), crepuscular (to diurnal), solitary, somewhat
'e Aa Jo Aos le jo ioads Araaa mo
seasonal, and occasionally hibernating lizard (Obst
nor is it expected that the veterinary technician can
et al. 1988, Balsai 1997). The diet of green iguanas is
become educated in the feeding habits of every species
 generally herbivorous, though as with other species, in
of lizard kept in captivity. There are, however, several
their native habitat they may be opportunistically insec-
fundamental aspects of knowledge regarding lizards
tivorous. For the savannah monitor the diet is carnivo-
with which to simplify the approach to understanding
rous or insectivorous (depending on the life stage and
natural history.
food availability). Remember, however, that one can
 The following are general categories and associated
only speak of living systems in generalities, adaptation
 specific questions with which the technician and prac-
is the key to survival and many captive lizards “adapt"
titioner should be familiar regarding every lizard
 to the captive environment. Thus, behavior observed in 
patient:
 nature may not occur in captivity.
 Native habitat and microhabitat: Does the patient
 Reptile hobbyists who pride themselves on main-
inhabit tropical rain forest, desert, mountain slope,
taining and breeding common and rare lizards in
estuary, beach, etc.? Is the patient arboreal, terrestrial,
captivity have learned that recreating the native envi-
aquatic, or subterranean?
ronment in almost every aspect is the key to success
Anatomy and physiology: What is normal color-
These achie vements are accomplished by observing the
ation and can the patient change coloration in response
animals in their native habitat, corresponding with
to environmental, seasonal, health, reproductive, or
 other hobbyists or zoologic professionals, and logging
behavioral influences? Are there size or other physical
countless hours of trial and error. Occasionally sub-
differences based on sex? What is the normal mucous
stantial investment is made in the construction of suit-
membrane color? Does the patient normally have four
able habitats that far exceeds the monetary value of
limbs and a certain number of digits? Does the patient
the lizard in question.
normally have secretions from the eyes or nostrils?
What are the characteristics of normal feces and
Enclosures and Environment
urates? How long does the patient normally live?
Diet: Is the patient insectivorous, carnivorous, her-
Cages
bivorous, or omnivorous, and does the diet change
There is no way to generalize a basic lizard cage. There
with respect to life stage or seasonality? If insectivo-
are, however, categories of habitats from which the
rous, does the patient have a preferred food item or
foundation for housing most species can be derived. In
size of food item (i.e. ants, centipedes, spiders, etc.)?
general terms lizards are categorized as arboreal or
How does the patient prehend food and at what time
terrestrial. Remember that some arboreal lizards are
of day does it normally feed? How does the patient
 occasionally both terrestrial and arboreal. Therefore,
normally obtain water?
suitable cage design may not be exclusive for either
 Behavior: Is the patient diurnal, nocturnal, or cre-
habitat. Native habitat use is listed in Table 6.1 for
puscular? Is the patient solitary or communal? Does
common species. Key requirements for all enclosures
the patient experience climatic seasonality? Does the
include security from escape, protection from injury,
patient hibernate or aestivate? Does the patient use dif-
access for cleaning, and environmental control of light,
ferent microhabitats during different seasons or life
heat, humidity, ventilation, and water and food
stages? How does the patient reproduce and how often?
availability.
These natural history parameters for all species of
True chameleons (Chamaeleo spp.) and day geckos
lizards would require volumes to list and these are
(Phelsuma spp.) are good examples of primarily arbo-
80
Chapter 6
is u a aea sads s  s 
and in microhabitat distribution, most species benefit
WATER
LIGHTSOURC
from a vertically spacious cage that offers visual secu-
rity on three sides and from above. Typically enclo-
sures for arboreal lizards contain numerous limbs,
branches, or plants in both a vertical and horizontal
orientation. The cage is typically rectangular and may
range from 0.3m by 0.3m by 0.5 m to 1 m by 1m by
2 m. The primary, if not exclusive, construction mate-
rial should be plastic screen with metal or plastic frame
for chameleons and a glass or plastic aquarium for
 geckos. Screen allows for good ventilation and is rela-
tively non-abrasive to the lizard. Wire mesh can lead
to skin abrasions and may be more difficult to clean.
Glass or plastic (plexi-glass) offers no ventilation and
may lead to overheating, but allows for maintenance
of higher humidity. The cage floor may be solid ( wood,
glass, or plastic) or mesh. Though a mesh floor with
removable tray beneath may be most accessible for
cleaning, it potentially allows escape of insect food
items or may cause injury to the lizard. A solid floor
with removable indoor/outdoor carpet is relatively
easy to clean and provides security for chameleons. A
well-sealed cage and lid are required for geckos because
they are masters of escape. The cage ceiling is typically
screen for both chameleons and geckos to allow ade-
quate ventilation and humidity control (Figure 6.4).
Substrate for chameleons should be simple: news-
 paper or indoor/outdoor carpet is best. Soils, mulches,
Figure 6.4. Arboreal habitat.
and shavings are messy and not essential for housing
chameleons. Glass enclosures for arboreal lizards
requiring higher humidity, such as day geckos, may
sure for most small terrestrial lizards. Larger lizards,
 a 'uo a sd m   n
such as monitors, commonly require custom built
majority of arboreal captive lizards do not use the
enclosures made from wood, glass or plastic, or wire
substrate except to oviposit and this substrate may be
mesh. Commonly these larger lizards are housed in
provided in the form of a nesting box or potted plant
outdoor enclosures where climates are favorable
when required. Though aesthetically pleasing, particu-
(Figures 6.5, 6.6).
late substrates such as soil, sand, gravel, and wood
chips pose a great risk to small (<20 cm) lizards because
Lighting
accidental ingestion may result in gastric or intestinal
 Lighting requirements vary greatly among species.
obstruction or impaction.
Some lizards require ultraviolet light (specifically
The leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius) and
UV-B) for vitamin D, (cholecalciferol) synthesis and
the savannah monitor (Varanus exanthematicus) are
subsequent calcium absorption from the gastrointesti-
good examples of primarily terrestrial lizards.
.As
nal tract (Frye 1991, Donoghue and Landenberg 1996,
opposed to the arboreal cage design, terrestrial enclo-
Boyer 1996). A general rule is that primarily insectivo-
rous (Gekkonidae), primarily herbivorous (Iguana
large cage floor and may contain one or several diago-
spp, Uromastyx spp.), and omnivorous (Pogona spp.)
nal or horizontal perches of relatively large diameter.
lizards require supplemental UV-B light and most pri-
Smaller cages range from 0.2m by 0.3 m by 0.5 m to
marily carnivorous lizards (monitors) do not. Many
many meters in length, width, and height. Because
lizard owners provide artificial lighting in the form of
many terrestrial lizards are relatively strong, more
various incandescent and fluorescent fixtures.
durable construction materials may be required for
It is important to understand that ultraviolet light
cage design. The glass aquarium is the standard enclo-
 does not penetrate glass or plastic; therefore, sunlight
Lizards
81
1
cates that the newer coiled "screw-in" type fluorescent
bulbs manufactured specifically for reptile enclosures
 provide adequate UV-B radiation for lizards in enclo-
sures. Historically, the long “tube-type" fluorescent
bulbs were considered the standard of artificial lighting
 for reptiles. Additional lighting sources for pet reptiles
include mercury vapor lights and possibly compact
halogen lights, which are new to the reptile market.
Heating
 Most common pet lizards require additional heating
 during some portion of their captive existence. Because
Figure 6.5. Terrestrial habitat.
lizards are ectothermic they seek microhabitats that
 meet their preferred optimal temperature zone (POTZ).
The POTZ is the temperature range in which normal
 physiology is most efficient (Barten 1996a). It is impor-
tant for the client to understand that a lizard uses a
range of temperatures, not a uniform cage tempera-
ture, to create the POTZ; in the cage setting this range
is commonly referred to as the thermal gradient. It is
also important to understand that various physiologic
conditions such as pregnancy or disease may change
the POTZ for a given animal. Observing the natural
history and behavior and the study of lizard physiol-
Ogy is important for deriving the POTZ of each species.
These values are available in many books, manuals,
and journals for the species in question (Table 6.1).
 Lizards achieve their POTZ by thermoregulation. By
Figure 6.6. An inappropriate size cage for a lizard.
 altering their exposure to light, orientation to light,
and reflectivity of light (coloration), and by radiating
through windows and fluorescent lighting filtered by
 heat (gaping, respiration), lizards are able to regulate
glass is inadequate to meet ultraviolet light require-
body temperature within a few degrees.
 ments. Direct sunlight is the best source of ultraviolet
Heating a lizard cage is generally not as difficult as
light for lizards and may be provided periodically
providing an adequate thermal gradient. The ideal heat
(once or twice weekly for ffteen minutes) to lizards
sources should be located outside the cage so that the
which otherwise are maintained indoors (Ritchie
lizard cannot directly contact the heating element. In-
1992). Most if not all lizards become stimulated when
cage heating elements such as hot rocks are poor choices
exposed to direct sunlight and may become aggressive
for heating reptiles and should never be recommended
 and very quick, making escape possible. Lizards should
by veterinary staff. Similarly, ceramic radiant heating
never be housed in enclosed or open-top glass or
elements and light bulbs, which mount into incandes-
plastic containers when in direct sunlight to avoid life-
cent fixtures, should not be placed inside the enclosure.
threatening hyperthermia. Some nocturnal lizards such
 All in-cage fixtures may cause thermal burns to lizards
as leaf-tail and flat-tail geckos (Phyllurus spP.,
through prolonged direct contact (Color Plate 6.7).
Uroplatus spp.) avoid bright light and are not active
Lizards have a poor sense of conductive heat and do not
by day when in good health.
necessarily avoid contact with hot surfaces (Mader
Light fixtures for lizards should be mounted outside
2000b). Ideally cage heatingshould be provided through
the enclosure so that the lizard cannot directly contact
radiant heat from an overhead light or ceramic heating
the light (or heating element). Ultraviolet light sources
element. Commonly heating tape or heating blankets
should be within eighteen to twenty-four inches of the
are placed outside and beneath the cage. Care must be
closest basking surface. Many claims made by com-
exercised to avoid regions of the substrate or cage floor
mercially available UV-B-producing lights are not true
where heat is excessive. Additionally, below cage
and there are no regulations governing the legitimacy
of such claims. Recent research (Mitchell 2009) indi-
sources and increased cage humidity.
82
Chapter 6
or nebulizers are useful for increasing humidity. These
are easily regulated by automatic timers. Regulating
ventilation with screen lids or the addition of small
fans is helpful to control humidity for glass aquariums
or terrariums. Humidity is an important factor in both
the respiratory and epidermal health of some lizards.
Hygrometers are used to measure humidity in the
lizard cage.
Ventilation is primarily controlled to indirectly reg-
ulate heat and humidity. Ventilation can be modified
pue peuaxa Aq paooo aq Ae no uisap eo Aq
internal cage accessories. Small fans, such as computer
cooling fans, are quiet, and capable of moving large
quantities of air. To a lesser extent, moving water such
as small waterfalls, misters, and passive evaporation
create some air circulation for more humid enclosures.
Plate 6.7. Thermal burns. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
It is important with any electrical devices that all wires
Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of Georgia.)
 be fully insulated from contacting water or metal in or
(See also color plates)
on the cage and that they cannot be altered by cage
inhabitants.A
Also, fans must be housed outside the
enclosure so that the lizard cannot contact the turning
Some desert species such as Uromastyx spp. may
blades.
require daytime basking temperatures that range from
37°C to 43°C (100°F to 110°F) to nighttime tempera-
Water and Food Availability
tures of 2.5°C (77°F) (de Vosjoli 199.5). Montane forest
Water availability and water quality must be closely
lizards such as Jackson's chameleon (Chamaeleo jack-
controlled. Some desert species such as Uromastyx
soni) require daytime temperatures of 25*C (77°F)
spp. do not require standing water to be available in
and night temperatures near 17°C (62°F) (de Vosjoli
the cage (de Vosjoli 1995). Instead, these animals may
and Ferguson 1995). Arboreal lizards generally do not 
be removed from the cage and soaked in water once
benefit from under cage or substrate heating. Certain
weekly or they may be misted in an enclosure separate
temperate and some sub-tropical lizards may require
from their cage once weekly. Some tropical lizards
cooler temperatures during winter months to induce
dup auo yup aeu suo ann se yns
brumation or hibernation that is essential for success-
water off leaves or other cage ornaments. In time these
ful breeding. Temperature is best measured with ther-
lizards may learn to drink from containers or from
mometers or temperature probes placed inside the
hand misting. The client should be educated that not
enclosure at various locations.
 all lizards readily accept water from containers or they
Humidity can be a difficult parameter to regulate in
are not physically capable of ingesting standing water.
the lizard enclosure. In a smaller enclosure humidity is
If water is not provided in the form that these lizards
more difficult to regulate. As with temperature, many
typically drink, they will dehydrate rapidly. Water
lizards benefit from a humidity gradient—another
containers for all lizards should be cleaned at least
example of microhabitat use by lizards. In larger cages
weekly. Soaking with a 10% bleach solution for fifteen
this gradient is created by the interface between sub-
minutes is sufficient for disinfection. Because some
 strate and cage ornaments such as rocks or logs. Small
lizards may defecate or otherwise contaminate larger
covered plastic containers containing moistened sub-
water containers, more frequent cleaning of water con-
strate such as vermiculite or moss may be provided.
tainers may be required.
These are called humidified shelters (de Vosjoli 1997)
Feeding stations for lizards are preferred over the
and are particularly useful to assist shedding in some
random introduction of food items into the enclosure.
desert species such as leopard geckos and juvenile
Carnivorous lizards should be fed pre-killed food items
bearded dragons.
such as small mammals from a container within the
cage, or the lizard may be moved to a separate cage
Ventilation
for feeding. Most insectivores only eat moving insects
In well-ventilated cages, such as those for true chame-
and therefore must be fed live food items such as
leons, hand misting or electronic misters, vaporizers,
crickets, mealworms, and waxworms. These food
Lizards
83
items may be introduced into small bowls within the
performed monthly. In the absence of fecal parasites,
enclosure. Many lizards readily adapt to eating from
prophylactic deworming may be indicated in wild-
containers. Invariably some food items will escape into
caught animals and many herpetoculturists routinely
the cage and are usually consumed by the lizard.
medicate new animals without the diagnosis of parasit-
Presenting food in containers can reduce the risk of
ism. Clients who prophylactically deworm their pets
accidental substrate ingestion. It also may provide a
should be thoroughly informed of the potential side
central location at which the lizard may be observed
effects of medications and the potential side effects of
while feeding to evaluate appetite and health. Feeding
killing parasites in the patient's body. Prophylactic
live foods such as small mammals and crickets increases
treatment with antibiotics is not recommended unless
the risk of bodily damage to the lizard by the food
clinical signs of bacterial or protozoal infections are
item. Crickets, just as mice and rats, may feed on the
observed or clinical disease is diagnosed.
flesh of lizards if deprived of food for more than a day
 Housing during quarantine should consist of an
in the enclosure.
enclosure that provides comfort and visual security for
Herbivores are generally fed prepared meals in con-
the lizard, but also provides visualization of every
tainers. Most healthy herbivorous lizards consume
aspect of daily (or nightly) activity. Substrate, when
their daily share of food at one feeding, though in
possible, should be paper to visualize and collct feces,
nature these animals generally browse throughout the
urates, and urine. Feedings should be provided at
day. Uneaten food should be removed from the cage
consistent feeding station and supervised to observe all
on the day of feeding to prevent spoiling. Prepared
aspects of feeding behavior and quantify food intake.
foods such as powdered, frozen, or otherwise pro-
Impeccable sanitation and cage hygiene is essential.
cessed herbivore foods should be provided with strict
Ornaments, hide boxes, and water bowls should
attention to the manufacturer's recommendations for
be simple and either disposable or easily cleaned.
rehydration, thawing, and feeding frequency. For her-
Minimizing accessories and having duplicates for each
bivorous lizards freshly prepared vegetable diets are
cage aids in cleaning. Safe and effective disinfectants
 preferable over processed diets.
for home use are chlorine bleach at a 1:10 dilution of
the commercially available concentration and ammonia
at 5% solution (McKeown 1996). The two products
QUARANTINE
 should never be mixed to prevent the release of poison-
ous chlorine gas. Soaking surfaces for fifteen minutes
 The most important consideration often overlooked
is adequate for disinfection with chlorine bleach at a
by the owner of new pet lizards is quarantine. Many
1:10 dilution (Ritchie 1992). When cryptosporidiosis
     o  s
is a concern, soaking accessories with 5% ammonia
collections, establish breeding colonies, or expand
 and allowing them to dry for a minimum of three days
their interests to other reptiles. In their excitement to
is advised (Bennett 1996c).
introduce new pets to the home, they ignore the poten-
 Record keeping by the client is essential both for
tial for contagious infectious diseases that may affect
long-term captive lizards and new arrivals. Recording
their entire collection of animals.
dates of feeding and ecdysis, environmental parame-
Acariasis is a significant contagious disease seen In:
ters, and especially weekly or monthly weight (in
Reptile collections (see Parasitology). Mite infestations
 grams) are all helpful in monitoring for disease. With
can lead to reduced fertility, multisystemic disease, and
the exception of hibernation or parturition, lizards
death in captive reptile collections, and may
be
rarely lose weight as part of normal physiology.
extremely diffcult to eradicate once established in
Juvenile lizards that fail to grow or adults that
large collections (Mader 1996a). Intestinal parasitism
progressively lose weight are usually diseased. Casual
is a prime concern in lizards housed together. Other
 observations such as the frequency and consistency of
diseases that are generally not contagious but may
defecation and urination and daily activity patterns
opportunistically spread are bacterial and fungal der-
should also be recorded.
matitis, pneumonia, and infectious stomatitis (primar-
ily from fighting).
 Though recommendations on quarantine vary, a
NUTRITION
minimum of thirty days of isolation in addition to
physical exam and clinical laboratory tests are required.
One adaptation that has allowed lizards to colonize
Wild-caught lizards should have the quarantine period
 nearly every terrestrial (and some aquatic) habitat on
extended to sixty to ninety days with serial fecal exams
earth is their variation in dietary preference.
84
Chapter 6
Consequently, their prime vulnerability in captive
humidity also impacts overall patient health and may
management becomes nutritional related disease when
lead to decreased feeding response. Donoghue and
proper diet is not provided. Lizards are commonly
Landenberg (1996) provide excellent discussion of the
classifed as herbivorous, insectivorous, carnivorous,
 nutrient requirements and daily energy needs of various
or omnivorous. Though the differentiation between
reptiles and the nutrient values of various animal,
insectivorous and carnivorous may seem subtle, some
plant, and commercial food items.
species are so highly specialized to eat specific arthro-
The quality and variety of food offered is important
pods and gastropods that they refuse to eat and fail
for all lizards. Food items should be fresh or provided
to thrive in captivity if offered any substitutes.
 promptly after thawing if frozen. Foods offered once
Additionally, when fed proper whole animal meat
to lizards should be disposed and not refrozen or pre-
diets, carnivorous lizards generally do not require
served and offered again. Protein content and quality
supplemental ultraviolet lighting, whereas the great
is generally met with whole animal diets and insects.
majority of insectivorous lizards do require routine
 For herbivores, the entire protein requirements should
ultraviolet light exposure, even when fed calcium-
 be plant origin. Good plant protein sources include:
enriched or supplemented insect diets (Donoghue and
romaine lettuce, spinach, alfalfa sprouts, clover, dan-
Landenberg 1996).
 delion, bean sprouts, and bamboo shoots (Donoghue
 Just as there is no way to describe the basic lizard
and Landenberg 1996).
 cage, it is impossible to generalize lizard diets. Each
Calcium is an essential element for all captive lizards 
species has specific dietary requirements and variation
and its deficiency is the cause of metabolic bone disease
in food availability in their native habitats that dictate
(MBD) that encompasses a vast syndrome of physio-
diet preferences on a seasonal or even monthly basis.
logic disorders. Calcium absorption and excretion is
Carnivorous lizards (monitors, tegus) ingest other ver-
regulated by several factors. Calcium absorption in the
tebrates (fish, reptiles, birds, and mammals) as their
small intestine is regulated by an activated metabolite
primary diet, but remain opportunistic and usually
of vitamin Dg, cholecalciferol, which occurs in some
attempt to eat anything that moves and anything that
animal tissues (Frye 1991). Vitamin D2, ergocalciferol,
will ft into their mouth. Some carnivorous and omniv-
 occurs in plants and does not apparently facilitate the
orous species may also eat carrion or may
y be canni-
uptake of calcium in the gut of lizards and does not
balistic (Balsai 1997, Donoghue and
1 Landenberg
appear to be beneficial as a dietary supplement for
1996). Carnivorous lizards that are not fed whole
reptiles regarding calcium metabolism. (Boyer 1996).
animal meat products are more likely to develop nutri-
Therefore, supplements claiming to contain vitamin D
tional disease (Donoghue and Landenberg
1996).
should be scrutinized as to which form of vitamin D
Some herbivorous lizards are opportunistically
/car-
is provided. Vitamin Dg may be exogenously consumed
nivorous or insectivorous, which, with some species in
in the form of dietary animal tissues and some dietary
captivity, may cause serious nutritional disease when
supplements or it may be endogenously produced
 animal protein is fed in abundance (see Common
when the lizard is exposed to appropriate ultraviolet
Disorders).
(UV) radiation. Cholecalciferol is synthesized in the
The ultimate paradox with the cause of some nutri-
skin of lizards, and then is hydroxylated frst in the
tional diseases in lizards, however, is that the causes
liver and then the kidney to become 1,25 dihydroxy-
of disease may have nothing to do with food.
cholecalciferol, the active metabolite of vitamin Ds.
Temperature, humidity, landscape, water, infectious
(Frye 1991). The consequence of this pathway is that
organisms (intestinal endoparasites, bacteria), and
in spite of adequate dietary calcium, lizards may be
especially light (specifically ultraviolet light) commonly
 prone to MBD in the absence of adequate vitamin Ds.
factor into nutritional health despite the provision of
Clinically this is most commonly the result of insuff-
proper diet. Thus, proper husbandry becomes the key
cient exposure to UV-B radiation.
to providing proper nutrition.
 Ultimate control of blood calcium homeostasis rests
Nutritional requirements pertain to all lizards.
with the parathyroid glands and their production of
 Feeding behavior, digestion, the absorption and assim-
 parathyroid hormone (PTH). The occurrence of hypo-
ilation of nutrients, and cellular physiologic activity
calcemia or hyperphosphatemia results in increased
are all somewhat dependent on temperature for all
 production of PTH. Calcium is removed from bone
reptiles (Barten 1996a, Donoghue and Landenberg
(calcium resorption) to increase calcium ions in the
1996). The POTZ (preferred optimal temperature
 blood. Additionally, PTH stimulates the production of
zone) and thermal gradient must be provided for each
the active metabolite of cholecalciferol (vitamin Dg) to
species to optimize nutritional value of foods. Improper
increase intestinal calcium absorption. When calcium
Lizards
85
levels in the blood are adequate, the thyroid hormone
and the veterinary staff is responsible for informing
calcitonin inhibits the effects of PTH and bone resorp-
clients of these requirements (Barten 1996a, de Vosjoli
tion slows or reverses.
1993, Rossi 1998b, Donoghue and Landenberg 1996,
Excess phosphorous in the diet is also a nutritional
Boyer 1996, de Vosjoli 1995, de Vosjoli 1993). For
concern. High phosphorous diets can induce nutri-
years the green iguana has been the standard after
tional secondary hyperparathyroidism that ultimately
which all herbivorous diets have been modeled, but the
depletes calcium stores in bone (Frye 1991, Mader
-o ss sd    
2002a). In addition to the overall content of calcium
ing the approach to feeding these pets for optimal
in the diet, attention must be given to the calcium to
health. Barten (1996a) presents the best summary of
phosphorous ratio (Ca:P). This ratio should be 1:1 to
the green iguana diet in the current literature. Several
2:1 for the entire diet (Frye 1991, Donoghue and
of the primary to exclusive herbivorous lizards seen in
Landenberg 1996). Whole animal diets (rodents and
 practice include green iguanas (Iguana iguana), rhinoc-
chicks) provide this ratio. Organ meats such as heart,
erosiguanas ( Cycluraspp.),desertiguanas ( Dipsosaurus
liver, and muscle without bone are excessively high in
spp.), spiny tailed iguanas (Ctenosaura spp.), chuck-
phosphorous. Most commonly fed insects have a Ca:P
wallas (Sauromalus spp.), prehensile-tailed skinks
of 1:9 and thus require periodic to routine vitamin and
(Corucia zebrata),andspiny-tailedagamids( Uromastyx
 mineral supplementation (Donoghue and Landenberg
 spp.). The green iguana is highly adaptive in its dietary
1996). Salads containing leafy greens such as beet
 preferences in a captive environment and is known to
greens, broccoli leaves, outer green cabbage leaves,
eat commercial dog and cat foods, rodent diets, insects,
collards, dandelion leaves, and mustard greens are
fish, mice, and a wide variety of plant materials (de
calcium-rich (Donoghue and Landenberg 1996, Boyer
Vosjoli 1992).
1996).
Several beliefs regarding the feeding of iguanas have
Nutritional supplements abound for reptiles and are
been modified over the past few years. Hatchling and
required for optimal nutritional health of insectivorous
juvenile iguanas do not eat insects as a substantial
and herbivorous lizards (Donoghue and Landenberg
 portion of their diet and then switch to primarily veg-
1996). Calcium with vitamin Ds (Rep-Cal, Los Gatos,
etarian diets as adults (Barten 1996a). Contrary to
CA)  or  calcium
1and
phosphorous
containing
 popular belief, leaf lettuce is an acceptable source of
powdered supplements are preferred. Some vitamin
protein and calcium for herbivorous reptiles ( Donoghue
and mineral supplements contain no
(Nekton-Rep,
and Landenberg 1996). Iguanas of any age DO NOT
Clearwater, FL) or very low (Herptivite, Rep-Cal, Los
 require animal protein in the diet; this includes insects;
Gatos, CA) calcium and additional calcium must be
whole animal or organ meat; and commercial pet
mixed or given separately. Supplements are applied to
foods for dogs, cats, primates, and fish. All protein in
ne san Aand au yym u susnp, Aq sinasu!
the diet of the green iguana should be derived from
placed in a container and the powder added. With
plant sources.
gentle swirling of the container the supplement is
 Herbivorous lizards at all life stages are generally
attached to the insect and then fed to the lizard. For
fed more often than carnivorous lizards and in many
herbivores the supplements are sprinkled over or
cases daily feeding is indicated. Adult herbivores are
 mixed with the salad. Supplements should be provided
commonly fed every other day. Most herbivores con-
once weekly for adult lizards that are fed well balanced
serve water well and obtain the majority of their water
diets. Juvenile or growing lizards should be supple-
needs from plants.
 Tropical lizards such as green
mented two to three times weekly. Problems associated
iguanas and particularly juvenile green iguanas should
with mineral supplements include decreased palatabil-
have constant access to water. Desert species are best
ity or refusal of supplemented food items; dispropor-
soaked in water in buckets or other containers once
tionate distribution, improper ratio, or decomposition
weekly to meet their water requirements. This treat-
of nutrients within supplements; toxicities from over-
ment helps reduce the risk of certain respiratory and
 dosing or ingestion of high levels of certain nutrients;
skin diseases that may occur from elevated enclosure
 and false claims made by manufacturers. Supplements
humidity.
do not compensate for the feeding of imbalanced or
 poor quality diets.
Insectivorous Lizards
Insectivorous lizards, among the most popular pet
Herbivorous Lizards
lizards today, have nutritional and feeding needs
The dietary requirements of the captive herbivorous
similar to herbivorous lizards. The insectivores com-
lizard diet have been well documented in the literature
prise the majority of all modern lizards and because of
86
Chapter 6
their dietary diversity their nutritional needs are the
ing, swallowing, and digesting ten 10-mg crickets may
least known of captive lizards. The likely key to under-
exceed the energetic costs of capturing and eating a
standing insectivorous lizard nutrition is likely not in
 single 100-mg cricket for a particular lizard. Therefore,
the food items themselves, but in the food of the food
the lizard ignores the smaller food items and searches
items themselves (Donoghue and Landenberg 1996, de
or waits for a larger item. This behavior is seen in
Vosjoli 1997). Lizards in nature eat insects that browse
captivity as the refusal of certain size foods. Lizards
on numerous plants, detritus, feces, soil, and other
that are incapable of dismembering or shredding large
animals. The assimilation of these nutrients may be
food items usually avoid catching and eating them.
crucial for the health and survivability of some species.
oo s     
For example, in amphibians, poison dart frogs derive
items that the lizard may have eaten as a juvenile. Both
skin toxins secondarily from alkaloids and other chem-
the size and type of food items must be considered
icals originating in plants through the insects that they
when feeding captive lizards.
ingest in their native habitat. In captivity, when wild-
Some lizards eat only one or two specific prey items
caught frogs are fed similar insects that are not exposed
and may or may not accept crickets or other domestic
to native plants, the skin toxins are greatly reduced or
insects at the expense of anorexia (Moloch borridus,
absent.
some Phrynosoma spp. [ants], Dracaena spp. [snails]]
Herpetoculturists of insect-eating lizards are becom-
(Obst and Jurgen et al. 1988). Most other insectivores
ing aware of the importance of "prey item nutrition"
accept domestic insects such as crickets, mealworms,
waxworms, superworms, and roaches. Field sweepings
on the market (Ziegler, Gardners, PA). Some research
for wild insects can also be offered to smaller insecti-
suggests that some high calcium diets are inappropri-
vores, though the owner must be cautious of pesticides
ate for crickets and may affect the growth and repro-
and potentially venomous or dangerous insects. Insects
duction of these insects (Donoghue and Landenberg
are offered in an amount that the lizard can consume
1996). The diet for captive insectivorous lizards should
 in one feeding which is typically several hours in a day
be varied and supplemented with vitamin and mineral
or overnight in the case of nocturnal lizards.
powders. Because most domestically raised insects are
 Insects loose in a cage can be as much a hazard to
low in calcium and have improper Ca:P, calcium sup-
insectivorous lizards as live rodents are to carnivorous
plementation is crucial. Little is known about the
lizards. Adult crickets are capable of chewing through
dietary needs for amino acids, vitamins, other miner-
skin, digits, and eyes of lizards that cannot escape from
 als, and trace elements. Generally these are supple-
the enclosure. Mealworms are also similarly impli-
mented in addition to calcium.
cated in trauma or death to otherwise healthy lizards
 Insectivorous lizards as a group have the same light
(de Vosjoli 1997). Feeding stations that restrict the
require ments for vitamin Ds synthesis as do herbivores
movement of these insects can reduce the possibility of
(Frye 1991, Donoghue and Landenberg 1996, De
health risk to caged lizards. Most insectivorous lizards
Vosjoli 1993). This is particularly true of juvenile
should be fed daily, though as with adult herbivores,
insectivorous lizards. The author has observed numer-
 every other day feedings are appropriate (de Vosjoli
ous juvenile to young adult Chamaeleo spp. present
1992, de Vosjoli 1997). Dusting with vitamin and
with MBD that are fed a varied diet routinely supple-
 mineral supplements is done as with various life stages
mented with calcium. The deficiency arises
sfrom
of herbivorous lizards.
insuffcient UV light exposure. Questions must arise,
howe ver, regarding the required light exposure of noc-
Carnivorous Lizards
turnal insectivorous Gekkonidae such as Phyllurus
Clinically carnivorous lizards typically present less
spp. and Uroplatus spp. that hide by day.
 often with nutritional diseases than do herbivorous or
 The patterns by which animals choose their prey are
insectivorous  1
lizards. Carnivores are generally fed
described under the optimal foraging theory (OFT)
whole animal vertebrates such as small mammals or
(Helfman 1990). It is theorized that animals choose
birds which, when fresh, are generally well balanced
between energetic costs and energetic gains when
with nutrients (Donoghue and Landenberg 1996).
selecting food items. Insectivorous lizards have been
These lizards also are more likely to accept a wide
observed to choose certain species of insects even when
variety of food items which allows for more variety in
 multiple species of a similar size of insect are present
 nutrients. Several reasons based on natural history for
or the lizard chooses a certain size of insect when dif-
 the nutritional stability of carnivorous lizards in cap-
ferent sizes of the same species of insect are available.
tivity include: a generally wider POTZ than herbivores
For example, the energetic costs involved in prehend-
and insectivores, less specific humidity requirements,
Lizards
87
and with proper diet less specific light requirements,
poor Ca:P (1:9) ratio, dusting of these insects with
 all of which make habitat management less time con-
calcium powders is recommended. Pinkie mice (1:1)
suming and less expensive for the owner. Several intan-
have a lower calcium content than do weanling (1.1:1)
gible reasons for the nutritional stability of carnivorous
or adult mice (1.4:1), though the Ca:P ratio is suitable
lizards include: they are less shy about eating in captiv-
and due to the relatively short term that these food
ity and the availability of food as a whole animal
items are offered, calcium supplementation is not
requires less work by the owner to prepare the meal
likely required (Donoghue and Landenberg 1996).
and provide balanced nutrition. Though several of
Hatchling and juvenile carnivorous lizards should be
these reasons suggest owner non-compliance, they are
fed at least every two to three days.
unfortunately substantial causes for the prevalence of
FINALLY,
NEVER
FEED
LARGE
ADULT
 nutritional disease in many herbivorous reptiles in the
CARNIVOROUS OR HERBIVOROUS LIZARDS BY
pet trade.
HAND. The potential consequence to fingers and
Consideration must be given to the quality of the
 hands is obvious, but more serious is the conditioned
carnivore diet. Live foods should never be fed to car-
response that is created by this behavior. Lizards are
nivorous lizards to prevent rodent bites. Similarly, live
wild animals whose behavior is driven by instinct and
wild-caught vertebrates and most purchased "feeder"
conditioning, not by reasoning. A lizard cannot discern
reptiles and amphibians should not be fed to prevent
between the end of the food item and the beginning of
the transmission of some parasitic, bacterial, and viral
the human hand until after the bite occurs. The client
diseases. Fresh-killed prey items have equal nutritional
should also be instructed to exercise caution when
value to live prey (Donoghue and Landenberg 1996).
removing uneaten food items from cages.
 Frozen vertebrate food items are commonly offered
after complete thawing. These items should have been
frozen immediately after death, thawed only once, and
COMMON DISORDERS
disposed if not consumed within hours after feeding.
Thawed frozen tissues decompose rapidly after thawing
 Diseases of lizards include many diseases common to
and the author has observed regurgitation by lizards
reptiles in general and a few that are unique to particu-
within days after the ingestion of apparently rancid
lar species or families of lizards. Many disorders are
food items. Adult monitors and tegus are fed several
husbandry related. Some diseases are more common
adult mice or small rats several times weekly.
. This
in imported lizards than in domestically captive raised
feeding schedule may be adjusted for obesity
or
lizards; therefore, it is important to inquire or discern
leanness.
the origin of the patient.
Prepared foods such as poultry meat, beef, and dog
 Not all disorders require medications. Many dis-
and cat foods are not substitutes for whole animal
eases require correction of improper husbandry and
meals and should not be offered. Exceptions may be
supportive care. The author advocates increasing
made for short periods if rodents are unavailable or if
quality caloric intake for all traumatic injuries
assisted feeding is required for health-compromised
and many infectious diseases to strengthen immune
individuals. In these cases canned cat foods are the
response and speed tissue repair in reptiles. Observation
better choice for feeding these patients. A variety of
of POTZ and humidity is essential for the healing of
 prepared diets specifically for lizards are available
 all reptilian diseases.
through pet suppliers. Veterinarians and herpetocul-
turists should thoroughly research dietary claims and
Integument
scrutinize research for these products before recom-
 Rostral abrasions are a common skin disorder of
 mending them as a sole source of nutrition. Lizards fed
many lizards including Iguana spp., Physignathus spp.,
 n ss q   d j si
Chlamydosaurus
and vitamin E deficiencies (Donoghue and Landenberg
Abrasions are less common in Gekkonidae or in delib-
1996, Barten 1996a).
erate or slow moving species such as Uromastyx spp.
Hatchling and juvenile carnivorous lizards can
and Chamaeleo spp. The most common cause of
present a few nutritional challenges to their owners.
rostral abrasions is facial impact with glass walls of
Because of their smaller size, these lizards may not
aquariums or pacing and rubbing the nose on cage
accept whole vertebrate food items early in life.
  s    
Therefore, insects are commonly offered to smaller
 dragons develop these abrasions from handling during
lizards and newborn or "pinkie" mice are offered to
the importation and distribution process to pet stores
larger juvenile lizards. Because insects have a relatively
Animals not adjusted to captivity commonly attempt
88
Chapter 6
Bacterial and fungal dermatitis may occur as pri-
mary or secondary infections and are typically the
result of improper husbandry. It is essential to know
if the patient is captive raised or wild-caught and if
any cage mates are similarly affected. Clinically these
diseases are more common in terrestrial species.
 Improper hygiene and increased humidity are sus-
pected as the primary causes of infection (Rossi 1996).
Other potential causes include acariasis, trauma from
cage ornaments or accessories, immunosuppression
from a variety of factors (temperature, nutrition, meta-
bolic disease, overcrowding, capture and importation),
prolonged exposure to water or sitting in water bowls,
 and dysecdesis. Histologic microscopy, fungal culture,
Plate 6.8. Rostrum abrasion. (Photo courtesy of
and bacterial culture are all indicated for diffuse or
Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color plates)
focally extensive disease. Treatment is based on diag-
nostic testing and may include enteral or parenteral
antibiotics, topical antibiotics or antifungal agents,
escape by incessantly rubbing on cage walls or lids or
and most importantly identification and correction of 
   a   sm  
 improper husbandry. Note: Inform the client of prog-
room around them (Color Plate 6.8).
 nosis based on diagnostic testing and response to treat-
Recovery from rostral abrasions may be prolonged
ment. Correcting any existing husbandry is essential
u zuaoa on ioalqns aq Aeu suaed aul pue
for both healing and prevention of reoccurrence.
Treatment must include altering the enclosure 
to
 Dysecdesis is more a clinical sign of disease rather
 prevent further injury. Creating visual security such as
than a disease itself. Shedding problems are most com-
a paper covering or the painting of glass walls or
monly the result of underlying diseases or improper
adding other visual barriers, even if temporary, is man-
husbandry, particularly low humidity and malnutri-
datory. Various antibiotic ointments may be used if
 tion. Low humidity may not be an entire enclosure
indicated for infection. Note: Inform the client that
 phenomenon as much as a lack of humidity gradient.
treatment through habitat or behavioral modification
Even some desert dwelling lizards benefit from micro-
is more important than medicating the lesion.
environmental humidifed shelters to aid in shedding.
Traumatic injury may occur from bite wounds,
Occasional misting for some species is beneficial.
thermal burns, and skin autotomy. Both burns and bite
 Other diseases that may contribute to dysecdesis are
wounds (cage mate or prey item) commonly require
external parasitism and possibly thyroid disorders
surgical debridement of damaged or necrotic tissue
(Rossi 1996).
 and primary or delayed secondary closure. Secondary
Complications  t
 that arise from dysecdesis are
bacterial and/or fungal infections are common and
extremity necrosis, particularly toes and tails. This
systemic antibiotics are indicated in most cases.
 process arises from portions of the extremities that
Bacterial culture and sensitivity is indicated for all slow
incompletely shed (occasionally more than once in
or non-healing wounds that do not respond to empiric
several layers) and form a tourniquet to the distal
therapy.  Topical  cleansers  such  as  chlorhexidine
extremity. Devitalization is quick and necrosis follows
(Rossi 1996, Barten 1996a) or chloroxylenol (personal
slowly over days or weeks. Lizards with thick skin or
observation) (Vet Solutions, Fort Worth, TX ) are
heavy scales may show no apparent signs of necrosis
excellent topical antimicrobial agents. These injuries
for weeks. Amputation of the affected extremity to the
 invariably result in scar tissue formation and occasion-
 next proximal viable joint is required. Similar treat-
ally disfiguration. Reptile skin is slow to heal and open
ment is required for tails (see ascending tail necrosis,
wounds require sequential shedding to fully close.
below).
Proper nutrition is vital for wound healing and the
 Broken tails resulting from tail autotomy and not
author recommends increased quality caloric intake
from traumatic amputation usually do not require
for these patients to increase the rate of shedding and
medical treatment. In rare cases hemorrhage may be
repair. Note: Inform the client to expect prolonged
 profound or extend beyond one minute. In these cases
(months) healing and to expect permanent scarring to
pressure bandaging may be used. An appropriate size
the affected skin.
i a oi padei s az m poed so a
Lizards
89
for one day if needed. The lesion should be cleaned if
 clinical signs are most common in species of Iguanidae
indicated and the patient maintained on a clean surface
and Varanidae.
with no substrate for several days following the injury.
 In species of Chamaeleontidae clinical signs are
Topical or systemic antibiotics are indicated only if
commonly generalized weakness, anorexia, inability
wound contamination has occurred and only then for
to grasp or climb, loss of balance, swollen joints,
several days. Surgical repair is contraindicated in auto-
soft mandibular bones, crest deformities (Chamaeleo
sad  s s sq srds 
calyptratus), and occasionally flaccid tongue paralysis.
regeneration. Note: Inform the client to maintain a
 Clinically MBD is related to inadequate exposure to
clean environment and report any signs of inflamma-
 UV light. Prognosis for recovery for severely affected
tion; the less manipulation of the wound, the better;
juvenile chameleons with MBD is poor at best.
and regeneration will occur over months resulting in 
 Tremendous nutritional support and great care in han-
a smaller and often darker regenerated tail.
dling is required for rehabilitation.
 Tail amputation in non-autotomous species or
A detailed history of diet, dietary supplementation,
ascending tail necrosis in all species may require
and lighting are essential. Diagnostic testing includes
surgery and antimicrobial therapy. Traumatic tail
blood chemistry and radiographs (if fractures are sus-
amputation, though uncommon, may occur in chame-
pected). If hypocalcemia is detected, the patient should
leons, prehensile-tailed skinks, and rarely monitors.
be considered critical and intramedullary (via catheter)
 Also common is ascending tail necrosis that results
or intracoelomic calcium gluconate 10% is adminis-
from trauma to the tail such as bite wounds, handling
tered at a dose of 100 mg/kg every six hours until
injuries, enclosure injuries, or dysecdesis. Gradually
weakness and/or muscle tremors resolve (Boyer 1996).
ascending darkening and devitalization of the tail
Blood calcium levels are monitored routinely. Advanced
proximal to the injury characterize this disease. Skin
cases of hypocalcemia with paresis carry a grave prog-
may slough at times, revealing devitalized vertebrae.
nosis. Assess hydration and treat as indicated. Non-
Surgical tail amputation at a level proximal to the
hypocalcemic patients are treated with oral calcium
devitalized tissue is required. The gangrenous nature
glubionate (Neo-Calglucon) at a dose of 1ml/kg PO
of this disease may lead to sepsis and systemic anti-
    s s mi 
biotics are indicated. For non-autotomous lizards, the
 se veral weeks to months until normal appetite returns.
tail stump can partially regenerate and is generally not
Nutritional  s
support  is required  in  hypocalcemic
sutured, though hemorrhage control with pressure is
patients (see Techniques). Exposure to unfiltered sun-
essential. Note: Inform the client to observe diligently
light for fifteen minutes once or twice weekly and oral
for any signs of continued ascending devitalization and
vitamin Dg supplementation is indicated. Fracture
to be aware of signs of lethargy or anorexia that may
management is conservative for patients with MBD.
result from sepsis.
Traction and immobilization of forelimb and hind
limb fractures with external coaptation is performed
SkeletalSystem
(see Techniques).
Metabolic bone disease (MBD) is a somewhat over-
MBD is physiologically a gradual onset disease.
whelming and confusing disorder that might be best
From the client's perspective the clinical signs of MBD
described as a syndrome with variable manifestations.
are rapid. Note: Educate the client about the basics of
The pathophysiology of nutritionally derived MBD is
MBD pathophysiology with emphasis on the interre-
described in the nutrition section. Clinically one of the
lationships among diet, dietary supplements, and UV
most common signs of MBD is generalized or hind leg
light exposure. Explain that a deficiency in one of these
weakness or paralysis; and, therefore, might best be
factors can lead to MBD. Most importantly stress the
considered a neurologic disorder. MBD is the primary
fact that recovery from MBD may require months and
rule-out for lizards presented with this clinical sign.
Other common signs include failure to grow, general-
tion in the patient that presents with advanced disease.
ized weakness, anorexia, soft or pliable mandible on
palpation, palpably swollen or thickened long bone(s),
Cardiovascular System
fractures of long bones, and occasionally tremors or
Cardiovascular diseases are rarely reported in the lit-
fine muscle fasciculations. In profoundly weak lizards
erature. The author has observed one case of suspected
the pupils may appear to dilate and constrict errati-
heart failure in an adult savannah monitor. The patient
cally, possibly an ocular manifestation of muscle fas-
presented with generalized limb and coelomic swelling.
ciculations (personal observation). Presentation of a
Aspiration of the coelomic cavity revealed straw-
lizard with flaccid paralysis is an emergency. These
colored amber serous fluid that was relatively devoid
90
Chapter 6
of cells. Cardiac auscultation revealed a grade III-IV/
Nebulization with bacterial antimicrobial agents may
VI holosystolic murmur. Pulmonary auscultation was
 be beneficial. Aerosolized particles must be 3 microns
unremarkable. Unfortunately, work-up of the case was
 or smaller to reach the lungs (Murray 1996). Treatment 
 not permitted and the deceased animal was not avail-
periods are ten to thirty minutes at a frequency of
able for necropsy.
every six to twelve hours. Duration of treatment
may be several days to one week pending clinical
Respiratory System
improvement.
The most common true respiratory disease in lizards
Note: Meticulous investigation of all aspects of hus-
is pneumonia. In lizards etiologic agents of pneumonia
bandry and correction of improper husbandry are
are bacteria, fungi, and parasites (see Parasitology).
required to develop a complete treatment plan. Inform
Clinically
pneumonia
develops
with
improper
the client of the seriousness of the disease and be real-
husbandry and rarely as contagious disease and gener-
istic regarding prognosis. Treatment of pneumonia
ally presents in the advanced stages of the disease.
 often requires protracted hospitalization,
repeated
Pneumonia  associated  with  pulmonary
parasitism
diagnostic
testing, moderate to marked
dfinancial
commonly occurs as a secondary bacterial infection
investment, and tremendous patience.
(Murray 1996).
 The most prominent clinical sign of pneumonia is
Digestive System
dyspnea. The posture may be altered with the neck
Anorexia is the one of most common presenting com-
held in extension and the mouth held open. Occasionally
plaints for digestive disorders, the cause of which can
oral and nasal mucoid secretions are observed, though
be a challenge to diagnose. Though anorexia is not a
neither of these signs is pathognomonic for respiratory
disease, it is both a clinical sign of nearly all reptilian
disease. Secretions originating from the mouth
or
diseases and a contributor to several other diseases.
esophagus can appear foamy in lizards with normal
 Comprehensive history is required because improper
respiratory health. Thoracic auscultation may reveal
 husbandry often contributes to the cause of anorexia.
crackles or popping sounds with pneumonia. These
 If history and physical exam fail to uncover improper
sounds in the absence of oral secretions are highly
husbandry issues or clinical disease, a series of diag-
suggestive of pneumonia. The absence
of
any air
nostic tests is indicated, including fecal exam, blood
sounds may indicate lung consolidation and advanced
chemistry, complete blood count, and radiography
disease.
(including positive contrast). Treat the diagnosed
Radiographs are the diagnostic test of choice for
underlying disease and provide nutritional support.
 pneumonia. Transtracheal wash (see Techniques) with
Infectious stomatitis occurs as a secondary disease
cytology and bacterial culture with sensitivity of the
in lizards (Mader 1996d, Barten 2002). This disorder
wash are diagnostic for the etiology of pneumonia. For
may be unobserved by clients because the patient is
seriously compromised patients, a swab of the glottis
presented for anorexia, lethargy, weight loss, or occa-
or aspiration of tracheal exudate without flushing is
sionally oral or nasal exudate. Oral exam may reveal
recommended. Fecal exam is indicated in cases in
focal or diffuse gingival erythema, petechia, swelling.
-n as o assod nou si ysm pe 
erosion, ulceration, and mucoid or purulent exudate
worm infection.
(Figure 6.7).
Treatment is initiated upon diagnosis of pneumonia
The glottis mucosa may be involved in diffuse
and modified based on cytology and culture
and
 disease. In severe cases, aspiration of infectious exu-
sensitivity results if indicated. Pneumonia in lizards
dates may lead to pneumonia (Mader 1996d, Murray
many times presents as an emergency and treatment
1996). Because the oral cavity communicates with the
must not be delayed. Antibiotics
commonly
used
nasal cavity dorsally through the choana, exudates
are broad-spectrum and bactericidal. These include
may be observed bubbling from the nose in the absence
aminoglycosides, beta-lactam antibiotics (cephalospo-
of true respiratory disease.
rins), fluoroquinolones, and advanced 
 generation
Immunosuppression resulting from a myriad of
semisynthetic penicillins, all of which should be admin-
underlying causes contributes to the development of
istered parenterally either IM or SC (Murray 1996).
infectious stomatitis. Improper temperatures, poor
nutrition, and trauma from fighting with cage mates
cally by the accumulation of pulmonary exudates in
 or oral cavity manipulation may be implicated. The
recesses of the lungs (particularly caudally) and an
infectious agent is determined through bacterial culture
 inability of achieving the MIC of antimicrobial agents
and sensitivity and is commonly identified as normal
in  these relatively  poorly
/  vascularized
regions.
 oral cavity bacterial flora including Aeromonas spp. or
Lizards
91
Figure 6.8. Cloacal prolapse in an iguana.
Figure 6.7. Stomatitis in a lizard.
pendently, in association with, or secondary to foreign
 Pseudomonas spp, bacteria which are opportunistic
body obstructions. Impactions are commonly palpable
pathogens.
and visible on radiographs. If the lizard is alert and
 Treatment is based on degree of involved tissues,
marked gas accumulation is not observed on radio-
husbandry parameters, and sensitivity values. Small
 graphs, enemas and/or oral laxatives are indicated (see
(2- to 3-mm) focal regions of stomatitis may require
Techniques). Soaking in tepid water for ten to fifteen
 only warming the environment and no antibiotic treat-
minutes may also stimulate defecation. Assess for
ment or a single topical antiseptic or antibiotic appli-
 dehydration and treat as indicated. Impaction may
cation. Generalized or deep infections may require
occur secondary to a number of husbandry issues,
sedation, debridement, and a combination of topical
dehydration, improper diet, and hypocalcemia. Weak
and systemic therapy. Aminoglycosides (gentamicin,
lizards with diagnosed or suspected obstruction should
amikacin)  and  fluoroquinolones  (enrofloxacin)  are
have blood chemistry analyzed. Surgical correction is
 most commonly administered. Note: Inform the client
required when laxatives, enemas, or other conservative
that recovery may be protracted in severe cases of
therapy fails.
stomatitis. Routine rechecks are necessary to monitor
Intestinal parasitism is very common if not ubiqui-
progress of healing of infection. Correcting improper
tous in imported lizards (Klingenberg 1993, Lane and
husbandry is of primary importance.
Mader 1996). Signs of intestinal parasitism include
Obstruction and impaction are common and may
anorexia, diarrhea, weight loss, failure to gain weight,
present days or weeks after the onset of the actual
and weakness. Treatment is based on diagnosis (see
disease. The usual presenting complaint is anorexia,
Parasitology). Quarantine, fecal screening, and cage
but bloating, lethargy, weight loss, diarrhea, constipa-
 hygiene are essential in limiting reinfection. Some par-
tion, and rarely regurgitation may be observed.
asites are zoonotic (see Zoonoses) (Johnson-Delaney
Diagnosis may be suspected based on history alone.
1996).
Investigating the patient's enclosure substrate, feeding
Cloacal prolapse may occur as a digestive, repro-
habits, and normal defecation habits is important.
ductive, or excretory disorder The prolapse may occur
 Confirmation of obstruction can occasionally be made
secondary to straining from enteritis, egg laying, and
on physical exam, but commonly radiographs 
or
uroliths, and may comprise the colon, oviduct, or
exploratory surgery are required for definitive diagno-
urinary bladder, or a combination of the three.
sis. Complete foreign body obstruction commonly
Treatment is based on which organ is prolapsed and
results in gas bloating which is evident radiographi-
the duration of the prolapse and resultant trauma to
cally; the causative item, however, may not be radio-
involved tissues (Figure 6.8).
graphically visible. Complete obstruction with gas
The colon is a tubular, smooth structure with a
bloating is an emergency.
lumen. Fecal material may or may not been seen within
Impaction is the result of fine particulate substrate,
the lumen. The oviduct is a thin-walled, longitudinally
rodent hair, arthropod exoskeleton, or other food item
banded structure with a lumen and no fecal material
accumulation in the intestines and may develop inde-
will be present. The urinary bladder is a globular, thin-
92
Chapter 6
walled, smooth structure with no lumen and may be
strate or nest box is provided. Any dystocia accompa-
fluid filled. Prolapse of these organs originates from
 nied by  weakness or non-responsiveness despite
the coelomic cavity cranial to the vent. Paraphimosis,
the presence of a suitable nesting area is a critical
or prolapse of the hemipenes, originates from the
emergency.
proximal aspect of the tail caudal to the vent. The
Dystocia in lizards can be pre-ovulatory (as follicles
prolapsed hemipenis is a solid, fleshy structure with no
 on the ovary) or post-ovulatory (as follicles or shelled
lumen. All organs may be darkened in color from 
 eggs in the oviduct) (Stahl 2000). Differentiation of the
devitalization or necrosis. Cloacal prolapse of coelo-
 two is made by radiography as the pre-ovulatory eggs
mic structures is an emergency.
are non-shelled and located dorsally in the abdomen
In cases in which prolapse is recent, tissues may be
ae pue palus aq Keu ssa Kroeo-isod pue
cleaned and lubricated with a water-based lubricant
more caudo-ventral in the abdomen. Conservative
and gently reduced through the cloaca (Bennett 1996c).
management is advised when the lizard is alert and
A single transverse cloacal suture is loosely applied to.
active with pre-ovulatory or post-ovulatory dystocia.
maintain the reduction yet still allow the passage of
 Environmental modification such as providing a suit-
urates and feces. If swelling of the tissue is present in
able nesting area or more visual security may be
the absence of necrosis, swelling may be reduced with
curative.
hypertonic sugar solutions followed by manual reduc-
 Traditional mammalian treatments for post-ovula-
tion. Necrosis of prolapsed tissue requires surgical
tory dystocia refractory to conservative management
resection in the case of coelomic structures or amputa-
include oxytocin and calcium injections to stimulate
tion of the hemipenis (see Anesthesia and Surgery).
smooth muscle contractions. Calcium gluconate at a
dose of 100mg/kg IM or ICe followed in one hour by
Excretory System
oxytocin at a dose of 5 to 30 IU/kg IM or ICe are given
Renal failure is generally a secondary disease caused
(Stahl 2000, De Nardo 1996b). Oxytocin may be
by either improper nutrition in primarily herbivorous
repeated within thirty minutes of the frst injection.
lizards or by aminoglycoside toxicity in all lizards.
 Efficacy is unpredictable and may only approach 50%
Clinical signs and diagnostic test results may mimic
in lizards (De Nardo 1996b). Manual reduction of
those seen with MBD with the absence of bony lesions.
retained eggs may be attempted for one or two eggs in
History may indicate polyuria, anorexia, weakness,
close proximity to the cloaca and distal to the pelvic
and weight loss. Blood chemistry commonly reflects
canal. Tremendous care must be exercised to avoid
hyperphosphatemia, normo- or hypocalcemia,
and
prolapse, oviductal rupture, or trauma to the kidneys.
normal or elevated uric acid. Radiographs may reflect
 If the eggshell is not clearly visible emerging from the
enlarged kidneys that appear as masses within and
cloaca, manual reduction is contraindicated. Lizards
slightly cranial to the pelvic canal. Renal enlargement
with distal oviductal or cloacal dystocias following
is occasionally palpable
normal oviposition may be hypocalcemic.
The dietary etiology is theorized to be a result of
 Many cases of dystocia require surgical manage-
excessive dietary animal protein. Aminoglycoside tox-
ment.
 These are weakened and visibly distressed
icity is well documented as a cause of renal insuff-
animals or those in which a radiographic diagnosis of
ciency in mammals and reptiles. Treatment consists of
 obstruction is diagnosed. Obstruction may result from
fluid support and diuresis, though prognosis is typi-
eggs too large to pass through the pelvic canal or from
cally poor for recovery and long-term survival. Other
 coelomic masses or enlarged kidneys that prohibit the
renal diseases seen in lizards include pyelonephritis
passage of eggs.
and neoplasia.
Paraphimosis is managed similar to cloacal prolapse
(Barten 1996b). The prolapsed hemipenis is assessed
Reproductive System
for viability and replaced or amputated as indicated.
 Lizards are presented with several reproductive abnor-
 Transverse cloacal suturing is indicated with reduction
malities. Dystocia in females and paraphimosis in
of paraphimosis.
males are most common. Other disorders include
cloacal prolapse of oviducts, ectopic eggs, and neopla-
Nervous System
sia. It is possible for lizards to ovulate and deposit
Diseases of the lizard nervous system are typically
infertile shelled eggs in the absence of a male. When
secondary to systemic, metabolic, or nutritional disease
gravid or pregnant, most lizards do not eat but remain 
or trauma. Hypocalcemia from the various forms of
alert and active for a period of several days prior to
MBD is one of the most common causes of neurologic
egg laying and many retain eggs until a suitable sub-
weakness or paralysis in captive lizards (Barten 1996b).
Lizards
93
Figure 6.9.Spinal cord injury with vertebral column
Figure 6.10. Retrobulbar abscess in an iguana.
fracture due to trauma.Note thedorsal displacement
caudal to theforelimbs.
Several species of geckos have spectacles (see
Anatomy). Subspectacular abscesses and retained spec-
 The pathophysiology of hypocalcemia is described in
tacles occur as in snakes. The abscesses may be unilat-
the nutrition section. All lizards presented with weak-
eral or bilateral and often are the result of ascending
ness, tetany, or muscle fasciculations should have
bacterial infection from the mouth. Treatment consists
blood calcium levels assessed immediately.
 of surgical drainage and irrigation of the abscess along
Trauma is a common cause of neurologic disorders
the ventral margin of the spectacle as well as treatment
- a  s  o si  s 
 of associated stomatitis. The surgical incision remains
ranging in homes or traveling with the owner (Figure
 open to drain, but commonly seals in a matter of days.
6.9). Both cerebral and spinal trauma occurs and is
Subsequent shedding of the spectacle results in com-
treated empirically with corticosteroids and time.
plete closure of the surgical incision and resolution of
u a sai aass idde ua ri siso
the abscess. The spectacle revealed following shed may
be grave if the client is able to provide adequate sup-
appear wrinkled and typically requires several shed
portive care (see Emergencies).
 cycles to return to normal appearance.
 Foreign bodies and trauma commonly result in
Ophthalmology
blepharospasm. Evaluation of the globe and periocular
Periocular inflammatory diseases are clinically the
tissues may require sedation. Treatment of lesions
most common ophthalmic disorders in lizards. Infec-
 depends upon thorough examination of the globe,
tious agents do not cause all periocular diseases. Many
eyelids, and conjunctiva (Figure 6.10).
inflammatory diseases, however, result from or give
rise to secondary bacterial infections. Williams (1996)
reports that the majority of ocular diseases are a sign
BEHAVIOR
of more generalized infection.
 One nutritional disorder that affects the eye is hypo-
The primary reported behavior disorder of lizards is
vitaminosis A. This disease is not specific to the eye,
aggression and is categorized as dominance or fear
 but also affects glandular mucous membrane epithe-
aggression, as seen in dogs and cats. Dominance aggres-
lium including the respiratory and digestive tract.
 sion may be conspecific (same species) or intraspecific
(different species) among lizards housed together and it
in turtles and occasionally in lizards. Clinical signs
may be diffcult to separate from fear aggression in
 include blepharitis, chemosis, and epiphora. Secondary
cases of lizard-human interactions. Aggression is most
bacterial infection is commonly observed in these
often observed against humans in cases of large lizards
cases and topical ophthalmic antibiotics are commonly
such as iguanas, monitors, and tegus, especially during
indicated in addition to weekly vitamin A injections
breeding season, and is likely hormonally induced. This
(Williams 1996). Recovery may be prolonged
lto
behavior is variable and may be directed at only one
several months. A thorough review of diet
IS
person in the household (personal observation). The
recommended.
author suspects the possibility of pheromonally induced
94
Chapter 6
 aq Ae om um isue sni un uoissr
animal rather than plant protein diet. Gout may also
estrous cycle. Aggression in large lizards directed
be renally induced secondary to dehydration or renal
against humans is a serious and dangerous problem
disease most commonly in association with renal
(see Zoonoses). Seasonal aggression is treated with
tubular toxicity from aminoglycosides or sulfon-
 ovariectomy or orchiectomy.
amides. Even at proper dosages these antibiotics
can induce renal disease if the patient is or becomes
dehydrated during treatment. Gout is a managed
TOXICITY AND MISCELLANEOUS
disease and not curable in most cases. Medications
NUTRITIONAL DISORDERS
to lower blood uric acid concentrations and anti-
inflammatory agents are recommended (Mader 1996c).
Toxicities occur from a variety of substances including
In cases of advanced gout palliative therapy may be
pharmaceuticals, insecticides, dietary supplements,
insufficient. This disease is best prevented before it
chemicals, and cigarette smoke (Williams 1996).
occurs with proper client education regarding diet
Pharmaceutical toxicities are most commonly seen
and the judicious use of potentially nephrotoxic
from injectable aminoglycosides and ivermectin, oral 
medications.
metronidazole, and topical pyrethrin or organophos-
phate compounds. The author is unaware of Teflon
toxicity in lizards as reported in birds, but this possibil-
ZOONOSES
ity should be considered. A thorough history is required
for diagnosis of toxic exposure, because there are
Client education regarding zoonotic diseases must
rarely pathognomonic clinical signs for exposure to
be a priority for all veterinary health professionals.
any of these compounds. Treatment is supportive
Unfortunately, popular literature, television/radio, and
depending on the underlying exposure. Mader (1996a)
the Internet are saturated with misinformation regard-
recommends standard atropine, diazepam, and iso-
 ing reptile zoonotic diseases. The threats posed to
tonic fluid therapy for lizards with pyrethrin toxicity
 humans, however, should not be underestimated. This
(see Emergencies).
information gap is prevalent within human medicine
 Nutritional disorders leading to neurologic signs of
as well, and human physicians fall victim to the lack
disease include vitamin B,, vitamin E, and selenium
of education reflected by the popular press regarding
deficiencies. Thiamine (B,) deficiency is seen in car-
disease in many domestic pets.
nivorous lizards fed raw egg diets in which the com-
All veterinary staff should take the following steps
pound avidin inhibits vitamin B. Vitamin E deficiency
to understanding zoonotic disease:
is seen in lizards fed high fatty fish diets (Donoghue
and Landenberg 1996). Treatment consists of dietary
1. Gain a complete understanding of the pathophysiol-
correction and injectable vitamins as indicated.
 ogy and method of transmission (direct or indirect
Gout is a disease of lizards and other animals with
and vector) of the disease in question, both in the
several potential etiologies. In lizards, gout can origi-
 potential source animal and in humans.
 nate both from improper nutrition or secondary to
2. Have a complete understanding of risk factors for
pharmaceutical toxicity. In vertebrates the pyrimidine
humans to contract the disease in question, includ-
amino acids are metabolized into COz and NH; and
 ing immunosuppression and human behaviors when
eliminated from the body. Purine amino acids are
handling the pet.
metabolized into various degradation products of
     s d  s '
which uric acid is the final product in reptiles (Mader
 particular zoonotic pathogens.
1996c). Uric acid in high concentrations in the blood
 4. Gain a thorough knowledge of laws governing the
becomes insoluble. Simplistically, gout is the result of
 possession and treatment of exotic species in a given
excessive uric acids in the blood that crystallize and
jurisdiction.
precipitate in tissues prior to elimination from the
body via the kidneys. Common sites of this deposition
Human behavior is likely to be a primary cause or
are serosal surfaces of internal organs and synovial
facilitator of contracting zoonotic diseases from rep-
membranes. A common presenting complaint of gout
tiles. Because many lizards are particularly sociable
is swollen joints or white to yellow nodules of the oral
and exhibit behaviors that are commonly anthropo-
mucous membranes.
morphized, their owners form a human-animal bond
Gout is seen in lizards on diets high in purines, most
that is similar to that seen with other domestic animals.
commonly in herbivorous lizards fed a primarily
Therefore, reasoning regarding the potential for zo0-
Lizards
95
notic diseases is commonly ignored because of emo-
tions of various species of lizards (Jacobson 2002).
tional considerations.
Direct transmission of Chlamydia from reptiles to
Behaviors that greatly increase the risk of contract-
humans is unknown. Several fungal infections,
ing infectious diseases from lizards include:
 mycoses, that have the potential to infect humans have
● Housing or handling lizards in or near food prepa-
been reported in reptiles.
Reptiles are the definitive host for tongueworms,
ration or storage areas
pentastomids, of various genera that are know to
?
 Allowing lizards to soak in bathtubs, basins, or
 containers used for human hygiene
infect humans incidentally (Lane and Mader 1996,
 Allowing any part of the lizard to contact a human
Johnson-Delaney 1996). Transmission is direct and
fecal-oral by ingesting eggs or larvae. Because humans
mouth or face
are incidental “dead-end" hosts, they do not pass
?
 Allowing lizards to roam free in any facility of
infective stages of pentastomids. Larval forms of these
human habitation
● Allowing young children to handle or have access
worms may migrate and then die in humans, resulting
 in localized immune response and calcification or gran-
to pet  lizards 
when not under direct adult
ulation of lesions.
supervision
There are a variety of indirectly transmitted diseases
?
 Handling lizards by any person under treatment of
for which lizards may be reservoirs of disease or carry
inmunosuppressive medication(s) or having con-
the vectors of zoonotic disease. A variety of ticks,
tracted any immunosuppressive disease
 Not washing hands and exposed skin following
mites, and biting insects are implicated in transmitting
?
disease such as viral, rickettsial, and bacterial diseases.
handling of pet lizards
Lizards have not been implicated in acting as a reser-
Other risk factors include possessing aggressive
voir host for these diseases, but they may harbor ticks
 or potentially dangerous lizard species, disregarding
and mites that can bite and infect humans (Johnson-
proper handling techniques of any lizard, feeding pet
Delaney 1996).
 radond uuu oi suy pue puey Aq spiez]
An often overlooked yet significant risk to humans
sanitation.
from captive reptiles is trauma from bites and scratches.
 Bacterial diseases are most commonly implicated
With all infectious diseases aside, there is no excuse
among reptilian zoonoses. Of these diseases salmonel-
for humans to incur bite wounds from pet lizards.
losis (Salmonella spp.) is most notorious for causing
Some species are simply poor choices for the average
disease in humans.
 See  Johnson-Delaney
(1996)
hobbyist. These include Heloderma spp., adult green
for a comprehensive discussion of salmonellosis.
iguanas, large monitors, and some adult tegus. There
Salmonellosis is directly transmitted by a fecal-oral
is risk of bite wounds or other injuries from these
route. Transmission of infective serotypes does not
  d s  ss
require the direct contact of fecal material by a human.
and a minimal amount or even no handling. Generally,
Because lizards are commonly maintained in enclo-
however injuries occur from careless interaction with
sures where they defecate, invariably bacterial organ-
the animals.
ad a n  a ro  s  
The importance of this issue becomes evident when
Handling the pet can transfer infective organisms to
legal authorities attempt to strip the rights of pet
human skin. It is likely that disease transmission will
owners to possess these animals because of accidental
bites or the irresponsible behavior of a few people.
number of infective organisms and an immunocompe-
Many local ordinances restrict or prohibit the sale or
tent host; with zoonotic diseases, however, there is no
 possession of certain exotic animals, particularly ven-
acceptable level of risk.
omous reptiles and large snakes or lizards, because
 Other bacterial infections may occur in humans
of perceived danger to humans. Accidental bites that
from fecal-oral contamination or from penetrating
occur at zoological parks and large snake escapes that
wounds such as bites or scratches. Aeromonas spp.,
are reported by the media contribute substantially to
 Pseudomonas spp., and other Gram-negative bacteria
the hysteria that enables much knee-jerk improper leg-
may be normal flora in the mouths of lizards.
islation. Veterinary staff have a critical role in educat-
 Mycobacterium spp. infections may occur in reptiles
ing clients about the proper handling of exotic animals
and are potentially infectious to humans through
and in advising clients about exotic animals which are
direct contact with skin defects and inhalation. This
unsuitable as pets.
infection  in reptiles maya
 appear in any organ.
Additionally, however, veterinary staff must be
Chlamydiopbila psittaci has been identified in infec-
aware of these laws when admitting or treating pets
96
Chapter 6
that are illegal to possess. Injuries sustained to staff or
availability, cage cleaning, and cage accessories, it
clients by these pets (and others) are the responsibility
is essential to ask the following: Does the lizard ever
of the practice owners when on the premises. Similarly,
roam free in the house or in any area other than the
advising clients regarding the home treatment of
cage or enclosure or has the lizard ever escaped
potentially dangerous animals should be approached
from its enclosure? Does the lizard have any direct
with great discretion. For a somewhat complete but
or indirect exposure to any other animals presently
already outdated overview of laws regarding reptiles
or in the past and are those animals similarly
in the United States see Levell (1998).
affected? Is the lizard ever handled or observed by
anyone except the client? Where is the cage located
in the house? Is it ever moved? What are potential
HISTORY, RESTRAINT, AND
exposures to noxious materials such as cleaning
PHYSICAL EXAM
agents, cigarette smoke, fuel exhaust, etc., and are
there temperature, light, humidity, or ventilation
History
fluctuations?
 In the practice of exotic animal medicine, as much can
 5. Regarding nutrition, determine exactly what the
 be learned about a patient from the history as from
lizard is fed and the origin of the food (i.e. does the
any other diagnostic procedure. With lizards, a veteri-
client collect food in the environment to feed or
 nary technician or receptionist educated with a basic
purchase the food at a pet store or grocery store?)
understanding of the patient's husbandry needs can
How often is food offered, at what time of day is
often develop a working diagnosis well before the vet-
food offered, and in what quantities is food con-
erinarian examines the patient. It is the very diversity
sumed? In cases in which a variety of food items are
of husbandry requirements among species of lizards
offered, which portions are usually consumed?
that demands a fundamental knowledge of all natural
Does the client use any commercially available
history aspects of the patient.
foods or vitamin and mineral supplements and if so,
It is essential to not dismiss any observation by the
how often and in what quantity? Does the client
client as trivial or inconsequential. The client may be
actually observe the lizard eating the food items or
the most educated person in the exam room with
just notice that food is missing after a period of
regard to the natural history of the patient, and with
time?
long-term captive lizards, the client is usually aware of
 a pattern of "normal" behavior. Discovering the devia-
Restraint
tions from normal behavior is essential to obtaining a
 Portions of the physical exam, most diagnostic proce-
complete history.
dures, and many treatments require restraint (Figure
These are several fundamental questions for clients
6.11). The veterinary staff must be aware that every
to answer regarding their lizard pets:
species of lizard can bite. Most, however, will not bite
or scratch unless restrained and the more firmly they
1. What is the presenting complaint(s), what is the
 are restrained, the more they will struggle and attempt
duration of the problem, how rapidly has the
to bite or scratch the handler. Lizards with delicate
problem developed, and does the client believe that
skin should not be handled for physical examination
the problem is related to any external influence(s)
unless absolutely necessary. These species include the
on the lizard?
Malagasy geckos Geckolepis spp. (fish-scale geckos)
2. What is the species, age, and sex? How long has the
and Phelsuma spp. (day geckos) that may autotomize
 lizard been in the client's possession, and are there
both tails and skin with minimal physical restraint.
any known previous disease or health problems?
This behavior rarely results in death of the lizard, but
Has the client or anyone else medicated the lizard
it may cause permanent disfigurement. These patients 
or been instructed to medicate the lizard, and if so,
can be observed through clear enclosures such as
by whom and for what reason?
plastic pet carriers or they can be placed inside a 5- to
3. Is the lizard captive born or wild-caught? This is
6-cm. diameter clear plastic tube for examination
not essential to the diagnosis, but can be very helpful
(Barten 1996b).
in developing a diagnostic plan for infectious
There are some lizards that at all times should be
disease.
considered dangerous to handle. These include all
4. In the area of general husbandry, in addition to
lizards greater than 1m length, especially all large
obtaining a general overview of housing, lighting.
species of iguanas and monitors. Large lizards may be
temperature and heating, humidity, substrate, water
calmed by covering the head and eyes with a towel in
Lizards
97
Figure 6.12. Lizard restraint using a towel.
Figure 6.11. Proper restraint of a lizard.
addition to wrapping the body in a large towel or
blanket to prevent clawing (Figure 6.12). The head,
however, must be fully and firmly immobilized at all
times. Occasionally these lizards cannot be safely
restrained and examined without sedation (see Surgery
and Anesthesia). Other species, though smaller and
typically docile, are capable of producing digit ampu-
tation, disfiguration, or extremely painful bites to
humans. These include prehensile-tail skinks (Corucia
zebrata) and some adult Tegus (Tupinampis spp.).
Some smaller lizards such as the Tokay gecko (Gecko
gecko) tend to be aggressive and will attempt to
bite without being handled. Even small lizards such as
fat-tailed  geckos (Hemitheconyx  caudicinctus) are
Figure 6.13. Restraint of a small lizard.
capable of producing painful bites when handled and
may be reluctant to release when biting a hand or
patient, placing the patient near a human face, placing
finger (Figure 6.13).
fingers or hands within the mouth of the patient, or
The veterinary staff should refrain from inappropri-
allowing the patient to cling to clothing or hair in an
 ate contact with pet lizards. This includes kissing the
 unrestrained fashion. This behavior is both irrespon-
98
Chapter 6
sible and unprofessional and may result in serious
appendages the external and skeletal anatomy of
injury to either the patient or veterinary staff. Clients
lizards is bilaterally symmetric.
should also be informed of the potential health risks
As with general body condition, the skin can be
that may result from these behaviors. The veterinary
 observed without handling the lizard. There is great
staff should never allow the client to assist in the
structural variation among lizards in skin and scale
restraint of a potentially dangerous patient during
texture. Lizards such as bearded dragons and horned
examination or when performing a treatment or diag-
lizards (Phrynosoma spp.) have roughly textured and
nostic procedure. Though lizards may become some-
armored skin. Others, such as some geckos (Phelsuma
what tame, there are no domesticated lizards and their
spp.), have relatively small granular scales and thin
beha vior may not be predictable.
skin which is delicate. Observe for missing scales,
abnormal skin coloration, crusts, dysecdysis (incom-
Physical Examination
plete shed skin), subdermal swellings, and external
The traditional physical exam for most companion
parasites including mites and ticks. Pay particular
animals is a hands-on affair. More can be learned,
attention to skin folds, flaps, nostrils, eyelids, axillae,
however, by simple observation of the lizard patient
and ears for mites and ticks. Observe for signs of
at rest in a cage while in the exam room or waiting
 trauma such as rostral abrasions, necrotic or missing
      
toes, damage to the tail, bite wounds, and signs of
during the traditional question-and-answer session
thermal or chemical burns that may appear as ery-
and may quickly uncover potential emergencies that
thema or tissue necrosis. Inspect for missing, damaged,
have not been realized by the client. First observe the
or discolored toes or toenails. Remember that not all
posture (again, the technician must frst be familiar
lizards have four legs and five toes per leg. Ophisaurus
with normal posture of a particular species). Quadruped
 spp. and Lialis spp. are two examples of legless lizards.
lizards generally hold the head somewhat erect and
Chamaeleo spp. have five toes which are fused into
may have a portion (if not all) of the body held sus-
two gripping bundles per foot.
pended above the ground. For diurnal lizards, assess 
While observing the lizard systematically pay atten-
alertness. Does the lizard follow the observer in the
tion to respiration and the respiratory effort. As with
room with eyes or head? Healthy chameleons, for
caged birds, respiration for most lizards at rest is rela-
example, are constantly surveying their environment
tively effortless and nearly imperceptible from a dis-
with turret-like eyelids and generally do not sit still
tance. Gaping (holding the mouth open) associated
 except when restrained or confined. For lizards with
with dyspnea may be the result of upper or lower
movable eyelids (all but some geckos), are both eyes
 respiratory disease. Overheating, defensive posturing.
 open and are they clear?
and stress or anxiety may also lead to this behavior.
 Observe general body condition, paying particular
Similarly, mucoid oral and nasal secretions are not
attention to the muscle mass of the dorsal tail, dorsal
normal, though crystalline or salt secretions may be
pelvis, and dorso-lateral scapular region. Emaciation
pue ds xaisoun se yns saioads aos us ou
 results in diminished subdermal fat and muscle mass
Iguana spp. Thoracic auscultation should be per-
and the skin may have a concave contour to one or all
formed c
over the entire dorsal and lateral thoracic
of these body regions. Additionally, the eyes may have
regions. When performing auscultation, a moistened
a sunken or recessed appearance from diminished ret-
paper towel or thin cloth may be wrapped over the
robulbar fat or from dehydration. Species that rou-
diaphragm of the stethoscope to reduce noise from
tinely present with signs of emaciation include the
rough skin or scales.
green iguana, spiny-tailed lizards (Uromastyx spp.),
An essential
part of the physical exam for most
prehensile-tailed skinks (Corucia zebrata), bearded
 lizards is the oral exam. This examination may require
dragons (Pogona spp.), and monitors (Varanus spp.).
physical or chemical restraint and must be performed
It is important to understand that the physical changes
with consideration to safety of the veterinary staff and
 associated with emaciation are chronic and do
not
health risk to the patient. Some lizards (Iguana spp.,
occur over several days. Some lizards, which are later-
Varanus spp., Chamaeleo spp., Pogona spp., some
ally or dorsally compressed, may appear thin or under-
Gecko spp.) may voluntarily open the mouth when
weight but they are in fact normal. Some of these
approached in the cage or when restrained, making
species include leaf-tailed geckos (Uroplatus spp.),
oral examination less physically challenging. In these
some true chameleons (Chamaeleo spp.), and spider
 species (excluding Gecko spp.) the mouth may be
 opened with gentle retraction of the dewlap while the
ticularly of skeletal structures. Except for some skin
maxilla is secured with the other hand. This approach
Lizards
99
is contraindicated in patients that have normally fragile
ration both to observe normal movement of glottis
skin (most species of Gekkonidae) or those with dis-
cartilages and to observe for any exudates from within
eased skin as with hypovitaminosis C. The author has
the glottis. The choana should be clear of any exudate.
observed the dewlap skin easily tear in malnourished
The dentition and gingiva should be free of erythema
 Chamaeleo spp. suspected of having hypovitaminosis
or exudate. S
Similar to snakes, some Gecko spp.
C among other malnourishment-related diseases. The
have a spectacle which covers the eye. Subspectacular
 gentle introduction of a rubber spatula into the mouth
 abscesses are commonly observed in conjunction with
is useful as a speculum. Metal and wood speculums
and may arise from infectious stomatitis (Mader
should be avoided because they may result in damage
1996d); an oral exam is always warranted with the
to gums and teeth as well as damage to or accidental
presence of subspectacular abscesses.
ingestion of the speculum (or portions thereof) with
Examination of the external cloaca or vent also
stronger lizards. For very small lizards plastic spoons
requires physical restraint. The vent should have
or plastic credit cards may be used as a speculum. For
appearance consistent with that of the remaining
large lizards or those with dark pigmented oral epithe-
dermis with the exception of specialized scales that
lium an otoscopic or laryngoscopic illuminator is
vary among species. Some lizards possess femoral
useful to visualize the oral anatomy.
pores that extend laterally from the vent onto the
Chemical restraint is required to examine the
ventral aspect of the hind legs and pre-femoral pores
oral cavity with some species because of strong jaws
cranial to the vent. The vent and surrounding integu-
and a reluctance to open the mouth. These species
ment should be bilaterally symmetric. As with the
include spiny-tailed lizards, prehensile-tailed skinks,
integument, observe for signs of trauma, swelling, exu-
some
monitors,
 some
tegus,
and
occasionally
dates, and crusts, and observe for prolapse of cloacal
bearded dragons. Similarly, lizards with metabolic
tissue or hemipenes.
bone disease or those with thin mandibles may suffer
Abdominal palpation is a non-invasive method to
traumatic iatrogenic fractures from manipulation of
evaluate gastrointestinal, reproductive, and urinary
 the mouth. Tremendous caution and attention must be
systems. Palpation is performed gently with the finger-
used when manipulating the mouth of adult iguanas
tips to create minimal stress and reduce the risk of
 and monitors. Any distraction or a mistake in handling
internal(
damage to delicate or diseased patients.
may result in serious injury or amputation of a digit
 Caution must be exercised if gastrointestinal obstruc-
to the handler. The bodies of larger lizards must be
tion or bloating is suspected to prevent iatrogenic
fully immobilized prior to opening the mouth
to
rupture to dilated gastrointestinal structures. In dor-
prevent the patient from exerting any leverage by
sally compressed lizards, such as bearded dragons and
thrashing or spinning the body, should an accidental
uromastyx, the kidneys may be palpable in the dorsal
bite occur.
 caudal coelom. It is difficult to differentiate the kidneys
Examination of the oral cavity includes observation
from other abdominal structures in laterally com-
of the choana, dentition, glottis, and mucous mem-
pressed or very large lizards without forceful palpa-
branes. While manipulating the head, palpate for the
tion. Uroliths may be palpable as in dogs and cats. It
frmness and symmetry of the mandible and maxilla.
is also difficult to impossible to differentiate gastroin-
 Bones that compress or bend in a lateral fashion may
testinal structures on palpation other than by extrapo-
signify metabolic bone disease. The mandibular sym-
lating their location. Paired fat bodies are present in
physis is fused in lizards. Abscesses and granulomas
the caudal coelom. These are bilateral and may be
may occur in the mandible with no apparent mucous
confused with kidneys or masses in the coelom. The
membrane abnormalities. The oral cavity should be
fat bodies are particularly evident in dorsally com-
bilaterally symmetric. The mucous membranes of the
 pressed lizards such as bearded dragons and Uromastyx
 oral cavity are generally uniform in color. Many lizards
spp.
have a pink to pinkish white color to the oral epithe-
Small lizards, particularly many Gekkonidae, have
lium with a somewhat glistening surface. Some lizards
semi-transparent ventral abdominal walls and skin.
may have pigmented oral epithelium. The oral mucous
This allows for visualization of some abdominal struc-
membranes of some old world chameleons ( Chamaeleo
tures while the lizard is contained in a clear plastic or
spp.) and bearded dragons (Pogona spp.) are yellow
glass container. This technique is particularly useful
and should not be interpreted as icteric or jaundiced.
for visualizing eggs in these species. An oviparous
In a healthy lizard there is little to no mucus, blood,
lizard carrying eggs is termed gravid and a viviparous
. The glottis should
lizard carrying embryos is termed pregnant. Both
be observed through several respiratory cycles of inspi-
terms are used interchangeably for both conditions.
100
Chapter 6
Eggs are generally visible against the body wall or
Therefore, partial rotation of the patient to a 30-degree
 palpable in many gravid oviparous lizards. Pregnancy
or 45-degree lateral exposure can be useful as a third
in viviparous lizard is suspected with generalized coe-
exposure when evaluating the coelom.
lomic swelling, though developing embryos may not
The difficulty with radiology in lizards is restraint
be palpable.
and positioning. Large healthy or aggressive lizards
should be sedated without exception. This minimizes
bite risk and radiation exposure risk to the handler(s).
RADIOLOGY
Small lizards that are slow moving or calm may be
allowed to rest unrestrained on the cassette for the
 Radiographic imaging is particularly useful in evaluat-
 dorsoventral vertical beam exposure. Lateral horizon-
ing skeletal disorders in lizards. Evaluation of respira-
tal beam exposures are possible without restraint for
tory disorders and gastrointestinal disorders is also
some still or chemically restrained lizards. Small fast-
possible, though gastrointestinal imaging must com-
moving or delicate lizards may be placed inside a clear
monly employ contrast media. Other coelomic struc-
plastic container or tube or cloth bag and positioned
tures that are evident on radiographs are kidneys, liver,
 appropriately for exposure. Though some detail of the
coelomic masses, fat bodies, and occasionally uroliths.
image may be lost, this may be the only option to
During ovulation, ovaries and shelled or non-shelled
 obtain radiographs of these patients. When sedated,
eggs as well as developing embryos may be observed;
 gauze ribbons may be used to extend limbs as needed.
otherwise, gonads are not visible on radiographs in
Tape should be avoided because it may remove scales
lizards.
or otherwise damage skin.
 Radiographic equipment should have several capa-
Contrast media is commonly employed when non-
bilities. A milliampere (mA) setting of 300mA and
skeletal imaging is required. Gastrointestinal contrast
exposure times approaching 1/60 second (5 mAs) with
studies are not only beneficial for evaluating complete
relatively low kVp (45 to 60kVp) produce excellent
 or partial obstructions, but are also particularly useful
exposures using high-detail, rare-earth intensifying
for evaluating extraintestinal coelomic masses. Barium
screens (Silverman and Janssen 1996). A collimator is
sulfate is the standard contrast material for gastroin-
essential because multiple exposures are commonly
testinal contrast imaging. Frye (1991) recommends
made on a single film for relatively small patients. The
the use of 10% barium sulfate at a maximum dose of
radiographic machine should have horizontal beam
20 ml/kg. Barium for gastric and small intestinal
capabilities, though without this, and through creative
imaging is administered via an oral ball tip dosing
positioning of the patient, acceptable imaging is pos-
needle or flexible, non-rigid rubber catheter (see
sible. A minimum of two exposures is desired of the
 Techniques). Unless the imaging of the esophagus spe-
coelomic cavity: dorsoventral and laterolateral (lateral).
cifically is required, administration of barium via a
Similarly, extremities should be imaged in at least two
gastric tube is best. Oral cavity dosing may result in
planes.
partial aspiration and loss of barium through the
For many lizards a table-top technique is employed
 mouth or nostrils. In diseased lizards gastric to colonic
without a grid. Exposure techniques vary widely with
transit times may be delayed substantially, though the
different radiology units. For most small lizards (5 cm
author experiences partial to complete transit of
 or less in thickness), small animal extremity techniques
barium within twenty-four hours in non-obstructed
work well. For lizards larger than 5 cm, small animal
patients.
thoracic techniques yield good exposure. Remember
 Retrograde or percloacal barium administration is
that the lungs of many lizards, in part, may extend
 indicated when distal intestinal obstruction or caudal
caudally to the pelvis. The author commonly
uses
abdominal coelomic masses are suspected. Barium is
small animal extremity techniques even for larger
administered via a flexible, non-rigid rubber catheter.
iguanas with satisfactory results. Generally settings of
 In small lizards (<200 grams) rigid or metal catheters
lower kVp are desired because bone density is rela-
should be avoided to prevent iatrogenic cloacal or
tively lower in reptiles than mammals (Silverman and
colonic perforation (see Techniques). The clinician
Janssen 1996). Similarly, the coelomic body fat of
should approximate the amount of barium required
reptiles is typically lower than that of adult domestic
for the desired image. Diseased colon or intestine may
 animals, making the contrast of viscera more diffcult
rupture with even the slightest pressure; therefore,
to obtain with higher kVp. The standard dorsoventral
resistance on the syringe is not a good practice for
and lateral positioning techniques may not reveal the
approximating dosing for administration of oral or
true nature of coelomic structures or abnormalities.
percloacal barium.
Lizards
101
ANESTHESIA AND SURGERY
Opioids such as butorphanol (Torbugesic) provide
 a smoother induction when administered as a premedi-
Once uncommonly performed, coelomic cavity surgery
cation for injectable or inhalant induction. Butorphanol
's iad u og a mo si o 
is administered IM at a dose of 0.4 to 2mg/kg (Bennett
These include ovariectomy, orchiectomy, salpingot-
1996a). The author uses 1mg/kg IM routinely for
omy, gastrotomy, enterotomy, cystotomy, biopsy, and
reptile surgical anesthesia.
tumor excision. Other surgeries that do not require
The benefits of the anticholinergics atropine or gly-
celiotomy include amputation (digits, limbs, tails,
copyrollate (Robinul) as preanesthetic medications in
hemipenis), enucleation, fracture repair, laceration
lizards are questionable. Atropine is administered IM
repair, prolapse (intestinal, oviductal) repair, and
 at a dose of 0.01 to 0.04mg/kg and glycopyrrolate is
reconstructive surgeries.
 administered IM or SC at a dose of 0.01 mg/kg ( Bennett
1996a). In mammals anticholinergics are administered
Anesthesia
to decrease salivary and respiratory secretions and for
Injectable and  inhalant anesthetics are commonly
counteracting bradycardia during general anesthesia.
employed both for surgery and sedation for diagnostic
or treatment procedures. The most common injectable
tiles (Murray 1996), causing tracheal or endotracheal
anesthetics are the dissociative agents ketamine and
tube occlusion, and their efficacy at reducing the inci-
telazol (tiletamine plus zolazepam). Ketamine is admin-
 dence of bradycardia is uncertain.
istered IM or SC at a dose of 22 to 44 mg/kg. A dose
 Inhalant anesthetics are preferred for maintenance
of 55 to 88 mg/kg is reported for surgical anesthesia
of general anesthesia in lizards. The inhalant anesthetic
(Bennett 1996a). Telazol is more potent than ketamine
 of choice for lizards is isoflurane (Aerrane). Another
and is the author's preferred injectable anesthetic.
recently introduced inhalant anesthetic is sevoflurane
Telazol is administered IM or SC at a dose of 4 to
(Schumacher 2002a). Halothane and methoxyflurane
5mg/kg (Bennett 1996a). Its potency allows for the
are not recommended. Isoflurane provides relatively
administration of substantially less volume of injec-
rapid induction if used alone for short sedation proce-
tion, the effects are rapid, and recovery is typically
dures. Because ventilatory suppression is common
quicker than with ketamine. Telazol is best used as a
during anesthesia, recovery, though smooth, is pro-
 pre-intubation anesthetic for surgical procedures or as
longed (up to fifteen minutes) compared to the typical
a sedative for diagnostic or treatment procedures.
recovery of mammals of similar size induced and main-
Intramuscular administration, when possible, is pre-
tained on isoflurane. The author has observed no
ferred for injectable anesthetics because induction of
benefit of quicker induction with sevoflurane in lizard
anesthesia is typically more rapid than with subcutane-
patients. Additionally, recovery is typically as long or
ous administration. This is likely the result of quicker
longer with sevoflurane compared to isoflurane for
or more complete venous absorption. For procedures
both healthy and health-compromised lizards. Based
more invasive than cutaneous lacerations inhalant
on the dramatic price difference between these inhal-
anesthesia should be employed because movement of
 ants, isoflurane is still the inhalant anesthetic of choice
the anesthetized patient may continue with either ket-
for lizards (Figure 6.14).
amine or telazol.
An additional injectable anesthetic, propofol
(Diprivan, Rapinovet), is also used in reptiles for anes-
thetic induction and restraint. Propofol must be admin-
istered IV or via intraosseus catheter (IO) at a dose of
3 to 10mg/kg (Schumacher 2002a). The drug is admin-
istered slowly over thirty to sixty seconds or until the
desired sedation is achieved. Propofol is eliminated
rapidly from the blood and therefore is suitable for
short diagnostic procedures or to achieve intubation
for inhalant anesthesia. Its anesthetic effects may be
extended by slow constant rate or intermittent infu-
sion. Unless an indwelling catheter exists in the patient
to be sedated, other injectable or inhalant anesthetics
are preferred. Propofol is an ideal anesthetic when
repeated, daily sedation is required.
Figure 6.14. Mask anesthetic induction of a lizard.
102
 Chapter 6
Lizards should be intubated for inhalant anesthesia
 on the mandible, or may be placed across the tongue.
whenever possible. Intubation is relatively easy for the
The advantage of pulse oximetry is the detection
sedated lizard. The glottis is visible in the floor of the
of blood flow that is reflective of mechanical cardiac
mouth at the base of the tongue. Minimal lubricant, if
 activity as opposed to simply the detection of cardiac
any, is applied to avoid obstruction of the small diam-
electrical activity that may continue after mechanical
eter tracheal tube (2 mm to 4 mm). Lizards that are too
activity is compromised. Electrocardiography (ECG)
small for intubation may be maintained on a mask. A
is also valuable and is used with a three lead system.
cone constructed of appropriate size syringe casing
A Doppler blood flow probe may be taped to the
covered by a rubber glove, similar to that used for
thorax over the heart for audible blood flow
rodents, is ideal.
monitoring.
Reptilian respiratory physiology differs from that of
 Reptile patients are warmed during surgical anes-
mammals. In reptiles the spontaneous ventilation rate
thesia with water recirculating heating pads. Electrical
is directly related to temperature and the partial pres-
heating pads put the patient at risk for thermal burns.
sure of oxygen (PO2) and in mammals respiration is
Surgical temperature should match the POTZ for a
driven by carbon dioxide (PCO2) (Murray 1996).
given species, but a range of 78°F to 85°F is suffcient
Thus, in high oxygen environments spontaneous ven-
for most patients. Supplemental heating is also indi-
tilation is suppressed because the demand for oxygen
cated during the entire phase of anesthetic recovery.
by tissues is met by the oxygen saturation of inhalant
 Lizards sedated with injectable anesthetics may require
 anesthesia. As with mammals, control of the airway
hours to recover. In debilitated animals, this time is
during anesthesia is helpful for the control of depth of
prolonged. For ketamine and telazol, recovery times
anesthesia and is essential for assisted ventilation.
from one to ninety-six hours are reported in reptiles.
Breath holding is a common problem during the
induction phase of inhalant anesthesia  in some
Surgery
 lizards. Because lizards experience profound respira-
  s  pd  i 
tory depression during general anesthesia, assisted or
surgical procedures already listed. Surgical preparation
intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) venti-
for lizards is similar to that of small mammals. The
lation is commonly required.
lizard is placed in dorsal recumbency with legs and tail
IPPV is performed at two to four breaths per minute
restrained by tape to the surgical table. The surgical
 at a pressure of less than 10 cm water in medium to
site should be scrubbed with mild detergent if neces-
large lizards and much less in smaller lizards (Bennett
sary to remove dirt or debris. Standard surgical prepa-
1996a). Ideally the anesthetist should visualize rib
ration is performed. The author uses or chloroxylenol
expansion for several cycles of IPPV to discern the
 2% (Vet Solutions, Fort Worth, TX) as the sole surgi-
ideal pressure or ventilatory volume before the patient
cal preparation. This agent, similar to chlorhexidine,
is draped. To avoid excessive pulmonary pressure and
provides excellent antibacterial and antifungal activity
 possible pulmonary rupture, the pop-off valve should
 on contact. Surgical draping is required. A fenestrated
never be fully closed when ventilating reptile patients.
paper drape or a combination of clear plastic and
The great majority of lizards are maintained on a non-
fenestrated paper drape is used. The benefit of clear
rebreathing anesthetic circuit. An oxygen flow rate of
plastic drape is visualization of the patient for anes-
300 to 500 ml/kg/minute is indicated. Lizards over 5 kg
thetic
Cmonitoring（
during  the surgical procedure
can be maintained on a closed or circle circuit (Bennett
(Bennett and Mader 1996).
1996a). Isoflurane is typically maintained at 1.5% to
Surgical incisions are made with consideration for
3% depending on the sedation obtained by injectable
skin and abdominal musculature lines of force, trauma
anesthetics.
to tissues, visualization of the desired surgical field,
 Anesthetic monitoring is essential during reptilian
and wound healing. The long accepted standard
sedation. Unlike snakes, cardiac movement may not be
approach to celiotomy is the ventral paramedian inci-
detectable through the chest wall because of the pres-
sion in an effort to avoid transection or manipulation
ence of a cartilaginous sternum. Contrary to some
of the large ventral abdominal vein (see Anatomy).
reports, the author has found pulse oximetry to be
This incision requires the transection of ventral
satisfactory in monitoring at least the heart rate of
abdominal muscle, which increases surgical bleeding,
 sedated lizards. For small lizards the finger probe may
may decrease surgical feld visibility (both from bleed-
be placed across the dorsal head with the infrared
ing and from left versus right coelom access), and may
transducer above the head and the receiver in the
 increase post surgical pain when compared to a ventral
mouth. For larger lizards, the orientation is reversed
midline incision through the linea alba. In larger lizards
Lizards
103
the ventral abdominal vein may be gently retracted
Orthopedic devices are removed following the prin-
 during the ventral midline incision.
ciples used in mammals, though healing of fractures in
The most common procedures performed during
reptiles is slow and hardware may require removal
prior to radiographic evidence of complete bone
for dystocia, ovariectomy, orchiectomy, and enterot-
healing (Bennett 1996b).
omy. In most cases hemostatic clips are used for liga-
tion of ovarian and oviductal vessels as indicated by
surgical procedure. Great care must be exercised when
PARASITOLOGY
handling all reproductive and mesenteric tissues in
lizards, because they are delicate and quite friable.
Many reptile owners are unaware of the prevalence of
Closure of the celiotomy incision is two layers consist-
 parasitism in their animals. It is safe to assume that all
ing of abdominal musculature or linea with absorbable
wild-caught reptiles are parasitized (Lane and Mader
suture, followed by the skin. The skin is closed in an
1996). Commonly many captive-born reptiles are sub-
everting pattern with absorbable or non-absorbable
clinically parasitized. In wild animals internal parasites
tissue or skin staples. Reptilian skin heals significantly
maintain a homeostasis with the host animal, because
slower than mammalian skin. Suture removal is
the host is essential for the survival of the parasite and
delayed until a minimum of four to six weeks post
 a means of transporting future generations of the para-
surgery (Bennett and Mader 1996).
site to suitable areas for transmission to another host.
A common non-celiotomy surgical procedure is
Factors that maintain homeostasis include the host's
digit or limb amputation. This procedure is indicated
 immune system and the dilution of infective stages of
when trauma sustained from bites of cage mates, bites
the parasite in the environment that the host occupies.
from rodents, or fractures result in non-healing wounds
 Thus, in many cases the captive environment offers a
or ascending limb infection. Surgical preparation is
 prime opportunity for imbalances in favor of the para-
standard as in celiotomy. Amputation is performed at
site through the stress and subsequent immunosup-
the most distal non-infected joint for limbs and prefer-
pression of the host and through the increased risk of
ably at the metacarpal or metatarsal-phalangeal joint
reinfection of the host due to concentration of infective
for digit amputation. General anesthesia is required for
stages of the parasite.
 limb amputations. Peripheral nerve block may be per-
Based on an awareness of parasites in some reptiles,
formed for some digit amputations.
however, some herpetoculturists advocate the prophy-
Amputation of the hemipenes is indicated in cases
lactic treatment of all reptiles with antiparasiticides for
of paraphimosis complicated by trauma, infection, or
the more common intestinal parasites (de Vosjoli and
necrosis.T
This procedure may be performed with
Ferguson 1995). It is interesting, however, that the
appropriate sedation using only injectable anesthetics
majority of hobbyists do not prophylactically treat for
such as ketamine, tiletamine/zolazepam, or propofol.
external parasites. This is perhaps because of an under-
Aseptic preparation is standard. Amputation of one
standing of the potential side effects of pesticides
hemipene does not sterilize the lizard because the
applied to the animals. The side effects of oral deworm-
hemipenes are paired. No compromise of urinary func-
 ing are similar. Though some therapeutics may be rela-
tion will result from amputation, because there is no
tively safe at high doses, the potential effects of killing
incorporation of urinary structures in the hemipenes
massive loads of intestinal parasites in an already
 or penis of reptiles (Barten 1996d).
immunocompromised animal can be severe. The safer
Percloacal prolapse of colon, oviducts, or urinary
alternative to prophylactic treatment of parasites is
bladder may require amputation
1or
resection
of
quarantine, serial parasite screening, and treatment of
the affected tissues. Exposure of affected tissues or
specific clinically identifed diseases.
severe trauma may result in necrosis if the prolapse
 Techniques for identifying reptilian endoparasites
is not reduced promptly after occurrence. ]
Necrosis
are the same as those for small mammals. Fecal floata-
 of large portions of these tissues may require celiotomy
tion of fresh fecal material in concentrated salt or
 to evaluate viability and repair the affected organ.
 sugar solutions and wet mount direct smears in saline
Open reduction and  internal  fixation
of
long
are essential to screen for reptilian endoparasites.
bone fractures in reptiles are performed following
Smaller infective stages of some parasites may only be
surgical approach and principles applied to mammals.
observed by direct smear. Stains such as Lugol's iodine
Intramedullary pins, orthopedic
wire,
external
solution (5 grams iodine crystals and 10 grams potas-
skeletal fixation, and bone plating are employed as
sium iodide in 100 ml distilled water) both kills motile
indicated.
protozoans and stains cysts to make identification
104
Chapter 6
easier. Lane (1996) recommends examining both
exposure increases the risk of toxicity. The spray must
stained and unstained direct smears in addition to the
 be applied in a well-ventilated area and not into par-
fecal floatation.
tially enclosed vivaria containing animals. All exposed
mites are killed on contact. Pyrethroids are effective
External Parasites
 against mites in the environment, but not against egs;
External reptilian parasites consist of ticks, mites, chig-
therefore, reapplication on a weekly basis for two to
 gers, leeches, and biting flying insects. Acariasis, or
three weeks is advised. The author is unable to confirm
mite, tick, or chigger infestation, is a serious disease of
reports on the safety of fipronil spray as a miticide in
reptiles. Clinically tick infestations are most common
lizards.
 in imported lizards. Mader (1996a) reports that there
 Ivermectin (Ivomec, Merck; and generics) is reported
are seven genera of ticks and more than 250 species of
 as both a topical and systemic treatment for mites in
mites that parasitize reptiles. Chiggers, also called red
reptiles (Klingenberg 1993). The topical formulation
bugs, are the larval stage of Trombiculid mites and
 is 0.5 cc ivermectin 1% (5 mg) added in 1,000 cc water
are generally self-limiting in lizards. Reptile mites
 and applied as a spray. The systemic administration is
(Ophionyssus natricis) are mobile and highly transmis-
 0.2 mg/kg ivermectin 1% SC or PO. Clinical experi-
sible between reptiles and are capable of infesting mul-
 ence reflects unpredictable results and variable degrees
tiple animals in a room or household without direct
of toxicity or side effects on a species-to-species basis
contact between hosts. These mites may be transmitted
with the injectable protocol, though no lethality has
between hosts on the skin or clothing of people, though
been observed in lizards by the author. Topical admin-
human infestation is supposedly rare.
istration is absolutely not reliable. The miscibility
Reptile skin provides many sites for attachment and
and stability of ivermectin in water as a spray is
 protection for both mites and ticks. Ticks are com-
questionable.
monly found beneath scales or in crevices such as the
Many over-the-counter pet industry products are
junction of the limbs and body or around the eyelids.
available for mites. These are generally “soap and
Mites may be seen crawling freely over the lizard, but
water” mixtures designed to reduce the surface tension
commonly concentrate in protected skin folds. It is not 
 of water and allow water to penetrate the spiracles or
uncommon to diagnose mites after handling a lizard
airways of mites that essentially drowns the mite. The
and then observing them on the human skin or seeing
active ingredients are generally fatty acids (listed by
dead mites in water bowls of lizards that soak them-
scientific name) in an aqueous base.
selves routinely. Lizards that increase soaking beha vior
 Other home remedies include the use of pest strips,
are commonly infested with mites.
organophosphate-impregnated resins designed to kill
Eradicating  mites  from  individual  animals 
is
 flying insects. These products are also quite effective
easier than eradicating them from the premises.
in killing reptiles. Unfortunately, if used in a safe
Infestation of one animal indicates the possibility and
manner (or by sheer luck), these products have been
likelihood of widespread infestation. Thus, prevention
effective in environmental control of mites in large
through quarantine of new animals is imperative (see
collections. The narrow safety margin, however, pro-
Husbandry) and treating the cage and cage accessories
hibits recommendation of these products.
and maintaining cleanliness of the surrounding envi-
Finally, some insecticidal powders (Sevin dust,
ronment is imperative.
Ortho) have been effective in environmental control
Treatment consists of physical removal of ticks and
(Mader 1996a). Their use on the floor of well-
inspection for the presence of ticks over several weeks.
q se i  r s 
For mites the best treatment is pyrethroid flea sprays
 paper or carpet substrate is effective. This treatment is
such as flea sprays for dogs and cats. Pyrethroids are
 particularly effective against infestations refractory to
synthetic pyrethrins and are less toxic to reptiles than
     n
pyrethrins. Allethrin is a common example of a pyre-
pad e rn isnoo p iid si ansa
throid. Note: Sprays containing pyrethrins or organo-
 of one month and possibly repeated in one month if
phosphates should be avoided (Mader 1996a). Prior
indicated. Note: Prepare the client for a long duration
 to spray application, mineral oil or ophthalmic lubri-
of treatment and for the strong possibility of both the
cant should be placed on the eyes of lizards. The pyre-
contagious nature and high relapse rate of reptilian
throid spray is then applied to the entire lizard and
mite infestations. Also inform of the potential side
rinsed immediately. Avoid spraying in the mouth or
effects of treatments both to lizards and humans from
onto exposed wounds or mucous membranes. Oral
pyrethrins, pyrethroids, and organophosphates.
Lizards
105
Internal Parasites
Eimeria, Isospora, and Caryospora. The life cycle of
 Internal parasites comprise many families and induce
coccidia is similar to that seen in mammals: oocysts
the majority of parasitic diseases in lizards. It is pos-
passed in the stool sporulate outside the body and are
sible for many parasites to remain latent in the body
ingested by a suitable host, sporozoites are released to
and manifest disease during host immunosuppression
invade host epithelial cells and mature, and the epithe-
from stress or other concurrent disease. Intestinal
 lial cell ruptures and releases merozoites which infect
parasites consist of protozoa, nematodes, and
 other cells and then can either multiply to infect other
trematodes.
cells or form intracellular gametocytes which eventu-
ally become infective oocysts to pass in the stool.
Protozoans
Clinical disease results  from  cellular destruction
Many protozoa inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of
and from secondary bacterial infection. Detection of
lizards as nonpathogenic or commensal organisms.
oocysts is made by fecal floatation or direct smear.
 The amoeba Entamoeba invadens, various species of
Understanding the pathophysiology is important
coccidia, and specifically the coccidia Cryptosporidium
 because infective oocysts are shed intermittently; thus,
spp. are responsible for the diseases amoebiasis, coc-
clinical disease can occur in the absence of a detectable
cidiosis, and cryptosporidiosis, respectively.
infectious agent. Clinically lizards may be asymptom-
Amoebiasis is directly transmitted by a fecal-oral
atic or have diarrhea, anorexia, weight loss, or failure
 route in reptiles and is pathogenic and highly virulent
to gain weight. The author has observed a higher inci-
to some snakes and lizards. Amoebiasis is non-
 dence of coccidiosis in bearded dragons (Pogona spp.)
pathogenic in turtles and crocodilians, but may be
than in other species of lizard with routine fecal exami-
transmitted by both (Lane and Mader 1996). The life
endod u padan ose si uound s 
cycle of amoebiasis is as follows: the passing of infec-
literature (de Vosjoli et al. 2001). Many adult lizards
tive cysts from a host, ingestion of cysts by a suitable
with coccidiosis appear to be asymptomatic carriers,
host, multiplication into trophozoites in the intestinal
 but neonates and juveniles with coccidiosis are usually
tract, invasion of trophozoites into host tissues, forma-
clinically diseased. Coccidiosis can cause death in
tion of infective cysts, and shedding of infective cysts.
small or young lizards if undetected and untreated.
The pathogenesis of clinical disease is multifactorial
Treatment consists trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
and is caused by the tissue invasion of trophozoites
(Sulfatrim) at a dose of 30mg/kg PO once daily for
and cellular destruction and from secondary bacterial
fourteen days or sulfadimethoxine (Albon) at a dose
infection. Clinical signs include diarrhea or loose
of 90 mg/kg on day one, then 4.5 mg/kg PO once daily
mucoid stools, anorexia, dehydration, and weight loss.
for fourteen days (Klingenberg 1996,; Donoghue and
Infective trophozoites may spread to other organs
Landenberg 1996, Lane and Mader 1996). Strict
hematogenously, causing inflammation and potentially
hygiene and sanitation are required to prevent hori-
organ failure (Lane and Mader 1996).
zontal transmission. Repeat fecal examinations are
Diagnosis is made by fecal examination. Cysts are
imperative.
identified by fecal floatation or direct saline smear and
Cryptosporidiosis is a highly virulent pathogen of
trophozoites are identified only by direct smear. For
snakes and lizards. There is speculation regarding
direct saline smears, a drop of Lugol's iodide is helpful
zoonotic potential, but at this point this potential
to immobilize and stain the organisms.
is unknown (Cranfield and Graczyk 1996). Because
Treatment of amoebiasis consists of antibiotics and
cryptosporidiosis is considered untreatable  in all
antiprotozoal medications. Antibiotics are adminis-
animals caution should be exercised when handling
tered to treat potential secondary bacterial infections
infected animals. The pathogenesis of cryptosporidium
 or potential septicemia. Aminoglycosides such as ami-
in reptiles is not fully understood. Direct fecal-oral
kacin at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg IM or SQ every seventy-
nods si ll pn roo on umo si uiss
two hours for three to five treatments are appropriate.
that there is a possibility of indirect transmission
Metronidazole is administered at a dose of 50mg/kg
 through an intermediate prey item. Cryptosporidiosis
once weekly for two to three weeks while checking
is reported in Lacerta spp., Chamaeleo spp., Iguana
fecal samples for cysts or trophozoites (Lane and
iguana, and two species of geckos (Cranfeld and
 Mader 1996). Strict hygiene and sanitation are required
Graczyk 1996).
to prevent horizontal transmission.
Oocysts are diagnosed by direct smear. Oocysts are
Coccidiosis is directly transmitted by fecal-oral
4 to 5 um in size and are best identified by modified
route and is caused by protozonans of the genera
acid-fast staining (Cranfield and Graczyk 1996). Serial
106
Chapter 6
fecal tests should be performed because of the intermit-
may also migrate to other organs. Pathology due to
tent shedding of oocysts. Diagnosis may be achieved
these species is unclear. Diagnosis is made by fecal floa-
through histopathology from gastric mucosal biopsy
tation and treatment is indicated on identification.
or by cytology of gastric lavage.
Strongyloides spp. have a somewhat complex life
Though no treatments are known to be 100% effec-
cycle with direct transmission by a fecal-oral route or
tive, Sulfatrim as dosed for coccidia and the human
through skin penetration. Strongyloides spp. inhabit
drugs spiramycin and paromomycin have been used.
the gastrointestinal tract and greatly resemble the lung-
Suspected or known positive animals are best isolated,
 worms Entomelas spp. on fecal flotation. Diagnosis for
not bred, and handled last in the maintenance of a
either species is made by fecal floatation and identifica-
collection of animals. Many traditional disinfectants
tion of larvae (Strongyloides spp.) or embryonated
have proved to be ineffective in environmental control.
eggs (Entomelas spp.). Diarrhea, anorexia, or weight
Ammonia solutions at 5% for a period of three days
loss may be seen with Strongyloides infection. Increased
are effective for disinfection (Cranfield and Graczyk
respiratory secretions, pneumonia, anorexia, and
1996).
weight loss may be seen with Entomelas infections.
Treatment of all intestinal and respiratory nema-
Nematodes
todes consists of fenbendazole (Panacur) at a dose of
Various nematodes infect lizards. Those infecting the
50 mg/kg PO once daily for three days, then repeated
gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts include various
int
three weeks followed by repeat fecal flotation
species of the familiar roundworms and hookworms;
(Klingenberg 1996). Because the majority of nematode
pinworms, Oxyurus spp.; hepatic worms, Capillaria
 parasites have direct transmission, proper hygiene and
spp., strongyles, Strongyloides spp., and lungworms of
sanitation are imperative.
the genus Entomelas. Treatment for all intestinal and
respiratory nematodes follows descriptions.
Cestodes
Roundworms in lizards are similar to those
Tapeworms are infrequently encountered in captive
mammals. Transmission is indirect and diagnosis is
lizards. Transmission is indirect, typically through an
made by fecal floatation and identification of the
arthropod intermediate host as seen in dogs and cats.
typical thick-walled round to ovoid oocysts. Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is made by observations of proglottids in the
may also be made by identification of the adult worm
stool or identification of oocysts on fecal flotation.
in feces or vomitus. Because they require an indirect
 Treatment consists of praziquantel (Droncit) 5 to 8 mg/
life cycle, these parasites are most commonly observed
kg PO or IM and treatment is repeated in two weeks
in carnivorous lizards and occasionally in omnivores.
(Klingenberg 1996).
Hookworms (Oswalsocruzia spp.)） 
have
direct
 Treatment of intestinal parasites in lizards is not
transmission by fecal-oral route or through skin pen-
without potential side effects. Anecdotal reports of
etration. Diagnosis is made by fecal floatation and
sudden deaths in Chamaeleo spp. treated with stan-
identification of the typical thin-walled oval eggs.
dard single doses of fenbendazole and ivermectin
Hookworms are responsible for more clinical disease
(Stahl 1998) are known and the author has observed
in lizards than are roundworms because of the mucosal
this effect on several occasions. Over several years the
attachment of adult worms in the intestines. Clinical
author has made similar observations of a dramatic
signs may include diarrhea, anorexia, and weight loss.
decline in health following the deworming of some
 Pinworms (Oxyurus spp.) have a direct transmis-
individuals of wild-caught Uromastyx spp., Varanus
sion by fecal-oral route and are found as adults in the
spp, and Chlamydosaurus spp. at a reptile wholesale
large intestine of lizards. Diagnosis is made by fecal
distribution facility. Some of the affected animals had
 floatation and identification of the typically embryo-
an oi d yeu sd dde ou
nated cigar-shaped larvae. Mammal pinworm ova or
but were housed with conspecifics in relatively small
larvae may be passed in the stool of carnivorous lizards
cages, experienced repeated movement of humans
but do not infect the lizards themselves. Typically pin-
around the enclosures, and may not have been on the
worms are an incidental finding on fecal examination,
optimal plane of nutrition (Color Plates 6.9-6.20).
though diagnosed infections should be treated.
Hepatic worms (Capillaria spp.) have both direct
and indirect transmission by fecal-oral route or through
EMERGENCIES
infected prey ingestion, and the oocysts somewhat
resemble those of whipworms ( Trichuris spp.) of dogs.
Many health disorders of lizards are potential emer-
q in ps au  ii ds 
 gencies simply because of the latency in which they are
Plate 6.12. Oxyurid, original magnifcation 40x
Plate 6.9. Flagellate, original magnification 40x.
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
plates)
plates)
Plate 6.10. Roundworm, original magnification 40x.
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
Plate 6.13. Ascarid, original magnification 40x.
plates)
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
plates)
Plate 6.11. Ascarid, original magnifcation 40x.
Plate 6.14. Coccidia, original magnification 40x
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
plates)
piates)
107
Plate 6.15. Nyctotherus, original magnification 40x.
Plate 6.18. Eimeria, original magnification 40x
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
plates)
plates)
Plate 6.16. Strongyle larva, original magnification
Plate 6.19. Capillaria, original magnification 40x.
40x. (Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
plates)
plates)
Plate 6.17. Pinworm and eimeria, original
Plate 6.20. Pinworm, original magnification 40 x
magnifcation 40x. (Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color
(See also color plates)
plates)
108
Lizards
109
presented or other related or consequential disorders
malities  including muscle postural abnormalities,
with which they present. A few diseases or presenting
 tremors or fasciculations, seizures, and paralysis may
 complaints, however, are considered critical and death
occur.
is imminent without immediate medical care. Some
With
1 reasonable suspicion of pesticide toxicity
critical cases may present moribund or deceased and
treatment is similar to that of mammals, including
may require the same level of diagnostic attention to
cleaning or removal of the inciting cause, supportive
determine the cause of death.
care, and treatment with anticholinergics (see Common
Disorders). Diazepam at 2.5 mg/kg IV or IM is reported
punniL
for seizures (Rossi 1998a, Schumacher 2002b).
 Trauma, as with any animal, may be an emergency.
Many cases of trauma present ambiguously because
Hypocalcemic Metabolic Bone Disease
the patient is found in a compromised state and the
This form of metabolic bone disease (MBD) is sepa-
owner did not observe the inciting cause.
Trauma
rated from the classic osteopathic MBD. Diagnosis of
should be suspected whenever the onset of clinical
 hypocalcemic MBD should be suspected of any patient
signs is acute; that is, within hours of the patient
presenting with abnormal neurologic signs and no
observed in a normal state and no history of gradual
history of trauma or toxin exposure. Physiologically
onset of lethargy, anorexia, weight loss, pregnancy, or
this disease is gradual in onset, though the onset of
other abnormal physiology. The presence of a thin or
 clinical signs may be acute or subtle and unnoticed by
dehydrated animal or any history of anorexia should
the owner. Herbivorous or insectivorous lizards are
indicate the presence of another or an additional
clinically most affected, but all lizards are susceptible
underlying disease process. Infectious or metabolic dis-
to hypocalcemia. F
 History regarding diet and light
eases rarely show acute clinical signs in lizards.
exposure may help to confirm suspicion of this disease
Diagnosis of trauma may be speculative because no
prior to diagnostic testing.
external  clinical  abnormalities  may
be
apparent.
The most common clinical signs include hind limb
 Radiography is the desired diagnostic test to evaluate
for abnormal anatomy. Hematocrit
and
blood
and depression. It is not uncommon for the only clini-
profle parameters may be normal, though creatine
 cal sign to be hind limb paresis with a normal appetite
kinase (CK) values are commonly elevated with skel-
and no other physical abnormality. The progression of
etal muscle injury. Radiographically suspected intra-
clinical signs from paresis to profound mental depres-
coelomic fluid may be aspirated for analysis.
sion is usually gradual. Hypocalcemic MBD is a
With a high degree of suspicion of traumatic injury,
critical emergency when the patient is substantially
empirically derived doses of corticosteroids are indi-
depressed or stuporous.
cated in addition to providing proper thermal gradient.
Diagnosis is highly suspected and supported by
Warmed intravenous, intraosseus, or intracoelomic
history in herbivorous lizards fed improper diets, no
fluids are indicated for hypotension. Stabilization of
calcium or vitamin Dg supplements, or little to no
fractures or luxations is performed following cardio-
exposure to ultraviolet light. Diagnosis is confirmed
vascular and thermal stabilization.
with blood chemistry. Radiographs may be helpful in
excluding other disorders such as trauma or dimin-
Toxicity
ished bone density, but they do not confirm
Unless presented with the known history of chemical
hypocalcemia.
toxicity, the veterinary staff must be meticulous at
Treatment is supportive with warming; IV, IO, or
obtaining a history to support this diagnosis. The clini-
IC fluids; and calcium gluconate at 100 mg/kg SC, IM,
cal signs of chemical or pesticide toxicity in reptiles are
or IC. Treatment is long term and prognosis for recov-
ambiguous, which leads to a diagnosis by exclusion
ery is grave for the most critical cases.
 of other metabolic diseases and delay in appropriate
treatment. Generally, chemical toxicities in lizards are
Gastrointestinal Obstruction
 relatively acute and have no history of anorexia, paral-
Signs of gastrointestinal obstruction may be vague,
 ysis, or weight loss preceding the onset of clinical signs.
though history supports a gradual onset (days) of
The most common exogenous chemical toxicities in
anorexia, constipation, depression, weight loss, bloat-
lizards are exposure to pesticides containing pyrethrins
ing, and rarely regurgitation. All species of lizards are
susceptible, but terrestrial lizards are much more likely
 infestations of the patient or the enclosure. Profound
to ingest foreign materials from their environment.
depression, death, or a variety of neurologic abnor-
Impaction or constipation may occur in arboreal insec-
110
Chapter 6
tivorous lizards, especially if dehydrated. A diagnosis
disease in lizards. History usually indicates a gradual
 of obstruction may also be supported by a history of
 onset of disease with a moderate to prolonged period
feeding improper foods, such as processed meat prod-
 of anorexia, weight loss, and increased respiratory
ucts to herbivores.
effort. Oral or nasal exudates may or may not be
 Diagnosis is based on history, physical exam, and
 present. Thorough physical exam, including thoracic
radiographs. The radiographic presence of a foreign
auscultation and thoracic radiographs, is required
body or generalized gas distention of small and/or
for definitive diagnosis of pneumonia. Stomatitis
large intestine is indicative of obstruction. Because
 may be concurrent or absent. Profound weakness and
large herbivorous lizards have a relatively large disten-
depression may be the result of profoundly reduced
sible gut and relatively narrow pelvic canal, obstruc-
ventilatory
capacity
secondary
septicemia.
tion may occur much lower in the gastrointestinal tract
Diagnostics and medical treatment are discussed in
than is classically seen in dogs and cats. Obstructions
Common Disorders.
at the pelvic inlet exhibit marked abdominal bloating
 Oxygen therapy is generally not indicated due to
and commonly large and small intestinal gas disten-
respiratory suppression (see Anesthesia). IO fluid
tion. If these signs are observed radiographically in the
therapy and  antibiotics are  indicated.  Nutritional
absence of a detectable foreign body, retrograde per-
sd purd rn pa q  iodns
cloacal barium is indicated to identify the obstruction.
Asphyxiation is a concern because the lizard may be
On rare occasions repeated enemas administered by
 too weakened to expel pulmonary exudates. Passage
the owner or veterinary staff may result in colonic
of a rubber feeding tube and aspiration of tracheal
perforation and stricture that may mimic foreign body
secretions may be performed with caution. Transtracheal
obstruction. With the degree of gas distention com-
wash procedures are performed only in patients that
monly seen in obstruction, ultrasound may be of little
 are not critically compromised.
value diagnostically.
With high degree of suspicion of obstruction in the
Cloacal Proplapse
depressed patient, supportive care and surgery are
Cloacal prolapse is diagnosed by physical examination
 indicated. Trocharization to relieve gas is not indicated
alone. This disease is an emergency with respect to
because the t
 thin gastrointestinal membranes may
 potential necrosis and loss of tissue from time delay in
rupture and spill their contents into the coelomic
 presentation and treatment.
cavity. Careful advancement of an oral feeding tube
First aid of cloacal prolapse is cleaning and hydrat-
may aid in the reduction of bloating presurgically.
ing prolapsed tissue with isotonic solution. Following
diagnosis of the specific nature of the prolapse, hyper-
Dystocia
tonic solutions such as 50% dextrose may be applied
Dystocia, also called egg-binding, in oviparous lizards
to reduce swelling. Sedation or general anesthesia is
has varying degrees of presentation in lizards with
often indicated to reduce patient struggling and
many similarities to birds. Single or multiple eggs may
 pain. Reduction of viable tissue is first attempted man-
be retained and the lizard may be in varying degrees
ually when possible and then approached surgically.
of physical health. Those lizards presented with dysto-
Systemic antibiotics are indicated despite the method
cia in a profoundly weakened state must receive imme-
of reduction. Corticosteroids may be administered
diate supportive care and surgery. Placement of IO
empirically. The occurrence of reperfusion injury in
catheter and fluid therapy is indicated.
reptiles is not known.
Diagnosis is confirmed with history, physical exam,
and radiographs. Ovario-salpingectomy is indicated
 for lizards with dystocias of more than a few retained
TECHNIQUES
eggs because surgery time is greatly extended for
multiple salpingotomy incisions that are required for
Intravenous and Intraosseous
multiple eggs. Lizards retain reproductive ability when
Catbeter Placement
 Intravenous (IV) catheter placement is generally limited
is performed.
to the medium to large species of lizards, approxi-
mately 20 cm or larger, in the cephalic vein, though
Pneumonia
there is no reason not to consider catheterization of
Though generally a straightforward diagnosis, at first
smaller lizards with proper equipment and skill (Figure
appearance pneumonia may be confused with severe
6.15). Sedation is required for catheterization (Jenkins
cases of stomatitis with no associated respiratory
1996).
Lizards
111
Figure 6.15. Cephalic catheter placement.
 Standard sterile preparation of the catheterization
site is performed and a transverse skin incision is made
across the dorsal distal aspect of the antebrachium,
just dorsal to the carpus. The incision in smaller lizards
can be made with the sharp angle of a hypodermic
 needle or with a scalpel blade in the case of larger
Figure 6.16. IO catheter placement.
lizards. Once the vein is identifed, standard catheter-
ization technique is used with an appropriate sized
intra venous catheter. The catheter is secured with tape
Venipuncture
or suture.
Blood collection in lizards is performed from the
Intraosseous (IO) catheters are indicated in smaller
caudal tail vein or rarely from the ventral abdominal
lizards or those with anatomy or disease that prohibits
vein. Small patients are placed in dorsal recumbency
intravenous catheter placement. The bones of choice
and may be wrapped in a towel to ease restraint. Large
for intraosseous catheterization are the femur, tibia, or
lizards may remain in ventral recumbency with the tail
humerus. Consideration must be given to the location
supported offthe edge of a table. Fractious, dangerous,
with respect to the ability of the patient to interfere
or very small and delicate lizards may require brief
with or manipulate the catheter while hospitalized.
 anesthesia for blood collection.
For femoral IO catheterization, standard sterile
A portion of the proximal third of the tail from the
 preparation is performed over the distal femur and a
vent is selected and aseptically prepared as if for
spinal needle of appropriate size is passed through a
surgery. A needle of appropriate length and gauge is
cutdown in the skin. The needle is advanced through
selected for the patient. For lizards greater than 60 cm
the cortical bone of the distal diaphysis and then
total length, a 22-gauge 1- to 1.5-inch needle on a 3-cc
directed proximally into the medullary cavity of the
syringe is appropriate. For lizards less than 60 cm total
bone. The tip of the needle should rest in the medullary
length, a 22- to 25-gauge 0.5- to 0.75-inch needle on
cavity approximately one-third the distance from the
 a 1-cc syringe is appropriate. For lizards less than
 proximal femur (Jenkins 1996). The catheter is then
25 cm total length, a 27-gauge 0.5-inch needle on a
secured with taping that will also somewhat immobi-
1-cc or smaller syringe is appropriate. Insulin syringes
lize the stifle (Figure 6.16).
 are commonly used for these smallest patients.
 Sterile hypodermic needles of appropriate size may
Blood collection is performed in a manner similar
be used if spinal needles are not available. The tibia
to that of venipuncture of the tail vein of a cow. The
is catheterized with a proximal to distal approach.
 needle is advanced through the skin along the ventral
Intravenous and intraosseus fluid therapy is performed
 midline in a perpendicular to slightly cranially directed
with lactated Ringer's solution (LRS) and LRS + 2.5 %
angle until the tip of the needle contacts the vertebral
dextrose at a rate of 0.5 to 1ml/kg/hour (Jenkins
body. Slight vacuum is applied to the syringe as the
1996).
needle is slowly withdrawn until blood is seen entering
112
Chapter 6
the needle hub. Blood collection is slow and may
likely. These patients should be anesthetized. The
require ffteen to thirty seconds for large lizards and
blood collection site is prepared with the patient in
up to forty-five seconds for smaller lizards.
dorsal recumbency and accessed along the ventral
Care is taken to slowly expel blood into the collec-
midline at a point between the sternum and one-third
tion tube(s) to prevent hemolysis from narrow-gauge
the distance proximal to the pelvis. The bevel of the
needles. Lithium heparin (green top) tubes are the col-
needle is directed dorsally and the needle advanced just
lection tube of choice for reptile biochemistry and
beneath the skin while applying slight suction (Jenkins
complete blood count (CBC). EDTA may lyse reptilian
1996). Blood collection may be faster when compared
erythrocytes when used for CBC (Mader and Rosenthal
to collection from the ventral tail vein. Cardiocentesis
2000). Whenever possible, the needles of 25 gauge or
is not recommended for blood collection in lizards
 smaller should be removed from the syringe prior to
 because of the risk of trauma and the relative lack of
transferring blood. Most labs that perform reptilian
access of the heart in lizards (Figure 6.17).
blood chemistries are capable of using samples as small
as 25 uL (0.25 cc). CBC may be submitted as a blood
Transtracbeal Wash
smear instead of whole blood when only a small
o q  ss o  
sample is available for serum chemistry.
lected from the lungs in a matter consistent with that
The ventral abdominal vein may be accessed in very
of mammals. The glottis is easily visualized in patients
small lizards or in those in which tail autotomy is
that cooperate with opening the mouth. Light sedation
Cephalic Vein
Caudal Vein
Figure 6.17. Lizard venipuncture sites.
Lizards
113
may be required for patients that are reluctant to open
be accessed accidentally. The urodeum lies ventrally
the mouth. Following a diagnosis of pneumonia a
 and the coprodeum lies dorsally in the cranial cloaca.
sterile catheter of appropriate diameter and length is
It is imperative not to force the catheter if any resis-
advanced through the glottis and directed into the
tance is encountered upon advancement. The coelomic
right or left lung as indicated by radiographs. A sterile
tissues may be ruptured easily and the technician or
wire may be inserted into the catheter and molded
clinician may not perceive a rupture based on the
(using sterile technique) to aid the direction of the tip
resistance encountered. Occasionally, the slow infu-
into the left or right mainstem bronchus (Murray
sion of fluid upon advancement of the catheter will aid
1996). At no time should the tube be forced if resis-
in reducing resistance, especially with constipated
 tance is encountered. A speculum is employed to keep
animals. Once the catheter has reached the lower intes-
fingers out of the mouth and aid in visualization during
tine, saline solution is infused and retrieved several
the procedure.
times and gentle massage of the colon may be applied
Following placement of the catheter, warmed (to
to maximize return of diagnostic material. A swab and
ambient temperature of the patient) sterile saline solu-
floatation may be performed on the retrieved sample.
tion is infused at a dose of 1 to 5 ml/kg body weight
Administration of saline or stool softeners such as
and then retrieved into the syringe (Murray 1996).
docusate sodium solution is applied in a similar manner
Repeated flushing of the saline, gentle coupage, or
 to that of other companion animals. Resistance should
gentle rolling of the patient following infusion,
 never be achieved upon the syringe plunger with the
increases the return of diagnostic material. Following
 administration of any colonic solutions.
collection the patient is carefully monitored for normal
 In the event of suspected or confrmed iatrogenic
respiration and heart rate. Samples should be sub-
 colonic or cloacal rupture, surgery is immediately indi-
mitted for appropriate culture and sensitivity and
cated for primary repair of the defect and copious
cytology. Portions of the sample may be preserved in
lavage of the coelom. Most cases of iatrogenic ruptures
EDTA or fixed on a microscopic slide for cytologic
unfortunately go unnoticed until the animal presents
analysis.
with life-threatening coelomitis and sepsis.
When transtracheal wash is contraindicated, bacte-
Cloacal swabs for bacterial culture and sensitivity
rial culture and sensitivity may be obtained from
may be obtained in a manner similar to that performed
pulmonary exudates swabbed from the glottis by cul-
 in birds. Washing of the external vent is indicated to
turette. By observing the patient's respiratory cycle, a
 reduce contamination of the culturette upon insertion
microtip culturette is carefully inserted into the glottis
and sample retrieval.
and then retrieved in a matter not to retrieve oral secre-
tions. This method may not reflect the bacterial popu-
Bandaging
lation present in the lower respiratory tract.
Bandage application and wound care for skin defects
are consistent with those of other companion animals
Cloacal and Colonic Wash and Enema
with the exception that the healing process is pro-
Techniques for cloacal and colonic wash are applicable
longed. Except for deep or extensive wounds or those
for microbiologic and cytologic sample collection,
that may become contaminated, wounds on most
enema, and barium administration for contrast radi-
lizards are best maintained open in a clean environ-
 ography. Colonic wash is performed in the absence of
ment rather than bandaged. Bandages may be cumber-
a fresh fecal sample for parasite analysis. Retrograde
some to lizards or may be a source of rubbing or other
 percloacal colonic catheterization is not as routine and
behaviors that attempt to remove the bandage. Tape
as simple as performed in mammals and improper
is contraindicated on all geckos or other lizards with
technique can result in severe health consequences to
fragile skin.
the patient. Sedation is not commonly required except
Bandage application may be indicated for tail
in fractious patients.
A clean catheter similar to that used for transtra-
Application of antibiotic ointments and gauze-packed
cheal wash, a saline-filled syringe, and water-based
syringe casings are ideal to allow hemorrhage control
lubricant are used. Dosage for colonic wash is approxi-
 and prevent contamination. Typically these bandages
mately 10 ml/kg (Schumacher 2002b).
 are required for only a few days.
 Copious lubrication of the tube is recommended for
External coaptation of limbs is commonly per-
all procedures. Careful and slow advancement of the
formed as part of fracture management using materials
catheter in a retrograde fashion through the cloaca will
and techniques applied for other companion animals
reach the colon. On occasion the urinary bladder may
 The same principles of stabilizing one joint above and
114
 Chapter 6
below the fracture are followed. A potential splint for
 larger lizards is their own body. Under sedation fore-
dangerous lizards, tongs or forceps are used to intro-
limbs are secured to the lateral chest wall, with care
duce food. Assist feeding is used for patients that can
not to compress the chest cavity, especially in sedated
 swallow but are otherwise reluctant to prehend prey
animals. A similar application may be employed with
items; the mouth may be gently opened and the food
the hind limb to the tail. With this technique, however,
item placed into the mouth for the patient to swallow.
 proximal humeral and femoral fractures may not
Prepared foods such as vegetarian gruels may be fed
receive adequate reduction in motion of the proximal
by syringe in this matter. Assist feeding is used for
bone fragment, resulting in malalignment.
patients that are depressed and will not swallow or are
Spica splints are ideal for both forelimb and hind
incapable of chewing; food is provided by gastric or
limb unilateral or bilateral fracture management. Under 
pharyngostomy feeding tube.
sedation the rigid splint for forelimb humeral fractures
 For insectivorous and carnivorous species that are
 is incorporated into the soft bandage ventrally across
fed only every other day or every few days in normal
the sternum and in the hind limb the splint is applied
health, the normal feeding schedule may remain the
dorsally across the dorsal pelvis. The soft support
same. It is important for all lizards to not over feed,
bandage of the hind limb is wrapped in a figure-eight
especially if assist feeding normal dietary food items.
pattern incorporating both hind limbs dorsally, creat-
Constipation or obstruction can result from overzeal-
ing abduction of both hind limbs. A similar technique
 ous feeding in these patients. For those species fed
is applied forelimb soft bandage. This technique allows
specially prepared gruels either by mouth or through a
for the cloaca to remain free of bandage material and to
feeding tube, daily feeding is recommended because it
reduce contamination of bandage material (Bennett
 is likely that these diets are more rapidly digested and
1996b). For more distal fractures of limbs a modified
 absorbed when compared to the diet of normal health.
Robert Jones bandage incorporating or encased by a
The procedures of tube assist feeding are similar to
plastic syringe casing and stirrups is ideal.
those applied for neonatal companion animals. The
 Carpal, tarsal, and digital fractures may be bandaged
stomach of quadruped lizards is measured to the last
with soft bandage material. A ball bandage comprised
few ribs. Anguiform lizards are treated as snakes for
of a cotton ball applied to the palmar or plantar aspect
 tube feeding purposes. Rubber catheters or stainless
of the affected foot is wrapped by soft bandage (Bennett
 steel ball-tipped dosing needles are appropriate to use
1996b). For all bandage applications, lizards should be
as feeding tubes. Because of the stresses imposed on
maintained on clean non-organic substrate such as
the patient from restraint and opening the mouth by
paper or carpet, including those lizards requiring a
 assist and force feeding, feeding frequency is generally
higher humidity environment. Strict attention is given
no more than once daily for these patients. Alternatively,
to cage and bandage sanitation and hygiene.
placement of a pharyngostomy tube accommodates
  s    
Assist Feeding
Diets are based on identifying the patient as car-
One of the most common signs of any disease state in
nivorous (including juvenile omnivorous) or herbivo-
lizards is anorexia. Assist feeding is employed when
the normal feeding response is diminished or when the
animal is physically incapable of normal prehension or
swallowing of food or water.
The technique for assist feeding may also be applied
to gastric oral medication administration and diagnos-
 tic gastric lavage. Some species of lizards may require
sedation to access the oral cavity (Uromastyx spp.,
Corucia zebrata, and occasionally Iguana spp. and
Varanus spp.). These species, especially Uromastyx
and Corucia, are candidates for pharyngostomy tube
placement when repeated force feeding or oral medica-
tion is required.
Assist feeding of lizards is accomplished in several
ways. Voluntary feeding for smaller lizards is applied
when the patient's normal feeding response or mobility
is compromised, but with a little enticement the patient
Figure 6.18. Assist-feeding.
Lizards
115
rous (including adult omnivorous). The amount of
lizards because of potential drug inactivity and the
feeding is a calculated daily energy need based on
diffculty in accurate dosing.
standard metabolic rate (SMR) measured in kcal/day.
Injections  are performed 
1  using five methods.
The formula is SMR = 32*BW77 where BW = body
 Subcutaneous (SC) and intramuscular (IM) techniques
weight in kg. Alert and relatively non-compromised
are most common. Intracoelomic (ICe) technique is
patients receive 75% to 100% of daily energy needs
used for large volumes of fluids or for drugs that need
in the first twenty-four to forty-eight hours. Weak or
rapid systemic absorption such as calcium gluconate.
debilitated patients receive 40% to 75% of their daily
Intravenous and intraosseous are typically performed
energy needs in the first several days (Donoghue and
through an indwelling catheter.
Landenberg 1996). The amount of feeding of the daily
 It is generally uncommon for clients to administer
energy requirement is gradually increased to 100% as
injectable medications to mammalian patients for
the patient's health and responsiveness improve. And,
routine infections. This practice is relatively common
because the goal of force feeding is to bring the patient
for reptile patients, but it must be approached with
back to voluntary feeding, the amount and frequency
great attention to both the client's ability and the
 of force feeding decreases or may abruptly stop pending
 patient's cooperation. Considerations include:
the patient's recovery.
A variety of enteral diets are available for both
 n  oq     a i  '
human and veterinary use. These include: for omni-
 patient from the proposed procedure?
vores Ensure (Ross Laboratories, Columbus, OH), for
2. Is the client capable of adequately restraining the
herbivores Sustacal Enriched (Ross Laboratories,
patient while administering the medication?
Columbus, OH), and for carnivores Clinical-Care feline
3. Is the client capable of determining if an undesirable
and canine liquids (Pet-Ag, Elgin, IL). The available
side effect has occurred that prohibits further
energy in kcal/ml as well as protein, fat, carbohydrate,
tre atment?
 and fiber content are available on the packaging.
4. Is there risk
for abuse of the medication
dispensed?
Therapeutic Administration
Treatment of lizard patients with pharmaceuticals is
When dispensing injectable medication for the client
performed in a manner consistent with that of
to administer, adhere to the following:
mammals with several exceptions. First, the oral
administration is not always the route of choice:
1. Dispense the medication premeasured in syringes
(1} Oral access may be difficult or stressful for some
for each dose and only the amount for the specified
patients receiving daily medications; (2) gastrointesti-
number of doses. Administration should be only by
nal transit time and factors affecting absorption of
the SC or IM route for home administration. If
 medications varies among species; (3) inexperience or
long-term treatment is required, dispense a portion
reluctance of the client in administering oral medica-
of the amount and only refill the medication with a
ued au oi eune Anessanauun oi peal Ae suo
recheck exam or consultation. Accurately and fully
 or noncompliance by the owner. When properly coun-
label drug name, concentration, route, frequency,
seled, however, most clients enjoy the opportunity to
and duration of administration with no abbrevia-
take an active role in restoring the health of their pets.
tions. Never dispense medications that are poten-
Examples of antibiotics commonly administered
tially dangerous to humans at the prescribed dose
orally in lizards are enrofloxacin injectable and com-
(large doses of aminoglycosides, chemotherapeu-
 pounded suspensions (Baytril), griseofulvin suspension
tics, narcotics).
(Fulvicin), metronidazole injectable and compounded
2. Describe, show, and allow the client to practice
suspensions, sulfamethazine (Albon), trimethoprim-
administration of the medication. Sterile saline may
sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim), and compounded tetracy-
be used for a practice injection.
clines. Additionally, many injectable antibiotics or
 3. Instruct the client on the appropriate uncapping and
ophthalmic preparations may be applied directly to
capping of needles and handling of the sterile needle.
oral mucous membranes rather than by injectable
4. Counsel the client on potential side effects of the
method to achieve higher drug concentrations at the
drug and potential side effects administration.
site of infection. The parasiticides fenbendazole
(Panacur) and praziquantel (Droncit) are administered
5. Provide the name and number of an employee at
PO. The author does not recommend the application
the clinic who can be reached at any time if there
of antibiotics to drinking water or to food items for
is a problem.
116
Chapter 6
6. Have the client bring all medical waste products to
-d ot rd sian eisa r edd
the hospital or clinic for disposal.
ing the procedures.
 Humane euthanasia in the veterinary hospital is
Subcutaneous injections are made in the lateral
 best performed under heavy sedation with the dissocia-
scapular region. The skin is not drawn or lifted above
tive agents ketamine or telazol. Ketamine at a dose of
the body wall as is common practice in mammals. The
100 mg/kg IM or telazol at a dose of 25 mg/kg IM will
needle is advanced into the subcuticular space, gentle
assure adequate sedation (Mader 1996b). Euthanasia
aspiration is applied to check for incidental venous
solution as specified by the manufacturer for mammals
 access, and the injection is administered. Serial injec-
is applied to lizards. Injections may be given intracar-
tions are alternated between the left and right sides
 dially with a sternal or lateral percutaneous approach
and among different locations within the region.
to the heart. If the patient is dehydrated or severely
Subcutaneous injections are contraindicated in most
 debilitated and the cardiac approach is not possible,
Chamaeleo spp., all Phelsuma spp., and many other
injection into the occipital sinus is indicated.
Gekkonidae because of skin autotomy, scarring, and
skin discoloration caused by the injection. PO admin-
istration is indicated in these species.
REFERENCES
Intramuscular injections are administered in epaxial
muscles or triceps muscles in large lizards.
IM
 Balsai M. 1997. General Care and Maintenance of Popular Monitors
injections are generally not possible in smaller
and Tegus. Escondido: Advanced Vivarium Systems.
lizards. When possible, intramuscular injections are
Barten SL. 1996a. Biology: Lizards. In: Reptile Medicine and
 Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
 preferred for lizards to decrease the risk of skin
47-61.
inflammation.
Barten SL. 1996b. Differential Diagnosis by Symptoms: Lizards. In:
Intracoelomic injections are administered in the
 Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia:
right lower quadrant of the abdomen slightly cranial
W.B. Saunders Co. 324-232.
Barten SL. 1996c. Specific Diseases and Conditions: Bites from Prey.
dorsal to the rear leg (Klingenberg 1996). Drugs
In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR.
administered in this way are sterile fluids, calcium
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 353-355.
gluconate, potassium penicillin, and some injectable
Barten SL. 1996d. Specific Diseases and Conditions: Paraphimosis.
anesthetics.
In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR.
It is essential to understand not only the intended
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 395-396.
Barten SL. 2002. Diseases of the Iguana Oral Cavity. In: Proceedings
use of the medication, but also potential undesired or
of the North American Veterinary Conference {16). Gainesville,
side effects. Side effects may be the result of a single
FL.
administration, a series of administrations, a route of
Bennett RA. 1996a. Special Techniques and Procedures: Anesthesia.
administration, or a cumulative dose. Individual varia-
In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR.
tion as seen in mammals may also occur in reptiles.
Philadelphia; W.B. Saunders Co. 241-247.
 Side effects also involve the restraint or manipulation
Bennett RA. 1996b. Special Techniques and Procedures: Fracture
Management. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader
necessary to administer a particular administration.
DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 281-287.
When considering the use of therapeutics, the old
Bennett RA.
4.1996c. Specific Diseases and Conditions:
adage "do no harm" must be remembered.
Cryptosporidiosis. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by
Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 359-363.
Bennett RA, Mader DR. 1996. Special Techniques and Procedures:
Soft Tissue Surgery. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by
EUTHANASLA
Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 287-298.
Boyer TH. 1996. Specific Diseases and Conditions: Metabolic Bone
Euthanasia of captive lizards may be required for
Disease. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR.
several reasons. The procedures for lizard euthanasia
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders. 385-392.
more closely resemble those of domestic laboratory
Cranfield MR, Graczyk TK. 1996. Specific Diseases and Conditions:
Cryptosporidiosis. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by
animals than of dogs and cats. The relative inaccessi-
Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 359-363.
bility of peripheral veins for injection of euthanasia
DeNardo D. 1996a. Special Topics: Reproductive Biology. In:
solution necessitates injection of euthanasia solution
Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia:
directly into the heart (Mader 1996b) or occasionally
W.B. Saunders Co. 212-224.
into the occipital sinus or foramen magnum.
 DeNardo D. 1996b. Specific Diseases and Conditions: Dystocias. In:
 Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: 
Intracoelomic injection of euthanasia solution can be
W.B. Saunders Co. 370-374.
performed, but cardiac arrest may be prolonged and
de Vosjoli P. 1992. The Green Iguana Manual. Lakeside, CA:
detection of death uncertain. The client must be fully
Advanced Vivariurm Systems.
Lizards
117
de Vosjoli P. 1993. The General Care and Maintenance of Prehensile
Mader DR. 1996d. Specific Diseases and Conditions: Upper
Tailed Skinks. Lakeside, CA: Advanced Vivarium Systems.
Alimentary Tract Disease. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery,
de Vosjoli P. 1995. Basic Care of Uromastyx. Santee, CA: Advanced
edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 421-424.
Vivariurm Systerms.
Mader DR. 2000a. Reptilian Microbiology and Antibiotic Therapy.
de Vosjoli P. 1997. The Lizard Keeper's Handbook. Santee, CA:
In: Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference
Advanced Vivariurm Systems.
{14). Gainesville, FL. 961-964.
de Vosjoli P, Ferguson G (eds.). 1995. Care and Breeding of Panther,
Mader DR. 2000b. Thermal Burns in Reptiles. In: Proceedings of
Jackson's,
,Veiled, and Parson's Chameleons. Santee, CA:
the North American Veterinary Conference {14). Gainesville, FL.
Advanced Vivariurm Systems.
965-67.
de Vosjoli P, et al. 1997. The Leopard Gecko Manual. Mission
Mader DR. 2002a. Metabolic Bone Diseases in the Green Iguana.
Viejo, CA: Advanced Vivariurm Systems.
In: Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference
de Vosjoli P, et al. 2001. The Bearded Dragon Manual. Irvine, CA:
{16). Gainesville, FL. 921-922.
Advanced Vivarium Systerms.
Mader DR. 2002b. Ventral Midline Approach for the Lizard
Donoghue S, Landenberg J. 1996. Special Topics: Nutrition. In:
Coeliotomy. In: Proceedings of the North American Veterinary
 Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia:
Conference (16). Gainesville, FL.
W.B. Saunders Co. 148-174.
Mader DR, Rosenthal K. 2000. Proper Collection of Laboratory
Frye FL. 1991. Biomedical and Surgical Aspects of Captive Reptile
Samples. Proceedings of the 
North American Veterinary
Husbandry. 2d ed., vol. 1 and 2. Melbourne, FL: Krieger
Conference (14). Gainesville, FL. 958-960.
Publishing Co.
McKeown S. 1993. The General Care and Maintenance of Day
Glaw F, Vences M. 1994. A Field Guide to the Amphibians and
Geckos. Lakeside, CA: Advanced Vivariurm Systems.
Reptiles of Madagascar. 2nd ed Bonn, Germany: Koenig.
McKeown S. 1996. Introduction: General Husbandry and Captive
Goin CJ, Goin OB, Zug GR. 1978. Introduction to Herpetology.
Management. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader
3rd ed New York: W.H. Freerman and Co.
DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 9-19.
Helfrman GS. 1990. Mode Selection and Mode Switching in Foraging
Mitchell MA. Artificial Lighting for Reptiles: What We Know and
Animals. Advances in the Study of Behavior 19:249.
What you Need to Know. In: Proceedings of the North American
Innis CJ. 2000. Diagnosis and Treatment of Renal Disease in
Veterinary Conference (23). Gainesvill, FL pp 1783-1785.
Tortoises. In: Proceedings of the North American Veterinary
Murray MJ. 1996. Specific Diseases and Conditions: Pneumonia and
Conference (14). Gainesville, FL., 954-955.
Normal Respiratory Function In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery,
Jacobson ER. 2002. Chlamydiosis: An Underreported Disease of
edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: WB. Saunders Co. 396-
Reptiles. In: Proceedings of the North American Veterinary
405.
Conference {16). Gainesville, FL., 916-917.
Obst FJ, et al. 1988. The Completely Illustrated Atlas of Reptiles
Jenkins JR. 1996. Special Techniques and Procedures: Diagnostic
and Amphibians for the Terrarium. Neptune City, NJ: TFH.
and Clinical Techniques. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery,
Ritchie BW. 1992. Class Notes: Exotic Animal Medicine. University
edited by  Mader 
rDR. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders Co.
of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine.
264-276.
Rossi J. 1998a. Emergency Medicine of Reptiles. Proceedings of the
Johnson-Delaney CA. 1996. Introduction: Reptile Zoonoses and
North American Veterinary Conference (12). Gainesville, FL.
Threats to Public Health. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery.
Rossi J. 1998b. What's Wrong with My Iguana? Escondido:
edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Advanced Vivarium Systems.
185-203.
Rossi JV. 1996. Special Topics: Derrmatology. In: Reptile Medicine
Klingenberg RJ. 1993. Understanding Reptile Parasites. Lakeside,
and Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
CA: Advanced Vivariurm Systems.
Co.104-117.
Klingenberg RJ. 1996. Special Techniques and Procedures:
Schurmacher J. 2002a. Anesthesia of Reptiles. In: Proceedings of the
Therapeutics. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader
North American Veterinary Conference (16). Gainesville, FL:
DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 229-321.
ESVA.
 Lane TJ, Mader DR. 1996. Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Special
 Schumacher J. 2002b. Critical and Supportive Care of Reptiles In:
Topics: Parasitology. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited
Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference (16).
by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 185-203.
Gainesville, FL.
Levell JP. 1998. A Field Guide to Reptiles and the Law. Melbourne,
 Silverrman S, Janssen, DL. 1996. Special Techniques and Procedures:
FL: Krieger Publishing Company.
Diagnostic Imaging. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by
Mader DR. 1996a. Specific Diseases and Conditions: Acariasis. In:
Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 258-264.
 Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia:
Stahl SJ. 1998. Common Medical Problems of Old World
W.B. Saunders Co. 341-346.
Chameleons. In: Proceedings of the North American Veterinary
Mader DR. 1996b. Special Techniques and Procedures: Euthanasia
Conference {12). Gainesville, FL. 814-817.
 and Necropsy. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by
Stahl SJ. 2000. Reptile Obstetrics. In: Proceedings of the North
Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 277-281.
American Veterinary Conference. Gainesville, FL. 971-974.
Mader DR. 1996c. Specific Diseases and Conditions: Gout. In:
Williams DL. 1996. Special Topics: Ophthalmology. In: Reptile
Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia:
Medicine and Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: WB.
W.B. Saunders Co. 374-379.
Saunders Co. 175-184.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Kes
Ryan Cheek, Shannon Richards, and Maria Crane
INTRODUCTION
offered the natural diet to which it is accustomed. For
example, a snake feeding primarily on frogs in its
Keeping snakes in captivity has become increasingly
natural environment may not be receptive to the white
popular over the years. With the increase in captive
lab mice that are sold commercially as snake feeders.
specimens there has is a large demand for veterinarians
This is not to say that it will never feed on mice in the
and veterinary technicians who are educated in proper
future, but it will take some time to adjust and may
husbandry and treatment of reptiles. The veterinary
take some trickery.
staff must be willing to keep up with current treatment
Captive-bred snakes are those that have been bred
protocols (through continuing education courses or
and raised in a captive environment. These are obvi-
literature) because reptile medicine is ever changing
ously better specimens due to their lack of exposure to
and still evolving. One important tool in the diagnosis
the diseases and parasites found in wild-caught speci-
of any reptile is a thorough history. This is important
mens. Captive-bred snakes also accept commercially
because most reptiles in captivity become ill due to
available diets better (such as feeder rodents) when
improper husbandry. Snakes kept in ideal conditions
offered and are not as finicky about accepting prekilled
prey items, which is the recommended method of
the species). This chapter contains general husbandry
feeding. Although the temperament of a snake can
information on snakes to assist the veterinary staff
never be guaranteed, those that are captive-bred tend
through the diagnostic process.
to be more docile overall and can become more accus-
tomed to handling.
Captive-bred specimens should always be recom-
CAPTIVE-BRED VERSUS
mended to potential buyers to better ensure the snake's
WILD-CAUGHT
overall health. There are many reputable snake breed-
ers who can provide a more reliable history on the
         
snake. In many cases these snakes are less expensive
been wild-caught or captive-bred. Wild-caught snakes
than those bought from pet retail stores.
are those that have been taken from their natural habi-
tats and sold through the pet trade. Unfortunately, this
is a common occurrence in the reptile industry. Wild-
BEHAVIOR
caught specimens typically have parasites (ticks, mites,
and various internal parasites) and can take a long
 Snakes are solitary animals and should be housed sepa-
time to adjust to a captive environment, if they do at
rately unless attempting to breed. Some can exhibit
all. They also can have a host of other illnesses such
territorial behavior and be aggressive to other inhabit-
ants. Signs of aggressive behavior toward other snakes
in captivity due to stress.
include biting, constricting, and head pinning. The
Feeding wild-caught snakes can prove to be chal-
head pinning is a courtship behavior as well. During
lenging as well due to their reluctance to eat in captiv-
breeding season, some of these behaviors are observed
a o anp nsn  iea o aun s 
more often. If these signs of aggression are observed
difficulties that a wild-caught snake may have adjust-
with snakes being housed together one should be
ing to a captive environment (especially if husbandry
removed immediately. As with any animal, if snakes
guidelines are not being followed) and not being
 are fighting, care should be taken if interference is
119
120
Chapter 7
edas ii u am q aq i oi essa
the snake's growth process. Therefore, it needs to be
the combating snakes. Using hooks or tongs is recom-
 shed every so often. The cells of the upper stratum
 mended when human interference is warranted
germinativum, the outer-generation layer, begin to
Another downside of housing snakes together is
proliferate and differentiate. The germinative layer
that some species (i.e. king snakes) eat other snakes as
begins to divide, producing new layers of cells. These
part of their natural diet. Therefore, all king snakes
new cells form the inner generation layer, which is the
should be kept separate. Size or gender does not affect 
 precursor to scales, or the outer-generation layer, for
the snake's instinctive predatory behavior.
the next ecdysis cycle. At this stage the new epidermal
Finally, it is also important to know whether the
layer is ready. The Oberhautchen then fills with lymph
snake is diurnal (active during day hours) or nocturnal
 and enzymatic action produces a cleavage zone and the
(active during night hours). Knowing when the snake
old epidermis is shed (Zug et al. 2001).
is the most active will aid in making several decisions 
Before a snake sheds, it secretes a lubricant under-
such as handling and ideal feeding times.
 neath the outermost layer of skin to assist with the
shedding process. This lubricant is most noticeable on
the snake's eyes, which become opaque or blue in color
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
due to this lubricant being secreted. The snake will
begin to shed its skin sometime after this optical
Integument
 opacity or dullness in appearance is noticed.
As in mammals, the skin of snakes plays several crucial
 It can take a week or two before the entire shedding
roles. The skin is the cellular protective barrier from
 process is over and should be repeated at regular inter-
the snake's outside environment. It protects the body
vals. The snake may attempt to use any furnishings in
from microbes and parasites, resists abrasions, and
the enclosure to assist in removing the dead skin. The
buffers the internal environment from the extremes of
furnishings should be nonabrasive to avoid causing
the external environment. The skin holds other tissues
injury. The snake may also attempt to soak in its water
and organs in place while being elastic enough to allow
 bowl to assist in shedding. Water softens the old skin
for respiration, movement, and growth. The skin also
and makes it easier to remove. If the humidity is too
serves other roles such as physiological regulation,
low, the snake may have problems shedding.
sensory detection, respiration, and coloration.
A snake sheds its entire outer layer of skin all at
The snake's skin consists of two main layers, the
once. All snakes, with the exception of large boids,
dermis and epidermis. The epidermis is covered com-
should shed in one piece. If there are numerous pieces
pletely by keratin. This layer of keratinous cells,
of the snake's shedded skin or some still present on the
stratum corneum, shields the living tissue below. The
snake, the shed is abnormal. Snakes with abnormal
stratum germinativum, the innermost layer of the epi-
shedding may need husbandry changes or may have
dermis, divides continuously to replace the outer layer
ectoparasites and should be checked thoroughly. Age,
of dead keratinous cells. As the cells in the stratum
nutrition, species, reproductive status, overall health,
germinativum are pushed outward, they slowly flatten,
 and hormonal balance also play a role in frequency of
die, and keratinize to form the stratum corneum. The
ecdysis.
stratum corneum is composed of three
layers,
 If some shedding is still present on the snake,
the Oberhautchen layer, the beta-keratin layer, and the
au u isisse on An oi pasn ueo Sueds 1o Sueos
alpha-keratin layer,
，from the surface
inward,
removal of the skin. Infections can occur underneath
respectively.
the old skin if the skin is allowed to build up and not
The dermis consists of two layers, the stratum com-
slough off naturally.
 pactum and the stratum spongiosum. The stratum
 Snakes should not be handled or fed while they are
compactum is the innermost layer of the dermis. It
in shed. Their senses are dulled (eyes opaque) and
consists of densely knit connective tissue. The stratum
because they fel vulnerable, they can also be very
spongiosum consists of connective tissue, blood vessels,
defensive. To avoid potential bites, handling is not
glands, nerve endings, and other cellular structures.
recommended during this time. It is unlikely that the
Ecdysis, or shedding of the skin, is a normal occur-
snake will eat, so feeding should not occur until after
rence for the duration of the snake's life. Young snakes
it has shed. If offering live prey items, feeding should
shed much more often and begin to have a longer
not occur while the snake is in shed due to the higher
resting period as they reach adult size. Because the top
potential for rodent bites.
layer of snake skin consists mostly of keratin, which
Snakes are either entirely or partially covered by
is dead material, it is incapable of expanding
during
 overlapping scales. The surface of each scale is com-
Snakes
121
posed of beta-keratin while the interscalar space, or
 outward and upward while the posterior zygapophyses
sutures, is composed of alpha-keratin. This distribu-
flare inward and downward. The angle of the zyg-
tion of keratin gives a protective covering while allow-
apophyses gives reptiles their flexibility or rigidity.
ing for flexibility and expansion. Certain species of
Snakes are able to have such great flexibility due to
colubrids and viperids are nearly scaleless. These
these articular surfaces being angled toward the hori-
species may only have labial and ventral scales. The
zontal plane (Figure 7.1).
remainder of the body is covered in a smooth kerati-
The muscular system of snakes consists of several
 nous epidermis. This anomaly is a recessive homozy-
hundred multisegmental muscle chains composed of
gous trait.
elongated and interconnecting segmental muscles and
 Snakes have paired scent glands at the base of their
tails. These glands open at the outer edge of the cloaca.
contraction patterns of the muscle chains. There are
A large amount of semisolid, malodorous fluid is
six types of locomotion divided into two classes (Pough
 released for defensive behavior in some species and for
et al. 2001). Lateral undulation and slide-pushing
courting behavior in other species.
have no static points of contact with the substrate.
Rectilinear, concertina, sidewinding, and saltation do
Musculoskeletal System
have static points with the substrate.
Snakes possess a very complex cranial skeleton. They
Lateral undulation is the most widely used method
have a cartilaginous anterior chondrocranium,
l,the
of locomotion in snakes. At fixed points in the snake's
portion of the cranium that covers the brain (Zug
environment, force is generated by horizontal waves
et al. 2001). This anterior portion of the chondrocra-
traveling down alternating sides of the body. These
 nium consists of continuous internasal and interorbital
fixed points can be a rock, tree, or any other physical
septa and a pair of nasal conchae (Zug et al. 2001).
object that the snake contacts. At each point the body
The chondrocranium calcifies between the eyes and
 generates a force that pushes it posterolaterally. Slide-
ears and forms the basisphenoid. Farther posteriorly,
 pushing is similar to lateral undulation but does not
a pair of exoccipitals, the supraoccipital bones, and the
use fixed points in the physical environment. Slide-
basioccipital form just below and behind the brain.
pushing involves very rapid alternating side body
 These occipital bones encircle the foramen magnum.
waves that generate sliding friction to propel the snake
The exoccipitals and the basioccipitals form a single
forward.
occipital condyle and the articular surface of the skull
Concertina locomotion is very slow and consumes
and atlas.
large amounts of energy. It is a very complex system
The maxilla is loosely connected to the other cranial
of locomotion. First, the anterior portion of the body
bones. It connects to a special process on the prefrontal
 remains still while the posterior portion draws up in a
bone. They are connected via a movable articulation.
series of tight curves. The posterior end is then station-
The maxilla is also loosely connected to the cranial
ary and the anterior end extends forward. The sequence
bones by the ectopyerygoid (Romer 1997). The snout
 then repeats. Concertina locomotion is most effectively
structures, premaxilla, nasal, septomaxilla, and vomer
used on the ground where static friction is used to
are movable as a separate series of bones from the
prevent rearward slippage.
maxilla and are also loosely connected to the cranial
Sidewinding is most commonly used on shifting soil
bones. This adaptation allows snakes to swallow large
such as mud or sand. Most snakes appear to have the
prey.
The mandible is highly specialized to allow for a
large gape when swallowing large prey items. The
mandible lacks a mandibular symphysis; an intraman-
dibular hinge allows for the mandible to flex in the
middle, and an articulated streptostylic quadrate
allows the mandible to move sideways.
The vertebral column in snakes is divided into the
atlas and axis, 100 to 300 trunk or precloacal verte-
brae, several cloacal vertebrae, and ten to 120 caudal
vertebrae (Zug et al. 2001). Each precloacal vertebra
has a rib attached. The zygapophyses, the interverte-
bral articular surfaces, possess a posterior and anterior
Figure 7.1. Snake skeletal anatomy. (Drawing by
 pair on each vertebra. The anterior zygapophyses flare
Scott Stark.)
122
Chapter 7
ability to sidewind. The forces in sidewinding are
postcaval vein, and the left hepatic vein. The left
directed vertically on the substrate. Sections of the
atrium receives blood from the right and left pulmo-
body are alternately lifted, moved forward, and then
nary veins.
set down. This produces a series of tracts that are
Blood flow through the heart starts when both atria
 parallel-producing forward motion.
contract. The atrioventricular valves open and allow
Saltation involves a very rapid straightening of the
blood to flow into the ventricle. When the atria con-
body from anterior to posterior, lifting the entire body
tract, the valve between the right atria and the cavum
off the ground. This is used only by small species.
venosum seals off the intraventricular canal, allowing
Rectilinear motion relies on the lateral muscles to
the oxygenated blood from the left atrium to flow
work at the same time. The costocutaneous superior
into the cavum arteriosum and the deoxygenated
muscles pull the skin forward relative to the ribs. The
blood from the right atrium to flow into the cavum
ventral scales then anchor themselves to the ground.
venosum and then to the cavum pulmonale. When the
The costocutaneous inferior then pulls the ribs and
ventricle contracts, the blood pressure inside the heart
with them the rest of the body forward relative to the
increases.
stationary ventral scales. This form of locomotion is
Because resistance is lower in the pulmonary circuit,
used by large-body snakes such as boids and vipers.
deoxygenated blood is expelled from the cavum pul-
monale through the pulmonary artery. When the ven-
Cardiovascular System
tricle shortens, the muscular ridge that separates the
cavum venosum and the cavum pulmonale comes into
The Heart
contact with the wall of the ventricle and closes off the
The heart size, shape, structure, and position all depend
 passage between the two compartments. The atrioven-
on the species’ anatomy, physiology, and behavior.
tricular valves are forced shut as the pressure inside
Heart position has a direct correlation with arboreal,
the ventricle increases. When the atrioventricular
terrestrial, and aquatic habits (Vasse 1994). Terrestrial
valves are shut, the oxygenated blood from the cavum
species have a heart that is close to the head and blood
arteriosum is pushed through the intraventricular
vessels in the distal portion of the body that dilate to
canal into the cavum venosum and out the left and
receive extra blood. The heart of arboreal species is
right aortic arches. At this point, the pressure inside
also located close to the head so that blood can more
the cavum venosum is more than twice that in the
easily reach the brain when hanging vertically. Marine
cavum pulmonale.
species have a heart that is found in the middle of the
Another remarkable ability of snakes, as well as
u op Aau ieu si oa udnd a os aog
other squamates and chelonia, is the ability to perform
have blood accumulation in the tail and the low blood
intracardiac shunting. Intracardiac shunts are classi-
pressure is compensated for by the external water pres-
fied as left-to-right or right-to-left. In a right-to-left
sure (Vasse 1994).
shunt, the deoxygenated blood that should normally
The heart consists of three chambers, a right and
be flowing out to the pulmonary circuit is being
left atria and a single ventricle. The ventricle is further
expelled out to the systemic circuit via the aortic
divided into the cavum arteriosum, cavum venosum,
arches. This shunt increases the amount of circulating
and cavum pulmonale. Although the ventricle lacks a
 blood and decreases its oxygen content. Primarily, the
septum, the snake can still separate oxygenated and
right-to-left shunt is used to increase the body tem-
deoxygenated blood and can maintain different sys-
perature and bypass the lungs during breath-holding.
temic and pulmonary pressures because the heart is
The left-to-right shunt is used to help stabilize the
functionally five chambered (Pough et al. 2001). A
 oxygen content of the blood. The direction and degree
muscular ridge in the ventricle separates the cavum
of intracardiac shunting depends on the pressure dif-
pulmonale and the cavum venosum. The cavum arte-
ferences between the pulmonary and systemic circuits
riosum is located dorsal to the other two compart-
and the washout of blood remaining in the cavum
ments and communicates with the cavum venosum
venosum.
through an intraventricular canal. There are two
The renal-portal system exists in all fish, reptiles,
inflow routes, the right and left atria, and three outflow
and birds. It collects blood from the caudal portion of
routes, the pulmonary artery and the left and right
the body and carries it to the kidneys. The blood is
aortic arches. The right atrium receives blood from the
then filtered and returned to the heart via the post
sinus venosus. The sinus venosus is a large chamber
caval vein. Blood that travels through the renal-portal
on the dorsal surface of the atrium. It receives blood
system only goes through the convoluted tubules and
from four veins, the right and left precaval vein, the
not the glomeruli (Holz 1999)
Snakes
123
The location of the heart, being so cranial, has two
All reptiles breathe using a negative-pressure venti-
disadvantages. First, when a snake holds its head
lation (Pough et al. 2001). During inspiration, the
down, blood flow to the tail is compromised. Second,
 intercostal muscles expand the ribs the entire length of
and most important, when the head is up or the entire
the body, dropping the pressure inside the lungs to
body is in a vertical position, the blood from the tail
 below atmospheric pressure and drawing in air. Then
must travel all the way to the heart against gravity.
the intercostal muscles relax and the glottis closes,
The veins of snakes do not have valves to prevent back
closing the respiratory tract. The snake then pauses for
flow so snakes have adapted three ways to ensure that
several seconds to several minutes before exhaling.
the blood continues to flow toward the heart even
Terrestrial and arboreal species normally have a
while being vertical. The contractions of the smooth
 period of apnea between respiratory cycles. The ribs
muscles that line the vessels help push the blood
in the anterior portion of the body are unable to
toward the heart. Snakes undulate or contract their
expand for proper inspiration when snakes are swal-
skeletal muscles, massaging the blood toward the
lowing large prey. I
During ingestion of prey, the pos-
heart. The tight skin of arboreal species acts as an
terior ribs expand, causing the saccular lung to inflate
antigra vity suit, further assisting the blood in traveling
and deflate, moving air through the respiratory system
toward the heart.
(Table 7.1).
The lymphatic system in snakes, as well as all rep-
tiles, is an elaborate drainage system. Microvessels
Nervous System
collect lymph from throughout the body. These micro-
 The central nervous system is organized the same way
vessels merge into larger vessels that eventually empty
in snakes as it is in all reptiles and similar to mammals.
into larger lymphatic trunk vessels and then into lym-
The brain of snakes is divided into the forebrain and
phatic sinuses. All three parts, the trunk, vessels, and
hindbrain. The forebrain contains the cerebral hemi-
sinuses, empty into veins. The lymph can be bidirec-
spheres, thalamic segment, and optic tectum, and is
tional but mostly flows toward the pericardial sinus
further broken down into the telenchephalon, dien-
and into the venous system. Reptiles have a pair of
cephalon, and mesencephalon. The cerebral hemi-
lymph hearts located in the pelvic region but do not
spheres are pear shaped. They contain olfactory lobes
 possess lymph nodes.
that project anteriorly and end in olfactory bulbs (Zug
et al. 2001). The thalamic region, which is tube shaped
Respiratory System
with a thick wall, is hidden by the cerebral lobes and
 Snakes have upper respiratory anatomy similar to that
the optic tectum. The dorsal portion of the thalamic
of mammals. Air enters and leaves the trachea through
region has two dorsal projections. The anterior projec-
the glottis located in the back of the pharynx.
The
tion is the parietal body and the posterior projection,
glottis and other cartilage form the larynx. The trachea
the epiphysis, is the pineal organ. The pineal organ is
of snakes has incomplete cartilaginous rings. The
 glandular in most snakes. The ventral portion contains
ventral portions of the rings are rigid and the dorsal
the hypothalamus. The optic tectum is located on the
portion is membranous.
 dorsal part of the posterior portion of the forebrain
Most snakes only have a single right lung and a
and the ventral part contains the optic chiasma. The
small nonfunctioning left lung. The right lung is gener-
hindbrain contains the cerebellum and medulla and is
ally one-half or more of the snake's body length. In
also broken down into the metencephalon and myel-
 most species, the posterior one-third is an air sac. In
encephalon. Both are small in extant species of reptiles.
those species that do have a very small functional left
Reptiles also have twelve pairs of cranial nerves.
lung, it is about 85 % smaller than the right. The right
bronchi enters the lung and empties into a wall that is
lined with faveoli. The faveoli are richly supplied with
Table 7.1. Approximate Organ Location in Snakes.
blood. Most of the gaseous exchange occurs in the
faveoli (Zug et al. 2001). Snakes that have only one
First quarter
Trachea, esophagus, heart
functioning lung possess a tracheal lung, a vascular sac
Second quarter
Heart, liver, lung, stomach
that contains many faveoli for gas exchange. The tra-
Third quarter
Stomach, gallbladder, gonads,
cheal lung extends from the point where the tracheal
small intestine, pancreas, spleen,
rings are incomplete dorsally and posteriorly until it
adrenal glands
touches the right lung. The air sac, or saccular lung, is
Fourth quarter
Colon, kidneys, cloaca
not used as a site for gas exchange but as a site for air
Tail
Hemipenes, musk glands
regulation.
124
Chapter 7
The spinal cord runs the entire length of the verte-
Vomeronasal Sense
bral column. Each vertebra contains a bilateral pair of
The vomeronasal organ, or Jacobson's organ, which
spinal nerves, each of which contains a sensory and
is connected to the oral cavity by the vomeronasal
motor root that fuse near their origin. The diameter of
duct, plays a vital role in predation. It detects
the spinal cord is uniform all the way down to the end.
 nonaerial, nonvolatile particulate odors by the chemo-
receptors on the forked tongue. The snake then carries
Sense Organs
that scent to the vomeronasal organ. The sensory
cells
s inside the vomeronasal organ react with
Cutaneous Sense Organs
certain molecules that then transfer the scent to the
Boids, pythonids, and viperids have specialized struc-
accessory olfactory bulbs, other encephalic centers,
tures in the dermis and epidermis that contain heat
and the nucleus globosus. The vomeronasal organ is
receptors (Zug et al. 2001). These pit organs sense
also used for interspecies relations. Snakes can use the
infrared heat and are located in different locations in
pue sueuaqq noy u e asuas oi uesio pesuonaa
each taxon. In the boids, the pit organs are scattered
for1
reproductive behaviors such as picking up
on unmodified supralabial and infralabial scales. Boids
pheromones.
have intraepidermal and intradermal types. Pythonids
have a series of pit organs in the labial scales. The heat
Eyes
receptors lay on the floor of each pit. In viperids, the
 The snake has very different eye anatomy than other
pit organs are located bilaterally between the eyes and
reptiles. Embryologically, the eyelids of snakes fuse to
the nares. The opening of each pit is forward facing
form a transparent spectacle, which has an extensive
 and is overlapped by other receptors. The heat recep-
vascular network that is optically transparent (Zug
tors are contained inside a membrane that stretches
et al. 2001). The anterior layer of the spectacle is shed
across the pit, further enhancing its heat-seeking
during each ecdysis cycle. The spectacle is separated
ability.
from the cornea by an epithelial-lined subspectacular
space. The globe of the eye is kept moist via secretions
Ears
made by the harderian glands. The nasolacrimal ducts
The ears of snakes have the same two functions as they
drain from the medial canthus to the roof of the oral
do in mammals, hearing and balance. The middle ear
cavity at the base of or just behind the vomeronasal
in snakes is virtually nonexistent (Platel 1994). It is a
 organ. The globe has poorly developed rectus muscles
very narrow cavity that does not contain a tympanic
and limited rotational muscles. Snakes lack the scleral
membrane but does contain one ossicle, the columella,
 ossicles and cartilage of lizards and chelonians. Snakes
that abuts the quadrate bone for transmission of vibra-
 possess a soft and pliable lens and they focus by the
tions. The inner ear of snakes is very similar to that of
forward movement of the lens by increased pressure
mammals. The utricle and saccule make up the semi-
of the vitreous applied by the ciliary muscle. The iris
circular canals that ensure balance. Vibrations are
contains striated muscle, making dilation and contrac-
received in the inner ear via the columella and pass
tion of the pupil voluntary.
through the cochlear canal and onto the basilar papilla.
The retina, pupil shape, and lens color have gone
Even with the absence of an outer ear and the virtual
through evolutionary changes to better fit the species'
absence of a middle ear, snakes are adept at hearing
lifestyle (Platel 1994). Diurnal species usually have a
(Platel 1994). Snakes pick up vibrations from the sub-
round pupil, yellow lens, and a retina made of all
strate on which their head rests because the columella
cones. Crepuscular species have a paler lens and the
senses vibrations from the quadrate bone that is located
 retina contains both rods and cones. Nocturnal species
on the upper jaw (Funk 1996). It is believed that arbo-
have a vertical slit-shaped pupil, a colorless lens, and
real snakes can pick up aerial vibrations, enabling
a retina consisting of mostly rods with very few cones.
them to catch avian prey in midflight.
These are just generalized statements, with many
exceptions. For example, crepuscular or nocturnal
Smell
pythons have a round pupil and a retina that contains
It is difficult to determine the amount of olfactory
a large quantity of both rods and cones.
sensation snakes have. Snakes have a large number of
Snakes have a very wide range of vision from 125
olfactory nerves, which leaves no doubt that they are
degrees to 135 degrees for most species. They also can
macrosmatic animals. Their olfactory abilities do not
 perceive depth and distance using binocular vision.
work alone; they are closely associated with the vom-
The area that both eyes can see is between 30 degrees
eronasal sense as well as sight.
and 45 degrees (Platel 1994).
Snakes
125
Digestive System
length. The stomach is a very large muscular tube that
The digestive system in snakes is a linear tract (Funk
has the primary role of mechanical digestion and start-
1996). It starts with the mouth that opens directly into
ing the chemical digestion process. The stomach lining
the buccal cavity. The buccal cavity contains rows of
has numerous glands that produce secretions to aid in
teeth on the upper and lower jaw, the vomeronasal
digestion. The pyloric valve controls the food bolus
 organs, the primary palate, the internal nares, and a
that enters into the small intestine, which is a long,
highly specialized tongue. Anilids, the false coral
narrow, straight tube. It also has glands to help with
snakes, have developed a partial secondary palate. The
the digestion process. At the junction with the large
morphology of the tongue is variable depending on
intestine, there is a marked difference in the size. The
the feeding behavior of the snake. The buccal cavity
large intestine has a diameter several times that of the
contains many glands throughout the entire cavity.
small intestine. Boidea have a small cecum located at
Multicelular glands, a component of the epithelial
the proximal colon. The large intestine is the weakest
lining of the tongue, produce and secrete mucous that
and most thin-walled structure in the digestive tract.
coats the prey, making passage down the esophagus
The large intestine ends at the anus and then leads to
smooth. Snakes also have five types of salivary glands:
the dorsal portion of the cloaca, the coprodaeum.
labial, lingual, sublingual, palatine, and dental. Venom
The primary function of the liver in snakes is the
glands are modifed salivary glands. The pharynx con-
same as in mammals. The liver, which is elongated and
 tains a muscular sphincter that controls the opening of
spindle shaped, produces bile that is stored in the
the esophagus (Figure 7.2).
gall bladder and then sent to the duodenum via
 The esophagus is a muscular walled tube that con-
the common bile duct. Bile aids in the digestion of fat.
nects the buccal cavity to the stomach. In snakes, the
The pancreas produces digestive fluids into the duode-
esophagus may be one-quarter to one-half of the body
num. It is usually located in a triad with the spleen and
gallbladder, or some species have a splenopancreas
(Figure 7.3).
Because the feeding behavior of snakes is not all the
same, different physiological and morphological
changes occur with different feeding behaviors. Snakes
that eat small, frequent meals tend to have a digestive
system that is always in an active state. On the other
Sim.
lntestine
Rt.
Kidney
Lt
Testicle
Choanal
Slit
Stomacb
Glottis
Lung
I.g,
Hcart
Intestine
Trachea
Live
Hemi-
Penis
Figure 7.2. Oral cavity of a snake. (Drawing by
Figure 7.3. Visceral anatomy. (Drawing by Scott
Scott Stark.)
Stark.)
126
 Chapter 7
hand, snakes that eat large, infrequent meals maintain
rhythms and seasonal cycles. As a gland, both organs
their digestive system in an inactive state until a prey
 release melatonin. All snakes have a pineal gland that
item has been ingested. At that point the gut begins to
lies on the brain but does not exit the skull as in some
increase secretions of hydrochloric acid and digestive
iguanids.
enzymes. Within one day, the small intestine doubles
 in size and other organs in the digestive, respiratory,
Thyroid Gland
and circulatory system also gain size. When the diges-
The thyroid is located in the throat adjacent to the
tive tract is activated, the metabolic rate increase as
larynx and trachea and is nearly spherical. Snakes
much as forty-four times that of the resting metabolic
can have either a single or paired thyroid gland. The
rate. The energy needed to activate the intestinal tract
thyroid is responsible for accumulating iodine and pro-
must be received from stored reserves before the diges-
ducing and regulating hormones that control growth
 tive process begins for the new prey. Infrequent feeders
and development as well as ecdysis.
usually maintain a metabolic rate half that of frequent
feeders.
Parathyroid Gland
The parathyroid is located just cranial to the thyroid.
Urinary System
It functions as a blood calcium regulator.
Snakes have a bilateral pair of lobulated and elongated
kidneys. They are located in the dorsal caudal coelo-
Pancreas
mic cavity, and the right kidney is located cranial to
The pancreas in snakes, as in mammals, functions as
the left kidney. The kidneys are metanephric in struc-
 an endocrine and exocrine gland. As an exocrine gland
ture and have few nephrons and lack a loop of Henle
 it secretes digestive enzymes, and as an endocrine
and a renal pelvis (Divers 2000). The ureters empty
gland it secretes the hormone insulin via clusters of
into the urodeum in the cloaca. Snakes do not have a
 cells called the islets of Langerhans.
urinary bladder.
Snakes excrete nitrogenous waste as uric acid. Uric
Gonads
acid is a purine and is synthesized in several interlock-
 The gonads produce the sex hormones. Their function
ing pathways. It is very insoluble in water. In the
is closely regulated by the brain and the pituitary.
kidney tubule, urine stays dilute. Water is reabsorbed
 Hypothalamohypophyseal hormones and gonadotro-
when the urine reaches the cloaca, making the urine
end au pue uenq au Aq panpoid ane sud
solution more concentrated and some of the uric acid
respectively, when the gonads are triggered by a hor-
precipitates. The precipitation of uric acid reduces its
 monal response. Along with stimulating reproductive
concentration, acid allowing more water to be reab-
structures, the sex hormones also produce secondary
sorbed. Again, this leads to more precipitation of uric
sexual characteristics and provide a feedback mecha-
acid. This process allows nitrogen to be excreted, using
 nism to the hypothalamic-pituitary complex.
very little water. The end product is a white or gray
semisolid pasty material containing uric acid.
Adrenal Glands
The adrenal glands are a pair of bilateral glands located
Endocrine and Exocrine Glands
anterior to the kidneys. They have many functions:
produce adrenaline and noradrenaline; affect sodium,
Pituitary Gland
potassium, and carbohydrate metabolism; and affect
The pituitary gland is the so-called master gland of the
the androgens and the reproductive process.
body. It consists of two parts, the neuropophysis and
adenopophysis. The neuropophysis produces hor-
mones that stimulate the adenopophysis or act directly
REPRODUCTIVE BIOLOGY AND
on the target organs. The adenopophysis releases six
HUSBANDRY
hormones:
adrenocorticotropin, follicle-stimulating
hormone, luteinizing hormone, prolactin, somatotro-
The Male Anatomy
 pin, and thyrotropin.
All male snakes have a right and left testicle and a pair
of hemipenes. The testicles are in the shape of an ovoid
Pineal Complex
mass that consists of seminiferous tubules, interstitial
The pineal complex consists of an epiphysis and a
cells, and blood vessels. They are located dorsomedi-
parapineal organ. They act as light receptors and
ally within the coelomic cavity between the pancreatic
are associated with cyclic activities such as circadian
triad and the kidneys. The right testis is located just
Snakes
127
cranial to the left. Snakes do not have an epididymis.
Sexual Maturity
The hemipenes are located in the base of the tail and
Sexual maturity in snakes depends on many factors
are held in place by a retractor muscle. Sperm is pro-
 Husbandry and nutrition are more important than age.
duced in the seminiferous tubules. During copulation,
 Ultimately, it is the size of the snake that determines
sperm travels to the hemipenis through the Wolffian
sexual maturity. Due to the large difference in care
ducts. The sperm is able to enter the female by means
 provided to captive snakes, the age of sexual maturity
of the sulcus spermaticus located on the outside of the
consequently is different as well. With proper hus-
hemipenis. During copulation, only one hemipenis is
bandry and nutrition, snakes grow quickly and become
used. Many snakes, especially boids, have vestigial
sexually mature within their first or second year of life.
se uonendos u pasn are sinds asaui snds (oiiad)
stimulation and to help position the two cloacae
Follicle Maturation and the Fat Cycle
together (Figure 7.4).
The female begins to store fat in the months before her
reproductive cycle (Ross et al. 1990). This fat plays a
The Female Anatomy
major role in the reproductive cycle. Vitellogenesis, the
The paired ovaries are located similarly to testes. They
 production of yolk, only occurs if enough fat is stored.
consist of epithelial cells, connective tissue, nerves,
Furthermore, snakes may not eat at the end stages of
blood vessels, and germinal cell beds encased in an
gestation, so the fat bodies are used for energy. The
elastic tunic. An inactive ovary is small and granular.
follicles mature within the ovaries. When the follicles
Active ovaries are large, lobular sacs filled with spheri-
are mature and palpable, some ova are released into
cal vitellogenic follicles. Snakes do not have a true
the oviduct while other ova may be released before or
uterus. The oviducts empty directly into the cloaca
after copulation. At this point the snake finds a male
and have an albumin-secreting and shell-secreting
and copulates and the female becomes gravid. After
function.
 the proper gestation period, the female either lays eggs
or gives live birth. At this point the female is very thin
Fertilization
and weak after using all of her fat deposits during
Prior to egg production, ferilization occurs in the
 gestation and/or incubation. She cannot stimulate fol-
upper portion of the oviducts when the sperm and egg
licular maturation until the fat stores have been built
unite. Fertilization is usually delayed for a few hours
back up. She begins to eat and increases her fat bodies,
to years after copulation. The sperm storage structures
and after a couple to several months she is back to full
facilitate storage of sperm for long periods of time.
weight and can begin the follicular maturation cycle
This process of delayed fertilization permits females to
again.
mate with other males, allowing multiple paternity
among the offspring and having a higher fecundity
Courtship
rate, although not all snakes practice this.
It is important to know and observe signs of courtship
 so proper changes can be made. If communal cages are
kept, insubordinate specimens should be separated
from the courting pair. Temperature cycling patterns
should be started before or at the first signs of copula-
tion. Specimens should be removed or added if either
 of the specimens seen courting is inappropriate for
breeding.
 Many courtship behaviors are observed in snakes;
most are not species specific. Following is an explana-
tion of four common courtship behaviors that are seen
in many taxa (Ross et al. 1990).
1. The tactile chase behavior is characterized by the
 male pursuing the female in often jerky and erratic
movements. The male may flick his tongue over the
female's body and begin to crawl over her dorsum,
 trying to align his body with hers. The female will
Figure 7.4. Large pelvic spurs. (Photo courtesy of
continue to crawl away if unreceptive to the
Ryan Cheek.)
behavior.
128
Chapter 7
2. In the tail search copulatory attempt the male
products. The chorion is a membrane that surrounds
rotates his tail under the female's tail in an attempt 
and protects the embryo and yolk sac. The shell mem-
to bring both cloacae together. A receptive female
branes that cover these three membranes provide gas
will then lift her tail or allow her tail to be lifted by
exchange throughout the shell. The blood vessels in
the male. The male may use his spurs to stimulate
the shell membranes and the yolk stalk combine to
the female to lift her tail.
form the umbilicus. As the egg passes through the
 3. Tactile alignment is characterized by the male align-
oviducts, the shell and shell membranes are gradually
ing his tail with the female's, using his spurs as
 applied by the shell glands.
stimulation and to help align the cloacae.
4. Intromission and coitus occurs when a female raises
Timing and Frequency of Reproduction
her tail and everts her cloaca to a male. The male
 Environmental factors trigger the breeding season in
then aligns the two cloacae and copulation occurs.
most species. While some species breed year 'round,
This behavior is also known as cloacal gaping.
breeding season usually begins in the spring after a
hibernation period for temperate species. Most equa-
Oviparous, Ovoviviparous, and Viviparous
torial species breed year *round. There are exceptions
 Oviparous snakes are those that lay eggs that are pro-
to these rules. Some tropical boids reproduce in the
tected by a hard shell. Around 70% of snakes are
cooler part of the year, though temperature changes
oviparous. Some of the more common oviparous
o poseas ui auu up raen e a
  a ad  e  s 
Many species in areas where there is a rainy season,
and milk snakes (Lampropeltis spp.), rat and corn
such as the monsoons in Southeast Asia and India,
snakes (Elapbe spp.), and all pythons. Oviparous
time their reproductive cycle with the rainfall.
snakes go to much trouble finding an appropriate place
It is not common for a snake to reproduce more
to lay their eggs. Some lay in a natural cavity, hollow
 than once in a single year due to the lengthy gestation
stumps, or small mammals burrows, while others dig
 jo zunoue aiel e yoeq ue oi paau pue spouad
their own burrow or make a nest. Most pythons incu-
deposits. The entire reproductive process, starting with
bate their eggs by hugging them and increasing their
follicle maturation and ending with the snake back at
own body heat through rhythmic contractions of their
full weight, can take several months to more than a
abdominal musculature.
year, depending on species.
 Ovoviviparous snakes incubate the eggs inside the
oviducts until the eggs hatch. This process ensures
Maternal Care
 proper humidity and temperature levels within the
Very few snakes show any maternal care. Some pythons
mother's thermoregulative capabilities. Ovoviviparous
coil around the eggs to incubate them and protect them
snakes are found mainly in places where the ground is
from predators. Some viviparous species show mater-
too cold to incubate eggs (Saint-Girons 1994). There
nal care by helping the newborns out of the amniotic
are many disadvantages to ovoviviparous snakes. The
sac and consuming the infertile yolk sac.
 gravid female moves very slowly, which opens her up
to predation; she is only able to eat very small prey,
which are hard to find at times; and she must focus
EGG INCUBATION AND
more on thermoregulation. Some examples of ovovi-
MANAGEMENT
viparous snakes are all boas, all vipers, and garter
snakes (Thamnophis spp.).
Artificial Incubation
Snakes do not practice true viviparity.
It is recommended that eggs only be artificialy incu-
bated by experienced herpetoculturists. Many herpe-
 a n a  ae s
EGG ANATOMY
chance of hatching. In captivity, it is difficult for the
female snake to keep the relative humidity high enough
After fertilization, the embryo begins to develop on the
to incubate her own eggs. If the decision is made to
dorsal surface of the yolk. The yolk is then covered by
artificially incubate the eggs, the herpetoculturists
the yolk sac and attached to the embryo by the yolk
must be prepared several days before the female lays
stalk at the umbilicus. Nourishment is provided by the
the eggs, and the incubator should be ready several
yolk via the blood vessels of the yolk sac. The amnion
days in advance. It should maintain a constant tem-
is a fluid-flled sac that surrounds and protects the
perature and humidity that is ideal for the species
embryo. The allantois is a closed sac that collects waste
being incubated. For most species, a temperature range
Snakes
129
of 86°F to 91°F is ideal. Eggs do not benefit from
tainer should be installed that does not rest on the
temperature variations so a constant temperature
bottom of the incubator to allow the heat to be evenly
should be maintained. It is not critical to measure the
distributed throughout the entire incubator. The ther-
relative humidity, although a high relative humidity
mostat should be sensitive enough to control the
should be maintained. As long as condensation appears
temperature fluctuation within one degree, and the
on the sides of the incubator, the humidity should be
temperature should be monitored from the outside of
high enough.
 the incubator. To ensure adequate humidity, the incu-
When the female lays the eggs, herpetoculturists
bator and eggs should be sprayed with water that is the
should move quickly to remove them. The eggs become
same temperature as the incubator every two to three
adherent within a few hours after oviposition. It is
days. The incubator should be lined with Styrofoam to
preferable that the eggs be laid singly in the incubator
maintain a proper temperature. The best substrates are
so they can be properly monitored; the conditions
vermiculite, sphagnum moss, potting soil, sand, shred-
 inside the enclosure also may be inadequate for proper
 ded newspaper, pea gravel, and paper towels.
incubation, which can be detrimental to the eggs. Eggs
can dehydrate within forty-eight to seventy-two hours.
Determining Egg Viability
Gently remove the eggs and place them in the
pre-
A viable clutch should be uniform in size, have a bril-
heated incubator. The incubator should be checked
liant white color, and be pliable or elastic (Ross et al.
-pnu pue aaduan adord rg p e sau ieas
1990). If an egg is smaller, discolored, or hard or
ity and the eggs should be checked for viability.
rubbery, it usually is not fertilized. Some female snakes
reject an unfertilized egg from the clutch. If an egg does
Matemal Incubation
 not adhere to the rest of the clutch, it should still be
Maternal incubation should be performed for several
incubated until signs of egg death appear. Wrinkles or
reasons. The eggs should be maternally incubated if
depressions at the time of oviposition are not signs of
the female is too large or aggressive to safely remove
 nonviability. A fertilized egg does not show significant
the eggs, if she unexpectedly laid eggs and an incubator
 change during the incubation period. An unfertilized
was not ready, or if normal incubation parameters are
egg quickly begins to show signs of decomposition.
not known. The humidity in the cage should not fall
 It can sometimes be very difficult to determine the
below 75%. Because of the high humidity that must
viability of an egg. If the viability is uncertain, the egg
be maintained, the cage should be kept in a very clean
 should be incubated until further signs appear. The
environment with adequate circulation. The tempera-
rest of the clutch will not be in danger. The texture of
ture in the cage should be constant. The incubating
 an egg or irregular calcification should not be used as
female should not have to thermoregulate, which
an indication of nonviability. Another method for
requires an excessive amount of energy that many
determining egg viability is a technique called can-
incubating females do not have. The cage should be
dling, which uses of a high intensity light to transil-
 1n sads ud 1s rg  8 1e 1da
luminate the egg. A viable egg should have a network
 incubation was chosen due to a lack of experience in
 of blood vessels and an embryo during the late stages
artificial incubation, extensive research on the natural
of incubation. The absence of blood vessels indicates
history of the species should be conducted to deter-
a nonviable egg.
mine the proper incubating temperature.
Manual Pipping
IncubatorDesign
 Sometimes manual pipping is necessary for the embryo
 Incubators can be bought commercially or easily made.
to live. An egg should be manually pipped only if most
The basic requirements of an incubator are: the con-
eggs in the clutch have hatched, no eggs have pipped
struction should prevent excessive heat and humidity
by the estimated due date, or the due date is unknown.
loss, there must be a constant and reliable heat source,
Manual pipping is a very delicate procedure that with
 and there must be a thermostat to control the tempera-
time and practice can be a very effective method of
ture. The actual design of the incubator can vary as
saving a clutch. All that is needed to perform this
long as the above three rules are met.
technique is a pair of iris scissors and thumb forceps.
 Some general guidelines should be followed when
 A small perforation is made in the shell with the iris
constructing an incubator. It should be uniformly
scissors. With the scissors pointing up toward the inner
heated. An easy way to accomplish this is by using heat
surface of the eggshell, a small incision is then made
tape that can be evenly positioned on the bottom of the
in the shell. Another small incision is made at the site
incubator. Hot water can also be used. An inner con-
of the puncture creating a V-shaped incision. The
130
 Chapter 7
wedge can be elevated using the thumb forceps and
removed. If done properly, the shell membranes should
all still be intact. During this process, one should avoid
cutting large blood vessels; small vessels are impossible
to avoid. The embryo should not be visible.
 The shell membranes should be gently separated
from the shell with the thumb forceps, starting at the
window that was made and then working outward.
More pieces of shell can be removed as the membrane
is separated. The embryo can then be stimulated when
 a large enough window has been made.
To stimulate the embryo, prod it gently with a blunt
tip instrument. If it is alive, the embryo will move
freely in the egg. The embryo should be intermittently
stimulated until the neonate has emerged from the
Figure 7.5. Inappropriate housing for a snake.
shell. This process usually takes twelve to twenty-four
(Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
hours.
solely of wood without any way to view the snake.
Glass or Plexiglas should be included when construct-
HOUSING
ing a wooden enclosure. Screen can be used on the
sides or even the top of the enclosure to ensure proper
The following points must be considered when obtain-
ventilation. Without proper ventilation, bacteria accu-
ing housing for a snake: (1) the size (length) of the
mulate, making the enclosure stagnant. Using screen
snake to be housed, (2) whether it is a terrestrial or an
on the top also allows for proper lighting/heat fixtures
arboreal species, (3) security of the housing (escape
to be affixed while preventing the snake from contact-
proof), (4) proper ventilation, (5) access for necessary
 ing the fixtures. To prevent burns, heat lamps should
cleaning/disinfecting.
 not be placed inside the enclosure where the snake can
Aquariums are certainly suitable and aesthetically
contact them.
pleasing enclosures for most species of snakes, but can
An enclosure should not be constructed solely of
be quite costly to obtain, especially when housing
screen, however, because it can become too drafty. The
some of the larger species. Ideally, the length of the
wood used should be sanded and free of abrasive sur-
enclosure should be no less than half of the length of
faces to prevent potential injuries to the snake. It also
the snake being housed. When housing arboreal species
 must be treated or painted to allow regular cleaning
(i.e., green tree python), the enclosure should have
without damaging the wood and so that feces and such
more vertical space than horizontal to allow for place-
do not soak into the porous wood. Priming and paint-
ment of perches for the snake. If an aquarium is used,
 ing the inside of the enclosure white can assist in spot-
it is important that a lid can be secured appropriately.
ting problems such as mites in the caging. The white
Lids that rest on top of the aquarium without any
 paint also reflects the light better.
locking mechanisms are NOT appropriate for snakes
Different locking mechanisms can be chosen,
because they are escape artists. Aquarium lids should
 depending on what is preferred to access the inside of
allow proper ventilation (i.e. screen lids) if the aquar-
the cage. Everything from hinged doors with padlocks
ium itself does not have any ventilation holes (most do
to sliding glass doors are suitable for securing the
not). The lid must not present a potential fire hazard
custom enclosure.
if heat lamps are used above it. Plastic lids, for instance,
Commercially available enclosures such as Neodesha
will melt (Figure 7.5). Any aquariums with cracks
and Visions cages are specifically made for keeping
should be avoided due to the potential for the glass to
reptiles. These are perfectly suitable for housing snakes
shatter, resulting in injury to the animal.
 if one does not mind the added expense and as long
Building an enclosure for a snake is usually the
 as an appropriately sized enclosure can be obtained.
preferred method of acquiring housing. It is less expen-
sive in most cases and allows for customizing accord-
Substrate
ing to the snake's needs. Customizing an enclosure can
 Many different types of substrate are used in snake
be enjoyable as long as a couple of guidelines are fol-
enclosures (Figure 7.6). There also is a lot of debate
lowed. Obviously, it is not ideal to construct a cage
about what is appropriate and what can be harmful.
BARK
549
A
B
BONE AID
ccsand
alciumcarbonatg'subist
C
D
Figure 7.6. Various common commercially available substrates. (A) Repti Bark (fir bark). (B) Ground coconut
shell. (C) Calcium carbonate granules. (D.) Cypress mulch. (Photos courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
131
132
Chapter 7
It is necessary to read as much literature about the
brands of sand used as substrate for reptiles claim that
snake as possible to obtain more information about its
if it is ingested the sand is less likely to cause impac-
natural habitat to better assist in making husbandry-
tions than regular play sand due to its calcium contents
related choices.
and fine grain. However, caution should still be
Cedar and pine shavings are not recommended as
used when feeding any reptile on a sand substrate.
substrate for any reptiles. The oils and natural aroma
Furthermore, too much of calcium consumption can
of these shavings can be toxic to snakes and can even
be just as harmful as calcium deficiencies. Those who
lead to respiratory disorders. Shavings can also lodge
choose to use sand as a substrate can let personal
in the snake's oral cavity, which could cause stomatitis
preference dictate their choice. The key is to ensure it
(mouth rot). Although some companies claim that
is not being ingested, and if that is the case then the
 these shavings are great for snakes because they repel
substrate should be changed.
mites and ticks, use of any cedar or pine shavings
Cypress mulch is another good substrate, especially
should be avoided.
for species that require higher humidity. It can make
 Aspen shavings can be used for some of the snake
an enclosure look very natural and it is relatively inex-
species that require an arid climate. They should not be
 pensive. It is important to make sure that it is actually
used for snakes that require high humidity because
a yrn jo ad raue nou ue yn ssa
there are more suitable substrates for maintaining high
eucalyptus) because these can be very aromatic and
humidity. The aspen shavings must treated through a
lead to respiratory problems. The mulch can be mixed
 baking process, which can help to eliminate any poten-
with sphagnum moss if the goal is to make a natural
tial for parasites contained in the shavings and to ensure
appearing environment.
that they are free of toxic oils. Aspen shavings can also
Newspaper is frequently used as substrate, espe-
 become lodged in the snake's mouth so as a precaution,
 cially when an multiple snakes are kept. Newspaper is
the snake should not be fed on aspen shavings.
plentiful, inexpensive, and easily obtained. It is absor-
 Indoor/outdoor carpet or Astroturf is commonly
 bent and easily replaced during routine cleanings. It is
used as substrate. It is aesthetically pleasing and does
especially good for animals in quarantine, and it is the
not present any immediate harm to the snake. It can
substrate best suited for feeding because the chances
be purchased by the yard at most local hardware
of it being ingested are not as great as loose substrate.
stores. Routine cleaning and disinfecting is more
Although it is not as aesthetically pleasing as some
demanding than with other substrates because the
forms of substrate, it is definitely easier to maintain.
carpet needs to be replaced frequently and is more
Potting soil should be used with caution. Most
expensive than some options. When a snake defecates
 potting soils have fertilizers and other chemicals that
 or passes urates, the carpet absorbs some of the matter
could be toxic to snakes. If topsoil is used, make sure
and needs to be washed or replaced or it will become
that it is organic and free of chemicals. Topsoil can be
pungent and allow bacterial and/or mold growth.
a good substrate to use for snakes that require high
Animals with parasite infections should have the carpet
humidity because of its ability to retain moisture. This
changed completely to avoid recontamination.
 can be used for terrestrial and burrowing species.
Aquarium gravel and corncob should not be used.
Caution should be used if tree limbs, substrate, or
Some gravel can be abrasive and both can cause impac-
any other objects are collected from outside. They
tions if ingested in large amounts.
can contaminate the enclosure with parasites, molds,
Sand is used often for desert species, and there are
fungus, etc. Sterilization can be attempted with these
many contradicting statements regarding its use in any
 objects via boiling/baking or disinfecting with a diluted
reptile enclosure. There is debate about whether it
 bleach solution to minimize contamination. Tree limbs
causes digestive problems and obstructions. However,
taken from outside should not have any sticky sub-
sand is the natural substrate of many desert species.
stances such as sap on them.
Any loose substrate that is ingested in large amounts
 Good judgment must be used when choosing an
could potentially cause these problems as well as sto-
appropriate substrate. Knowing the geographic range
matitis. The snake should not be fed in the enclosure
 of the particular snake housed will aid in making hus-
to reduce the chance of this happening. Some people
bandry decisions.
feed their snakes in plastic tubs or boxes to eliminate
the opportunity to ingest substrate while feeding.
Heating and Lighting
Some people buy play sand at the hardware store
Snakes are ectothermic, which means they rely on their
to use as substrate, while others buy the sand sold at
surroundings
s to regulate their body temperature.
 pet stores for reptile substrate. Some of the commercial
 Unlike mammals, they are unable to do this on their
Snakes
133
own. Therefore, snakes kept in captivity require
Whether the snake is desert-dwelling or tropical, it
heating and lighting supplementation (Table 7.2).
is necessary to maintain an enclosure that mimics its
 Failure to maintain appropriate temperatures for the
natural surroundings and climate zone. Ideally, snakes
 particular snake can lead to respiratory disorders, food
 need a warm basking area to maintain good health as
regurgitation, anorexia due to lethargy, and even 
well as a cooler area to retreat to if they get too warm.
death.
 Thermometers must be used to ensure that necessary
Table 7.2. Husbandry Data for Selected Species of Snakes.
Ambient
temperature
Average
in Fahrenheit
Common name
Scientifc name
length*
(day)#*
Humidity
Geographic range
Boas
Common boa
Boa constrictor
~6'-10'
80-8.5
50-70%
Central America and
 South America
Brazilian rainbow
Epicrates cenchria
5'-7'
80-85
75-90%
Brazil
boa
cenchria
 Emerald tree boa
Corallus caninus
4'-6'
75-82
8.5-90%
Amazon Basin
Rosy boa
Lichanura trivirgata
2'-3'
80-8.5
20-30%
Southern CA, AZ,
Mexico
Pythons
 Ball python
Pythonrequis
3'-5'
80-8.5
60-65%
Central Africa,
Western Africa,
Borneo
 Blood python
Python curtus
3'-6'
80-8.5
70-75%
 Borneo Islands,
Malaysia, Sumatra
 Burmese python 
Python molurus
12'-20'
80-85
70-80%
S.E.Asia
bivittatus
 Green tree python
Morelia
4'-6'
75-8.5
8.5-90%
Australia, New
chondropython
Guinea
viridis
Carpet python
Morelia spilota
6'-10'
80-8.5
60-70%
Australia
 Reticulated python
Python reticulatus
10'-2.5'
80-8.5
65-70%
Thailand, Indonesia,
 Philippines (S.E.
Asia)
African rock python
Python sebae
12'-20'
80-8.5
65-70%
Africa
Colubrids
Common king snakes
Lampropeltis getula
4'-5'
75-8.5
30-50%
North & South
America
Corn snakes
Elaphe guttata
4'-5'
75-8.5
50-60%
 Eastern United
States, Midwest
United States
 Rat snake
Elaphe obsoleta
5'-7'
75-8.5
50-60%
 North America
Milk snake
Lampropeltis
2'-5'
75-8.5
50-60%
North & South
triangulum
America
Gopher/Bull/
Pituophis spp.
4'-7'
75-8.5
30-50%
United States &
Pinesnake
Mexico
Garter/Ribbon snakes
Thamnophis spp.
2'-4'
75-80
60-75%
United States
*Lengths refer to average adult lengths (in feet) not absolute min./max. lengths.
jo dop auuu e qim iauu Hoi-s aq pinoys siods uysq sainedui uque saisae ae uaia saneadass
5-10°F.
134
Chapter 7
temperatures are being met. These can be bought at
 medium if the low setting is not producing enough heat
most pet stores and have adhesives so they can be
to benefit the snake. The bottom of the enclosure
easily placed into the enclosure. Ideally, one thermom-
should always be tested (via touch or thermometers)
eter should be affixed in the enclosure where the
thoroughly to ensure it does not get too hot. A high
hottest temperature is achieved and one should be
setting should never be used. Do not trust that the
affixed in the cool zone. If the snake is a terrestrial
 snake will move if the heating element gets too hot.
species, the thermometer should be placed close to the
Thermal burns are easily prevented if caution is used
bottom. With arboreal species, the thermometers
and regular checks are performed on the heating
should be placed near the areas where the snake can
elements.
perch (Figure 7.7).
 Heat lamps are acceptable primary heat sources and
Heat rocks are sold as an artificial heat source for
they also provide the snake with necessary day and
reptiles. These are not reliable heat sources and can in
 night cycles if actual lights are used. These lamps can
fact injure the snake. The heating element is not on a
be used in conjunction with under-tank heaters for
thermostat and can become extremely hot. The snake
snakes that require high temperatures. Clamp light
can sustain serious burns if it is allowed direct contact
fixtures are relatively inexpensive and can be pur-
with the rock. At other times the rock can be cool to
chased from a local hardware store (Figure 7.8). These
the touch, providing no supplemental heat at all. While
can be placed on top of the enclosure (on a screen, not
the author does not recommend heat rocks, if they are
plastic or flammable material) or clamped to a surface
used they should be buried under the substrate so the
 allowing the light to be directed into the enclosure.
snake does not have direct contact with them, and they
 Bulbs should be selected based on the snake's tem-
should not be the only source of heat provided.
 perature needs and the design of the enclosure itself.
Heating tape and pads and under-tank heaters are
Incandescent bulbs, ceramic heat emitters, or flood
good sources of heat for snakes. They also sold com-
lamps can be used for heating purposes. The wattage
mercially in the pet trade and if used correctly, are
 of the bulb depends on the dimensions of the enclosure
safer than heat rocks. The pads and tape can be placed
and the snake's temperature needs. In most cases, a
on the outside of the enclosure underneath the tank
50- to 75-watt bulb is sufficient. Extremely high
where the snake cannot have direct contact with the
wattage bulbs or those used for food warming pur-
units but still benefit from the heat being emitted.
poses should not be used because they get extremely
These heating mechanisms distribute the heat more
hot. The heat-emitting bulbs should be sufficiently
evenly and in some cases cover the entire length of the
distant from the snake so that burns do not occur, and
enclosure. If a heating pad that has a temperature
the snake should not have direct access to the bulbs.
setting control is used, the setting should be kept on
 Burns can be sustained from any heat source, including
low. If the enclosure is made of thick wood or if there
bulbs, if the snake is allowed direct access to them or
is a thick layer of substrate, the pad can be placed on
if they are not placed at a safe distance from the snake.
Figure 7.7. Thermometer and bygrometer. (Photo
Figure 7.8. Clamp light fixture. (Photo courtesy of
courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
Ryan Cheek.)
Snakes
135
The snake is allowed a good basking area when the
Wiring the heating device (bulbs or pads) to a ther-
lamp is placed at one end of the enclosure. The other
mostat can assist in more accurately maintaining tem-
end should be free of any heat sources to provide a
peratures and decrease the chance of thermal burns.
cooler zone to retreat to (Figure 7.9).
This is not to say that thermostats are always accurate
 Lights used as heat sources should not be kept on
 or 100% dependable, but it certainly helps. Frequent
all the time. Timers can be used to control when the
temperature checks should be performed when syn-
light comes on and turns off. This assists in maintain-
chronizing thermostats.
 ing natural photoperiods or day/night cycles. Ideally,
the snake should have around twelve to thirteen hours
Water and Humidity
of daylight followed by eleven to twelve hours of dark-
 Depending on the geographic range the snake derives
ness to mimic nighttime. The timers can be set to
from, it may be necessary to supplement humidity as
mimic the different seasonal day/night cycles by syn-
well as heat. Tropical species (i.e. emerald tree boas)
chronizing them with the different day/night cycles
need relatively high humidity and require some form
that change slightly from season to season. For
 of supplementation. In some cases, it may be necessary
example, there are longer daylight hours in the summer
 to make husbandry choices to prevent high humidity,
than in winter; therefore, daylight should be provided
as with desert species that require arid environments.
for approximately thirteen hours, whereas in winter
Hygrometers (humidity gauges) can be purchased
eleven hours of daylight is typical.
with thermometers and placed inside the enclosure
 It is particularly important to follow the photope-
to provide humidity readings. This provides informa-
riod in snakes if breeding is being considered. Some
tion about when humidity needs to be increased or
snakes are only receptive to breeding during certain
decreased so any changes necessary can be made for
seasons, so these seasonal changes must be recreated
ideal conditions.
in captivity for successful breeding activity. However,
 High humidity can be maintained by misting the
if bulbs are the only source of heat being used, it may
entire enclosure and even the snake. The mist should
be necessary to purchase night bulbs to ensure the
 be fine and not extremely cold or hot water. It may be
snake does not get too cool during the night hours. A
necessary to mist multiple times a day for tropical
slight drop in temperature at night is a natural, but too
species. Some people even set up misting systems on
aA ieay ia sqnq in 'ssau oi pea ueo yon
timers to provide constant and consistent humidity
allow darkness. Red, blue, black light, ceramic or com-
(see Figure 7.7).
mercially available night bulbs can be purchased
to
 Remember that humidity is the presence of moisture
achieve this. Reading the temperature gauges in the
in the atmosphere itself. If the enclosure does not allow
enclosure assists in deciding whether night bulbs are
humidity to stay contained, then it must be modified
necessary. Keeping the enclosure in a temperature-
or a different enclosure should be used. For snakes that
controlled room and away from drafty areas fi.e.
require high humidity, enclosures made exclusively
windows) aids in preventing drastic temperature
 of screen are not ideal due to the inability to keep
changes at night when the heat lamps go off.
moisture within the enclosure. The moisture will
UV lighting or natural sunlight certainly could be
escape. Aquariums are good for maintaining humidity;
beneficial to the snake, but it is not detrimental to the
however, an appropriate lid is necessary. Furthermore,
snake's overall health as with diurnal lizards if it is not
ensure that the enclosure have some sort of ventilation
provided (Figure 7.10). It should be clear, though, that
to prevent the air and substrate from becoming
there no any bulb available that can replace natural
stagnant. Typically, if water is added to supplement
sunlight. During the warmer months, if the snake is
humidity (via misting, etc.), it should be evaporated at
kept outside, which is not recommended, special pre-
least within twenty-four hours. The enclosure is lacking
cautions are necessary. Glass or Plexiglas enclosures
 appropriate ventilation if it does not evaporate. It may
should not be used at all outside because they can get
take some trial and error to get the humidity right.
extremely hot in the direct sunlight and prove to be
When obtaining tropical species that require humid
fatal to the snake. The inside of the enclosure can
environments, appropriate methods should be estab-
become hot much like in a car with the windows rolled
lished before placing the snake in the enclosure.
up and no air flow. When other enclosures are used
 However, most species may not require any supple-
outside a shaded area should always be provided for
mentation if appropriate enclosures and substrates are
the animal. Snakes must be able to retreat to an area
used.
that is not receiving direct sunlight when they
are
 A water supply is essential for all snakes and can
finished basking or they will become overheated.
 assist in maintaining humidity as well. The enclosure
ESURe
REDHEAT
REDHEAT
BLACK
HEAT
HDIN
100WATT
100 WATT
NCANDESCENT
INCANDESCE
C
Theultinat
allypeso reprles
campufe
light/
Figure 7.9. Various commercially incandescent heat lamps.
(A) Night light. (B) Basking day light. (C) Incandescent heat
B
light.(Photos courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
136
Snakes
137
(sphagnum or peat), and mulch are great substrate
       sg
absorb and hold moisture well unless too much water
is added. Regular mistings in conjunction with appro-
priate substrate are keys in maintaining high humidity.
Items such as newspaper, shavings, or rock gravel
allow pooling and are not ideal for humid terrestrial
environments.
Other Cage Furmishings
Hide boxes are easily constructed and really make a
difference in the snake's overall demeanor. A snake
that has a place to go where it feels secure is less
stressed in its captive environment. This has also been
Figure 7.10. UV light bulb. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
 known to assist in the feeding response in some snakes 
Cheek.)
(i.e. ball python). Hide boxes can be constructed from
everything from boxes, plastic pots, and Tupperware
(not clear), to logs. They also may be purchased from
reptile supply stores and dealers. No matter how elab-
orate or simple they are, hide boxes serve the same
 purpose and should be provided.
Tree branches or some sort of perching material
should be provided for arboreal species. PVC pipe can
be used for this purpose as well. The perch should not
be any bigger in diameter than the largest part of the
snake's body. Anything larger makes perching diffi-
cult. Make sure all perching materials are secured
properly and free of abrasive surfaces.
Decorative rocks are nice additions to an enclosure
but can also injure the snake if there are sharp edges.
Snakes often use cage furnishings to assist them when
Figure 7.11. This is not an appropriate method of
shedding by rubbing against them. Nothing with rough
providing water to a snake. (Photo courtesy of Stacy
texture should be placed in the enclosure.
Bailey.)
should contain an appropriately sized water container.
QUARANTINE
Some snakes enjoy soaking in the water prior to shed-
ding, so the snake's size should be considered when
All reptiles brought into a home or facility should
choosing an appropriate bowl. Small ceramic bowls
-su aeoada si s d aunb e onan
 q   i ss  r  
sary in environments where numerous reptiles are
as easily as lightweight bowls) and plastic tubs work
housed. There are some diseases in reptiles that can
well for larger snakes. Be careful not to overfill because
wipe out whole collections if proper quarantine pro-
the snake can cause large amounts of water to spill
cedures are not used (i.e. inclusive body disease).
over when submerging. The water should be changed
 A room should be set aside for quarantine purposes
if it becomes soiled or stagnant, and no less than once
and should be absent of other animals, especially other
a week. A water container placed over the heating
reptiles. During the quarantine period, physical exams
element (heating pad or tape) creates some humidity
and fecal exams should be performed to check for
and evaporates quickly so the water levels should be
internal and external parasites. Ideally, a fecal culture
watched closely. If the species requires low humidity,
for salmonella should be performed as well. Salmonella
obviously the water should not be placed near the
is transmissible to other reptiles and is zoonotic. The
heating elements (Figure 7.11).
quarantine period should be no less than thirty days.
Substrate can play a vital role in maintaining high
Some facilities have a six-month quarantine period for
humidity. Substrate materials such as topsoil, moss
all reptiles. The quarantine period should be extended
138
Chapter 7
if the snake becomes ill and continued until the snake
neglected are of little nutritional benefit to the snake
is healthy.
that eats them. Just going through the motions of
 Proper cleaning and disinfecting is very important
feeding the snake does not ensure nutritional require-
during this time. The enclosures should be set up to
ments are being met. Remember, you are what you eat.
meet the snake's individual requirements but 
also
Today, many companies breed insects and rodents
should allow for frequent cleaning. Newspaper is a
specifically for food items, and they offer every growth 
good substrate to use for quarantined animals due to
stage of rats and mice. Commercially available snake
the ease of cleaning. It is easily changed and is cheap
food includes various stages of mice, rats, gerbils,
to replace. When the snake defecates or passes urates,
rabbits, guinea pigs, chickens (and other birds such as
the substrate should be changed completely. A dilute
guinea chicks). For smaller snakes (i.e. garter and
bleach solution (one-half cup bleach to 1 gallon of
ribbon snakes) that feed primarily on invertebrates,
water) should be used to clean surfaces in the enclo-
there are crickets, various worms, and even small fish
sure. Make sure the surfaces are dry before placing the
available for feeding purposes. In some cases, other
snake back in the enclosure. Gloves should be worn
reptile and/or amphibian species, such as anoles or
when cleaning soiled cages to prevent contamination.
frogs, may be used to encourage finicky eaters to feed
Any cage furnishings should be properly disinfected or
in captivity. However, most of the commonly kept
replaced.
species feed on rodents. Below are some of the terms
 used when specifying the stage of feeder rodent desired
if standard adult size is not ideal:
NUTRITION
·Pinkies: baby mice, no fur present yet
All snakes are carnivores that feed on whole prey
 Fuzzies: baby mice that have just gotten fur
items. Their digestive system is made to digest whole
 Hoppers: juvenile mice that have fur and all adult
 prey and they cast out or defecate the parts of the prey
characteristics but are not as large as adult mice
that are not digested, such as fur. Eating whole car-
 Pups: usually unweaned or nursing baby rats
casses provides them with added nutrients such as
?
Weanlings: baby rats that are no longer nursing
calcium from bone so that no further supplementation
 Otherwise (for rats): small, medium, large, or jumbo
is needed. Feeding packaged meat and poultry prod-
is used to obtain the desired size.
ucts is not an appropriate, balanced diet for snakes.
Feeding in this manner may be convenient for some,
Choose an appropriately sized meal by offering a
but it is not as nutritionally beneficial as whole prey
 prey item that is no larger than the biggest part of the
items. It should be remembered that just because a
snake eats something readily does not mean it is nutri-
size of the snake's head. This can be deceiving because
tionally sound. It is the responsibility of the person
the snake will dislocate its jaw for feeding; therefore, it
who cares for the captive snake to make sure its nutri-
can feed on prey items that are much larger than its
tional needs are properly met.
head. Gauging by the actual body itself helps to ensure
Although some commonly
kept species feed
on
e  ad yoa aei e a aq s aus a ie
invertebrates, most readily feed using commercially
yet one that is not so big that could cause an uncomfort-
bred mice and rats. What to feed the snake depends
 able, large, bulging appearance.
on multiple factors: (1) availability of prey item,
Another benefit of easily accessible commercial
(2) natural diet, (3) whether the snake was captive-
rodent breeders is the ability to purchase rodents
bred or wild-caught, and (4) size of the snake.
prekilled and/or frozen. Some people find it dishearten-
ing and difficult to feed live rodents to snakes. In the
Prey Items
wild, the snake feed on live prey, but with the avail-
With the increase in popularity of keeping snakes in
ability of prekilled prey on the market, there is no need
captivity, there is a larger and more diverse market for
for this in captivity. Captive-bred specimens readily
buying varieties of food items. At one point, the most
feed off prekilled or previously frozen prey items.
accessible food items were pet rodents at pet stores.
Offering live prey to snakes causes unnecessary suffer-
Not only was this costly, but the pet rodent's nutri-
ing to the rodent, and the snake can endure rodent
  s  d   p
 bites as a result. Significant rodent bites can cause
as those that are sold as food items. It is essential that
many dermatological problems; some even warrant
any prey item is fed a nutritionally sound diet. Those
systemic antibiotics and/or topical treatments of a
that were starved, fed inappropriately, or otherwise
dilute betadine or chlorhexidine solution. Scars from
Snakes
139
bite wounds are usually apparent in snakes that are
is when the snake is being fed. This creates a feeding
offered live prey items (Color Plate 7.1).
response and makes bites more likely to occur. Feeding
 Offering previously frozen prey rather than live
outside the primary enclosure is safer and also can help
prey has many other benefits. It is usually cheaper to
to ensure that any loose substrate located inside the
and may be purchased in bulk rates if freezer space is
primary enclosure is not ingested during feeding.
available. Another benefit is that a frozen rodent is
 certainly less likely to introduce parasites to the snake
Why Won't My Snake Eat?
and/or enclosure. Rodents are one of the main sources
 Some people claim that their snake will not take previ-
of parasitic contamination in captive snakes. They can
ously frozen prey and will only accept live prey items.
harbor mites, for instance. If a frozen prey item had
 Some people have snakes that are reluctant eaters in
parasites (endoparasite or ectoparasite), the parasites
general. Below are some feeding guidelines and tips to
will most likely be dead due to the freezing process.
follow for all reluctant eaters.
This is not to say, however, that it is acceptable to
Some snakes, such as Boidae and pit vipers, have
knowingly offer parasite-infested animals as food just
heat-seeking pits that they rely on for locating their
because they were frozen. Buying snake food from a
warm-blooded prey. Some people confuse these pits
reputable company helps to make sure the snake's
for nostrils. These bilateral openings are located on the
nutritional needs are met.
skin of the upper lip, usually under the nares. If they
 Do not attempt to feed a frozen rodent to the snake;
confront a cold prey item (previously frozen), they are
it must first be thawed out. Putting the rodent in a zip
unlikely to show any interest; therefore, make sure that
lock bag and submerging it in hot water is an easy
the prey item is warm, using the warming techniques
way to do thaw it. Some people even place the rodent
 described above, before offering it to the snake.
on a warm surface (under a heat lamp, on a heat pad,
Motion also can trigger a snake to feed. Tongs
etc.) to ensure the rodent is properly thawed.
should always be used when placing a prekilled rodent
 Microwaves are not an option for thawing rodents.
into the enclosure. This is especially true when one
Feedings only need to occur about once a week to
entices the snake by moving the prey item around.
every fourteen days for adult snakes due to their slow
Many snakebites occur during feedings and can be
digestive process. For juveniles, it may be necessary to
easily avoided if using tongs (not hands) when feeding
feed twice a week to ensure that proper nutritional
and keeping a safe distance from the snake.
requirements are being met during the growth process.
There are several things to check for if the snake
If a snake refuses one meal, do not panic. This occurs
was wild-caught and is not feeding in captivity. Wild-
occasionally and the snake will not starve in one
caught specimens are frequently reluctant to eat in
week's time. If several consecutive meals are skipped,
captive environments. Remember that they have been
then the snake's inappetence needs to be addressed.
taken from their natural habitat and placed in a cage.
To avoid bites, some reptile hobbyists believe that
Furthermore, in most cases they are being offered prey
snakes should not be fed inside their primary enclo-
they would have never encountered in their natural
sure, especially if the only time the enclosure is opened
habitat. For example, a green tree python feeds pri-
marily on birds, frogs, and occasional small mammals
in its natural habitat. Once in captivity, it is offered
white mice. This is an unnatural prey item and small
mammals are not a large part of the natural diet to
 begin with. This is not to say that it will never accept
commercially bred rodents in captivity, but adjusting
to a new captive environment is tough.
 ‘  e r o  is i A
feeding colored rodents rather than the typical white
feeder rodents if the snake is reluctant to eat white
 rodents. Although more expensive than mice and rats,
gerbils are another option to be used for prey. This
sometimes helps with wild-caught snakes that are
reluctant to eat because gerbils look more like a natural
Plate 7.1. A snake suffering from trauma from a
source of prey than white rodents do. Wild-caught
prey item. (Photo courtesy of Dr. Sam Rivera.) (See
specimens will most likely be reluctant to take prekilled
also color plates)
Aard all on pasooe ae aau asneoaq Aeu and
140
Chapter 7
items. Therefore, attempting to feed prekilled or frozen
breathable fabric and can be secured. The snake should
prey items to newly acquired wild-caught snakes will
be placed in the sack and then the sack should be knot
most likely be unsuccessful and will take time. Besides 
tied at the open end. The bag should then be grabbed
the moral issues with keeping wild-caught snakes, this
above the knot because a bite can still occur through a
is another reason why they should be avoided as
bag. The bag should be moved using tongs if the snake
purchases.
is venomous. Venomous snakes should be transported
 Some people attempt to speed up the process of
 in something more durable to safeguard against bites.
getting a wild-caught snake to accept commercially
Plastic tubs or clean paint buckets with lids can be
bred rodents by scenting them. This does work occa-
used as well. This works well for larger species if a
sionally. Scenting them is achieved by rubbing a natural
large enough bag cannot be obtained. One should
prey item on the rodent to leave a scent. This works
-doid panoas aq ueo o umop sdeus pl aui ieqi ansua
mostly for hobbyists who keep multiple species of
erly in case the snake pushes on it. Breathing holes
reptiles and amphibians. For example, if trying to feed
must be cut in the plastic if tubs or buckets are used
a mouse to a snake that mostly feeds on lizards and
taking care not to create abrasive or sharp edges that
frogs naturally, a person can rub the feeder rodent on 
the snake could contact.
a lizard or frog that is kept in their collection. This
will leave the scent of that animal on the rodent, and
 possibly trick the snake into eating it.
DISEASES AND CLINICAL CONDITIONS
Another common reason a snake may refuse food
is inadequate heat. If a snake is cold, it will most likely
Diseases Affecting tbe Reproductive Tract
refuse food. A snake needs to be warm to properly
 Cloacal prolapse is a common problem seen in snakes.
digest food. Regurgitation occurs frequently in snakes
The prolapse can be the colon, hemipenes, uterus, or
kept too cold. A snake that is too cold spends most of
oviduct. It is usually caused by excessive straining or
its time in a heat-preserving posture and is not inter-
 during copulation. It is important to determine which
ested in feding at all. Make sure all heat requirements
organ has prolapsed before initiating treatment. The
are being met when dealing with a reluctant eater.
hemipenes are solid and do not have a lumen. The
As a rule, when a snake refuses prey, all husbandry
colon is smooth and has a lumen. Feces are normally
requirements should be checked to ensure they are
be seen if the colon is prolapsed. The oviduct or shell
being met properly. Even something as simple as
gland has longitudinal striations with a lumen. There
absence of a hide box (a secure place) will cause a
 are no feces present if it is the oviduct or shell gland.
snake to refuse prey.
Hemipenile prolapse, or paraphimosishas several
Note: If a snake is about to shed, it will most likely
causes, including infections from bacteria, fungus, or
refuse food. Food items should not even be offered
parasites; swelling secondary to forced probing; forced
until the snake has fully shed to avoid excess stress.
separation during copulation; constipation; or neuro-
Snakes that are ailing from respiratory disorders or
logic dysfunction in the hemipenes retractor appara-
other illnesses most likely stop feeding as well. The
tus, cloacal vent, or anal sphincter muscles. Treatment
onset of illness affects their appetites, just like any
should begin immediately after diagnosis. The pro-
other animal. It is extremely important for the snake's
lapsed hemipenis should be cleaned, lubed, and
owner to read as much literature as possible on the
 replaced. If replacement is unsuccessful or the hemipe-
snake being kept. Once again, knowing the natural 
nis is necrotic, the hemipenis should be amputated.
geographic range of the snake help in making hus-
Snakes have two hemipenes, so reproductive ability is
bandry decisions, which may be the root of many
not affected.
problems. All too often, snakes are impulse buys and
 A prolapsed colon is caused by excessive straining,
the buyer does not bother with reading up on the
 usually from constipation. The tissue must be moist-
requirements and responsibilities involved with that
ened and replaced. Most colon prolapses can be
 particular snake.
replaced through the cloaca, but occasionally surgery
is required. When the tissue is replaced it must also be
 inverted. If replaced properly, a purse string suture is
TRANSPORTATION
 not required. Because this condition is not the primary
 problem, both conditions must be treated.
There are several ways to transport a snake. Snake bags
 Oviductal or shell gland prolapses are most com-
are the most commonly used and can be burlap sacks,
 monly seen during normal oviposition or parturition.
pillow cases, laundry bags, or other linens that are
 They are treated much the same as a colon prolapse.
Snakes
141
The prolapsed tissue must be kept moist and replaced
dysecdysis are numerous but mostly associated with
through the cloaca. Resection is recommended if a
 poor husbandry. Some common husbandry problems
large amount of the oviduct is prolapsed or if the tissue
associated with dysecdysis are too high temperature,
is necrotic
too low humidity, no shedding implement such as a
Dystocia is another common reproductive disorder.
rock or log, and malnutrition. Other causes of dysec-
 There are two types of dystocia in reptiles, obstructive
dysis include systemic disorders, metabolic disorders,
and nonobstructive (Lock 2000). An obstructive dys-
stress from excessive handling, loud noises, vibrations,
a rap on aieui oe ue Aq paso si ein
overcrowding, or anything that limits the snake's
eggs or live young or by a complication during oviposi-
movements. Treatment includes soaking the snake in
tion. The anatomic defect may be fetal or maternal.
tepid water for one to eight hours a day and treating
Some common maternal anatomic defects that are seen
the underlying problem.
in snakes include misshapen pelvis, oviductal stricture,
Increased ecdysis frequency can occur in snakes.
nonoviductal masses, oviduct scarring from previous
Hyperthyroidism and dermatitis are the main causes
infection, or retained eggs or fetuses from previous
 of this condition. Frequent ecdysis is also the natural
pregnancy. Fetal defects include an egg that is too large
function of healing after a severe trauma.
or eggs that have adhered. Diagnosis is made through
There are many clinical signs of dermatosis.
a physical exam, history, and radiographs or
ultra-
Abscesses, abrasions, blisters, bullae, discoloration,
 sound. Treatment includes the surgical removal of the
and nodules are all signs of a diseased integument
eggs or fetuses.
(Rossi 1996). Abscesses are the most common derma-
Nonobstructive(
dystocias are mostly caused by
tologic condition seen in captive reptiles. They are
poor husbandry, infection, or poor physical condition
commonly caused by bites from prey or cage mates.
(Lock 2000). Improper temperature, humidity, diet,
Most abscesses are filled with a solid exudate.
and nesting site can all cause a dystocia. Oviposition
 Treatment for abscesses includes surgically removing
requires great strength. Most captive-raised snakes
the abscess, irrigating the area, and using antibiotics
do not have the muscle mass that wild snakes have,
pending a culture and sensitivity.
which makes it very difficult to deliver eggs or live 
Bacterial dermatoses are also a very common condi-
 young. Treatments include massaging the eggs down,
tion. The most common bacterial infection is caused
percutaneous ovocentesis, posterior pituitary l
hor-
by Pseudomonas spp. Other common bacterial patho-
mones, and, as a last resort, surgery. When massaging.
, staphylococcus, and
care must be taken to not trap a portion of the oviduct
 streptococcus, as well as many other possible bacterial
posterior to the egg or live young. If this happens,
pathogens.
massage the egg or embryo back to its original position
Fungal dermatoses are commonly seen in snakes
and start over (Ross et al. 1990).
that live in humid environments. The clinical signs are
Percutaneous ovocentesis can be performed in ovip-
much the same as in bacterial infections. Clinical signs
arous snakes. A needle is inserted into the egg through
 of both fungal and bacterial infections include a brown
the ventrum and the contents aspirated. It is important
to greenish yellow discoloration,
,blisters, ulcers,
that the coelomic cavity is not contaminated with egg
 nodules, crust, and granulomas.
contents. The egg should pass naturally within forty-
Vesicular dermatitis, commonly known as blister
tight hours. Posterior pituitary hormones such as oxy-
 disease, is common in snakes kept in dirty, very humid
tocin can be used to assist with the oviposition. Surgery
enclosures (Rossi 1996). Fluid-filled blisters appear all 
must be performed if all attempts have been made and
over the body and are quickly contaminated with bac-
the eggs or embryos are still retained. Successful incu-
teria, and septicemia and death quickly follow without
bation of eggs after a dystocia is rare. Live fetuses have
treatment.
 been raised after a salpingotomy, but it is not common.
 Another bacterial infection caused by poor cage
The prognosis for the female is good following a dys-
hygiene is ventral dermal necrosis (Lawton 1991).
tocia. The future reproductive status is also good as
Snakes kept in dirty enclosures can develop infections
long as there were no complications and at least one
 underneath their ventral scales. The signs include pete-
of the reproductive tracts was left intact. The female
chiation, echymosis, and eventual necrosis of the
 is more likely to retain eggs and live young again.
ventral scales. Fluid therapy is often needed due to the
 fluid loss from the damaged skin.
Disorders of the Integument
Contact dermatitis occurs when the snake is exposed
Dysecdysis, or difficulty in shedding, is the most
to harsh chemicals such as pesticides, cleaners, and
common disorder affecting the integument. Causes of
harsh aromatic compounds.
142
Chapter 7
The diagnosis for all dermatosis includes a physical
Disorders of the Respiratory Tract
examination and history, culture (aerobic, anaerobic,
 Respiratory infections are the most common illnesses
and fungal), and cytology (Rossi 1996). Treatment
 in snakes. They can be caused by bacterial, viral,
usually involves topical or systemic antimicrobials and
fungal,
. or parasitic pathogens (Driggers 2000).
husbandry and nutritional changes. During the treat-
 Bacterial pneumonia is the most common cause of
ment of any of these dermatoses the snake should be
respiratory illness, and Gram-negative pathogens are
housed on clean paper. The paper should be changed
the most common. Viral infections are under diag-
daily and the cage should be disinfected daily until the
nosed due to the lack of diagnostic assays. Fungal
condition has resolved.
infections are rare but have been reported. Common
clinical signs of pneumonia include cyanosis, bubbles
Disorders of the Cardiovascular System
coming from the nares or glottis, wheezing or crackles
Cardiovascular disorders are not commonly seen in
heard during auscultation, and petechiae of the oral
snakes. The clinical signs are nonspecific, ranging from
cavity. Stomatitis is commonly seen in snakes with
weight loss to a change in skin color. Nutritional dis-
pneumonia (Driggers 2000).
orders such as hypocalcemia, hypovitaminosis E, and
The diagnostic plan should include culture and sen-
hypercalcemia with hypervitaminosis D; have been
sitivity, cytology, and radiographs. A transtracheal
associated with cardiovascular disease. Infectious dis-
wash should be performed to obtain samples for the
eases affecting the cardiovascular system are usually
culture and cytology. Antibiotics should be started and
secondary to a systemic illness. There is potential for
changed pending the results of the culture and sensitiv-
endocarditis with any Gram-negative bacterial patho-
ity. Fluid therapy should be initiated with dehydrated
 gen. If bacterial sepsis is suspected, a blood culture
snakes. The most common cause of pneumonia in
should be taken. There have been reported cases of
snakes is husbandry related. It is crucial to keep the
congestive heart failure associated with infectious
snake within its POTZ and keep proper humidity
disease and with cardiomyopathy diagnosed.
levels. The cage also must be kept clean at all times.
 Other causes of respiratory disease include masses,
Disorders of the Nervous System
trauma, aspiration of substrate, and dehydration.
Spinal osteopathy has been observed in all species of
Dysecdysis can also compromise the respiratory tract,
snakes (Bennett 1996b). The exact etiology is unknown.
causing disease (Driggers 2000).
This condition has not been observed in wild popula-
tions. There are several possible causes to this disorder.
Disorders of the Urinary System
It is suspected that a virus found in mice or a virus of
 Unfortunately, early detection of renal dysfunction has
snakes that is spread by mice may be a causative agent.
 not been observed in reptiles. Renal diseases are among 
Septicemia is suspected because bacteria are often cul-
the most common problems in older snakes.
tured from the spinal lesions. An immune-mediated
Gout, though not as common in snakes as it is in
disease secondary to septicemia is also suspected.
other families of reptiles, does occur. It is the result of
Finally, chronic trauma from excessive handling is
excessive protein metabolism or catabolism. In this
thought to be a cause of this disease.
case uric acid production is greater than uric acid
Clinical signs include focal or multifocal swelling
excretion. All diseases that lead to renal failure can
along the dorsum, pressure inducing a pain response,
cause gout (Millr 1998). Gout is found in two forms.
hyperflexic cranial to the lesion, motor deficits, trem-
In the frst, urates are deposited on mesothelial sur-
bling, and spinal deformities. The diagnosis is made
faces. Urate deposits commonly occur on the pericar-
via clinical signs and radiographs. The snake is still
dial sac, the peritoneum, the capsule of the liver, and
able to function on its own in the early stages of this
within the parenchyma of the kidneys. In the other
disease. As the disease progresses, the snake will no
form, urate deposits are made in joints, tendon sheaths,
longer be able to move, constrict, or swallow prey.
ligaments, and periosteum. Both forms of gout can
Treatment includes blood and local aspirate cultures,
occur simultaneously. Treatment involves diuresis and
antibiotics, and surgical debridement.
diet change to a low-purine diet. The prognosis is
Organophosphate  and carbamate 
toxicity have
poor.
 been reported in snakes. Treatment is similar to that
 Bacterial nephritis is a common disease associated
 of mammals. The snakes should be given atropine and
with the urinary system. It is often secondary to other
fluid therapy to maintain hydration and renal function.
bacterial infections or an immunosuppressive event
Their temperature should be decreased to slow con-
(Miller 1998). The primary cause should be detected
duction velocity of nerves to control seizures.
and treated accordingly.
Snakes
143
Disorders of the Eye
Retained spectacles are a common reason snakes are
   a   
retained when dysecdysis occurs. To remove the
retained spectacle, place the snake in a very damp
environment for twenty-four hours and then wipe the
eye with a gauze sponge or damp tissue. The retained
spectacle usually will come off easily. If it does not,
the snake should be kept in a warm damp environment
until the next ecdysis cycle and proper ecdysis occurs.
Surgical intervention should be a last resort. This is
a delicate procedure and should be done carefully so the
eye is not damaged. Sterile lubricant should be applied
to the eye and the spectacle gently removed with forceps.
If the old spectacle is still attached frmly, force should
not be used to remove it. It may take several days of
soaking and/or applying lubricant to fully remove the
 retained spectacle or any retained piece of shed.
Intraspectacular dermatitis occurs as a localized
dermatitis or as part of a more generalized dermatitis.
The majority of these cases are caused by retained
spectacles. Often, enucleation is the treatment.
 Bullous spectaculopathy is caused by obstruction of
the nasolacrimal duct (Williams 1996). The obstruc-
tion is usually secondary to either infectious stomatitis
or a congenital obstruction. The lacrimal fluid is not
able to drain from the eye, which causes the distended
subspectacular space. Long-term treatment involves
surgically removing a 30-degree wedge of the ventral
spectacle, allowing for drainage.
Subspectacular abscesses are usually the result of an
Plate 7.2. Stomatitis in a snake. (Photo courtesy of
 ascending infection in the oral cavity (Williams 1996).
Dr. Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of
Treatment for these abscesses involves a wedge resec-
Georgia.) (See also color plates)
tion of the spectacle and flushing. The debris should
be cultured and the snake should be started on appro-
Vomiting and Regurgitation
 priate antibiotics.
Vomiting can occur for many reasons. Stress can make
Disorders of the Digestive System
 a snake vomit. If disturbed after a meal, a snake may
get nervous and vomit its meal. Also, feeding a prey
Infectious Stomatitis
that is too large, feeding a prey that is partially auto-
 Infectious stomatitis is a disease that is caused by poor
lyzed, and keeping the snake below its POTZ are all
husbandry and nutrition, stress, poor feeding tech-
common causes of vomiting. Infectious diseases such
niques, or trauma. It is crucial that the snake be kept in 
as parasitic infections, inclusion body disease, and bac-
its POTZ and that proper humidity be maintained.
terial infections can also cause vomiting in snakes.
When proper husbandry is not met, the snake's immune
 Regurgitation is usually associated with lesions in the
system is weakened, allowing for opportunistic bacteria
esophagus, oral cavity, or pharynx.
to reproduce. Stress from being in overcrowded cages,
excessive handling, or loud noises can also weaken the
Diagnosing Lumps and Bumps
 immune system. Snakes that are fed live prey commonly
Lumps and bumps are a common finding in snakes.
have small abrasions in their oral cavity that can lead to
They occur on the outside as well as on the inside.
an infectious stomatitis. Finally, snakes that rub on the
When a lump or bump is found on the surface of the
sides of the cage have rostral abrasions that lead to an
snake a fine needle aspirate should be performed.
infectious stomatitis (Color Plate 7.2).
Cytology, culture, and sensitivity should be performed
144
Chapter 7
on the sample. If the lump or bump is palpated in the
coelomic cavity, a radiograph or ultrasound should be
performed to determine the origin. A sample should
be obtained and cytology performed. Causes of lumps
and bumps in snakes range from parasites to abscesses
to neoplasia. Once the diagnosis is made, treatment
should begin accordingly.
Viral Diseases
s iq sd n on A si sxod
been isolated in most taxa of snakes (Schumacher
1996). It is transmitted through secretions of the respi-
ratory tract. Clinical signs are characterized by severe
respiratory disease. Neurologic signs such as head
tremors, excitement, star gazing, flaccid paralysis, or
convulsions can also be seen (Bronson and Cranfield
2006). A presumptive diagnosis of paramoxyvirus
Figure 7.12. Inclusion body disease: note the
should be considered when a pneumonia is unrespon-
absence of righting reflex. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
sive to antibiotics. A hemagglutination test has been
Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of Georgia.)
developed and can be used to measure antibodies
against ophidian paramoxyvirus. Titers reflect expo-
sure. A rising titer in paired samples is necessary for a
eventually die from this virus. Prevention of this disease
diagnosis of active disease (Ritchie 2006). A diagnosis
involves strict quarantine procedures when introduc-
can also be made by histological examination of post-
ing new snakes into to an established collection. If
mortem lung, liver, kidney, splenopancreas, and brain 
confirmed carriers are identified in the collection,
samples. There is no treatment for paramoxyvirus.
 euthanasia is recommended to prevent more specimens
Supportive care and antibiotics to treat secondary bac-
from becoming infected with the virus.
terial infections should be in the treatment plan. The
prognosis is grave. If an outbreak of paramoxyvirus
Zoonotic Diseases
occurs in a collection, all sick snakes should immedi-
l sas  a  ssassd s
ately be quarantined and strict hygiene procedures
2001) (Table 7.3). There are two ways in which zoo-
must be followed.
notic diseases are passed (Siemering 1986). One is by
Inclusion body disease (IBD) is another serious viral
direct contact with the infected animal. The other is
infection that is only found in boids (Figure 7.12). It
by indirect contact, which can be from contaminated
is believed that this disease is caused by a retrovirus.
feces, urine, secretions, blood, soil, fomites, and aero-
 Species of boa constrictors have been found to harbor
sols.
s. Zoonotic diseases, for the most part, are easily
species of retroviruses that do not cause disease
avoided by following a few simple rules. Do not use
(Marschang 2001).  The route  of transmission
is
the bathtub, sink, or shower as a place to soak a snake.
unknown. It is suspected that arthropods play a role
Do not kiss a snake. Wash hands after handling a
in the transmission. In boas, the most common frst
snake. A physician should be consulted a snake bite
clinical sign seen is regurgitation. In pythons, the first
 occurs and the area should be washed thoroughly.
clinical signs may be stomatitis and pneumonia ( Ritchie
 Finally, one should never clean any of the cage furnish-
2006). The disease progresses to severe neurologic
ings where human food is kept or prepared.
signs such as head tremors, disorientation, flaccid
The most talked about zoonotic disease associated
muscle paralysis, and the loss of the righting reflex.
with reptiles is salmonellosis. It is believed that most
Secondary bacterial infections are common. Eventually
reptiles carry salmonella organisms in their intestinal
the snake will become anorectic and die. The disease
tract and sporadically shed the organisms in their
progresses much more rapidly in pythons than boas
feces. An estimated 93,000 cases of reptile-associated
(Schumacher and Ylen 2006).
human salmonellosis is diagnosed each year (Glynn
Diagnosis can be made by histologic exam of the
2001). All clients that either own a reptile or are con-
liver, kidney, stomach, pancreas, and brain. There are
sidering owning a reptile for a pet should be educated
no treatments for IBD except for supportive care and
 about salmonella. Salmonellosis is easily prevented by
treating secondary bacterial infections. The snake will
 simply following the guidelines above.
Snakes
145
Table 7.3. Common Zoonotic Diseases in Reptiles.
Pathogen
Threat to humans
Mode of transmission
Salmonella spp.
Gastrointestinal
Fecal-oral contact
Campylobacter spp.
 Diarrhea and acute gastroenteritis
 Fecal-oral contact
Klebsiella spp.
 Diarrhea and genitourinary infections
 Direct contact
Enterobacter spp.
 Diarrhea and genitourinary infections
Direct contact
Yersinia enterocolitica
Gastroenteritis and severe abdominal
Environmental contact
pain
Pseudomonas spp.
 Cutaneous, respiratory, and digestive
 Ingestion, inhalation, or scratches or bites
Mycobacterium spp.
Cutaneous and subcutaneous nodule
Fecal oral contact, inhalation of oral or
 respiratory mucosa, or bites or scratches
Coxiella burneti
Q-fever
Inhalation or direct contact
TAKING A HISTORY
species known to live more than thirty years. Such
short life spans are mostly associated with poor
 Taking a complete history of a snake patient is the first
husbandry.
crucial step in diagnosing and treating a sick snake.
At this point in the history-taking, the origin of the
Such topics as signalment, presenting complaint, hus-
snake should be noted. Wild-caught snakes are often
bandry and nutrition information, and any previous
imported in very substandard conditions and arrive at
 sise rdod oi sia ae s ie
the pet store with a subclinical disease. Internal and
treatment.
external parasites and respiratory infections are most
commonly seen with imported specimens. Captive-
Signalment
bred specimens, generally speaking, are much tamer,
Signalment includes the common and scientific names
are free of disease and parasites, and live longer than
(ball python, Python regius), age, amount of time in
wild-caught specimens. It is also important to urge
owner's possession, whether it was captive-bred or
wild-caught, and whether it is kept as a pet or as a
depletion of wild populations caused from the collec-
breeder. It is important that the common and scientific
tion of wild animals for the pet trade.
 names of the snake are acquired when the appointment
Note whether the snake is kept as a pet or a breeder.
is made. With approximately 2,400 extant species of
Snakes kept solely as pets usually do not need to be
snake, it is impossible for a single person to know the
natural history, husbandry, and nutritional needs of 
throughout the year, and nutritional needs usually do
every species. Therefore, it is important that the
not change t
throughout the year. Snakes kept for
 medical staff be prepared ahead of time to ensure that
breeding do have nutritional and husbandry changes
u p ap raord s ro a
throughout the year. Temperate species should be
needs. Many species of snake also have two or more
hibernated, which takes several weeks of preparation.
common names, which can make identification very
 If hibernation is not done properly, the snake can
diffcult. For example, most Americans refer to Python
 become very sick and possibly die while hibernating.
regius as a ball python, whereas most Europeans refer
With regard to nutrition, many female snakes do not
to Python regius as the royal python. By knowing the
eat while gravid. The females normally start eating
scientifc name of the snake, proper identification can
again when the clutch is laid, the clutch hatches, or the
 be made, and the appropriate information can be
live babies are born. Special nutritional needs must be
relayed to the owner.
met before the breeding season starts and when the
Another key component to signalment is the age of
female snake stars eating again. Also, to ensure a suc-
the snake. If the actual age of the snake is unknown,
cessful breeding season, the photoperiod must be
then the amount of time that the owner has had pos-
changed to simulate the natural photoperiod.
session of it is important information. The average life
All snakes that are large enough should be sexed. It
span of captive snakes is very short. However, snakes
is a very simple procedure that should be included in
are capable of living to a very geriatric age, with some
the initial exam.
146
 Chapter 7
Presenting Complaint
·Are there other reptiles or other animals in the same
The presenting complaint is the reason the owner
air system?
brought the snake to be examined. Some common
· Are any of these animals sick or have any died
presenting complaints include wheezing, dysecdysis,
within the past three months?
anorexia, and lethargy. Approach the presenting com-
· Is proper quarantine performed on new and sick
plaint as if it were that of a dog or cat. The owner
specimens?
should be asked when the problem started, if there
were any husbandry/nutritional changes, if he noticed
Previous Medical History
any other problems, and so on. The medical staff is
Any previous medical condition or diagnostic tests
like a team of detectives that must gather as much
should be noted in the record. The owner's fecal check
evidence as possible to come up with a diagnosis and
and deworming schedule should also be noted in the
treatment plan. It is important to get as much informa-
record.
tion from the owners as possible.
Husbandry and Nutritional Information
PREPARING FOR THE
The single leading cause of death in captive snakes is
PHYSICAL EXAM
 poor husbandry and/or nutrition. It is up to the veteri-
nary technician to find out every detail of the hus-
The exam room must be prepared ahead of time to
bandry practices and advise the owner if corrections
ensure a quick and complete physical exam. The exam
need to be made. This part of the history takes fifteen
room needs to be snake proof. The doors must be
to twenty minutes. It is crucial to take time and record
sealed so the snake cannot escape under the door, large
every detail. Following is a list of questions that should
drains in the sink should be covered, air vents should
be asked at the initial exam:
 be covered with mesh to prevent the snake from crawl-
ing in, and any other holes or cracks that the snake
· What is the day and night temperature range?
can get into should be covered or sealed to keep the
●What is the day/night cycle?
snake from escaping or getting stuck. Appropriate-
What light sources are available?
sized sex probes with lubrication for sexing and a
● What are the primary and secondary heat sources
 spatula or credit card for oral examination should be
available?
in the exam room. Restraining devices such as snake
?
What is the humidity in the enclosure?
hooks, clear plastic restraining tubes, and capture
· What humidity devices and methods are used?
tongs should be readily accessible for aggressive or
· How big is the cage?
venomous species. Large snakes could need two or
Where is the cage located?
more people for proper restraint. It may be necessary
· What is the cage made of?
to have other technicians or assistants close by in the
· Is the cage designed for an arboreal or terrestrial
event that more help is needed. Other essential instru-
species?
ments that are needed for a physical exam are a good
?
What substrate is used?
light source, ophthalmic scope, stethoscope, fecal col-
 How often is the cage cleaned and disinfected?
lection system, and magnifying glass to check for
What type of disinfectant is used?
external parasites.
?
What cage furnishings are available (rocks, branches,
hide box, etc.)?
· How is water offered (drip system, misting, bowl,
RESTRAINT
etc.)?
+
What food items are offered and what time of day
As stated previously, snakes can be very unpredictable
are they offered?
and should be treated as such to avoid being bitten.
+
 Is the snake fed live, frozen-thawed, or fresh-killed
Even the most docile of snakes will bite if they feel
prey items?
threatened or cornered. Watch for warning signs such
How is the prey offered (feeding tongs, set in the
as hissing or an S-shaped striking posture before
bottom of the cage, in a separate cage, etc.)?
attempting to handle a snake (Figure 7.13).
·What is the feeding schedule?
Whether restraining or simply holding the snake,
+
 How are the prey items stored?
it is important to do so properly. If not held properly,
?
Where were the prey items acquired?
not only can one get bitten, but the snake can
· What is the ecdysis/defecation schedule?
sustain injuries, too. The body should always be
Snakes
147
Figure 7.13. A snake in a striking pose. (Photo
courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
supported as much as possible. With larger snakes, it
will take more than one person to hold and offer neces-
sary support.
When manually restraining the snake, ensure that
someone has control of the head. This should be the
first part of the body restrained. The head should be
 held right at the base and without applying too much
pressure around the neck area. This could obstruct the
trachea, causing a strangling effect, and the snake
could suffocate. In addition, the snake could panic,
making it very difficult to manage. The rest of the body
can be held with a free hand or by assistants when
handing large or aggressive snakes. Do not place a
Figure 7.14. Proper use of a snake hook. (Photo
snake (especially  large snakes and/or constrictors)
courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
around the neck. While this is commonly done, it can
be dangerous. If the snake feels threatened and inse-
cure it will begin to constrict around the neck.
Snake hooks are also used when coercing a snake
Different tools can be used to move snakes or assist
into a snake tube for physical exam or immobilization.
 in immobilization, including hooks, tubes, and tongs,
all of which are discussed below. Snake hooks allow
(Figures 7.15, 7.16).
a person to move a snake without having to touch the
o id prer ra pudo ane saani as
animal or get too close. This is advantageous when
acrylic tubes that are used to hold a snake and view it
handling aggressive snakes. A hook can be used to get
safely during examination. The tube's diameter must
a snake out of an enclosure, as a guide, or as a pinning
be just large enough for the snake's head to fit into,
 device. For example, to remove a snake from an enclo-
 but not allow the snake to turn around in. One end of
sure, the hook is used to hook the snake one-third of
the tube should be aimed toward the snake's head and
the way down its body and then gently lift it. The hook
a snake hook used to entice the snake into the tube.
can then be used to pin the head to take control of it,
Once one-third to one-half of the snake's body is in
but extreme caution must be used because any thrash-
the tube, the handler should grasp the snake and the
ing by the snake can cause severe spinal cord injury.
base of the tube so it cannot back out. A face mask
Only handlers experienced with the hook should use
can be placed on the other end of the tube to admin-
the pinning technique. If the snake is hooked too close
ister gas anesthesia and immobilize the snake com-
to the head or tail, it will usually slide right off. It may
pletely, if necessary. This is the safest way to manage
be necessary to use more than one hook for larger
aggressive snakes and venomous species. Most of these
snakes (Figure 7.14).
tubes are purchased from reptile supply stores or hard-
148
Chapter 7
Figure 7.15. Snake tongs at the top and two snake
Figure 7.17. Feeding a python with tongs. (Photo
hooks below. (Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
courtesy of Ryan Cheek)
be used to assist in tubing the snake but not as a
 primary handling mechanism.
An undesirable method of restraint is to allow a
snake to partially swallow prey. This allows the handler
time to take control of the head and the body before the
snake can strike. However, often the snake regurgitates
 the prey, making this technique undesirable.
To avoid bites, some reptile hobbyists believe that
snakes should not be fed inside their primary enclo-
sure, especially when the only time the enclosure is
opened is when the snake is being fed. This creates a
feeding response and makes bites more likely to occur.
Feeding outside the primary enclosure is therefore a
safer practice and also can help to ensure that any
Figure 7.16. Using a hook to coax a snake into a
loose substrate located inside the primary enclosure is
plastic tube. (Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta)
 not ingested during feeding.
ware stores (if appropriate materials are found) and
THE PHYSICAL EXAM
come in various sizes.
Another method of capturing an aggressive snake is
After a very thorough history has been taken and the
to place a clear shield over its head. Once the shield is
exam room is prepared, a complete physical exam
in place, the handler can grasp right behind its head
should be performed. It should begin as soon as the
taking control of it.
owner brings the snake into the exam room. The snake
Snake tongs can be used for many purposes. The
should be observed as it moves around its environ-
most common use is for feeding (Figure 7.17). Offering
ment. Body and muscle tone, proprioception, and
food items via tongs is obviously safer than using one's
mobility should also be observed. Any abnormalities
hands to offer prey. Tongs allow the feeder to keep a
should be noted. An accurate weight in grams or kilo-
safe distance from the snake and the prey item.
grams as well as the snout-to-vent length (SVL) should
Although some people use tongs to assist in restraining
 be measured to determine organ location and monitor
snakes, this method is not recommended. Grabbing the
growth in juvenile snakes. The cloacal temperature
snake with tongs can apply too much pressure and,
should be recorded to help determine the thermal envi-
depending on the part of the body that is grasped, the
ronment in which the snake lives.
- aa ea ose u s  aq  a
There are se veral approaches to performing a physi-
selves from tongs if not grasped properly. Tongs can
cal exam. Some clinicians prefer a head-to-tail evalu-
Snakes
149
ation, whereas others have a specific order of body
CN II: Because reptiles have an iris that is composed
systems that are examined. It is important to do the
of skeletal muscle, pupilary light reflex cannot be
same routine with every physical exam so nothing is
 used to determine the function of the optic nerve.
left out or overlooked.
Carefully watch the eye movements of the snake to
assess the function of the optic nerve.
Integument
CN III, CN IV, CN VI: This group of cranial nerves
The skin should be checked for parasites, thermal
is extremely hard to assess in snakes. They are
burns, trauma, skin tenting or ridges to assess hydra-
 responsible for eye movement coordination.
tion, dysecdysis, and bacterial or fungal infections. If
 CN V: Snakes with a malfunctioning trigeminal nerve
ecdysis is currently in process, the stage of ecdysis
 have abnormal jaw function and a loss of feeling
should be recorded.
 around the face. They cannot thermoregulate or
find prey.
Respiratory System
CN VIll: The acoustic nerve is difficult to assess.
 The upper and lower airways should be auscultated for
Snakes may show signs of nystagmus, head tilt,
any crackles or increased respiratory sounds. Remember
rolling, and abnormal righting reflex.
that most snakes only have a right lung with the excep-
CN IX, CN XI, CN XII: Dysphagia and abnormal
tion of the boids, which have a right lung and a small
tongue movements can be seen in a snake if one
left lung. The nostrils should be clear of debris and any
or more of these cranial nerves is damaged or
discharge. The glottis can easily be observed for proper
malfunctioning.
function and for any inflammation. When the glottis
CN VII and CN X: The facial and vagus nerves are
opens during respiration, look down the trachea for any
impossible to assess in snakes.
swelling, mucous, or foreign material.
Palpations
Cardiovascular System
 The entire length of the snake should be palpated for
Auscultation of the snake's heart can sometimes prove
any abnormalities such as enlarged organs, internal
to be difficult. It is crucial that the exam room be silent.
 masses, lumps, and bumps. In breeding females, eggs
 Using a damp cloth or gauze sponge can help enhance
and preovulatory follicles can be felt on palpation.
the heart sounds. The heart is generally around 25%
Digital palpation of the cloaca can reveal several
down the body from the snout. A heart rate should be
abnormalities and should be performed on all snakes
obtained during auscultation. Peripheral pulses should
that are large enough. An otoscope or endoscope can
be assessed via the use of a Doppler flow detector. The
be used as well.
Doppler can be placed on the ventral tail vein or just
cranial to the heart at the base of the glottis.
Ophthalmic Exam
As discussed in the anatomy section, snakes have a
Neurologic Examination
transparent spectacle that covers the cornea. The eyes
Neurologic exams are very simple to perform on
should be clear and smooth. Any retained sheds can
snakes (Bennett 1996b). The exam starts with the
easily be seen and removed. Any other abnormalities
initial presentation of the snake. Watch for any jerking
should be further examined with an ophthalmic scope.
motions, absent or slow righting reflex, or the inability
to strike at prey. The site of a spinal cord injury can
Fecal Exam
be found by using the righting reflex. Snakes will right
All snakes that come in for a physical exam should
themselves up to the point of the injury. A hypodermic
 have a fecal examination performed. This exam should
needle may be used to stimulate the panniculus reflex.
include a fecal floatation and two direct fecal smears,
A neurologically normal snake's skin twitches up to
 one prepared with a normal saline solution and the
 the point of spinal injury. A cranial nerve exam should
other prepared with a Lugol's iodine solution.
be performed if a neurologic disorder is suspected. The
following methods can be used to examine the twelve
Oral Exam
cranial nerves in snakes:
Because most snakes become distressed during the oral
exam, it is often best to perform the oral examination
CN I: A snake with a properly functioning olfactory
last. Gently open the mouth using a spatula or plastic
nerve recoils from the smell of noxious odors.
card. Determining the proper mucosa color can be
Alcohol can be placed in front of the snake's nose
diffcult. Most species have a pale mucosa color while
to see if it reacts to the smell
          
150
Chapter 7
important to know the normal color for that species
before the physical exam is performed. With all species
the oral cavity should be moist without any stringy or
tenacious mucus. The clinician should look for any
caseous exudates, hemorrhage, and necrosis.
RADIOLOGY
Creating a Technique Chart
A separate technique chart should be made for snakes.
A variable kVp or variable mAs technique chart can
 be made, although a variable mAs technique chart is
preferable. The technique chart should start at 2cm
and go to at least 20 cm. Describing the proper method
Figure 7.18 Radiograph of a snake taken while it is
of creating a technique chart is out of the scope of this
in a bag. (Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek)
text. There are numerous texts that describe this
process in detail. It is an easy but time-consuming task
that if performed correctly will save much time when
a radiograph is needed.
ANESTHESLA
Positioning
Anatomy and Pbysiology Considerations
As with all other animals, two views should be taken,
The lungs of reptiles are very fragile. When performing
lateral and dorsoventral (DV). Snakes should not be
 intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) always
radiographed in the coiled position because this can
stay under 20 cm water to avoid pulmonary rupture
distort internal organs and decrease detail. The snake
(Bennett 1996a). Reptiles do not have a diaphragm, so
should be stretched out over the cassette. If properly
respiration is accomplished through other muscles
collimated, two or more regions of the body can be
throughout the thoracic and abdominal areas. Some of
radiographed on one film. If possible, radiograph both
the muscles are paralyzed when the reptile reaches a
views of the same region on one film to make inter-
surgical plane of anesthesia, making IPPV necessary.
pretation much easier. If multiple films are required,
 Keep in mind that many snakes can breath hold and
the films should be labeled to match the region taken.
 convert to anaerobic metabolism. Many species can
There are several methods of doing this. The method
live for hours without oxygen. This adaptation makes
that this author uses is based on the number of films
 induction difficult to impossible in some species if
required to radiograph the snake. If four flms are
inducing with inhalant anesthesia.
needed, the first film is labeled 1/4, the second film is
labeled 2/4, and so on (Figure 7.18).
Preanesthetic Examination
and Considerations
Restraint
Before placing a snake under anesthesia a very thor-
With the exception of very sick snakes, most snakes
ough physical examination should be performed. A
will not be still enough to radiograph without proper
 minimal amount of diagnostics, including a packed cell 
restraint. For docile snakes, manually holding them on
volume and total solids, also should be recorded to
the table is suffcient enough restraint for proper tech-
 help determine the health status of the snake. More
nique. For less-docile snakes, placing them in clear
 diagnostics may be needed such as a biochemical
plastic tubes allows for proper positioning and tech-
 profle, complete blood count, fecal analysis, radio-
nique. If this method is used, the kVp or mAs, depend-
 graphs, or cultures if infection is suspected. Any abnor-
ing on the technique chart used, may need to be slightly
 malities on the physical examination or diagnostic
increased to compensate for the plastic. As a last
 testing should be treated or stabilized before the anes-
resort, chemical restraint, either injectable or inhalant
thetic episode. The snake should be fasted for one to
anesthesia, can be used. If injectable anesthesia is used,
two weeks for any elective procedures or nonemer-
a short-acting drug or one that is reversible is pre-
gency anesthetic procedures. The cardiopulmonary
ferred. Some injectable anesthetics can last for hours
function can be compromised if a large prey is still
or even days in reptiles
being digested in the stomach.
Snakes
151
Intravenous fluid therapy is needed for any debili-
the cage. The ultra short barbiturates work well in
tated snake or during long procedures ( Bennett 1997).
reptiles with a relatively short recovery time of only a
If the snake is dehydrated, rehydration should occur
few hours. As with all injectables, there is a significant
before beginning the anesthetic episode. Any of the
variation in response.
crystalloids are appropriate for use in reptiles (Lawton
Ketamine is frequently used in snakes for sedation
2001). There is much debate over the use of any fluids
and induction, and can also be used as a surgical anes-
containing lactate (Wright 1999). Lactate in reptiles
thetic. Due to metabolic scaling, larger species require
builds to high levels after muscle fatigue and can only
the lower end of the recommended dose (Bennett
be metabolized by the liver. There has been no research
1997). When used alone, moderate to high doses of
performed on this issue as of the date of publication
ketamine have been associated with increased heart
of this text. Until further research has been conducted,
rates, respiratory depression, hypertension, apnea,
it is recommended that fluids containing lactate not be
bradycardia, prolonged recovery times, and death
used on a long-term basis in reptile patients. If lactated
(Bertelsen 2007). However, when ketamine is com-
Ringer's solution is chosen for fluid therapy, potassium
bined with benzodiazepines or alpha-2-agonists, better
chloride must be added to prevent hypokalemia. If
muscle relaxation occurs and there is a reduction in
fluids are needed interoperatively, an intra venous cath-
the required dose (Bertelsen 2007).
eter must be placed in either the jugular vein or directly
Medetomidine has been used with great success in
into the heart. The interoperative fluid rate should be
 snakes. When given, it greatly reduces the amount of
 5 to 10 ml/kg/hour.
 induction needed and also at higher doses gives enough
sedation for quick procedures. Medetomidine is revers-
Preanestbetic Medications
ible with atipamezole. Medetomidine when given with
Preanesthetics are not routinely used in all reptiles.
ketamine shows better anesthetic effects than when
Preanesthetics can be used to provide safer handling
given alone.
of larger snakes to facilitate smoother inductions for
 Telazol, a combination of tiletamine and zolaze-
 general anesthesia. They may also help decrease the
pam, is recommended as a tranquilizer or induction
amount of drugs needed for induction.
agent and not the sole anesthetic. Telazol given at a
dose of 2 to 5 mg/kg will sedate the snake enough for
Anticholinergics
 diagnostic procedures or for intubation. High doses of
 Anticholinergics such as atropine sulfate and glycopyr-
telazol have been associated with prolonged recovery
rolate for the most part are unnecessary as a preanes-
times (Schumacher and Yelan 2006).
thetic medication. Glycopyrrolate has been shown to
 Propofol is a very short-acting nonbarbiturate that
help prevent bradycardia; however, bradycardia
is
can be used as an induction agent or for short surgical
usually not a concern in reptile anesthesia.
or diagnostic procedures. The only disadvantage of 
propofol is that it must be given intravenously, which
Injectable Anestbetics
can be very difficult in some snakes (Schumacher
The use of injectable anesthetics in reptiles is very
2002a). The advantages of propofol are that it pro-
unpredictable. The same dose given to two individuals
sey 'saun Araaosar pue uononpu! Pider Aia saonp
of the same species can yield completely different levels
minimal accumulation with repeated doses, and pro-
of sedation (Bennett 1996a). Once the injection is
 duces very little hangover effect after recovery.
given, the depth of anesthesia cannot be controlled.
 Several neuromuscular blocking agents have been
Reptiles have a very slow metabolism; therefore,
 used in snakes. Their use should be limited to nonpain-
recovery time can take from a couple of hours to a
ful diagnostic procedures because these drugs do not
week with some anesthetics. Reptiles require a very
produce
 unconsciousness or analgesia. Intubation
high dose of narcotics to produce any sedative effects;,
with IPPV is necessary because respiratory paralysis is
as a result, narcotics are not recommended in
likely.
reptiles.
Use of barbiturates is questionable in reptiles. It is
Inhalant Anesthetics
unknown how reptiles eliminate barbiturates from
Inhalant anesthetics have become the standard of
their body. It is believed that they rely on metabolism
 practice for reptiles (Bennett 1997). There are many
for eliminating barbiturates instead of redistribution
 advantages of inhalant anesthetics versus injectable
to nonnervous tissue (Bennett 1996a). Thiobarbiturates
anesthetics. First, the level of anesthesia is much more
have a recovery time of several days. This can be
precisely controlled. Another significant advantage is
quickened by increasing the ambient temperature in
that the patient is intubated and receives supplemental
152
Chapter 7
Oxygen. The recovery time of inhalant anesthetics is
much quicker than with injectable anesthetics. Usually
the patients are recovered in less than one hour after
 the anesthetic episode. A nonrebreathing system is rec-
ommended for patients that weigh less than 5 kg and
an oxygen flow rate of 300 to 500 ml/kg/minute is
recommended. Patients that weigh more than 5 kg can
use a rebreathing system at an oxygen flow rate of 1
to 2 L/minute. IPPV is recommended in all anesthetized
reptiles at a rate of two to four breaths per minute.
Methoxyflurane has been used successfully in
snakes. The disadvantage of this inhalant is that it
 produces slow induction and recovery times, and 50%
of the drug is metabolized by the liver, making it 
inappropriate in patients with any liver problems.
Figure 7.19. Endotracheal intubation of a snake.
Elapids and some pythons have shown sensitivity to
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
methoxyflurane.
Halothane produces a quicker induction and recov-
ery than methoxyflurane. In addition, only 12% of
halothane is metabolized by the liver, making this drug
a better choice for patients with liver problems. When 
inducing with halothane, start with a low concentra-
tion and slowly increase to prevent irritation. This
 process can induce breath holding. Venomous species
seem to require a higher concentration of halothane,
with viperids requiring more than elapids.
Isoflurane is the inhalant anesthetic of choice of this
author. It is completely eliminated by the lungs so it
causes no metabolic compromise, and can safely be
used on debilitated or compromised patients. Induction
is quick, taking five to ten minutes, with recovery
taking less than thirty minutes on most patients.
Figure 7.20.Stabilizing the endotracheal tube with a
The newest inhalant anesthetic on the market is
tongue depressor. (Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
sevoflurane. Sevoflurane gained popularity in the
human and veterinary market because of the low
blood-gas solubility, which allows for very fast induc-
 antinocieceptive mechanisms, and behavioral responses
tion and recovery times and improving the control of
to pain that other animals have (Bradley 2001).
anesthetic depth (Schumacher 2002b). In humans,
 Reptiles can and do feel pain and therefore analgesics
cardiovascular stability is better maintained with
sevoflurane than with isoflurane. Sevoflurane is also
than treat, analgesics should be given before an antici-
   ss e   
pated painful procedure. Snakes also share many of
very little research conducted on the effects of sevoflu-
the same signs of pain as domestic species. Commonly,
rane in reptiles. Clinical experience shows that species 
snakes shows signs of avoidance of handling, with-
and individuals respond differently to sevoflurane,
 drawal, restlessness, agitation, being easily startled, or
with some being much more resistant than others
anorexia when they are in pain. Some more obvious
(Schumacher 2002b).
signs of pain are holding the body less coiled at the
Tracheal intubation is easy on snakes (Figures 7.19,
site of pain, stinting on palpation, and being tucked
7.20). The trachea sits at the base of their tongue and
up and writhing in the affected area.
is easily visible when the mouth is open.
Recovery
Analgesics
 Recovering patients should be placed in an environ-
It was once believed that reptiles do not feel pain.
ment that is quiet and within the species' POTZ. Close
However, reptiles have the neurologic components,
attention should be paid to the respirations because all
Snakes
153
anesthetics compromise the respiratory system. Also
teinaceous fluid and fbrin fills the space to form a
observe the patient for any pain or discomfort and
scab. A single layer of epithelial cells grows under the
treat with analgesics accordingly. If the patient received
scab and then proliferates to restore the full thickness
fluids during the procedure, the fluids should be con-
of the epithelium. Underneath this layer of epithelial
tinued until the patient is fully recovered.
cells, macrophages and heterophils move in to clean
up any pathogens. Fibroblasts migrate to the area,
AnestheticMonitoring
forming a fibrous scar. Heterophils are present until
The depth of anesthesia in snakes is very diffcult to
maturation has occurred. Ecdysis seems to help with
assess. As snakes become anesthetized, relaxation
the wound healing process (Bennett 1997). It has also
begins cranial and goes caudal and is reversed when
been observed that incisions that have a cranial to
recovering. One of the first reflexes a snake loses is the
 caudal orientation heal faster than transverse incisions.
righting reflex. Other reflexes to check are the cloacal
 Furthermore, staying in the upper end of the species?
reflex and the tail pinch to help determine the depth
 POTZ promotes good wound healing (Bennett and
of anesthesia. At a surgical plane, snakes should still
Lock 2000).
have a tongue withdraw; they will lose this if they are
The incised skin of reptiles has a tendency to heal
beyond the surgical plane. Each anesthetized snake
inverted. The skin should be closed using an everted
should be connected to an electrocardiogram as well
suture pattern such as mattress pattern. Skin staples
as a Doppler flow device because the cardiovascular
can also be used for skin closure. The sutures should
system is very difficult to assess. The heart rate and
be removed in four to six weeks and preferably after
respiratory rate should be monitored continuously
the next ecdysis cycle.
starting when the patient is induced and ending after
the patient is fully recovered. Pulse oximetry is only
Common Surgical Procedures
 useful in reptiles to monitor trends in arterial oxygen
Celiotomies are routinely performed on snakes. The
saturation.
 incision for a celiotomy should be made between the
first two rows of scales dorsolateral to the large ventral
scales (Bennett and Lock 2000). This approach is per-
SURGERY
formed to avoid the large midabdominal vein. A zigzag
 incision is made between the scales in the softer skin.
The basic principles of surgery are universal. Aseptic
Celiotomies are commonly performed for foreign body
techniques should always be used. The patient should
removal and exploratory surgery.
be prepared for surgery, induced with anesthesia, intu-
The most common surgery of the respiratory tract
 bated, and placed on maintenance inhalant anesthesia.
is removal of granulomas from the trachea. The
The surgical site should be prepared with an initial
approach is the same as for a celiotomy. The granu-
scrub with an approved surgical scrub such as chlorhex-
loma is found and removed. The two ends of the
idine or betadine to remove any dirt or debris from the
trachea are then anastomosed and the incision is
substrate. When the patient is stable under anesthesia,
closed. The snakes are usually back to breathing nor-
it can then be moved into the surgical suite. Once
mally immediately.
inside the surgical suite, all assistants should put on a
Gastrointestinal surgeries are routinely done to
cap and mask to maintain asepsis. The patient should
repair abnormalities. These abnormalities may include
be properly positioned and taped down to secure it to
foreign body removal or resection and anastomosis.
the table. Snakes can be positioned either in sternal,
Surgery on the reproductive tract is usually not
dorsal, or left or right recumbency. Once the patient
performed to prevent a reproductive problem (Lock
is secured to the table, a sterile surgical scrub should
2000). The most common female reproductive surgical
be performed. The fluids used to prep the patient
procedure is dystocia and ovariectomy or ovariosal-
should be warmed to prevent cooling the patient. The
pingohysterectomy. The last two procedures are per-
 patient should also be kept at its POTZ during the
formed to prevent another dystocia, to remove cysts
entire procedure and through recovery. This can be
or tumors, or to prevent another prolapse. The most
achieved by using a circulating hot water pad or hot
common surgical procedure on the male reproductive
water bottles.
tract is penile amputation. The hemipenis will prolapse
and become inflamed and will not be able to be
Wound Healing
retracted. Often the hemipenis can be replaced, but
Wound healing in snakes has been studied extensively
occasionally it will become necrotic and have to be
(Bennett and Lock 2000). When a wound forms, pro-
amputated (Figure 7.21).
154
Chapter 7
has dark skin. Rarely are ticks in such a high number
on snakes to cause anemia, but they can transmit
blood parasites and viruses. All ticks should be removed
with extra care to remove all the mouthparts from the
skin.
Mites
Ophionyssus natricis, the snake mite, is a common
finding in pet snakes. The mites are small and appear
red, gray, or black. Snakes that are infected may spend
long periods of time soaking in water or appear to rub
or twist their bodies. Visualizing the mite is the only
diagnostic method. If mites are suspected, a clean
white paper towel or hand towel can be rubbed down
the entire length of the snake's body. Often, the mites
will come off onto the towel making for easier visual-
Figure 7.21. A snake in surgery. (Photo courtesy of
ization. Treatment includes cleaning and disinfecting
Dr. Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of
the cage and ivermectin. Ivermectin can be made into
Georgia.)
a spray or used as an injection. It is also recommended
that all wood and porous cage furnishings be removed
PARASITOLOGY
and paper be used as a substrate until the mites have
been eradicated from the area.
Diagnosing Parasites
Parasitic infections are relatively easy to diagnose. A
Internal Parasites
fresh stool sample should be obtained, being careful not
to collect any urates. When an appointment is made for 
Protozoa
a snake, the client should be asked to bring in a fresh
stool sample. The client can put the stool sample in a
Amoebiasis Of the many species of amoebae that
plastic sandwich bag and keep it in the refrigerator for
are found in snakes, Entamoeba invadens is the most
up to three days. It is not recommended that the stool
 pathogenic (Lane and Mader 1996). This amoeba
 sample be stored in a refrigerator that also stores food
causes a very high mortality and morbidity rate in
for human consumption. A double or even triple bag
snakes. It is transmitted via the ingestion of infected
system can be used if the sample is stored with food for
reptile feces. This parasite has a direct life cycle,
human consumption. If a fresh sample is not available,
making it very difficult to eradicate from snakes.
a colonic wash can be performed to obtain a sample.
 Clinical signs of amoebiasis are anorexia, dehydration,
Three diagnostic tests should be performed: a flotation,
and wasting away. Later stages of the disease show
centrifugation, and saline prepared direct smear. The
clinical signs of ulcerative gastritis and colitis. This
fecal flotation is used to diagnose nematode ova. The
 organism can spread to other tissues, causing renal and
centrifuge helps diagnose protozoan cysts. The direct
hepatic necrosis and abscesses. A diagnosis is made
smear is used to diagnose moving or live parasites. The
through a positive culture. Treatment of this disease
techniques used to perform these diagnostics are the
includes a broad-spectrum antibiotic, an amoebicide,
same techniques used for diagnosing parasites in small
 and supportive care. The snakes can also be kept at a
animals. Some parasites, like cryptosporidium, require
temperature of 95°F
specialized diagnostic testing.
Coccidia Coccidiosis is a common finding in captive
 snakes. In wild snakes, coccidiosis is a self-limiting
COMMON PARASITES OF SNAKES
infection, but in captivity, coccidia can cause severe
illness and in young or small species it can cause death.
External Parasites
Coccidia has a direct life cycle. Sulfonamides are the
 preferred treatment.
Ticks
 Cryptosporidium is becoming a serious coccidial
Ticks are a common finding on snakes. Ticks can be
infection in snakes. The exact source of infection is
very difficult to find on snakes, especially if the snake
unknown but it is believed that snakes contract the
Snakes
155
parasite by either contact with shedding reptiles or
from mammalian prey items. Clinical signs for the
disease includes midbody swelling, weight loss, and
regurgitation. The midbody swelling is a result of
chronic gastric hypertrophy caused by the parasite.
Cryptosporidiosis is diagnosed by visualization of
 oocysts on a microscopic exam. A dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) acid-fast fecal exam should be performed for
proper diagnosis. Cryptosporidium spp. oocysts are
difficult to find due to their small size of less than 4
microns. The oocysts contain no sporocysts and four
sporozoites. There are no safe and effective treatments
for cryptosporidiosis. Trimethoprim sulfa, spiramycin,
and paromomycin have been shown to reduce clinical
signs and reduce or eliminate oocyte shedding. These
drugs are given in conjunction with supportive care
including fluids, high environmental temperatures, and
tube feeding. It is not known if there is a zoonotic
potential with this disease, so proper precautions
should be taken.
Flagellated Protozoa Many genera of flagellates
are found in snakes. Most are nonpathogenic,
although there is the potential of Giardia spp. to cause
disease. Clinical signs include anorexia and weight loss
Plate 7.3. Ocular larva migrans in a snake. (Photo
(Barnard 1996). Metronidazole is the treatment of
courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.) (See also color plates)
choice for flagellates.
Cestodes
Blood Parasites
The life cycle of cestodes involves many intermediate
Extracellular and intracytoplastic blood parasites are
 hosts. Snakes that are susceptible to cestode infections
commonly seen in snakes. These parasites rarely cause
are those that are fed amphibians, f
fish, or
disease and are normally found on routine blood
crustaceans.
smears. Extreme cases can cause hemolytic anemia.
If anemia is found, an antimalarial medication is
Nematodes
indicated.
Several species of nematodes affect snakes. The life
cycle involves one or several intermediate hosts.
Preventing Parasites
 Nematode infections usually appear subclinical but
With parasites, like most other diseases, prevention is
signs can appear with severe infections. The only
easier than the cure. A few simple guidelines should be
species of great concern are the Rhabdias spp. and
followed. The enclosures should be kept clean and
Strongyloides spp. (Barnard 1996). Rhabdias spp. are
 disinfected often. New specimens should follow proper
known as the lungworm in snakes because these nema-
quarantine procedures. Do not feed wild prey items;
todes migrate to the lungs. There are few clinical signs
feed only frozen prey to the snakes. If live prey must
with minimal inflammatory response. Severe infections
be fed, start a breeding colony at home with a parasite-
show signs of dyspnea and mouth gaping. The diag-
free male and female. Varying the prey offered can
nosis of lungworms can be made by discovering eggs
help to break any parasite life cycle (Lane and Mader
and free-stage larvae in the oral secretions or feces.
1996).
Strongyles are nematodes that feed on the blood of the
host. Clinical signs include anorexia, weight loss, hem-
orrhagic ulceration, and gastrointestinal obstruction.
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
A fecal exam is performed for diagnosis. Treatment
for all nematodes includes any of several anthelmintics
As more and more snakes are kept as pets, the need
and supportive care (Color Plate 7.3.)
for proper emergency and critical care is increasing.
156
Chapter 7
The basics of emergency and critical care in snakes are
from the patient. More questions may need to be asked
the same as in any other animal. The patient is assessed
pending the results of the physical examination.
and diagnostics and treatments are quickly started. An
emergency is defined as a sudden, generally unexpected
Diagnostics
 occurrence or set of circumstances demanding urgent
The clinician will have a diagnostic plan after the
action. Unfortunately, the need for urgent care is in
physical examination has been performed. This plan
the eye of the owner and not trained medical profes-
may include a fecal analysis, biochemical profle, com-
sionals. Many owners wait days to months after first
plete blood count, packed cell volume, total protein,
noticing a problem with their snake to seek medical
or radiographs.
 attention, so that the initial problem turns into an
emergency situation.
Treatment
Treatment should begin after the diagnosis is made. For
Phone Calls
dehydrated or severely ill snakes, fluid therapy should
Many owners call the veterinary hospital seeking
be initiated. Intravenous fluid therapy is preferable but
advice on their pet snake to determine if emergency
other methods of fluid therapy will suffice. The fluids
medical treatment is necessary. Many problems with
should be warmed to the preferred body temperature
snakes that are reported after hours can wait until the
 ious aus a  q sias ae r
 morning when the regular veterinarian is available.
placed in a cage that is heated to the species’ POTZ.
Most diseases have been developing for weeks to
A full-spectrum UV light should also be provided.
months and initiating treatment can wait another
 Analgesics should be administered to patients that are
several hours. It is important that the technician
 in pain. Finally, other therapeutics should be started to
screening the phone calls be familiar with snakes.
treat the clinical signs and disease. Nutritional support
Some clinical signs in dogs could be very serious,
should be started only after the patient is stable.
while in a snake they are very normal. A common
phone call that is not an emergency is an owner
worried that his or her ball python (Python regius), or
EMERGENCY CONDITIONS
any other species, has not eaten in a week or some-
times several months. Obviously, for a snake this is
punni
not an emergency. Some of the more common
Trauma of any kind should be treated as an emer-
emergencies that do need to be seen immediately are
 gency. Bite wounds are common in snakes. Bites nor-
trauma, bite wounds, burns, hypothermia, hyperther-
mally occur from cage mates and live prey items left
mia, dyspnea, and cloacal prolapse. Common none-
 in the cage unattended. Lacerations are not as com-
mergency clinical signs in snakes are lethargy, anorexia,
monly seen in snakes. Most commonly they occur
dystocia, and constipation.
from exposed ends of wire mesh used on cages. Large
snakes can easily break through glass cages, causing
Initial Presentation and History
severe lacerations. Bite wounds and lacerations are
A veterinary technician should make a quick assess-
- ros r as ard ra Aq pea
ment to determine the urgency of care as soon as the
tion healing. If the wound is left open, antibiotic oint-
 patient comes into the veterinary hospital. If the patient
ments rubbed on the wound work well as a barrier.
is stable, a thorough history should be obtained. If the
 Systemic antibiotics should be used on all bite wounds
 patient is critical and needs immediate care, the patient
or lacerations. Analgesics should also be used.
should be taken to the attending veterinarian and a
 quick history should be obtained. This history should
Hypothermia
include such questions as: What is the ambient tem-
 Occasionally snakes escape from their enclosure and
perature in the enclosure? Is the snake eating and
are found in a place that is excessively cold, causing
drinking normally? Do you feed live or dead prey?
metabolism to cease. Frostbite may be seen on the tip
What heat sources are used? Has your snake been
 of the snake's tail. If not necrotic, some pigment will
lethargic? Have you seen any coughing, wheezing, or
be lost. Hypothermic snakes are not able to digest food
nasal discharge? Has your snake regurgitated any
-ds aas oi uooo si i ard aieninau uo pue
food? Have there been any other medical problems in
tory disease several days to weeks after an episode of
the past?
hypothermia. Snakes should be warmed up slowly
A more complete history can be obtained after the
over several hours and supportive care should be
patient is stable and more time can be focused away
started.
Snakes
157
Hyperthermia
be disinfected daily. Antibiotics should be started to
Hyperthermia often occurs when the owner lets the
 prevent infections that are common in burn victims.
snake outside in a glass or plastic enclosure in direct
Full-thickness burns are characterized by a black
sunlight. Radiant heat quickly warms the snake and it
eschar. They are not painful because all of the nerves
is not able to get into a cooler environment. Treatment
in the skin have been destroyed. Full-thickness burns
for hyperthermia includes subcutaneous or intracoelo-
have a poor to grave prognosis and require very inten-
mic fluids and a quick cool-water bath to decrease
sive treatment. The wound initially should be treated
the core body temperature. Steroids may also be
with a thorough cleansing and fluid therapy to treat
indicated.
for shock. The burn should be debrided to promote
healing and a bandage should be placed. Antibiotics
Dyspnea
should also be started. Daily bandage changes and
Snakes do not normally open-mouth breathe. If acute
debridement are necessary for successful treatment. As
dyspnea occurs the snake should be seen immediately.
the skin heals, the wound will become very painful.
Dyspnea can be caused by several pathogens or disease
Analgesics should be started as soon as the patient feels
processes, but it is most commonly associated with
pain. It can take months to a year for full granulation
to occur. The owners must be told of the poor prog-
pneumonia.
nosis, long-term care, and financial expense of treating
Thermal Burns
 a full-thickness burn before treatment begins.
Thermal burns are one of the most common emergen-
cies seen in practice. Often, snakes do not show clinical
signs of a burn for several days, making them difficult
CRITICAL CARE MONITORING
to treat. Thermal burns are most commonly caused by
 a malfunctioning heat source or improper use of a heat
The same principles apply to monitoring a critically ill
source. The two most common causes of thermal
snake as apply to monitoring a critically ill dog or cat.
burns in snakes are hot rocks (or what this author
Neurologic, respiratory, and cardiovascular function
refers to as death rocks) and heat lights that snakes
all must be monitored and assessed.
coil around.
The cardiovascular system should be monitored by
 Burns are classified as superficial, partial thickness,
using a Doppler and electrocardiogram. A heart rate
or full thickness. A superficial burn involves only the
should be obtained from both the Doppler and ECG
epidermis. The snake may appear to be in pain and
(Figures 7.22, 7.23). Auscultation should be performed
 have some discoloration on its scales. In severe super-
to monitor the respiratory system. The breath sounds
ficial burns some scales may be singed. Snakes with a
should be clear without any wheezing or crackles. A
superficial burn have a good prognosis. Antibiotic
respiratory rate should be obtained and recorded. The
therapy should be initiated if any infection is noted.
patient should also be observed for dyspnea. A neuro-
The snake should be housed in its POTZ and should
logic exam should be performed daily. The snake
heal by the next ecdysis. Little or no scarring is seen
should also be housed in its POTZ.
with superficial burns.
Partial-thickness burns involve complete destruc-
tion of the epidermis and extend into the underlying
layers of skin. These burns appear red, ooze plasma,
 and will blister. Partial-thickness burns are also very
painful. Treatment can take several months to com-
 pletely heal. Analgesics should be administered imme-
diately because these burns are very painful. The burn
should be flushed thoroughly and supportive care
should be started. It is not uncommon for these patients
to be in shock. After cleansing the burns, a burn cream
such as 1% silver sulfadiazine should be applied and
a sterile nonstick bandage should be placed. Wet to
dry bandages can also be used. The bandages should
be replaced every day. The snake should be housed in
a glass or Plexiglas container with no substrate until
Figure 7.22. ECG lead placement on a snake. The
the wound is completely healed. The cage should also
head is to the right. (Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
158
Chapter 7
Figure 7.23. ECG lead placement close-up to show
Figure 7.24. Probes used for sexing snakes. (Photo
detail. (Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
SEX DETERMININATION
apply too much pressure or the hemipenes can be
damaged. This method is unreliable in large snakes
Snakes do not possess external genitalia, so determin-
and some colubrids in which manual eversion of the
ing the sex can sometimes be challenging. There are
hemipenes is not possible.
several acceptable methods used to determine the sex
of snakes. Of the methods available, there are various
Cloacal Probing
degrees of simplicity and accuracy. It is important to
 This is the preferred method of sex determination. It
choose a method that best suits the particular snake.
 is very simple and accurate if done properly. The probe 
For a snake that is kept as a pet, it is best to stick with
 used can be anything that is straight and has a blunt
a more simple method of sex determination. Snakes
 end. Commercial sex probes are available in sets of
kept for breeding should be sexed using the most accu-
various diameters. Insert the lubricated probe into the
rate method for that species.
cloaca and angle it caudally. Position the probe just
lateral to the midline. Then gently slide the probe
Secondary Sexual Characteristics
caudally into the base of the tail. If the snake is
With the exception of the boids, most snakes do not
male, the probe will enter the inverted hemipenis
show any secondary sexual characteristics. Male boids
and slide down several millimeters. If the snake is a
sometimes have larger cloacal spurs than females.
female, the probe will either not be able to enter the
Only technicians that are very familiar with boids will
 tail base or will go only a couple of millimeters. Female
be able to accurately determine the sex by using this
snakes have blind diverticula that are smaller in diam-
method. Another secondary sexual characteristic that
eter and shorter in depth than the hemipenes. A major
can be used to determine the sex is looking for a small
cause of error in sexing is using a probe that is too
bulge in the tail, because the hemipenes are kept inside
small. A very small probe can enter the diverticula in
the tail. Using secondary sexual characteristics is a
females, giving a false diagnosis. The technician must
simple method but is the least accurate.
also be careful not to be forceful with the probe. The
 probe should slide smoothly with very l
little force
Manual Eversion
needed. Generally, the distance the probe enters the
A more accurate method of sex determination is manu-
base of the tail is measured in either millimeters or
ally everting the hemipenes. This method is best used
number of subcaudal scales. This number should be
in juvenile snakes or those that are too small for other 
 recorded in the fle with the sex diagnosis (Figures
methods. This method of sex determination is often
7.24, 7.25).
referred to as popping. For this process, firmly roll one
thumb up the base of the tail, starting distal and
Hydrostatic Eversion
working proximal to the cloaca. If it is a male, the
 Hydrostatic eversion is the most accurate yet difficult
hemipenes will pop out. Care must be taken not to
 method of sex determination. It involves injecting iso-
Snakes
159
B
C
Figure 7.25. Sexing a snake. (A) Appropriate placement of
probe prior to insertion. (B) Initial insertion of the probe.
(C) Advancing the probe. (D) In males the probe advances
D
farther than in females.(Drawings by Scott Stark.)
 isg n a o asq a o as oo
CLINICAL TECHNIQUES
to where the hemipenes would be located. Keep inject-
ing the saline until the hemipenes are everted or resis-
Administration of Medications
tance is felt on the syringe. A possible danger of this
procedure is injecting the saline into the hemipenes
Intravenous
instead of caudal. For very large snakes, anesthesia is
Intravenous (IV) injections can be given in the tail vein
required to perform this procedure. This method is
or directly into the heart. Use the same technique used
very accurate because the hemipenes are everted in
for venipuncture to give the injection. Another vein
 males, and if the snake is female, the swelling around
that can be used for IV injections is the palatine vein.
the cloaca allows for visualization of the oviductal
This vein is located in the oral cavity and is best suited
papillae.
for very experienced phlebotomists due to its small
160
Chapter 7
size. The palatine vein should only be used in snakes
with a healthy oral cavity and no signs of stomatitis.
Subcutaneous
Subcutaneous (SC) injections can easily be given
when the snake is coiled and skin folds appear The
needle should be placed between the scales on
the lateral coelomic body wall, aspiration applied to
the syringe to ensure a blood vessel has not been
entered, and then the injection given. If the snake is
not coiled, a small piece of skin can be lifted and the
 injection given.
Intramuscular
Intramuscular (IM) injections can be given in the
Figure 7.26. Venipuncture using the tail vein. (Photo
epaxial and lateral muscle groups. The needle is placed
courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
between the scales, aspiration applied to the syringe to
ensure a blood vessel has not been entered, and then
the injection given.
facing cranial, the needle is inserted exactly on midline
at a 45-degree angle. While maintaining gentle
Intracoelomic
suction, the needle is advanced until a flash of blood
The snake should be restrained in dorsal or lateral
is seen. Occasionally the coccygeal vertebrae will be
recumbency for intracoelomic (ICe) medication admin-
hit first and the flash of blood will be seen as the
istration. The needle is placed between scales in the
needle is withdrawn. The needle should be inserted
lower quadrant of the coelomic cavity, being careful
caudal to the hemipenes and scent glands. With
to be far enough caudal to avoid the lung. It is very
smaller snakes, a gentle suction and release may be
important to aspirate back on the syringe before inject-
 done to receive enough blood to perform diagnostic
ing. If any blood or other questionable fluid is aspi-
testing.
rated, the needle should be removed and a new syringe
and medication should be prepared. If giving ICe
Cardiocentesis
fluids, the fluids should be warmed up to the snake's
 Locate the heart by either manual palpation or Doppler.
 POTZ before administering.
Apply pressure just caudal and cranial to the heart to
stabilize it. After the heart has been stabilized, the
Oral
needle is inserted at a 45- to 60-degree angle.
 Oral (PO) medications are very easy to give to snakes.
The needle is advanced until a slight pop is felt and
The medication is drawn up into a syringe and then a
the needle has entered the heart. Aspirate back
 red rubber catheter is attached to the end. To prevent
until enough sample has been taken. Occasionally,
the red rubber catheter from passing into the trachea,
pericardial fluid may be aspirated. If this happens,
a catheter should be chosen that is too large to fit into
the needle should be withdrawn and the procedure
the trachea. The mouth should be opened to ensure
started over with a fresh needle and syringe
that the catheter has gone down the esophagus. After
(Figure 7.27).
checking for correct placement, administration of the
medication can begin. With another syringe filled with 
Palatine Vein
water, the medication should be flushed down to
As stated previously, the palatine vein is only recom-
ensure that no medicine is left in the catheter. This
 mended in a snake with a clean oral cavity and no signs
method can also be used to force feed snakes.
of stomatitis. This technique only works on very docile
or anesthetized snakes. Restrain the snake with its
Venipuncture
mouth open. A 25- to 27-gauge needle should be
advanced into the vein, and then aspirate gently to
Tail Vein
 prevent the vein from collapsing. Due to the chance of
The snake can be placed in either dorsal or ventral
contamination from the saliva, this vein is best used
recumbency (Figure 7.26). With the bevel of the needle
 only for IV injections.
Snakes
161
Figure 7.27. Cardiocentesis. (Photo courtesy of Zo0
Atlanta.)
Intravenous Catheter Placement
Jugular Vein
A cut-down incision is required for this procedure. The
skin should be surgically prepped. The incision should
be made at the junction of the ventral scutes and lateral
A
scales just cranial to the heart, about four to seven
scutes. It is necessary to bluntly dissect to expose the
vein. After the vein has been exposed, the catheter is
inserted until a flash is seen in the hub. The catheter
is then advanced into the vein. The skin is closed using
sutures and with the catheter sutured to the skin. A
bandage can be placed to keep the catheter site clean.
Heart
 In an extreme emergency, a catheter can be placed in
the heart for a short time. The technique used for
venipuncture can be used to place the catheter. Once
the catheter is placed, it should be secured with suture
or tape.
B
Force Feeding
Properly restrain the snake with its mouth open. An
Figure 7.28. Feeding a snake. (A) Restraint with the
appropriate-sized prey item is grasped with large
mouth open for insertion of prey. A tongue
depressor may be used to open the mouth. (B) Using
hemostats and a large amount of lubrication is applied
to the entire body of the prey. It is then inserted into
a pair of large hemostats, the prey is gently pushed
the snake's mouth, gently forcing it down. Once the
down into the esophagus. (Drawings by Scott Stark.)
prey is completely inserted, milk the prey down the
esophagus until it reaches the stomach. Be very careful
that the prey does not scratch the esophagus with its
foods can be used. For neonates or smaller snakes a
 SI S d  Am Aa u se  S
device called a pinkie press can be used.
trim the claws and teth before force feeding.
Snakes can also be force fed by using the 
Tracbeal and Lung Wash
same
technique for giving oral medications (Figures 7.28,
 Restrain the snake with its mouth open. Pass a sterile
7.29). Liquefied whole prey or artificially prepared
red rubber catheter into the trachea. Once the catheter
162
Chapter 7
A
B
Figure 7.30. View of the glottis. (Photo courtesy of
RyanCheek.)
is in place, infuse sterile saline into the trachea
and lung. Do not place more than 5ml/kg into the
lung. After the sterile saline has been administered,
aspirate back as much of the saline as possible. The
saline can be injected and aspirated as many times as
 needed to receive a proper amount of sample (Figures
7.30, 7.31).
Colonic Wash and Enema
colon. To enter the colon, the cloaca should be entered
C
and the catheter aimed ventrally. With a syringe
filled with saline, begin flushing the saline into the
Figure 7.29. Force-feeding a snake. (A) The snake is
colon and aspirating it back. This step should be
properly restrained and a tongue depressor is used to
repeated several times to get an adequate sample.
open the mouth. The prey is then inserted into the
This process also helps soften stools in constipated
oral cavity. (B) The prey is almost completely into
snakes. After aspiration, the sample can then be ana-
the oral cavity.(C) The prey is then gently pushed
lyzed for parasites, cytologic examination, and culture
down the esophagus. (Photos courtesy of Ryan
(Figure 7.32).
Cheek.)
Snakes
163
Figure 7.32. Colonic wash. (Drawing by Scott
Stark.)
VENOMOUS SNAKES
 It is not recommended to keep venomous snakes in
private collections, especially by novice hobbyists. In
some cases, it may be illegal to keep venomous snakes
without proper permits. For this reason, it is rare that
B
one would be brought into private practice for medical
care. If this occurs, however, proper protocols need to
 be implemented. Whether a veterinary practice is even
 equipped for safe handling of venomous snakes needs
to be addressed. At the very least, snake tongs, hooks,
and tubes are needed for safer handling. Someone
 trained in handling venomous snakes is also needed.
Although tubing and handling techniques can be prac-
ticed on nonvenomous snakes, there is obviously more
risk involved in dealing with the venomous ones, and
others could be put at risk as well.
Most procedures on venomous snakes should be
done while the snake is under anesthesia, which
involves either tubing or placing the snake in an immo-
bilization chamber. Do not attempt to manually
C
restrain the head of a venomous snake. Those who
Figure 7.31. Tracheal wash. (A) With the snake
milk snakes for venom have to do so but it is not a
safe method of restraint. Some fangs are long enough
properly restrained,the mouth is opened.(B)A
to still penetrate a hand while restraining the head.
tongue depressor is used as a mouth gag, and the red
An envenomation protocol also needs to be in place
rubber catheter is inserted into the trachea. (C) 0.9%
at the facility. Most human hospitals (if they carry
sodiumchloride isthengently flushed into the
 antivenin at all) only have those of indigenous species.
trachea and then aspirated back. (Photos courtesy of
Therefore, imported species are riskier to handle due
Ryan Cheek.)
164
Chapter 7
to the lack of accessible antivenin. Most facilities that
euthanasia. This can be easily avoided if the snake is
 handle venomous snakes keep the different types of
 left in the hospital overnight for observation.
antivenin in stock, not necessarily for self-administra-
tion should a bite occur, but to bring to the nearest
hospital if the hospital does not have any on hand.
BEING A RESPONSIBLE SNAKE OWNER
This is difficult though, due to both the expenses
involved and the lack of accessibility. Expiration dates
As a part of the veterinary team, the technician is
on the antivenin also must be closely monitored.
responsible for properly informing and educating
Be sure to have a line of communication established
clients about the needs of particular animals. It is also
with local hospitals to know who is able to handle a
important to offer guidance when purchases are being
venomous snakebite. Contacting the local poison
considered. Knowing what is involved in snake care
control facility to establish a protocol is helpful as well.
 and knowing specifics about different species of snakes
Once again, these are all issues that must be addressed
aids in giving advice to those considering purchasing
before venomous snakes are managed at the facility.
a snake as a pet. Offering consultations to clients
Minutes count should a venomous snakebite occur.
before purchases help to eliminate many of the prob-
Time cannot be wasted on calling hospitals to see if they
lems that arise after a snake is purchased. Snakes, in
can handle that particular bite. If this seems like too
general, do not make good pets. This should be kept
much of a hassle, then handling/treating
venomous
in mind when offering advice to potential buyers.
snakes should not be performed at that facility at all.
Buying a snake that will reach lengths of 20 feet or
more is obviously not a choice that should be made by
 most people, either These snakes usually become
EUTHANASLA
 neglected and the owners sometimes begin to fear them
 due to their size and their predisposition, which may
Unfortunately, not all patients can be saved. For-
 become aggressive.
tunately, veterinary medicine has the privilege of being
 More and more people are beginning to devise ways
able to humanely euthanize suffering animals with ter-
to get rid of their snakes when it is no longer conve-
minal illnesses. Euthanizing snakes can prove to be a
nient to own them. All too often these snakes are
difficult task. There are several humane methods of
impulse buys that are thought of as disposable belong-
euthanasia that are acceptable in snakes. Only the
ings. The most appalling of these occurrences is when
methods that this author feels are humane will be
 people let them go in their backyards when they don't
discussed here.
want to deal with them anymore. Most captive speci-
 This author's preferred method of euthanasia in
mens are not even indigenous to the country where
snakes starts with an injection of telazol or ketamine
their owners set them free. Not only will this most
HCl. If injectable anesthetics are not available, inhal-
likely kill the animal, but it can upset the natural
 ant anesthesia can be used. Due to the ability of snakes
 balance of that particular ecosystem. Some even choose
 to hold their breath for long periods of time this can
 to freeze the snake as their way of humanely euthaniz-
be a very lengthy process. After the snake is anesthe-
ing the animal so they will no longer be burdened.
tized, a cardiac stick is performed and an overdose of
There is nothing humane about freezing a live animal.
a barbiturate is injected. In very small species or very
It is, in fact a slow, painful death.
dehydrated snakes, a cardiac stick can be difficult. In
 If an owner no longer wants a snake, then attempts
that case, a simple IC injection of a barbiturate can be
should be made to place it in a home or facility ready
performed. It can take several minutes to several hours
and able to meet its needs. Most of the time, this
before the snake is finally deceased using this method.
  s      
The toughest part of euthanizing snakes is deter-
reach astounding lengths and girths and can be
mining death. There is not a good answer to the ques-
extremely dangerous, not to mention the size of the
tion. Is the snake deceased? An electrocardiograph,
enclosure needed to properly house them. These are
 auscultation of the heart, or a Doppler can all be used
obviously not for novice keepers and should be dis-
to determine if the snake is deceased. Due to the fact
couraged when an inexperienced individual inquires
that reptile hearts can still beat for several hours post-
 about obtaining one.
mortem or can even beat once or twice per minute
Another point to be made about being a responsible
postmortem, these three tests can prove to be inaccu-
snake owner is understanding that many people fear
rate. Many reptile clinicians have heard stories of the
 them. Taking snakes out to public places to show them
snake coming back to life twenty-four hours after the
 off is not doing the public any good, and especially not
Snakes
165
the snake. Being around a lot of commotion can scare
Lane TJ, Mader DR. 1996. Parasitology. In: Reptile Medicine and
the snake and can cause the people to panic as well.
Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
190-202.
This in turn, is doing more injustice to the snake than
Lawton MP. 2001. Fluid Therapy in Reptiles. In: Proceedings of the
one would think. The public, as a whole, has a terrible
North American Veterinary Conference. Eastern States Vet Assn.
phobia of snakes and forcing the issue by bringing
788.
snakes into public places makes it worse. If individuals
 Lawton MP. 1991. Lizards and Snakes. In: Manual of Exotic Pets,
want to display their snakes, they should offer educa-
edited by Beymon PH, et al. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
tional exhibits and lectures. By displaying them in this
254.
Lock BA. May 2000. Reproductive Surgery in Reptiles. In: Veterinary
way they can create a learning environment and offer
Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice. Philadelphia:
people the choice of whether to participate or not. A
W.B. Saunders Co. 734-737.
phobia (no matter how silly one thinks it is) is a phobia,
Marschang RE. 2001. Isolation of Viruses from Boa Constrictors,
 and it is not something that can be a forced change.
Boα constrictor spp., with Inclusion Body Disease. In: Proceedings
of the Association of Reptilian and Amphibian Veterinarians.
Eastern States Vet Assn. 37.
Miller HA. April 1998.Urinary Diseases of Reptiles: Pathophysiology
REFERENCES
and Diagnosis. In: Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine,
edited by Fudge AM. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 96-98.
Barnard SM. 1996. Reptile Keepers Handbook. Florida: Krieger
Platel R. 1994. Nervous System and Sensory Organs. In: Snakes: A
Publishing Company. 71-73.
Natural History, edited by Bauchot R. New York: Sterling
Bennett RA. 1997. Reptilian Surgery, Parts 1 and 2. In: Practical
Publishing. 51-55.
Exotic Animal Medicine, edited by Rosenthal KL. New Jersey:
Pough FH, et al. 2001. Herpetology. 2nd ed New Jersey: Prentice-
Veterinary Learning Systems. 32-38.
Hall Inc. 200-206, 272.
Bennett RA. 1996a. Anesthesia. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery.
Ritchie B. 2006. Virology. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, 2nd
edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 30,
ed., edited by Mader DR. Missouri: Saunders Elsevier.
243-244.
Romer AS. 1997. Osteology of the Reptiles. Reprint. Malabar, FL:
 Bennett RA. 1996b. Neurology. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery,
Krieger Publishing. 126, 209.
edited by
：Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Ross RA, et al. 1990. The Reproductive Husbandry of Pythons and
142-145.
Boas. The Institute for Herpetological Research, Stanford, CA.
Bennett RA, Lock BA. 2000. Nonreproductive Surgery in Reptiles.
55-60, 103.
In: Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice.
Rossi JV. 1996. Dermatology. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery,
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 718-721.
edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 106-114.
Bertelsen MF 2007. Squamates (Snakes and Lizards. In:
Saint-Girons H. 1994. Growth and Reproduction. In: Snakes: A
Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia,
Natural History, edited by Bauchot R. New York: Sterling
edited by West G, Heard D, Caulkett N. Jowa: Blackwell
Publishing. 99.
Publishing.
Schurmacher J, Yelen, T. 2006. Anesthesia and Analgesia. In: Reptile
Bronson E, Cranfield MR. 2006. Paramyxovirus. In: Reptile
Medicine and Surgery 2nd ed., edited by Mader DR. Missouri:
Medicine and Surgery 2nd edition, edited by Mader DR.
Saunders Elsevier.
Missouri: Saunders Elsevier.
Schumacher J. 2002a. Anesthesia in Reptiles. In: Proceedings of the
Bradley T. 2001. Pain Managerment Considerations and Pain-
North American Veterinary Conference. Eastern States Vet Assn.
Associated Behaviors in Reptiles and Armphibians. In: Proceedings
946.
of the Association of Reptilian and Amphibian Veterinarians.
 Schurmacher J. 2002b. Sevoflurane in Reptiles In: Proceedings of the
Eastern State Vet Assn. 45.
 North American Veterinary Conference. Eastern States Vet Assn.
Divers SJ. 2000. Reptilian Renal and Reproductive Disease
950.
and Diagnosis. In: Laboratory Medicine: Avian and Exotic
 Schumacher J. 1996. Viral Diseases In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery.
Pets, edited by Fudge AM. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 229.
217.
 Siemering H. 1986. Zoonoses. In: Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine,
Driggers T. May 2000. Respiratory Diseases, Diagnostics, and
2nd ed., edited by Fowler ME. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Therapy in Snakes. In: The Veterinary Clinics of North America:
64.
Exotic Animal Medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Vasse Y. 1994. A Cardiovascular Systerm Working Against the
524-528.
Forces of Gravity. In: Snakes: A Natural History, edited by
 Funk RS. 1996. Snakes. In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery, edited by
Bauchot R. New York: Sterling Publishing. 75.
Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 40-42.
Williams DL. 1996. Ophthalmology. In: Reptile Medicine and
Glynn MK, et al. 2001. Knowledge and Practices of California
Surgery, edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Veterinarians Concerning the Human Health Threat of Reptile-
181.
Associated Salmonellosis. Journat of Herpetologicat Medicine
Wright K. 1999. Fluid Therapy for Reptiles. In: Proceedings of the
(nd Surgery 11(2): 9-13.
North American Veterinary Conference. Eastern States Vet Assn.
Holz PH. 1999. The Reptilian Renal-Portal System: Influence on
817.
Therapy. In: Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine: Current Therapy
Zug GR, et al. 2001. Herpetology: An Introductory Biology of
4th ed., edited by Fowler ME and Miller RE. Philadelphia: W.B.
Amphibians and Reptiles. 2nd ed., New York: Acadermic Press.
Saunders Co. 249.
49-57, 173.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Chelonians
Samuel Rivera
INTRODUCTION
the diseases seen in captive chelonians are related to
improper husbandry and/or inadequate diet. Accurate
Turtles belong in the class Reptilia, which is divided
identification of chelonian species aids in the evalua-
into four orders, Chelonia (all turtles), Crocodylia
tion of husbandry and nutritional management.
(crocodilians), Squamata (snakes and lizards), and
The goal of this chapter is to provide a basic understand-
Rhynchocephalia (tuatara). There are approximately
ing of chelonian husbandry, nutrition, biology,
270 species in the order Chelonia. This order contains
a primitive group of animals that evolved into a shelled
form millions of years ago and is considered the most
primitive group of living reptiles. Chelonians include
turtles, tortoises, and terrapins. The terms "turtle,"
"tortoise,” and “terrapin" are sometimes confusing
because they have different meanings in different parts
of the world. In the United States, tortoise refers to
terrestrial chelonians; turtles often refer to aquatic or
semiaquatic chelonians with the exception of the box
turtle, which is terrestrial; and terrapins are semi-
aquatic, hard-shelled chelonians. Because of the confu-
sion in terminology, chelonians are often listed by their
binomial scientific name, which is uniform around the
world.
Hundreds of species of chelonians are kept in captiv-
ity (Color Plates 8.1, 8.2, 8.3). Unfortunately, many of
Plate 8.2. Sulcata tortoise. (See also color plates)
Plate 8.1. Male eastern box turtle showing red eye.
(See also color plates)
Plate 8.3. Aldabra tortoise. (See also color plates)
167
168
Chapter 8
basic
clinical techniques, and common health
 tron are the peripherals. The plastron has six pairs of
problems.
scutes. The cranial pair is the gular, followed by the
humeral, pectoral, abdominal, femoral, and anal
scutes, consecutively. The movable hinge is located
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
between the pectoral and abdominal scutes. This hinge
allows the plastron to be folded up to enclose the head
MusculoskeletalSystem
and forelimbs within the shell. The pelvic and pectoral
In this section, the North American eastern box turtle
girdles are contained within the rib cage that is fused
(Terrapene carolina carolina) will be described. The
to the carapace.
most remarkable feature of turtles is their shell, which
The bones of the limbs of most chelonians are
is divided in two parts. The dorsal part is the carapace
similar to those of other vertebrates.
and the ventral part is the plastron. The carapace
normally consists of approximately fifty bones. The
Respiratory System
nuchal bone is the most cranial along the dorsal
Turtles breathe through a pair of nostrils located at
midline. It is followed by seven neural, one suprapygal,
the dorsocranial aspect of the premaxilla. The glottis
and a pygal bone, consecutively. The neural bones are
is located at the base of the tongue. The trachea is
attached to the vertebrae. The costal bones are located
relatively short and bifurcates into two mainstream
on either side of the neural bones. The peripheral
bronchi that open into the dorsal aspect of the paired
bones are located on the lateral aspect of the costal
lungs. The lungs are large, compartmentalized struc-
bones and extend from the nuchal to the pygal bones
tures with a reticular surface containing bands of
on both sides of the carapace (Figure 8.1).
smooth muscle and connective tissue. The lungs attach
The plastron consists of nine bones. The cranial
 dorsally to the ventral aspect of the carapace and ven-
part of the plastron is comprised of the entoplastral
trally to a membrane that is attached to the stomach,
bone, which is surrounded by the epiplastral bones
liver, and intestinal tract. Turtles do not have a dia-
cranially and two hypoplastral bones caudally. The
 phragm. Respiration is achieved by the contraction of
hypoplastral bones are followed caudally by a second
the proximal muscle mass of the pectoral and pelvic
limbs (Wood and Lenfant 1976). Aquatic turtles can
bones, consecutively. The bones of a turtle shell articu-
exchange oxygen through the mucosal surface of the
late with each other by a suture. Box turtles have a
 oral cavity and cloaca. Soft-shelled turtles can exchange
movable hinge located transversely between the two
 Oxygen through their skin (Girgis 1961).
pairs of hypoplastral bones.
The bones of the shell are covered with structures
Gastrointestinal System
made of keratinized epithelium called scutes. The most
The tongue of turtles is large and unable to distend
cranial scute along the dorsal midline is the cervical
from the oral cavity. They have salivary glands that
scute, which is followed caudally by five vertebral
 produce mucus but not digestive enzymes. The esopha-
scutes. The scutes adjacent to the vertebrals are the
gus courses along the neck. The stomach lies on the
 pleurals. The scutes outlining the periphery of the plas-
left cranioventral side of the coelomic cavity and has
a gastroesophageal and a gastroduodenal valve. The
Carapace
small intestine is relatively short. The pancreas is pale
pink and can be located near the spleen or in the mes-
entery along the duodenum. The liver is large, saddle-
shaped, and located ventrally under the lungs. The
liver has two lobes and it envelops the gall bladder. It
Pelvis
轮
also has indentations for the heart and stomach. The
Femur
small intestine joins the large intestine at the ileocolic
valve. The cecum is not well developed. The large
Ulna
 intestine is the primary site of microbial fermentation
Radius
Fibula
in herbivorous turtles. The digestive tract empties into
Humerus
Tibia
the cloaca (Figure 8.2).
Plastron
Genitourinary System
Figure 8.1. Skeletal anatomy. (Drawing by Scott
The paired kidneys are located on the ventrocaudal
Stark.)
aspect of the carapace, cranial to the acetabulum. The
Chelonians
169
Heart
Liver
Lt
Lung
Cecum
Stomach
Uterus
Colon-
-Sm
Bladder.
Intestine
ANUS
Figure 8.3.Female reproductive anatomy. (Drawing
by Scott Stark.)
Figure 8.2. Visceral anatomy. (Drawing by Scott
Stark.)
turtles by species. A brief overview on the husbandry
paired gonads are located cranial to the kidneys. The
of aquatic and terrestrial turtles will be discussed. The
urogenital ducts empty into the neck of the urinary
 general public often seeks advice from veterinarians
bladder, which is bilobed with a thin membranous
and their support staff about the care and feeding of
wall. Male turtles have a single, large, dark-colored
their newly purchased turtle. It is essential to have a
penis. It is located in the floor of the cloaca and it is
basic understanding of the husbandry and feeding
not used for urination.
practices of chelonians. Whenever possible, the turtle
Many turtles are sexually dimorphic. The male tor-
should be identified so accurate information on its
toise has a concave plastron. The males of aquatic
turtle species have long nails on their front feet.
husbandry and eating habits can be obtained.
Generally, the tail is relatively larger in males than in
Aquatic Turtles
females (Figures 8.3, 8.4).
Aquatic turtles are one of the most labor intensive
reptiles to maintain. Inadequate husbandry often
Circulatory System
results in health problems. The housing requirements
Chelonians have a three-chambered heart consisting of
depend on the size and the number of turtles kept. As
two atria and one ventricle. Like other reptiles, turtles
a rule of thumb, the combined surface area of all the
have a renoportal circulation system. Its function is to
turtles' carapaces should not exceed 25% of the tank's
provide an alternate blood supply to the renal tubular
floor surface area (Anonymous 1990). The water
cells, and prevent ischemic necrosis when the arterial
blood supply to the glomerulus is compromised (Holz
should be as deep as the width of the turtle's shell, so
that if overturned it will be able to right itself. The
1999).
simpler the setup, the easier to clean, and clean water
is essential to the health of turtles. The best way to
HUSBANDRY AND NUTRITION
keep the water clean is by doing full water changes.
The larger the volume, the less the frequency of water
Hundreds of species of turtles are seen in the pet trade,
changes. The number of animals, the feeding fre-
and it is beyond the scope of this chapter to cover
quency, and the type of food offered also determine
170
Chapter 8
Figure 8.5. Aguatic habitat. (Drawing by Scott
Stark.)
An adequate diet is essential for good health.
Aquatic turtles are omnivorous with a few exceptions.
INDENTED
PLASTRON
Younger, rapidly growing animals tend to eat a larger
 percentage of meat but switch to eating more vegetable
matter as they get older (Frye 1991). A varied diet is
the key to a healthy turtle. Too much of one food item
can often lead to nutritional imbalances. Fish (goldfish,
 guppies, and bait minnows) is accepted by many
turtles. Chopped, skinned adult mice are a good source
of vitamins and minerals. Earthworms and a variety
of insects can also be fed. Many adult turtles can be
fed dark green leafy vegetables and a small amount of
fruits. Most pet turtle owners will a commercial pel-
leted diet. Turle owners who feed strictly pelleted
Figure 8.4. Male reproductive anatomy. (Drawing
food should always be encouraged to supplement the
by Scott Stark.)
diet with other food items to provide the most bal-
anced nutrition possible. Adult turtles can be fed two
the frequency of cleaning. Avoid drastic temperature
to three times per week, and young turtles should be
changes when replacing the water because this can be
fed daily or every other day. Aquatic turtles eat in the
detrimental to the turtle's health. A filtration system
water and can be quite messy. Some turtles can be
minimizes but does not eliminate the need for complete
water changes (Figure 8.5).
but does not eliminate the need for frequent water
Adequate environmental and water temperature are
changes.
important for good health. Turtles are ectothermic:
Some species of chelonians spend the majority of
they rely on the environmental temperature to regulate
their time in the water but some time on land. The
their body temperature. Turtles have a preferred
semiaquatic environment, a variation of the aquatic
optimal temperature zone (POTZ), which is the tem-
 one, is appropriate for these chelonians. This setup
perature at which they are the most comfortable. The
involves all the same features of an aquatic setup but
POTZ also allows for normal physiologic functions to
includes a land portion for basking (Figure 8.6).
occur, such as digestion and fighting disease. Most
-n rem do pnd e aeq s sne
Terrestrial Turtles
perature of 24°C to 29°C (75*F to 82°F). A dry area
Land turtles can be kept in a variety of enclosures,
should be available so the turtle can dry off and bask,
depending on the size and number of animals kept.
 a process by which turtles can regulate their body
temperature. An incandescent 50- to 150-watt light
 outside, which allows the animals plenty of room to
bulb with a reflector directed toward the basking area
exercise and graze. Healthy tortoises can be placed
creates a hot spot for basking. Place the basking light
 outdoors when the temperature is above 18°C (65°F)
and the midday temperature reaches 24°C (75°F) or
the basking area.
above (Boyer and Boyer 1996). The outdoor enclosure
Chelonians
171
Figure 8.6.Semiaquatic habitat. (Drawing by Scott
Stark.)
Figure 8.7. Setup for a small tortoise. (Photo
courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
should have a hiding place and a shaded area. The
sides of the enclosure should be made of wood or any
solid material that can provide a visual barrier. Wire
 If the tortoises are kept indoors all year, a source
fencing is not recommended because tortoises can
of UV light must be provided. There is a wide variety
injure themselves while trying to climb or push through
of UV lights and the manufacturer's instructions must
the fence. The walls should be at least three times the
be followed closely. Two points to keep in mind are
height of the largest tortoise. Some tortoise species like
that most UV bulbs must be kept at a minimum dis-
to dig; therefore, wire can be buried around the perim-
tance from the animals to be effective, and the lifespan
eter, at least ten to twelve inches, to prevent escape.
of the bulbs is limited and they must be replaced on a
Tortoises can be kept indoors. Generally
they
regular basis. Natural light is ideal and must be pro-
require more space than most reptiles of similar size.
vided whenever possible (Figure 8.7).
As a general rule, the combined size of all the tortoises'
Tortoises are mainly herbivores. In the wild, they
carapaces should not exceed 25% of the enclosure's
eat a variety of leaves, stems, flowers, and fruits; in
 floor (Anonymous 1990). Aquariums, or a wide variety
addition, some eat snails, earthworms, and other
of plastic containers, can be used for small tortoises.
invertebrates. The ideal diet should be made of 85%
Larger species can be kept in enclosures made of wood
vegetables (dark leafy greens, grasses), 10% fruits, and
or cement. A garage or spare room can serve as a
5% high-protein foods (Boyer and Boyer 1994). The
holding area for tortoises.
high-protein foods can be provided once or twice
The room temperature should be between 24°C and
weekly. Alternatively, a commercially made pelleted
32°C (75°F and 90°F). A thermal gradient between
diet can be provided and supplemented with high-fiber
 75°F and 90°F is ideal to allow for thermoregulation.
food items. Adult animals can be fed two to three times
This gradient can be created by placing a basking light
per week, whereas juveniles can be fed daily or every
at one end of the enclosure. The basking light should
other day.
be placed eighteen to twenty-four inches away from
the animals. At night, supplemental heat can be pro-
vided with heating pads placed under the enclosure,
COMMON DISEASES
ceramic heaters with a reflector, or night heat lights.
Acceptable substrates include cyprus mulch, large
Metabolic Bone Disease
conifer bark nuggets, alfalfa pellets, newspaper, and
This disease is caused by an improper calcium and
 indoor-outdoor carpeting, among others. Inappropriate
phosphorus ratio in the diet and/or a vitamin D; def-
substrates include sand, fine gravel, cat litter, crushed
ciency. Turtles fed liver, heart, or muscle meat often
corncob, or walnut shells because these can lead to
develop metabolic bone disease. The resulting calcium
gastrointestinal impactions. Pine and cedar shavings
deficiency often leads to a depletion of calcium from
are not recommended because of the presence of oils
bone, resulting in fibrous osteodystrophy. Clinical
that can adversely affect the respiratory tract. The cage
signs include anorexia, soft and/or deformed shell, and
should be cleaned several times per week. The sub-
abnormal scute growth. The treatment involves diet
strate can be changed as needed.
correction and proper vitamin D; supplementation.
172
Chapter 8
Vitamin A Deficiency
require surgical repair. In addition to shell repair, these
This is a common presentation in aquatic and terres-
animals require fluid and nutritional support and anti-
trial turtles. It is caused by feeding a diet deficient in
biotic therapy. They often have a prolonged recovery
vitamin A. The clinical signs include conjunctivitis,
and adequate treatment is needed until the turtle is
blepharitis, swollen eyelids, nasal discharge, dyspnea,
eating on its own and is free of infection.
and ear abscesses. The condition is treated with par-
enteral vitamin A and diet correction.
Overgrown Beak
Some turtles develop an overgrown beak in captivity.
Vitamin A Toxicity
This has been associated with an inadequate diet. The
This can be caused by excessive supplementation or
overgrown beak needs to be trimmed on a regular
administration of parenteral vitamin A. The clinical
basis. For the most part this can be done without seda-
signs include dry, flaky skin, or sloughing of the skin
tion. A Dremel tool works well (Figures 8.9, 8.10).
with secondary bacterial infection. Treatment requires
systemic antibiotics if secondary bacterial infection is
Respiratory Disease
present, and discontinuation of parenteral vitamin A
Respiratory disease is one of the most common pre-
or any source of over supplementation.
sentations in clinical practice. Turtles do not have a
Diseases of the Shell
"Shell rot" is a term used to describe infections of the
shell involving loss of scutes. The terms "wet" and
"dry" shell rot are used to describe the appearance of
the lesions. The wet form is usually associated with a
hemorrhagic discharge between the scutes and it is
often associated with bacterial infections. The dry
form has a dry appearance and is often associated with
fungal or bacterial infections. In some mild cases of
shell rot, the lesions can be treated topically. Aquatic
turtles need to be kept dry for thirty to sixty minutes
after topical treatment. Septicemic cutaneous ulcer-
ative disease (SCUD) is a common disease seen in
aquatic turtles. The clinical signs include cutaneous
ulcerations, anorexia, and lethargy. Treatment of any
shell lesion involves debridement and topical antimi-
Figure 8.8. Traumatic injury to the shell. (Photo
crobial treatment. In some cases, systemic antibiotics
courtesy ofRyan Cheek.)
may be indicated.
Traumatic injuries to the shell are relatively
common, especially in wild chelonia. In many cases,
radiographs can help determine the extent of the
damage. The prognosis is poor if the spinal cord is
damaged. Once the animal is relatively stable, the
wounds must be cleaned, debrided, and flushed with
sterile saline and diluted disinfectant (i.e. chlorhexi-
dine). Be careful when cleaning full-thickness fractures
with exposed coelomic cavity. Turtles with full-thick-
ness fractures or severe soft-tissue trauma need sys-
temic antibiotic treatment (Figure 8.8).
Repair of Shell
Superficial cracks on the shell can be repaired using
sterile fiberglass cloth impregnated with polymerizing
epoxy resin. Contact with the soft tissue should be
avoided. Dental acrylic can also be used. Full-thickness
Figure 8.9. Overgrown beak. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
fractures where the coelomic cavity has been exposed
Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of Georgia.)
Chelonians
173
Figure 8.10. Trimming an overgrown beak with a
Dremel tool. (Photo courtesy of Stephen J.
Figure 8.11. Penile prolapse. (Photo courtesy of Zoo
Hernandez-Divers, University of Georgia.)
Atlanta.)
diaphragm and as a result they cannot clear discharge
signs of gastrointestinal disease include anorexia, vom-
 in their lungs by coughing. Some predisposing factors
iting, weight loss, lethargy, dehydration, and abnormal
to respiratory disease include improper diet, inade-
stools. The diagnosis is based on a complete blood
quate temperature and humidity, unhygienic condi-
count, plasma biochemistries, fecal examinations,
tions, and/or inappropriate substrate. Clinical signs of
radiographs, endoscopy, and in some cases ultrasonog-
respiratory disease include a mucopurulent nasal dis-
raphy. The treatment is based on the disease present.
charge, ocular discharge, dyspnea, open-mouth breath-
 Fluids and nutritional support are an important part
 ing, anorexia, weight loss, and lethargy. Aquatic turtles
of the therapy.
may show inability to swim normally as they lose
control of buoyancy. Pneumonia can be caused by
Reproductive Disorders
bacteria, viruses, mycoplasma, and certain parasites.
Dystocia is one of the most common reproductive
The diagnosis is based on the clinical signs, radio-
problems seen in chelonians. The clinical signs include
 graphs, transtracheal wash, and culture and sensitivity
anorexia, lethargy, straining, and sometimes bloody
results. Treatment includes bactericidal antibiotics,
discharge from the cloaca. The diagnosis of dystocia
 nebulization, warmth, fluid therapy, and nutritional
is based on radiographs. The predisposing factors
support.
include poor environmental conditions, metabolic
disease, and improper husbandry.
Gout
Cloacal prolapse in females during parturition and
Gout is a condition that involves the deposition of uric
penile prolapse in males during copulation are common
acid in the visceral organs and/or joints. It can be
 presentations in chelonians. This can be caused by
caused by kidney disease, dehydration, and diets high
trauma, infection, or cloacal impaction. Severe cases
in protein. Clinical signs include lethargy, anorexia,
 of penile prolapse often require amputation (Figures
lameness, and swollen joints. The diagnosis can be
8.11, 8.12).
made by measuring serum/plasma uric acid levels,
radiographs, and cytological evaluation of the material
Aural Abscesses
in the affected joints. The treatment involves the cor-
While relatively common to see, the pathogenesis of
rection of the primary problem, but it is often
aural abscesses isn't completely known. Improper hus-
unrewarding.
bandry and malnutrition may be predisposing factors.
Treatment involves surgical intervention. The tym-
Gastrointestinal Tract Disease
panic membrane is incised and exudate removed, fol-
A wide range of diseases affects the gastrointestinal
lowed by debridement and lavage of the wound. An
tract of chelonians. Stomatitis, parasites, foreign
antibiotic ointment may then be applied to the wound.
bodies, bacteria and fungal enteritis, and amoebic
The wound is left open and lavaged daily, followed by
enterohepatitis are some of the most common con-
ointment application until the wound heals by second
ditions encountered in private practice. The clinical
intention (Figure 8.13) (Murray 1996).
174
Chapter 8
The genus Salmonella contains many species with
thousands of different serotypes. Many of theses sero-
types have been isolated from healthy turtles and have
been associated with human salmonellosis. The symp-
toms in humans include abdominal pain, diarrhea,
 nausea, vomiting, and fever Owners should be made
aware of the potential health hazard when keeping
turtles as pets.
Proper sanitation is essential to decrease the risk of
exposure. There is no effective or practical way to
eliminate the bacteria from the intestinal flora of posi-
tive animals. The bacterial burden in the environment
 greatly increases when the feces are allowed to build
up in the enclosure. This causes contamination of the
Figure 8.12. Cloacal prolapse. (Photo courtesy of
turtle's environment and body surface, increasing the
Zoo Atlanta.)
risk of transmission to humans, which is why it is so
important to practice strict hygiene when keeping
turtles. By cleaning frequently, the bacterial contami-
nation in the enclosure will be greatly reduced.
Perhaps the decline in percentage of human cases of
salmonellosis associated with pet turtles has been due
to the increased awareness and practice of adequate
hygiene.
Aeromonas, Campylobacter, and Pseudomonas of
reptile origin have been associated with illness in
humans. Reptiles can also be affected by several species
of Mycobacterium that are known to cause disease in
humans. Mycobacterium can cause a variety of lesions
in reptiles. The route of transmission for humans is
through direct contact or inhalation of contaminated
particles.
The hallmark of disease prevention and decreased
Figure 8.13. Aural abscess. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
risk of exposure to potential zoonoses is adequate
Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of Georgia.)
  o d    s  
health care provider. When sick turtles are hospital-
ZOONOSES
ized, it is imperative that they be kept in a clean envi-
 ronment andhandled carefullyto prevent contamination
The greater number of zoonotic diseases associated
 of the hospital environment.
with keeping turtles involve bacterial pathogens. The
most widely recognized disease is salmonellosis.
Children, immunosuppressed individuals, and the 
OBTAINING A HISTORY AND
elderly are at greater risk of contracting salmonellosis.
PERFORMING A PHYSICAL
In the 1960s and 1970s, a large number of human
EXAMINATION
cases of salmonellosis were linked to pet turtles as the
source of infection. In 1975, laws were enacted banning 
A thorough history is one of the most important
the sale of baby turtles with a carapace length of 4
aspects of the clinical evaluation. Improper diet, enclo-
inches or less. In 1999, the Centers for Disease Control
sure, temperature, and humidity are often major con-
estimated that of the millions of cases of human sal-
tributors to illness. Always ask about previous illness.
 monellosis reported between 1996 and 1998, only 7%
Any change in appetite, behavior, weight, and defeca-
per year was associated with reptile or amphibian
tion (consistency and frequency) should be recorded.
contact (CDC 1999). The vast majority of human sal-
The origin of the animal (wild-caught versus captive-
monellosis (approximately 80%) cases was associated
bred, bought from a pet store versus a private breeder)
with eating contaminated food.
must be ascertained. Also inquire about other animals
Chelonians
175
in the collection and whether there are other types of
turtles and/or other reptiles in the household. Were
any animals bought recently? Was the animal quaran-
tined? All these questions will help to formulate a
 picture of the animal's husbandry and potential expo-
sure to pathogens.
A visual exam should be part of an initial evalua-
tion. Assess motor function if the animal is willing to
walk. Check the plastron and carapace for any evi-
dence of trauma or infection. Look at the skin of the
legs and nails. Evaluate the head, eyes, nares, oral
cavity, and tympanic membrane. Note any discharge,
redness, or swelling. The lungs of chelonians can be
auscultated by placing a wet hand towel between the
carapace and the stethoscope to enhance the surface
Figure 8.14. Proper restraint. (Photo courtesy of
contact.
Dr. Sam Rivera.)
shell. Nails can inflict painful scratches to the handler.
RESTRAINT
 The towel can also be used to keep the head inside the
 shell in aggressive species. Remember that turles, like
The neck of most turtles has an S-shaped curve that
other animals, stress easily when handled excessively
allows the animal to withdraw the head within the
(Figure 8.14).
         s
applying gentle pressure with the thumb and index
finger behind the mandibles. In many cases the head
RADIOLOGY
can be grabbed by reaching from underneath. Turtles
quickly withdraw the head when approached from the
 Radiographs are an important diagnostic tool in the
top. Once you have a hold behind the temporoman-
 asssment of the musculoskeletal, respiratory, gastro-
dibular joints, apply gentle traction to overcome the
intestinal, and reproductive systems. The dorsoventral
turtle's resistance; be careful not to be too forceful. It
(DV), lateral, and anterior-posterior views are recom-
is important to avoid dorsoventral pressure with your
mended. The DV radiograph can be easily taken by
fingers because this can cause damage to the soft tissue
placing the turtle on the table. Most often it will stay
of the neck and trachea. This technique is limited by
still long enough to take the radiograph. For the lateral
the size, physical condition, and disposition of the
and anterior-posterior views, a horizontal beam is
turtle.
desired. Elevate the turtle by using a round container
The head of box turtles can be a little harder to
that fits under the plastron. Make sure the feet do not
exteriorize because a box turtle can move the cranial
come in contact with the container. It is desirable to
part of the plastron upward, making the shell an
keep the patient in the sternal position. Tilting the
almost impenetrable fort. In this case a tongue depres-
turtle on its side is not recommended because this often
sor or smooth stainless steel speculum can be used to
 causes distortion of the lungs and visceral and repro-
pry the shell open. Insert your tool between the cara-
ductive organs (Figure 8.15).
pace and plastron and apply gentle pressure down-
ward. Once exposed, a limb can be grabbed and an
 attempt made to restrain the head as described above.
ANESTHESLA
A more gentle approach is to place the turtle in a
small amount of warm water. Most turtles will attempt
The overall health of the patient should be established
to get out of the water and when they do, an attempt
to assess the anesthetic risk. Turtles should be well
can be made to restrain a limb or the head. If the first
hydrated prior to anesthesia. The environmental tem-
attempt to restrain the turtle fails, the animal should
perature is also important. When anesthetized, turtles
be placed in its holding container and tried later.
should be kept at their POTZ. Keeping them slightly
 Patience is your best ally.
warmer during recovery is recommended.
In aquatic species, with long nails, a towel can be
There are several techniques for anesthetizing che
used to wrap the animal and hold the legs within the
lonians. The preferred method is the use of parenteral
176
Chapter 8
PARASITOLOGY
Turtles can be affected by a wide range of parasites. It
is important to collect a fresh fecal sample. Dry feces
are not recommended for use because many protozoan
organisms die as the feces dry. Advise the client to
collect the feces at home, place the sample in multiple
sealable plastic bags, and keep it refrigerated. Reiterate
to the client the dangers of keeping reptile feces where
food for human consumption is kept. If the sample is
to be kept refrigerated, extreme hygiene is important
 to prevent cross contamination. The sample can be
refrigerated overnight, but longer refrigeration is not
recommended. The fecal exams must be done using
fecal material and not urates. If a fresh sample is not
available, a cloacal wash (see below) can be done to
Figure 8.15. Restraint for radiographs. (Drawing by
obtain a sample.
Scott Stark.)
Direct fecal exam: Using a small wooden stick,
place a small amount of feces on a microscope slide.
drugs. Chelonians can be anesthetized using inhalation
Place a cover slip on top and examine immediately.
agents via mask or chamber induction but they can
 The longer the sample sits the more likely motile pro-
hold their breath for a long time, making this tech-
tozoans will die. Do not use a cotton tip applicator
 nique time-consuming. If gas induction is used, the
because the cotton can absorb a substantial amount of
uptake of the anesthetic agent can be increased by
the sample. Certain cysts can be difficult to identify.
manipulating the limbs in and out. This enhances ven-
The sample can be stained by adding one drop of
tilation of the lungs. The IM and IV routes are fre-
Lugol's solution. It is ideal to prepare two direct
quently used for the administration of induction
smears, one stained and one unstained. The Lugol's
agents.
solution kills motile protozoans. Some of the protozo-
Once the turtle is anesthetized it can be maintained
ans commonlyencountered are Hexamita, Balantidium,
using isoflurane or sevoflurane. The animal can be
Nyctotherus, and coccidia.
intubated using a proper size endotracheal tube.
Flotation: The flotation technique is done in the
Alternatively, small red rubber catheters can be modi-
same manner as that for small animals. Use as much
fied to serve as endotracheal tubes. In small patients,
fecal sample as possible to increase the chances of
large-bore intravenous catheters can be used. The
finding parasite ova.
laryngeal opening is located near the based of the
Cloacal wash: Using a soft rubber catheter, instill a
tongue. A cotton tip applicator can be used to gently
small amount of saline solution in the cloaca. Collect
move the tongue cranially while inserting the endotra-
the fluid for examination. This sample can be used for
cheal tube. It is recommended to use a speculum to
 direct exam and flotation.
keep the mouth open and prevent the animal from
Turtles can be subclinical carriers of pathogenic
biting the endotracheal tube. Keep in mind that large
amoeba species. Entamoeba invadens is an example of
chelonians have a strong jaw tone even if slightly
an amoeba that causes low morbidity in turtles but can
sedated and can cause serious damage to fingers.
cause severe illness and death in snakes and lizards.
 Monitoring anesthesia in chelonians can prove chal-
Nematodes, trematodes, and cestodes are common in
lenging. An EKG is ideal to monitor the cardiac func-
turtles, particularly wild-caught animals. It is impor-
tion. An ultrasonic Doppler can be used to monitor
 tant to keep in mind that chelonians are also affected
the peripheral pulse in the limbs. The withdrawal and
by ectoparasites. Ticks, leeches, and cuterebra larvae
palpebral reflexes are sometimes helpful but not always
can be found in turtles.
reliable. A pulse oximeter with a cloacal probe can
often be used to monitor oxygen saturation. It is rec-
-a assd ed  s ri p
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
tion in chelonians (four to eight breaths per minute),
which helps ventilate the lungs and keeps an adequate
The most common emergency seen in private practice
flow of oxygen and anesthetic agent in the lungs.
is trauma. Wild turtles hit by cars are unfortunately
Chelonians
177
seen too often. The initial stabilization of the patient
however, this is not always the case. Once the vein is
requires proper assessment of the injuries, antimicro-
located, the needle should be inserted at a 30-degree
bial therapy, fluid support, and adequate environmen-
angle and negative pressure applied as the needle is
tal temperature. When a turtle with severe trauma is
advanced. The syringe will fill with blood as soon as
presented, the shell as well as the limbs, head, and neck
the vein is entered. In some cases, the flow is slow.
must be evaluated for the presence of blood. Once the
 Once blood fills the hub of the needle, stop advancing
wounds are identified, they must be cleaned thor-
and release suction on the plunger. Sometimes the vein
oughly using sterile saline and a disinfectant. Antibiotics
will collapse. Reapply gentle suction until the desired
may be required to avoid infection of the wounds,
amount of blood is obtained.
which can lead to fatal septicemia. Turtles with massive
trauma can become dehydrated quickly. Adequate
Brachial Vein
fluid support is essential for a full recovery. Fluids can
The animal should be placed in sternal recumbency.
be given subcutaneously or in the intracoelomic cavity.
Once the patient is stabilized, it should be kept at its
the brachial-antibrachial joint. The brachial vein is
preferred optimal temperature zone. This allows for
located deep to the triceps tendon. This tendon can be
the immune system and other physiologic functions
palpated on the caudal aspect of the extended leg. The
needed for healing to work efficiently. It is also impor-
needle should be inserted perpendicular to the skin,
tant to provide nutritional support to the patient as
in the groove located ventral to the distal end of
soon as possible. Wild chelonians will not eat on their
the tendon. Once the skin is entered, negative
own initially, and need to be force-fed. Adequate nutri-
pressure should be applied and the needle advanced.
tion is important for a full recovery. Chelonians with
Redirecting the needle may be necessary to find the
severe trauma take a long time to heal, but if they are
vein. Once the vein is entered, the vein blood will flow
handled properly from the time of initial presentation
into the syringe.
the recovery time can be reduced significantly.
Subcarapacial Vein
This vessel is located on the ventral aspect of the cara-
CLINICAL TECHNIQUES
pace along the dorsal midline. The animal should be
restrained in sternal recumbency with the front end
Blood Collection
ele vated at a 4.5-degree angle. With one hand, the head
The sites for blood collection in chelonians are the
should be held inside the carapace. With the index
jugular, brachial, subcarapacial, tail (ventral and
finger of the other hand, the first vertebrae that is fused
dorsal), and femoral veins, as well as the occipital sinus
to the carapace along the dorsal midline should be
and heart. Chelonians can prove challenging for blood
palpated. The needle is inserted in the midline position
collection. It is always a good idea to be familiar with
and slowly directed to the space between the carapace
multiple venipuncture sites. The supplies needed
 and the vertebrae. Negative pressure should be applied
depend on the size of the animal. Prior to blood col-
 as the needle is advanced. Blood will fll the syringe as
lection, slides, hematocrit tubes, small-volume (0.5 ml)
the vein is entered.
heparinized tubes, alcohol swabs, needles (22- to 27-
gauge), and syringes (0.5- to 3-ml) should be prepared.
Ventral Tail Vein
In patients smaller than 300 g, use a 25- to 27-gauge
The turtle is restrained vertically with the plastron
needle in a 0.5- to 1-cc syringe. In patients greater than
facing the phlebotomist or in dorsal recumbency. Keep
300g, a 22-gauge needle in a 3-cc syringe can be used.
in mind that placing the animal in dorsal recumbency
Larger needles (20g) can be used in turtles weighing
is stressful; therefore, this should be done for the
more than 5 kg (Figure 8.16).
shortest amount of time possible. The tail should be
extended and held as straight as possible. The needle
Jugular Vein
should then be inserted in the ventral midline,
The jugular vein is relatively superficial and located
distal to the vent. Keep in mind that the further distal
dorsally on the neck. Some turtles may need sedation
one goes, the smaller the diameter of the vein. The
for jugular venipuncture. In most turtles blood can be
needle is then inserted at a 60-degree angle with
collected from this location as long as the head can be
the hub directed cranially. The needle should be
exteriorized. The neck should be held in the extended
 advanced until the vertebral body is hit. Apply nega-
position. In some patients the vein can be visualized
tive pressure and gently move the needle out (1 to
by applying digital pressure at the base of the neck;
2mm) until blood flows. This site is generally not
178
Chapter 8
Sub-carapacialVein
Femoral Vein
Jugular Vein
CardiacPuncture
Brachial Vein
Figure 8.16.Venipuncture sites.(Drawing by Scott Stark.)
productive because only a small volume can be
Femoral Vein
obtained. Larger turtles in good physical condition can
The turtle should be restrained vertically with the plas-
hold the tail close to the body, making the tail very
 tron facing the phlebotomist or in dorsal recumbency.
difficult to exteriorize.
Keep in mind that placing the animal in dorsal recum-
bency is stressful; therefore, this should be done
Dorsal Tail Vein
for the shortest amount of time possible. The femoral
The animal should be restrained in sternal recum-
vein courses through the femoral triangle (the space
bency. The tail should be held as straight as possible
through which the femoral vessels run to and from the
and the needle inserted in the dorsal tail midline. Insert
hindlimb), which is located at the most proximal end
the needle, at a 30-to 45-degree angle, proximally near
of the medial aspect of the hindlimb. With one hand,
the junction between the tail and the caudal margin of
the hind leg should be extended, and the other hand
the carapace. The needle is then advanced until the
should be used to withdraw the blood sample. This,
vertebral bodies are encountered. Negative pressure
like many of the other techniques, is a blind stick. The
should be applied and the needle moved gently out (1
needle should be inserted at a 45-degree angle and
to 2 mm) until blood flows. If the tail cannot be exte-
suction applied as the needle is advanced. Blood will
riorized, the needle should be inserted in the proximal
fill the syringe as the vein is entered. Repositioning the
aspect of the tail midline and the steps followed as
needle should be minimized because nerves and other
described above.
vessels located in this area can be damaged.
Chelonians
179
Occipital Venous Sinus
         
 The animal should be restrained in sternal recumbency
retracted when the animal feels threatened. The intra-
and the head extended. The caudal aspect of the skull
coelomic route is most commonly used for the
is then palpated. The sinus is located in the dorsal
administration of fluids. Restrain the turtle in lateral
midline near the cranial cervical region. The needle
recumbency; this will cause the viscera and reproduc-
should be inserted at a 60-degree angle. Negative pres-
tive organs to shift away from the injection site. Insert
sure should be applied once the skin is penetrated as
the needle parallel to the plastron and direct it crani-
the needle is advanced. The syringe will fll with blood
ally in the ventral aspect of the fossa. If the needle is
as the sinus is entered. Sometimes the needle can be
 directed dorsally, there is a risk of injecting the fluids
repositioned to either side of the midline as the sinus
in the lungs. If the needle is directed medially, the fluids
can extend laterally. Be careful not to go too deep.
can go in the bladder. If the turtle urinates, the needle
may be in the bladder; pull and reposition the needle.
Heart
When injecting fluids into the coelomic cavity, keep in
This technique is relatively invasive because it requires
mind that the needle does not have to be inserted very
drilling a hole through the plastron. A sterile drill or
deep. The fluids can be given at a rate of 20 ml/kg every
-sid a ad oi pas aq  ud a
twenty-four to forty-eight hours.
tron. The site of entry is where the ventral midline
Oral Route: The supplies needed to administer oral
suture intersects the caudal suture of the pectoral
me dications or force-feeding are round-tip stainless steel
scutes. The needle is then inserted perpendicularly
tubes or red rubber catheters, speculums, and syringes of
 as suction is applied. The correct location of the needle
various sizes. Many sick turtles are anorexic. Nutritional
can sometimes be corroborated by the slight move-
support is essential for a full recovery. The most chal-
ment of the syringe caused by the heartbeat. Once
lenging part in many cases is opening the mouth. Some
blood is collected, the hole must be repaired using
turtles will open their mouths when restrained. Take
 dental acrylic or epoxy resin. This is the author's least 
advantage of this and insert a speculum or feeding tube
desirable site for blood collection and it is used rarely.
quickly. If this fails, the mouth must be pried open. The
upper beak in turtles hangs slightly over the lower beak.
 A blunt tool can be inserted under the upper beak and
ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS
inserted in the mouth. Once in the oral cavity, twist the
tool to pry the mouth open. Once the mouth is opened,
Routes ofAdministration
the feeding tube or speculum can be inserted. The tube
Intramuscular Route: Antimicrobial agents and certain
feeding volume is 1% to 2% of the body weight every
anesthesia induction agents are often given intramus-
twenty-four to forty-eight hours. Hold the head fully
cularly. Intramuscular injections are given in the
extended; measure the distance from the mouth to the
muscle mass of the front legs. Chelonians have a reno-
 mid plastron. Insert the feeding tube to the desired length
 portal circulation system. It is believed that medica-
and administer the feeding formula.
tions injected in the caudal half of the body are filtered
 Intraosseous Route: This route is not frequently
by the kidneys before entering the general circulation.
used but is available when needed. The two most com-
However, this concept has been challenged in recent
 monly used sites are the tibia and the plastrocarapace
studies (Holz 1999). Until more is known about the
bridge that connects the plastron and carapace on the
role renoportal circulation plays in filtering parenteral
lateral aspect of the body. An intraosseous needle with
drugs, these medications should be given in the front
a stylet is desirable. A 22- to 20-gauge needle with a
half of the body, particularly drugs with potential
 25-gauge needle inside to serve as a stylet can be used,
nephrotoxic side effects.
which keeps the primary needle from becoming clogged
 Subcutaneous Route: Subcutaneous injections can
(Figure 8.17).
be given in the inguinal and ventral neck skin folds.
 Cloacal Route: Fluids and deworming medications
 Fluid replacement can be given at a rate of 20 ml/kg
can be administered via the cloaca. A lubricated red
every twenty-four to forty-eight hours.
rubber catheter or ball-tipped stainless steel tube can
 Intravenous Route: The jugular vein can be used for
be placed in the cloaca and the desired medication
the administration of fluids. This and the subcarapa-
 delivered. It is recommended to hold the turtle at an
cial vein can be used for the administration of intra-
angle, with the cloaca elevated above the turtle's head
venous anesthetics.
to improve the absorption rate (Bonner 2000).
Intracoelomic Route: The coelomic cavity can be
Nebulization: One of the most common problems
accessed through the prefemoral fossa, the space just
seen  in  clinical  practice  is respiratory  disease
180
Chapter 8
A
Figure 8.17. Intraosseous catheter. (Drawing by
Scott Stark.)
Nebulization  is a relatively  stress-free method to
deliver medications into the respiratory system. Turtles
have lower respiratory rates than mammals and birds;
therefore, the nebulization time must be extended. In
 many cases, turtles must be nebulized for an hour or
longer to ensure that an adequate amount of medica-
tion is administered.
Intravenous Catbeter Placement
Jugular catheterization is reserved for patients that are
extremely weak and in a very critical condition (Figure
8.18). Patients that are relatively stable make it diffi-
Figure 8.18. Jugular catheter placement. (A) Proper
cult to maintain and clean the catheter site. The pro-
restraint for jugular catheterization. (B) Placement of
cedure for IV catheter placement in a jugular vein is
jugular catheter. (Photos courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
as follows:
se verely injured animals may require humane euthana-
1. Scrub the area of the jugular vein in the anesthetized
sia. The hardest part of euthanizing turtles is knowing
patient.
whether or not they are dead. This can be a tricky ques-
2. Make a full-thickness incision on the skin.
tion to answer. Some of the signs that help determine if
3. Identify the jugular vein using blunt dissection.
the patient is dead include absence of a heartbeat, no
4. Insert the IV catheter of adequate size, depending
response to pain (i.e. corneal reflex), rigor mortis, cya-
on the size of the turtle.
notic mucous membranes, and sunken flat eyes. An
5. Place a butterfly tape over the catheter and cap and
 EKG or ultrasound can be used to assess the heartbeat;
suture to the skin.
however, keep in mind that in turtles the heart can con-
tinue to beat several hours after euthanasia.
IV bolus fluids can be given at a rate of 1-2 ml/kg
The author's preferred method of euthanasia in
over a fifteen- to thirty-minute period.
turtles is lethal injection. The euthanasia solution
can be given intravenously or intracoelomically. In
some cases, it is recommended that the turtle be kept
EUTHANASIA
  p   on r   
Several sources have referred to freezing as an alterna-
 In some cases, euthanasia is the most humane course of
tive method for euthanasia but this is considered
 action. Ill animals with a poor to grave prognosis or
inhumane.
Chelonians
181
REFERENCES
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1999. Reptile-associated
salmonellosis—selected states 1996-1998. MMWR.
48,
Anonymous. 1990. Guideline for the housing of turtles and tor-
1009.
toises: Minimum standard housing guidelines for pet shops.
Frye FL. 1991. A practical guide for feeding captive reptiles.
wholesale animal dealers, and other commercial establishments.
Melbourne: Krieger Publishing.
New York Turtle and Tortoise Society Newsletter 19(5).
Girgis S. 1961. Aquatic respiration in the common Nile turtle,
 Bonner BB. 2000. Chelonian therapeutics. The Veterinary Clinics of
Trionyx triunguis. Comp Biochem Physiol. 3: 206.
North America, Exotic Animal Practice, edited by Fronefield SA.
Holz PH. 1999. The reptilian renal portal system—a review. Bull
3(7): 257-332.
Assoc Reptil Amphi Vet. 9(1): 4.
Boyer TH, Boyer DM. 1994. Tortoise care. Bull Assoc Reptil Amphi
Murray M. 1996. Aural abscesses In: Reptile Medicine and Surgery.
Vet. 4(1): 16-27.
edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Boyer TH, Boyer DM. 1996. Turtles, tortoises, and terrapins. In:
Wood SC, Lenfant CJM. 1976. Respiration: Mechanics, control,
Reptile Medicine and Surgery,edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia:
and gas exchange. In: Biology of Reptilians, vol 5, edited by Gans 
W.B. Saunders Co.
C. San Diego: Academic Press. 225-274.
CHAPTER NINE
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
DavidMartinez-Jimenez
INTRODUCTION
environment. For example, the U.s. Department of
Agriculture banned the import of some tortoises from
The reptile pet industry is a growing field with an
 Africa because they were carrying ticks, which were
estimated 13.4 million pet reptiles in more than 4.8
vectors of heartwater disease, a highly contagious
million households in the United States, averaging
wasting disease of ruminants (HSUS 2001).
about 2.8 reptiles per household (APPA 2007/2008).
Although reptiles are not domesticated, captive
While the number of wild-caught reptile imports has
breeding programs promote those individuals that are
 decreased with the establishment of commercial regu-
 ndeo u anpondan  aaissalruou pue a
lations and captive breeding, current reptile imports in
number of offspring and longer reproductive life) and
the United States are still estimated at about 2 million
 develop resilience to the stress of captivity. Therefore,
per year. Captive breeding is therefore a more sustain-
captive breeding also leads to a type of domestication
 able and reasonable approach for the pet market.
in itself.
Proper management and husbandry remain the
 Animal welfare is another important reason for
major obstacles to maintaining a healthy reptile collec-
decreasing the import of wild-caught reptiles for pets.
tion. Reptile medicine is still in its infancy. The impor-
Wild-caught reptiles can be captured by means harmful
tance of neonatal care andreptile breeding has a growing
to the animals and environment. They are often kept
significance in the management of these captive reptile
in substandard conditions without food and water
collections. Proper captive population management is
while waiting for transportation, which leads to a high
essential to decrease inbreeding and disease spread, and
mortality rate. Even with the best care, it is estimated
therefore preserve the health of the collection.
that 90% of all imported reptiles to the United States
This chapter covers the fundamentals for a healthy
die within the first year (HSUS 2001).
reptile collection and the principles behind captive
breeding.
QUARANTINE
CAPTIVE-BRED VERSUS
Quarantine is the isolation of animals and people to
WILD-CAUGHT
prevent the spread of infectious diseases. The recom-
mended quarantine period for reptiles is about three
Despite the increase in reptile pet ownership, reptile
months, but up to six months for snakes because of
imports remain about the same. This can be explained
the risk of ophidian paramyxovirus. Quarantine
by the increase of captive-bred reptiles. From 1989 t0
1997, 18.3 million reptiles were imported (HSUS
2001). Import of reptiles has seriously harmed many
Table 9.1. Species of reptiles (8,734 species), divided
wild populations and, in many cases, continues to
by taxa.
occur because captive breeding has not yet been mas-
Amphisbaenia (amphisbaenians)
168 species
tered for all species of reptiles, such as chameleons
Sauria (lizards)
 5,079 species
(HSUS 2001) (Table 9.1).
 Serpentes (snakes)
3,149 species
Captive breeding is a more sustainable way of nour-
Chelonia (turtles and tortoises)
 313 species
ishing the growing reptile pet market. Furthermore, it
Crocodylia (crocodiles)
23 species
facilitates regulation of the pet market, decreasing
Rhynchocephalia (tuataras)
2 species
the chances of introducing foreign diseases into the
183
184
Chapter 9
should be carried out in a separate room that does not
that become sick should be isolated, and any casualty
exchange air with other facilities. Individuals in quar-
or euthanasia must have a complete necropsy and
 antine should be examined at the beginning of the
tissue sampling for histopathology.
quarantine for evidence of external parasites (e.g.
 Pest control is important not only at quarantine, but
snake mites, Ophionyssus natricis) and signs of illness.
also for the collection in itself. Arthropods (insects)
Body weight, eccdysis (normal skin shedding), behav-
can facilitate spread of infectious disease between
ior, feeding, and urination/defecation should be moni-
exhibits, cages, and collections.
tored throughout the quarantine period and recorded
appropriately. Accurate record keeping is vital for
the assessment of the collection health and disease
MANAGING LARGE COLLECTIONS
identification.
Quarantined animals should be handled last, after
Managing large collections of reptiles requires a thor-
attending to the animals in the established collection.
ough understanding about each species (natural
Cages, furniture, and bowls should be properly identi-
history, husbandry requirements, etc.), reptile zoono-
fed so they do not leave the quarantine area, and they
sis, regulations (local, national, and international), and
should not be exchanged among quarantine animals.
preventive medicine. Preventive medicine includes
The quarantine area should have foot baths and foot
individual identification, sanitation and disinfection,
pump water faucets and soap dispensers to prevent
 nutrition, physical examination and quarantine, para-
 cross contamination. Furthermore, individual cage
site and disease surveillance, necropsy, and pest
accessories (bowls, hide boxes, etc.) should be kept to
control.
a minimum and should not be cleaned together with
 A population management plan is required to main-
 other accessories from other cages.
tain a large collection of animals. The following ques-
Cages should be maintained in a way to facilitate
tions should be asked: What is the size of the animal
 cleaning and disinfection (e.g. using disposable paper
aq are lm sads   ao 
towels as substrate) to minimize the exchange of
What is the purpose of the collection (private hobby,
pathogens between quarantine cages. Commonly used
captive breeding for commercial purposes, education,
disinfectants include household bleach (sodium hypo-
zoological, é
etc.)? How is the surplus of animals
chlorite) at 1:30 concentration (1 part of bleach per
managed? How is the genetic pool of the collection
30 parts of water; in other words, 30ml/liter of
 monitored? Once the purpose of the collection is estab-
water or 1/2 cup/gallon), 5% ammonia solution (effec-
lished, it is possible to focus on fulfilling the collec-
tive against coccidia and Cryptosporidia), and quater-
tion's specific requirements to successfully manage it.
 nary ammonium (effective against common reptile
Record keeping is fundamental. Data may include
pathogens) at 1:200 to 1:400 for reptile cages and
feeding details, waste output (fecal/urate), sheddings,
bowls. Other substances commonly used are shown in
weight, reproduction details (number of offspring), and
Table 9.2.
any medical condition. Reproductive data should
Quarantine is managed according to the “all-in-
 include temperature and humidity cycling, light cycles,
and-all-out" principle. Once a group of reptiles has
monitoring of time of introduction, courtship behav-
started quarantine, those individuals remain as a group
ior, and mating. Gravid females should be monitored
and no other reptiles enter the quarantine section or
throughout the gestation time and oviposition (egg-
area until the quarantine is over. The introduction of
laying) to maximize offspring and avoid reproductive-
new reptiles implies beginning the quarantine period
related problems such as dystocia. Once the oviposition
all over again.
occurs, it is very important to document the number of
Ideally, three negative fecal tests for gastrointestinal
live offspring, stillborn, and slugs for viviparous species,
parasites and protozoa are required. Each fecal testing
 and the number of healthy-looking eggs, abnormal
is performed three to four weeks apart. Once parasit-
eggs, and slugs in the case of oviparous species.
 It is important to maintain a proper identification
started. Those parasites with direct life cycles (e.g.
system for the collection so that there is a system
coccidia) are particularly difficult to eliminate, requir-
of documenting mortality, percentage of viable off-
ing a regular screening and deworming schedule.
spring, compatible breeding pairs, etc. For larger col-
Complete blood analysis should be performed at the
lections of animals, a visual (physical pattern, carapace
beginning and end of the quarantine period. In the case
marking, etc.) and a permanent system (e.g. microchip)
of healthy animals, this establishes normal baseline
is ideal. See Table 9.3 for proper microchip placement
values for future reference in the collection. Individuals
in reptiles.
Table 9.2.Disinfectants and their characteristics.
Advantages/
Type
Strength
Effectiveness
Disadvantages
Contact time
Chlorine (e.g.
2-10%
Fungi, bacteria, algae,
Corrosive, irritant to
Several minutes
sodium
enveloped and non-
mucous membranes,
for maximal
hypochlorite)
enveloped viruses. Good
eyes, and skin in
efficacy (10
against tuberculosis
high concentration.
minutes).
microorganism and
Germicidal activity
mycoplasma. Not effective
decreases in high
against spores.
water pH (ideally
between 6-8) and
when temperature
is below 65°F
Inactivation in
 presence of organic
material and some
soaps
Iodophors (e.g.
10-100%
 Fungi, bacteria, and
Inactivated by
1-5 minutes
betadine)
enveloped and non-
presence of organic
 depending
enveloped viruses.
debris and alcohol.
on the
Good activity against
Stains skin, fabric,
concentration.
tuberculosis organisms
and porous
 and mycoplasma. Poor
material.
sporocidal activity but
better than chlorine
products.
Biguanides (e.g.
90 ml/gal
Fair bactericidal (most
Not an irritant.
5-10 minutes.
chlorhexidine)
Gram-positive and few
Maintains
Gram-negative), viricidal
effectiveness in
 against enveloped viruses,
 presence of organic
sporocidal and low to
matter or alcohol,
 moderate fungicidal
but affected by
activity. Good activity
 alkaline pH
against tuberculosis
(precipitation of the
 organisms and
active ingredients).
mycoplasma.
Alcohol (e.g.
Full strength
 Strong bactericidal (both
Long contact time and
20 minutes.
ethyl alcohol
Gram-positive and Gram-
inactivated by
or isopropyl
 negative), slight fungicidal,
 organic matter.
alcohol)
and viricidal (effective
Tissue irritant but
 against enveloped viruses).
noncorrosive. Poses
Not effective against
a fire hazard.
 bacterial spores and
non-enveloped viruses.
18.5
Table 9.2. Continued
Advantages/
Type
Strength
Effectiveness
Disadvantages
Contact time
Oxidizing agents
 Full strength
Great for anaerobic bacteria,
 Inactivated by organic
1-10 minutes.
(e.g. hydrogen
but not viricidal. Tissue
matter. Not
peroxide)
irritant. Blended and/or
effective against
stabilized peroxides can be
 bacterial or fungal
used for disinfection of
spores.
equipment surfaces.
 Stabilized peroxides may
be blended with iodophors
 or quaternary ammonia.
Some products are
effective against a much
 broader range of
 pathogens including both
enveloped and non-
enveloped viruses,
vegetative bacteria, fungi,
and bacterial spores.
 Examples include:
Hyperox, Virkon S.
Phenol-based
Full strength
 Fair bactericidal (especially
Not inactivated by
10 minutes.
compounds
Gram-positive bacteria)
presence of organic
(e.g. Lysol,
 and viricidal (enveloped
matter. Skin
synPhenol-3)
viruses). Not effective
irritation if
 against non-enveloped
 prolonged exposure
viruses or spores.
and corrosive to
 Fungicidal.
skin. Toxic to cats
 and reptiles.
Ammonia
5%
Coccidia and
 Inactivated by organic
10 minutes.
Quaternary
1:200 to
poop ppuodsodao
 matter and soaps,
ammonium
1:400
bactericidal, moderate
 and poor activity in
compounds
fungicidal activity, and
hard waters. Low
(e.g. Roccal,
 poor viricidal (effective
toxicity but
Parvosol, etc.)
 against enveloped viruses).
 prolonged contact
Poor activity against
can be irritating.
non-enveloped viruses and
 not effective against fungi
 and bacterial spores.
Good activity against
tuberculosis
 microorganisms and fair
activity against
mycoplasma.
Aldehydes (e.g.
Full strength
 Bactericidal, viricidal,
Effective in the
20 minutes.
glutaraldehyde)
 fungicidal and sporocidal.
presence of
Effective against
 moderate organic
tuberculosis organisms
matter. Corrosive,
and Chlamydophila spp.
toxic, and irritant
to the eye, skin, and
respiratory tract
186
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
187
Table 9.3. Sites for microchip placement in reptiles.
Based on guidelines ofthe British Veterinary Zoological
Society.
Animal
Suggested site
Chelonians (turtles
 Subcutaneously in the left hind
and tortoises)
leg or intramuscularly in thin
and small species
Sauria (lizards)
 Left quadriceps muscle or 
subcutaneously in that area.
In very small species,
subcutaneously on the left
side of the body
Ophidia (Snakes)
Subcutaneously on the left side
of the neck area at about
twice the length of the head
Crocodilians
 Cranial to nuchal cluster
Reproducing reptiles in captivity can be complex.
entirely on their environment to successfully repro-
Figure 9.1. A temperature-and humidity-controlled
duce. A period of cool temperature is necessary for
hibernaculum allowing normal reptile hibernation or
most species to initiate reproductive behavior. Seasonal
brumation. (Courtesy of David Perpinan, LV, MSc,
cooling is usually referred to as hibernation or bruma-
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
tion (Figure 9.1.); in any case, this is very complex and
Georgia.)
species specific. Therefore, the author strongly recom-
mends extensive literature research on the species
before breeding. Another important factor for repro-
duction is space availability, which can affect proper
an sadar gun uosodap sa pue uonndo
more prone to egg retention or dystocia (Figure 9.2.).
 Another common cause of dystocia is improper laying
 conditions such as lack of a nesting box.
 Sanitation and disinfection requires a routine sched-
ule. Properly done, it requires a written protocol of
 cleaning and disinfecting agents used, as well as when
and how to use them. Disinfectants can only be used
 after removal of organic matter and cleaning.
Nutrition should be based on the species main-
tained. Diet can be complex and it can be almost
 impossible to reproduce to what would be encountered
in the wild. Vitamin and mineral supplements are
usually required. Generally, neonates and youngsters
 a  siq  e  d a
Figure 9.2. Egg retention (dystocia) in a green
day and adults require it about once a week. Palatability
iguana (Iguana iguana).Notice the distended
and composition of invertebrates vary considerably
abdomen full of calcifed eggs. (Courtesy of David
upon stage and species. Certain species of wild insects
Perpinan, LV, MSc, College of Veterinary Medicine,
may contain pollutants and can potentially be toxic
University of Georgia.)
(e.g. lightning bugs). Commercial pellet diets are avail-
able in the market; however, the nutritional require-
ments are not completely known and they should not
be used as the only food source.
188
Chapter 9
Reptile species should be examined bi-annually or
tial of a life-threatening injury. Code 1 animals are
annually depending on age and reproductive stage.
 those capable of causing death, long-term illness, or
The implementation of physical examinations, quar-
permanent disability, whereas code 2 animals are
antine, and necropsy aids disease surveillance within
unlikely to cause severe or long-lasting effects.
the collection. Early detection of an infectious and
 In the event of injury and escape, the victim is
metabolic disease permits prompt correction and lower
responsible for securing the area frst and then seeking
morbidity and mortality.
medical care. A frst-aid kit should be available and
 Pest control has important implications for personal
 personnel should be trained in providing first-aid care.
safety as well as prevention of disease spread within
A capture plan should also be part of the protocol.
the collection. Possible pest species should be carefully
 This part of the protocol should include the immediate
identified and a control plan instituted.
.Whatever
measures to secure the area, a contact list of people
system is implemented, this must be safe for the species
responsible to respond to an escape, equipment neces-
in the collection. The quality of the program must be
sary for safe capture and handling, etc. If the animal
carefully monitored and recorded. For example, rodent
cannot be s
 safely captured, humane killing may be
traps should be inspected regularly and the number of
indicated.
animals trapped monitored for control purposes. An
increase in the number of rodents trapped may simply
correlate with a change in management, such as waste
METHODS OF SEX DETERMINATION
disposal.
There are different ways of sexing reptiles but none of
 them is applicable for allreptile species. The following
MANAGING LARGE COLLECTIONS OF
are methods of sex determination in reptiles:
DANGEROUS SPECIES
+
 Sexual dimorphism
Dangerous reptile species are those that either can
Probing
inflict serious injuries from a bite (e.g. crocodile),
 Manual eversion of hemipenes or popping
strangulation (e.g. large boid), or venom (e.g. rattle-
Hydrostatic eversion of hemipenes
snake). The same principles discussed above for
 Digital palpation (crocodilians)
keeping a large reptile collection apply for dangerous
Plasma testosterone
species. However, these types of species require further
Morphometric measurements
 safety issues such as proper caging and in most cases,
·
DNA sexing (karyotyping)
a legal permit. In cases in which multiple people are
 Ultrasonography
handling dangerous species, an emergency written pro-
Laparoscopy
addresses every danger in the case of injury or escape,
Sexual Dimorpbism
minimizing the likelihood of mortality or permanent
 Sexual dimorphism is the difference in appearance
disability. Every protocol must be specific for the type
between males and females of the same species. This
and number of dangerous reptiles in the collection, and
is usually apparent in some chelonians (turtles and
in the case of certain venomous species, maintenance
tortoises) and sauria (lizard) species. Sexual dimor-
of antivenom may be required. The American Zoo and
phism is generally apparent in adults, but it can be very
Aquarium Association and the American Association
difficult in sub-adults and juveniles. General guidelines
of Poison Control Centers list the amount and location
for the identification of chelonian males are a longer
of available antivenoms for most venomous species. In 
tail with a cloacal opening beyond the rear carapacial
any case, it is strongly advisable to notify the local
shell margin and a plastral concavity (Figure 9.3.).
hospital about the ownership of venomous species so
 Some other species-specific characteristics are long
that medical staff is prepared in the case of a venomous
front leg toenails in slider turtles (Pseudemys spp.,
animal bite.
Trachemys scripta), painted turtles (Chrysemys picta),
 Dangerous species require proper labeling and their
and map turtles (Graptemys spp.); a red iris in the male
 handling is restricted to appropriately trained people.
eastern box turtles (Terrapene carolina carolina); and
 Access is restricted by the use of a lock and the cages
 more prominent mental glands, gular scutes, and body
must be properly secured at all times. This is especially
size in male desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizi). The
important in the case of venomous species. Venomous
female leopard tortoise (Geochelone pardalis) has
reptiles are coded as 1 or 2 depending upon the poten-
larger toenails in the rear legs than the males and the
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
189
A
B
Figure 9.3. Sexual dimorphisim in a chelonian species, red-footed tortoise (Geochelone carbonaria). (A) Male
chelonians commonly have longer tails with the cloacal opening beyond the rear carapacial shell margin. (B)
Plastral concavity is more pronounced in male chelonians than females to facilitate mating. (Courtesy of
David Perpinan, LV, MSc, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia.)
female map turtles and diamondback terrapins are
significantly larger than the males.
Although many lizard species are monomorphic,
male lizards have a pair of hemipenes located at the
base of the tail. In mature iguanids, geckos, and vara-
nids, a paired bulge from these hemipenes may identify
the individual as a male. Some lizards, especially
agamids, geckos, and iguanids, also have pores on
their ventral thighs {femoral pores) or on the ventral
procloacal skin (precloacal pores). The pores are rela-
tively larger in adult males than females (Figure 9.4.).
Male monitors have a bone structure in their hemi-
penes called the hemibaculum. The varanus species
reported to have hemibacula are acantharus, beccarii,
caudolineatus, eremius, giganteus, gilleni, gouldi,
indicus,karischmidti,komodoensis,olivaceus,panop
tes, salvadori, stori, tristis, and varius. In these
Figure 9.4. Sexual dimorphism in a lizard species,
species, the radiography can be used to make apparent
bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps). The male is on
the presence of the hemibacula (Funk 2002). Other
the right and female on the left.Femoral pores and
dimorphism among lizards is based on ornamentation
tail bulge from the hemipenes are obvious in the
such as the three large rostral horns in male Jackson's
male. (Courtesy of David Perpinan, LV, MSc,
chameleon (Chamaeleo jacksoni), or more robust
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
appearance (especially of the head) in males such as
Georgia.)
iguanas and gila monsters (Heloderma suspectum).
Sexual dimorphism among snakes is very rare.
Among boids, the spurs, located just lateral to the vent,
Probing
are larger in males than in females. These spurs are used
Probing is a technique in which a lubricated blunt-
for tactile stimulation of the female during courtship.
 tipped probe is used for sexing. Only water- or saline-
The spur size is highly reliable in the case of the rosy boa
based lubricants should be used because some other
(Charina trivirgata) and the sand boas (Eryx spp.).
lubricants may be spermicidal. This technique is only
190
 Chapter 9
valid for squamata (lizards and snakes). In males, the
species such as boids, monitors, iguanas, and gila mon-
sexing probe goes farther down into the tail as it enters
 sters anesthesia may be required because the retractor
the hemipenial pocket. The depth of the hemipenial
 penis muscle can counteract the hydrostatic pressure
sac varies among species. In females, probing results
created, therefore preventing the eversion of the
in the total inability or limited ability to insert the
hemipenes.
 probe into the tail base. This is the result of probing
a pair of blind diverticula, and female lizards may
Digital Palpation
have a tiny homologous structure called hemiclitori.
 Digital palpation is the prefered method for crocodil-
Common species in which these diverticula are well
ian species. This involves palpating the ventral aspect
developed, creating difficulty sexing by this method,
 of the cloaca for the presence of a penis in the other-
 include the monitors (Varanus spp.) and the blood
wise smooth-walled cloaca.
python (Python curtus).
Plasma Testosterone
Manual Eversion of Hemipenes or Popping
 Plasma testosterone concentration has been used for
Popping or manual eversion of the hemipenes is a
sexing chelonian juveniles, with or without the use
common method for determining the sex of neonatal
 of follicle-stimulating-hormone (FSH) stimulation test
colubrid snakes. This is accomplished by firmly rolling
(Owens et al. 1978, Lance et al. 1992, Rostal et al.
one's thumb proximally up the tail base toward the
 1994). Males typically have higher levels than females.
cloaca. In females the oviductal papillae can sometimes
However, this test also has limitations because older
be identified as two small reddish openings located
females may have normal elevated testosterone levels
laterally in the cloaca.
and prolonged handling of both sexes has been reported
to elevate testosterone levels (Rostal et al. 1994, Innis
Hydrostatic Eversion of Hemipenes
and Boyer 2002).
Hydrostatic eversion of hemipenes consists of the
injection of isotonic saline solution (as much as 100 ml)
Morpbometric
into the tail just distal to where the hemipene is located.
Morphometric is the use of body measurements to
If the technique is performed correctly, the hydrostatic
 determine sex. However, this is not a reliable way to
pressure created by the saline solution causes the
 differentiate males and females because there are many
hemipenes to evert (Figure 9.5.). This also causes
 exceptions among species. It is more common for males
swelling of the tissue surrounding the cloaca, and may
 to be larger than females in lizards. Female turtles are
partially evert the cloaca through the vent. For larger
 generally larger in body size than males. However, this
may be different in tortoises. The male desert tortoise
(Gopherus agassizi) is larger than the female.
DNA Sexing
Karyotyping is the use of DNA to determine gender.
It can be used for both temperature-dependent sex
determination (TSD) species and those that are not
TSD species (Demas et al. 1990, Innis and Boyer
2002). Although this technique is feasible, it has
received little attention.
Ultrasonograpby and Laparoscopy
Ultrasonography may be useful identifying males
and females by identification of ovaries, follicles, or
eggs in the coelomic cavity of females, and testis or
the hemipenes in the case of males (Figure 9.6.).
Laparoscopy has been also used for sexing. This is a
surgical procedure in which an endoscope is guided
Figure 9.5. Everted hemipenes in a lineated leaf-
through their coelom to directly visualize the testis or
tailed gecko (Uroplatus lineautus). (Courtesy of
ovarian tissue (Figure 9.7.). The advantage is that it
David Perpinan, LV, MSc, College of Veterinary
permits visual evaluation of the reproductive tract and
Medicine, University of Georgia.)
detection of possible abnormalities
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
191
CARETTACARETTA
HDZ
A2.30cm
Figure 9.6. Coelomic cavity ultrasound in a gravid
A
female.Note the presence of the follicles (increased
round echogenicity) as they lack of the more
mineralized egg shell. (Courtesy of David Perpinan,
LV, MSc, College of Veterinary Medicine, University
ofGeorgia.)
REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIOR
The development of secondary sexual characteristics
coupled with courtship behavior is an indication that
sexual maturity is approaching (Innis and Boyer 2002).
Sexual maturity depends upon the reptile size rather
than actual age (Taylor and Denardo 2005). In captiv-
ity, reptiles reach sexual maturity at a younger age
than their wild counterparts. For instance, captive
leopard tortoises (Geochelone pardalis) may repro-
B
duce successfully in four to six years, whereas their
wild-born counterparts do not reach sexual maturity
Figure 9.7. Endoscopic visualization of (A) a testis
for fifteen years (Innis and Boyer 2002). As a rough
in a male green iguana (Iguana iguana) and (B) an
generality in captive species, snakes usually mature in
ovary in a young female Hermann's tortoise
two to three years, small lizards in one to two years,
(Testudo hermanni). (Courtesy of Xavier Valls
large lizards in three to four years, and chelonians in
Badia,LV,Clinica Veterinaria Exotics,Barcelona,
five to seven years (Denardo 2006).
(uwds
 In most reptile studies to date, high plasma levels
of testosterone and corticosterone coincide with the
 mating period. The female estradiol level increases at
in chelonians is linked to the temperature and humid-
the onset of the mating season and decreases at the
ity determined by their natural habitats. For species in
onset of the nesting season. Progesterone levels are
temperate climates, reproductive activity is restricted
high close to ovulation and the beginning of the nesting
to the warmer months of the year when the days are
season, and they decrease during the nesting season
longer. In general, females ovulate and are fertilized in
(Schramm et al. 1999). Therefore, monitoring the
the spring, nest in the late spring and summer, and
reproductive cycle is possible via plasma chemistry and
begin folliculogenesis for the following year's egg in
hormone assays (Innis and Boyer 2002)
late summer and fall. An exception to this is tropical
The most common stimulus to reproduction in rep-
boids (boas and pythons), which tend to breed during
tiles is a change in temperature. The reproductive cycle
the cooler period (Denardo 2006). In tropical climates,
192
Chapter 9
the reproductive cycle follows the rainfall patterns,
female with its neck stretched low to the ground,
when temperature and day length fluctuations are
moving it rhythmically side to side while uttering low-
minimal (Innis and Boyer 2002)
pitched, grunting sounds. In some North American
Light also plays an important role in sexual behav-
aquatic species  (e.g. red-eared  slider, Trachemys
ior. Behavioral studies have proven the importance of
scripta), males fbrillate their elongated nails of the
full-spectrum lighting (UVA, UVB, and visible light;
forelimbs near the female's face (Innis and Boyer 2002).
Copulation is a short event only lasting for several
tion and foraging but also intersexual recognition.
minutes. Many chelonian and lizard species display
biting behavior as the male mounts the female from
Courtsbip and Mating Bebavior
behind (Innis and Boyer 2002). In snakes, the male of
Some degree of courtship behavior is noted in most
the colubrid neck-banded snakes (Scaphiodontophis
species. Courtship may last from minutes to hours, and
annulatus) grabs, holds, and bites the female during
it may even resume on subsequent days. Most terres-
copulation as part of the mating behaviour (Sasa and
trial tortoises such as the Mediterranean tortoises
Curtis 2006).
(Testudo spp.) display a lunging behavior toward the
During copulation, one hemipenis is everted into
females, battering the anterior edge of their carapace
the female's cloaca in the case of snakes and lizards
against the female. The male red-footed tortoise
(Figure 9.8.). In the case of chelonians and crocodil-
(Geochelone carbonaria) may stand in front of the
ians, a single penis arising from the floor of the cloaca
A
B
Figure 9.8. Snake copulation. (A and B) Copulation
in the timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus).
(Courtesy of BW Smith, Animal South LLC.) (C)
Copulation of the common boa constrictor (Boa
constrictor). (Courtesy of Susana Ringenbach, MVZ,
（
Fauna Silvestre, Merida, Mexico.)
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
193
is everted. In both cases, the sperm flows through a
FOLLICLE AND EGG DEVELOPMENT
ds ss r aaor pes a  oe a
maticus from the vas deferens down the penis or hemi-
Vitellogenesis is the major step of follicle maturation
 penis and down to the anterior portions of the female's
with the accumulation of yolk. Estrogen triggers the
cloaca. The spermatozoa travel upward through the
liver to convert the lipid from the body's fat stores to
oviduct where fertilization occurs. In some species
vitellogenin, which is selectively absorbed by the fol-
such as iguanids, sperm storage allows the female to
licles. Calcium also accumulates in the yolk during this
lay subsequent clutches (Funk 2002).
stage so that the yolk acts as a main calcium reservoir
for the embryo. Furthermore, a significant amount
Reproduction Without Mating
of calcium is drawn from the eggshell in oviparous
Amphigonia retardata, or sperm storage, has been
species. The mature ovum is ten-fold to 100-fold larger
described in turtles and snakes. This adaptation allows
than its previtellogenic size. In the oviduct, the ovum
a female to produce several clutches from a single
becomes an egg when albumin and a shell are added
mating in one season and to reproduce in subsequent
for oviparous species. In the case of viviparous species,
seasons. The viability of the storage sperm is not indef-
placentation takes place. This maternal-embryonic
inite and varies with the species, ranging from several
relationship varies among viviparous species with the
months to up to six years (Mader 2006).
most extreme example being some skinks (Mabuya
 Another strategy to reproduce without mating is
spp.), in which the mother contributes more than 99%
parthenogenesis. In this case, the female becomes
of the neonatal mass through a chorioallantoic pla-
 gravid in the absence of a male and produces only
centa (Denardo 2006).
female offspring (Mader 2006). Interestingly, genetic
 polymorphism is present to some extent, albeit the lack
of genetic recombination.
 Studies have shown in true parthenogenetic species,
CLUTCH DYNAMICS
such as the caucasian rock lizard (Darevskia unisexu-
alis), that mutations can make a significant contribu-
 The frequency with which reptiles reproduce depends
tion to population variability (Badaeva et al. 2008).
 on the species, environmental conditions, and health
Parthenogenesis has been reported in more than thirty
status of the specific individual. Reproduction has det-
species of lizards and some snakes. Some common
rimental effects for female reptiles because they cease
examples include members of genera Cnemidophorus
feeding during the latter stages of pregnancy. The
(whiptails), Darevskia (rock lizards), Hemidactylus
length of time during which feeding is reduced varies
(geckos), Komodo dragon (Varanus komodoensis),
but it is much shorter in oviparous (weeks) than in
and snakes such as the Rhamphotyphlops braminus
viviparous (months) species. This limited amount
(blind snake) (Table 9.4.).
of energy allocated to reproduction therefore has
direct effects on offspring and clutch size. Invariably,
the amount of energy is extraordinary, especially in
snakes, in which where more than 40% of the female's
Table 9.4. Reptile families in which parthenogenesis
body mass can be allocated to reproduction (Denardo
has been described.
2006).
Family Gekkonidae
5 species
Clutch size is extremely variable in reptiles. For
(geckoes)
oviparous species, it ranges from one in the case
of anoles (Anolis spp.) and the pancake tortoise
Family Agamidae (agamids)
 1 species
Family Chamaelonidae
 1 species
(Malocochersus tornieri) to 200 in the green sea turtle
(chameleons)
(Chelonia mydas). In viviparous species, the numbers
 Family Xantusidae (night
1 species
may be slightly lower with a range from one in the
case of shingleback skinks (Trachysaurus rugosus) to
lizards)
 5 species (e.g. Genus
ninety-two in the garter snake (Thamnophis radix)
Family Lacertidae (lacertids)
(Denardo 2006).
Darevskia)
15 species (e.g. Genus
 Many oviparous species can produce more than one
Family Teiidae (whiptails
and tegus)
-a he u a si s ran nd yi
Cnemidophorus)
 Family Typhlopidae (blind
ans and lizards than snakes. Due to the restraints of
1 species
snakes)
viviparity, viviparous reptiles are limited to a single
clutch per year.
194
Chapter 9
OVIPAROUS, OVOVIVIPAROUS,
 Box 9.1. Oviparity and Viviparity of Commonly
OR VIVIPAROUS
Kept Reptiles. (Adapted from Denardo 2006 in
 Reptile Medicine and Surgery, Mader DR, ed.,
The oviduct's function in lizards and snakes is fertiliza-
Elsevier.)
tion, sperm storage, egg transport and eggshell deposi-
tion, maintenance of the early embryo, and expulsion
Oviparous
of the egg or fetus. In viviparous species, the oviduct
All crocodilians
also contributes to the placenta, which is responsible
All chelonians
for gas exchange and nutrient provision to the fetus
Most lizards
(Blackburn 1998).
 All monitors ( Varanus spp.)
Three modes of reptile reproduction have long been
 Most iguanids
recognized: oviparous, ovoviparous, and viviparous.
Iguanas (Iguana spp.)
Ovoviparity was applied to those species in which the
Water dragons (Physignathus spp.)
young are born alive but there was not placental
All geckos
connection between the mother and the offspring.
Most chameleons
However, more recent investigations have demon-
Veiled chameleon (Chamaeleo calyptratus)
strated some nutrient transfer; therefore, the term ovo-
Panther chameleon (Chamaeleo pardalis)
viparity may be inappropriate (Funk 2002).
 Some snakes
Thus, the term oviparity refers to the condition of
All pythons
laying fertilized eggs and viviparity refers to the condi-
Most colubrids
tion of giving birth to live offspring regardless of how
 King snakes and Milk snakes (Lampropelis
nutrient exchange may have occurred between the
spp.)
mother and the offspring. Chelonian and crocodilian
 Rat snakes and Corn snakes (Elapbe spp.)
species are oviparous, while 20% of squamates (some
lizard and snake lineages) are viviparous (Funk 2002,
Viviparous
Benirschke 2007) (Box 9.1).
Some lizards
Although viviparity has a clear advantage over ovi-
Some skinks
 parity, there are several disadvantages worth mention-
Blue-tongued skinks (Tiliqua spp.)
ing. Sustaining the fetuses over an extended period of
Shingle-backed skink (Trachysaurus rugosus)
time limits the female to a single clutch per year.
Prehensile-tailed skink (Corucia zebrata)
 Bearing the offspring also has detrimental effects to
 Some chameleons
the female because viviparous females cease feeding
Jackson's chameleon (Chamaeleo jacksonii)
during the latter stages (Denardo 2006) (Figure 9.9.).
However, viviparous reptiles have the advantage of
Some snakes
Most boas 
(except Charina reinbardti，Eryx
regulating incubation temperature and enhancing the
jayakari)
fitness of the offspring. Therefore, a phylogenetic tran-
Most vipers
sition from oviparity to viviparity has occurred in cold
All rattlesnakes (Crotalus spp.)
climates (Webb et al. 2006).
Some colubrids
Garter snakes (Thamnophis spp.)
EGG INCUBATION VERSUS
MATERNAL INCUBATION
EGG INCUBATION METHODS
A number of factors determine the length of gestation,
Viable eggs are usually frm, dry, and chalky white.
such as season, ambient temperature, housing, and
Soft-shelled eggs in all snakes, most lizards, and some
food supply, among others (Mader 2006). Parental
chelonians are pliable, while the eggs of crocodilians,
care in reptiles is minimal with few exceptions among
many chelonians, and some lizards are hard-shelled
crocodilian and pythons. Female pythons are known
and therefore rigid (Figure 9.10.).
 to brood their eggs during incubation by coiling around
Artificial incubation is relatively simple. Incubators
them until hatching. Periodic rhythmic contractions of
can be easily designed and maintained by fulfilling
her abdominal musculature is capable of maintaining
three basic requirements: proper regulation of tem-
a mean body temperature of 7.3°C over the mean
 perature and humidity, even distribution of heat, and
ambient surface temperature (Mader 2006).
a reliable thermostat to control temperature. Although
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
195
A
B
Figure 9.9. Viviparity in a rainforest hognose viper
(Porthidium nasutum). (A) Hognose viper giving
birth. (B) Offspring surrounded by the placenta
membrane. (C) Necropsy of a rainforest hognose
viper in which several fetuses are contained within a
plancenta membrane within the oviduct. (Courtesy
ofAlejandro Ramirez, student of veterinary
medicine and supervisor of the group in Ophidism-
C
Scorpionism University of Antioquia, Colombia.)
insulation prevents the loss of heat and humidity, some
degree of ventilation should be permitted (e.g. small
holes on the lid of the egg chamber). A study on sea 
turtle eggs showed that poor ventilation increases incu-
bation time and reduces survival of embryos (Funk
2002). Commercial incubators are available for rep-
tiles, and even chick incubators can be used with minor
modifications such as stopping the movement of the
egg trays. Most incubators are designed according to
 a double-chamber principle so that the eggs are located
inside a box, which is inside the larger incubator
chamber. A Styrofoam cooler can be used as a cheaper
alternative for the containment chamber of the nest
box. Plastic storage boxes can be used as a nest or
inside box. The lid should fit tightly so that the air
humidity approaches saturation. The moistened sub-
Figure 9.10. Hard-shelled eggs of the Mediterranean
strate material is filled halfway, and then water is
spur-thighed tortoise (Testudo graeca). (Courtesy of Jose
dp as Au si i ien os Aae ae
Luis Crespo Picazo, LV, Nexo CMA Valencia, Spain.)
196
Chapter 9
Heat is provided by heating coils, strips, and pads, and
determination systems: genotypic sex determination
a thermostat assures that the temperature stays con-
(GSD) determined by the sex chromosomes and
stant within the inner chamber with the set-up based
temperature-dependent  sex  determination  system
on the species' eggs. As long as the three main prin-
(TSD) in which temperature affects sex determination
ciples of reptile egg incubation are fulflled, any con-
(Wibbels et al. 1991; Delmas et al. 2008). The rele-
tainer with controlled heat, humidity, and ventilation
may be suitable (Figure 9.11.).
Although there is no scientific study indicating oth-
erwise, the eggs should be placed in the incubator in
the same orientation as they were laid. A pencil mark
on top of the egg may help maintain the orientation
when the egg is moved. Soft-shelled eggs are then half-
buried within the moist substrate and separated from
each other by a small distance (Figure 9.12.). Hard-
shelled eggs may be placed in a small depression in the
substrate. Maintaining a certain distance between the
eggs prevents the spread of disease processes among
the eggs. When two or more eggs are strongly adhered
to each other, they will have to be half-buried together.
-ad oi peal Ae sa asou aeeds oi uda
nent damage.
Incubation requirements for most reptilian eggs are
 similar. Very important factors to remember in reptile
reproduction are ambient temperature, humidity, and
A
substrate.
Temperature
Ambient incubation temperature directly affects the
length of incubation and, in some species, gender
determination (Table 9.5). There are two types of sex
B
Figure 9.12. After egg deposition, the eggs are
removed and placed into the incubator chamber.
(A) Egg laying of a Mediterranean spur-thighed
tortoise (Testudo graeca). (Courtesy of Jose Luis
Crespo Picazo, LV, Nexo CMA Valencia, Spain.)
(B) The egg chamber contains the balf-buried eggs
Figure 9.11. A hand-made incubator can be easily
setinto themoistenedsubstrateand separatedfrom
designed by creating an environment of controlled
each other by a small distance. Maintenance of a
temperature and humidity,and even distribution of
certain distance between the eggs prevents the spread
heat and some degree of ventilation. (Courtesy of
of disease processes among the eggs. (Courtesy of
Jose Luis Crespo Picazo, LV, Nexo CMA Valencia,
David Perpinan LV, MSc, College of Veterinary
Spain.)
Medicine, University of Georgia.)
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
197
Table 9.5. Patterns of temperature sex determination in reptiles.
Sauria (lizards)
Family Geckonidae
African fat-tailed gecko (Hemitheconyx
 Pattern II
caudicinctus) 26°-29°C (78.8°-84.2°F) results
in females
30°-32°C (86°-89.6°F) results in males
34°-35°C (93.2°-95°F) results in females
Japanese gecko (Gekko japonicus)
Pattern IA
Females at higher temperatures, males at lower
temperatures
Leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius)
 Pattern IB
26.7°-29.4°C results in 90% females
>32.2*C results in 90% males
Rainbow lizard (Agama agama)
Pattern IB
26°-27°C (78.8°-80.6°F) results in females
29°C (84.2°F) results in males
Jacky dragon (Amphibolurus muricatus)
Pattern II
Tuataras (Sphenodon sp.)
 Pattern IB
Chelonians (turtles and tortoises)
 Some Bataguridae
Pattern IA
Carettochelydae
Pattern IA
Chelonidae
Pattern IA
Dermochelydae
 Pattern IA
Emydidae
 Pattern IA
Testudinidae
Pattern IA
Pelomedusidae
 Pattern II
Kinosternidae
Pattern II
Macroclemys temminckii (Chelydridae )
Pattern II
Some Bataguridae
Pattern II
All crocodilians
Pattern II is assumed in all crocodilians. Pattern IB is still
suggested for some species (Alligator sinensis, Caimen 
crocodiles yacare, and Paleosuchus trigonatus) due to
the limited available data.
 Note: Pattern I-IA: Males produced at low temperatures and females produced at high temperature with a single transition
'az uosun aauis e um sainieadan mol ie panpond saeuag pue sainiaduan yau ie panpoud salen ai auon
Pattern Il: Females produced at both low and high temperatures with males produced at intermediate temperatures; two
transition zones.
Author's disclosure: This table is not intended to represent all reptile species in which gender is determined by temperature
(TSD). Not all reptile species bave been studied, and in many cases there is not enough scientific data about temperature
ranges. Occasionally a reptile species bas been reported having TSD pattern IA or IB, and later evidence has proven that it
may follow a different pattern, such as pattern Il.
vance of TSD over GSD is still unknown but may be
2008). TSD occurs in all studied crocodilians and tua-
related to environmental fitness (Warner and Shine
taras, it is very common in chelonian, less frequent in
 2008). However sex determination is very complex in
lizards and unknown in snakes (Delmas et al. 2008).
reptiles and even both systems can be present in a
Although TSD has evolved in several lineages of
single species. Sex determination in the
montane
lizards, there is less information than among the other
scincid lizard (Bassiana duperreyi) is regulated geneti-
reptile taxa. The time in which TSD occurs in called
cally by sex chromosomes but temperatures can over-
the thermosensitive period and is about the middle
ride chromosomal sex generating phenotypically male
one-third of the embryonic development ( Wibbels et
offspring from XX eggs in cool nests (Radder et al.
al. 1991; Delmas et al. 2008). TSD may be also evident
198
 Chapter 9
in viviparous lizards in which sex ratios fluctuate with
may need to be added. Dampened sphagnum moss can
thermal conditions. In the Spotted skink (Niveoscincus
 be used to cover the eggs to help prevent desiccation;
ocellatus) there is a higher proportion of male off-
 however it will prevent or make more difficult visual
spring in colder years (Wapstra et al. 2008). There are
 checking of the viability of the eggs.
two distinct patterns of TSD. In Pattern I, there is a
It is advisable to weigh the incubation box and its
single transition zone at which eggs incubated below
eggs periodically so that water can be added to keep
this temperature zone result predominantly in males
the box at its original weight. If water needs to be
and above the temperature zone predominantly in
added, water should be at the same temperature as the
females. Pattern II has two transition zones with males
incubator.
predominating at the intermediate zone and females at
both extremes. Pattern I occurs chiefly in turtles in
which the adult females are larger than the adult males
DLAGNOSING EGG PROBLEMS
while Pattern II is primarily present with females being
smaller than males or non-dimorphic species (no dif-
In order to diagnose egg problems it is important to
ference between males and females). Some Sternotherus
 understand the basic differences among reptilian eggs.
and Chelydra are exce
eptions such that a constant incu-
The eggshell in snakes and most lizards is leathery and
bation temperature within the transition zone yields
soft; however the egg of chelonian, crocodilians and
100% males (Eti 2009).
 geckos is hard as they have a calcareous shell. Both
-n yiu Aq panan Aensn si yua uoeqnu
soft-shelled and hard-shelled eggs have three internal
peratures, but it increases the risk of congenital defects
membranes (the amnion, the chorion and the allantois)
(Denardo 2006). Furthermore, abnormally high or low
that retard outward water diffusion and allow embry-
temperatures will affect on the health of the hatchlings
onic respiration. Even the hard-shelled eggs will take
(Mader 2006). In general, incubation temperature
water from the environment to some extent and swell
ranges from 26°C to 32*C (80°F to 90*F) (Denardo
in size during embryonic development. All the nutri-
2006).
ents will come from the yolk and the white, and any
Gestation periods vary. Eggs of most snakes and
remaining yolk in the egg will be incorporated into the
small lizards hatch in 45 to 70 days, and 90 to 130
hatchling's coelomic cavity (Mader 2006).
days for eggs from larger lizards such as iguanas and
The death of the egg can occur when the environ-
monitor lizards. Gestation lengths cannot only vary
 mental conditions for egg development are not ful-
among species, but also within the same species and
flled. Incorrect humidity (high or low), temperature
within the same clutch. Incubation time of the leopard
(high or low) and improper ventilation are very
tortoise (Geochelone pardalis) can range from 250 to
common problems that can cause egg death. Other
540 days and from 30 to 40 days variation within
potential causes are excessive handling or trauma. In
same clutch (Denardo 2006).
any case, it may be difficult to determine the cause the
embryonic death. Reptiles from temperate zones can
Substrate
Commonly used substrates include perlite, vermiculite,
 For instances, the embryos of the tropical green iguana
potting soil, sand, sphagnum moss, and shredded
(Iguana iguana) fail to develop at temperatures varying
paper. There is also commercially available substrate
for more than 2°C from the optimum 30°C (86°F)
for reptile incubators based on a pre-prepared mixture
(Funk 2002).
of the already mention substrates. Perlite and vermicu-
Health assessment of the eggs is based on daily
lite are preferred by many hobbyists as they are very
monitoring for color and texture changes. A collapsed
light, absorbent, siliceous material that naturally resists
egg is a sign of dehydration but not necessarily egg
molding. In any case, the purpose of the substrate is
death. Marked changes in color or texture or fungal
to provide a media that will retain water and maintain
growth are usually signs of a non-viable egg, either
 humidity within the egg container while preventing
from egg that has died or from a non-fertile egg (Table
excessive fungal growth.
9.6.).
Two diagnostic methods of assessing the health of
Humidity
an egg are “candling" and ultrasonography for non-
The amount of water added to the substrate varies but
calcified eggs (most squamata). A high-intensity light
should be enough to create clumping of the media
source (e.g. transilluminator) placed in direct contact
without dripping of water. Water will be required
with the side of the egg in a dark room can reveal a
throughout the incubation period and therefore, more
developing vascular pattern in a viable egg as the
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
199
Table 9.6. Common signs encountered during egg incubation, treatment, and prevention.
Problem
Signs
Treatment
Prevention
Diapause
Fails to develop
Correction of
Some eggs enter diapause and
 environmental
resume growth after proper
conditions
environmental conditions
Egg death
 Fails to develop
 Proper environmental
 Proper environmental conditions,
conditions
 proper monitoring and design of
incubator
Infertile egg
No treatment
Sex determination of individuals,
 correct level of maturity, and
proper pairing
 Fungal growth
Clean fungus gently with
Avoid excessive humidity and
cotton tip
contact between eggs
Trauma
Depression or deformity
No treatment
Mark egg's orientation with a pencil
and avoid trauma or excessive
handling
Dessication
 Egg shrinkage
 Rehydrate with warm
 Proper monitoring of humidity and
spring water
temperature
 Fungal growth
Mold on egg surface
 Remove growth with a
 Prevent excessive humidity and avoid
cotton tip, and sprinkle
contact between eggs. Remove any
antifungal powder (e.g.
 dead eggs.
athlete's foot powder)
Slugs
Waxy yellow deformed
No treatment
 Discard unfertilized ova. It may
and shrink eggs
imply an underlying issue with the
female. Seek veterinary attention.
embryo grows or a homogenous diffuse yellow-white
for survival of the offspring (Denardo 2006). Among
luminescence in a death egg. Ultrasonography must be
lizards, there are few examples of maternal care but
used carefully because the ultrasound gel can poten-
this is basic and limited to nesting care against preda-
tially damage the eggs by clogging the oxygen exchange
tors in the case of some skinks. Nest guarding has been
pores. Utrasonography of the developing
embryo
 also documented in chelonians (e.g. Burmese mountain
requires a high-frequency ultrasound transducer (7.5
tortoise, Manouria emys), snakes (e.g. King cobra,
to 10MHz) to properly assess development (Mader
Ophiophagus Hannah, and cobras, Naja spp.), and
2006). In any case, ultrasonography can not only be
virtually all species of crocodilians. In the case of the
used to distinguish the general stages of follicle and
skink Eumeces obsoletus, the female assists during
egg development, but it can also be used to reasonably
hatching and subsequently licks their cloacas, and sup-
predict birth by monitoring the loss of yolk,
with birth
plies them with food up until about the tenth day
occurring about a week after yolk can no longer be
(Mader 2006). As a part of nest guarding, crocodilians
detected (Denardo 2006).
assist the neonates in emerging from the nest and
 guard them after hatching. Rattlesnakes remain with
their offspring until the neonate's first shed (Denardo
CARING FOR THE NEWBORN
2006).
 In captivity, neonate care can be divided into three
Reptilian neonates are born precocious. In other
categories: environmental conditions, space,
and
words, they are fully independent and capable of sur
 proper food. The care provided to newborns is minimal
vival from birth. Adult reptiles rarely provide any care
and merely a scaled-down version of the care given to
for their offspring. Parental care can be defined as the
adults. Hatching can take from one to four days. In
parental actions after oviposition or parturition that
the case of chelonians, the neonate's shell begins to
may increases the offspring's chances of survival (Funk
unfold, facilitating yolk absorption. Absorption of the
2002). Parental care has been documented in at least
yolk sac may take several days after hatching so neo-
100 species of reptiles but it is limited and nonessential
nates should be kept in a clean and moist environment.
200
Chapter 9
In general, hatchlings are maintained at or near the
width between the reptile's eyes; otherwise, it is poten-
 incubation temperature, and many breeders leave them
tially too large to be ingested.
in the incubator for the first few days. A plastic con-
The food nutritive value should be enhanced with
tainer with clean, moist paper towels is also commonly
commercially available vitamin and mineral supple-
used for the first few days. Once the yolk sac is fully
ments, and this is especially important for herbivores
absorbed and the umbilicus sealed, the neonates can
and insectivores species. There are two basic methods
be transferred to a cage with other substrate. Neonates
for vitamin/mineral enhancement: dusting and gut
are very prone to dehydration, and thus humidity
loading. Dusting implies sprinkling the supplement
should be close to 100%. After leaving the incubator,
 over the food item. This technique may decrease the
temperature should be close to the adults' temperature
palatability of the food item so careful monitoring is
range, with slightly higher humidity. Higher humidity
required to assure that the food is completely eaten. In
can be easily accomplished by using moistened paper
the case of insects, if these are not ingested immedi-
towels and a humidity box, a confined box containing
ately they can self-groom and remove these powders
moistened paper towels with a small opening that
 and therefore decrease the supplement available for the
allows the youngsters to get in and out easily. Being
 reptile. Alternatively, an enriched media can be offered
such a confined and closed space, this allows a relative
 to these insects for a few days before being fed to the
humidity of almost 100% as long as the substrate is
 reptiles. This is called gut loading.
replaced on a daily basis. Other, more natural sub-
Assisted feeding may be required 
1incases(
of
strates can be used as the youngsters grow but paper
anorexia. This can be accomplished by the use of an
is generally the preferred option because it is cheap
appropriate-size stomach tube to deliver the food into
and easily cleaned.
the stomach. Commercially available foods or purees
Aggression is very common among neonatal lizards
 of appropriate food items (rodent parts, eggs, vegeta-
and snakes as part of the survival instinct. Providing
bles, etc.) can be used. Assisted feeding is provided
enough space is therefore fundamental for them to
by forceful placement of the food into the reptile's
thrive and decrease stress. The hatchlings should be
mouth. It can potentially damage the back of their
separated if aggression is obvious. Separating the
mouth (oropharynx) and esophagus, and is stressful.
clutch into smaller groups not only decreases aggres-
 Snakes can be stimulated to eat by using a technique
sion but also helps monitor the health status of the
called "slap feeding" by gently tapping the snake's
group (weekly weight monitoring) and their appetite.
nose with the food item. This tends to initiate a reflex
in the snake to strike and grasp the food item (Mader
Feeding the Neonate
2006).
Hatchlings usually begin feeding within one and four-
 teen days of leaving the egg; most neonatal snakes do
REFERENCES
not eat until their first shed at about one to three weeks
after hatching (Mader 2006). Appropriate feeding is
APPA. 2007/2008. APPA's 2007/2008 National Pet Owners Survey.
critical for proper growth and development. The yolk
Badaeva T, Malysheva D, et al. 2008. Genetic variation and de novo
provides nutrients for the first few days but proper
mutations in the parthenogenetic Caucasian rock lizard
food type and size is fundamental thereafter. A thor-
Darevskia unisexualis. PLoS ONE 3(7): e2730.
ough understanding of the dietary requirements of the
Benirschke K. 2007. Jackson's chamaleon Chamaeteon jacksonii
d  a ss s ss si s
xantholophus. In: Comparative Placentation, edited by
Benirschke K. Ithaca, NY: International Veterinary Information
species that are not commercially available, requiring
Service.
"scenting" to train the neonate to eat alternate food
Blackburn D. 1998. Structure, function, and evolution of the ovi-
items. This is accomplished by rubbing the proper food
ducts of squamate reptiles, with special reference to viviparity
 item (e.g. fish or frog) against the alternate food (e.g.
rodent). Herbivore reptiles can be offered a mix of
Delmas V, Prevot-Julliard A-C, et al. 2008. A mechanistic model of
fresh vegetables, which should be finely chopped to the
temperature-dependent sex determination in a chelonian: the
European pond turtle. Funct Ecol 22(1): 84-93.
appropriate size. Insectivorous and carnivorous rep-
Demas S, Duronslet M, et al. 1990. Sex-specific DNA in reptiles
tiles can be offered insects such as crickets, mealworms,
with temperature dependent sex determination. J Exp Zool 253:
 grubs, wingless fruit flies, termites, slugs, small fish
319-324.
(guppies or comets), pinky mice, small lizards (anoles
Denardo D. 2006. Reproductive biology. In: Reptile Medicine and
Surgery, edited by Mader D. St Louis: Saunders Elsevier:
or geckos), small frogs (toads can be toxic), chick legs,
376-390.
hatchling quails, and mouse parts. In any case, the
Eti, turtles of the world Temperature dependent sex deterrmination.
offered food item should never be larger than the
www.eti.uva.nl/turtles. ETI. Accessed October 8, 2009.
Herpetoculture and Reproduction
201
Funk R. 2002. Lizard reproductive medicine and surgery. Vet Clin
Sasa M, Curtis S. 2006. Field observation of mating behavior in the
Exot Anim 5(3): 579-613.
neck-banded snake Scaphiodontophis annutatus (Serpentes:
HSUS. 2001. The trade in live reptiles: Imports to the United States.
Colubridae). Rev Biot Trop 54(2): 647-650.
Washington DC.
Schramm B, Casares M, et al. 1999. Steroid levels and reproductive
Innis C, Boyer T. 2002. Chelonian reproductive disorders. Vet Clin
cycle of the Galapagos tortoise, Geachelone nigra, living under
Exot Anirm 5(3): 555-578.
seminatural conditions on Santa Cruz Island (Galapagos). Gen
Lance V, Valenzuela N, et al. 1992. A horrmonal method to
Comp Endocrinol 114(1): 108-120.
determine the sex of hatchling giant river turtles, Podocnemis
Taylor E, Denardo D. 2005. Sexual size dimorphism and growth
Expansa: application to endangered species research. Amer Zoof
plasticity in snakes: an experiment on the western diamond-
32:16A.
backed rattlesnake {Crotatus atrox). J Exp Zoot A Commp Exp
Mader D.
2006.
.Perinatology.
In:Reptile Medicine
and
Biot 303(7): 598-607.
Surgery, edited by Mader D. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier:
Wapstra E, Uller T, et al. 2008. Climate effects on offspring sex
365-375.
ration in a viviparous lizard J Anim Ecot. Sep 22.
Owens D, Hendrickson J, et al. 1978. A technique for determining
Warner D, Shine R. 2008. The adaptive significance of temperature-
 sex of immature Chelonia mydas using radioimmunoassay.
dependent sex determination in a reptile. Nature 451: 566-
Herpetologica 34: 270-273.
568.
Radder R, Quinn A, et al. 2008. Genetic evidence for co-occurrence
Webb J, Shine R, et al. 2006. The adaptive significance of reptilian
of chromosomal andthermal sex-determining systerms in a lizard.
Biol Lett 4(2): 176-178.
esis. Evotution 60(1): 115-160.
Rostal D, Grumbles J, et al. 1994. Non-lethal sexing techniques for 
Wibbels T, Bull J, et al. 1991. Chronology and morphology of
hatchling and immature desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizi).
temperature dependent sex deterrmination. J Exp Zoot 260:
Herp Mono 8: 83-87.
371-381.
Section 4
Amphibians
CHAPTER TEN
bians
Brad Wilson
INTRODUCTION, TAXONOMY, AND
Amphibians of the order Gymnophiona, Caecilians,
NATURAL HISTORY
are uncommonly kept as pets and even less commonly
observed clinically. Originating in the eastern and
A fascination with amphibians has gripped mankind
western tropics, caecilians may be terrestrial (yellow-
since the first recorded history. It continues today
striped caecilian, Ichtbyophis kohtaoensis) or totally
through scientific discoveries of remarkable healing
aquatic (Typhlonectes compressicauda) as adults. To
and disease resistance properties of amphibian tissues,
 many, caecilians resemble snakes or oversized earth-
the discovery of potential therapeutic compounds in
worms. All known species are limbless with greatly
amphibian skin, and the understanding of potential
reduced eyes. Some species are oviparous (egg-laying)
human health consequences to environmental altera-
and some are viviparous (live-bearing). All known
tion. Interest in captive amphibians over the last two
species are carnivorous and consume various arthro-
decades has increased tremendously and the knowl-
pods, annelids, or gastropods. Because of their secre-
edge gained regarding the husbandry, physiology, and
tive nature, it is likely that many species remain
breeding habits of many species has likely exceeded
undiscovered. Longevity  of  captive  caecilians  is
that of any other “exotic pet" group during this time
reported at nine years (Goin et al. 1978).
period. Awareness of the demand for health care in
The order Caudata, tailed amphibians, consists of
these animals and the willingness of many clients to
salamanders, newts, sirens, and amphiumas. Sirens
treat these pets has stimulated and necessitated a
were once classified in a separate order, Meantes
demand for more education by veterinarians and vet-
(Trachystomata).  The majority of species inhabit
erinary technicians.
North America, with one species in Africa and no
species in Australia or Antarctica (Goin et al. 1978,
Taxonomy
Duellman and Trueb 1994). Many species of all sub-
 The biological saying “ontogeny recapitulates phylog-
orders are maintained as pets, though few are com-
eny" is most appropriately applied to the natural
mercially available. Few species venture far from water
history of amphibians. The life cycle of the amphibian
or moist environs and most species require water
from egg to adult (ontogeny) is the abridged version
for some portion of reproduction or development.
of the monumental evolutionary  adaptations
of
Some species are fully aquatic, some facultatively
amphibians (phylogeny) that enabled the vertebrates
aquatic, some terrestrial, and some American newts
to leave water and colonize the land 350 million years
(Notophthalmus viridescens) are aquatic as larvae,
ago (Wright 2001e; Goin, Goin, and Zug 1978).
terrestrial as juveniles, and aquatic again as adults.
Modern  amphibians  comprise  more than 
4,000
Salamanders are carnivorous as both larvae and adults
(Wright 2001g) species that are classified into three
and consume various arthropods, gastropods, arach-
orders based on anatomic characteristics. The orders
nids, annelids,
 crustaceans, and other vertebrates
are listed with the modern accepted nomenclature fol-
including mammals. The longevity of salamanders is
lowed by commonly used traditional nomenclature in
ad au ro sa a-y o dn aq oi uo
parentheses: the caecilians, Gymnophiona (Apoda);
giant salamander (Adrias japonicus) (Goin et al. 1978).
the sirens, salamanders, and newts, Caudata (Meantes
Generally, the larger species have a longer lifespan
and Urodela); and the frogs and toads,
Anura
than smaller species.
(Salientia). See table 10.1 for species commonly kept
The order Anura, tailless amphibians, consists of
in captivity.
frogs and toads. This order represents the great major-
20.5
Handling concerns
occas. aggressive,
occas. aggressive,
aggressive, sturdy
aggressive, sturdy
aggressive, sturdy
aggressive, sturdy
occas. aggressive,
docile, sturdy;
docile, sturdy;
docile, sturdy
docile, fragile
docile, sturdy
escape
escape
sturdy
sturdy
Kpins
mod; large
mod; large+
mod; large+
diff; large#
easy; small
easy; small
mod; small 
 medium
 medium
 medium
mod; small
Cares
large+#
easy;
diff+;
easy;
‘+HP
Feed4
ar,cr,v,g
an,ar,cr,v
an,ar
cr,ar,v
ar,cr,v
ar,cr,v
ar,cr,v
ar,an,v
 an,ar
ar
t,ar
ar
oviparous
viviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
 oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
Repro3
n/a
14 to 171
14 to 20/
14 to 17/
H/I
25/mod
22/mod
mod
high
mod
23
15
2
20
15
20
8 to 14
(cm)
to 100
to 50
to 75
fossorial, tropical 50
08
40
10
aquatic, tropical
aquatic, tropical
tropical forest
Habitat
temperate
 temperate
temperate
temperate
terrestrial
temperate
temperate
terrestrial,
fossoria
emporary
aquatic;
terr/arbor,
terr/arbor,
terrestrial,
Table 10.1. Amphibians Commonly Kept in Captivity.
aquatic,
aquatic,
aquatic,
aquatic,
forest
forest
e N America
 e N America
w N America
C,S America
w N America
 e N America
Origin
S America
Cryptobranchidae (Giant salamanders)
 N America
C America
N America
N America
Plethodontidae (Lungless salamanders)
Ambystomatidae (Mole salamanders)
SE Asia
Proteidae (Neotenic salamanders)
Amphiumidae (Amphiumas)
Amphiuma, Amphiuma
Ambystomatigrinum?
Mudpuppy, Necturus
Axolotl, Ambystoma
Arboreal salamander,
Aquatic caecilian,
Cryptobranchus
Sirenidae (Sirens)
Tiger salamander, 
Palm salamander,
Common name/
Gymnophiona
Yellow-striped,
species name
snsononu
Hellbender,
Caudata
206
occas. aggressive,
docile, fragile to
docile, sturdy
docile, sturdy
docile, sturdy
—see below
 docile, sturdy
 docile, sturdy
 docile, sturdy
 docile, fragile
 docile, sturdy
docile, sturdy
docile, sturdy
docile, sturdy
sturdy
sturdy
mod; med to
mod; large+
easy; small
easy to diff;
 medium
 medium
 medium
medium
easy; large
 medium
 medium
medium
medium
diff; large
Apinis
varies
docile,
easy;
mod;
diff+;
easy;
easy;
easy,
easy;
easy;
pou
small
 an,ar
 an,ar
v,an,ar
v,an,ar
ar,g,v
ar,v
ar,t
ar,t
ar,t
IE
 oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
22 to 30/
25 to 271
pou 01
20/mod
25/mod
25/high
high
25/high
25/mod
20-22/
15-20/
20/low
22/low
high
25/low
pou
high
25
5
25
1.5 to 5 
to 15
to 10
to 10
to 10
to 10
to 5
15
4
2
23
r
6
 streams, forests 
aquatic, tropical
arboreal, tropical
 arboreal, tropical
aquatic, tropical
aquatic, tropical
terrestrial, temp/
semiaquatic,
temperate
semiaquatic,
 temperate 
terrestrial,
tropical
terrestrial,
montane
tropical
terrestrial,
 tropical
terrestrial,
tropical
tropical
terrestrial/
fossorlal
tropical
terrestrial,
tropical
arboreal,
C,S America
Madagascar
C,S America
C, S America
 N America
C,S America
N America
C America
N America
S America
(  m 
SE Asia
SE Asia
SE Asia
Africa
Africa
Dendrobatidae (Poison dart frogs)
Pelobatidae (Spadefoot toads)
Agalychnis callidryas14
Pipidae (Clawed frogs)
Phyllomedusa spp.14
t1'dds uouopnasd
American toad, Bufo
Hylidae (Tree frogs)
Red salamanders,
Marine toad, Bufo
Hymenochirus
Asian leaf frogs,
Harlequin toads,
Atelopus spp.
Asian tree toads,
Monkey frogs,
Anura
207
Handlling concernss
Se pe s = rspodosee = a rsueiso = ao rspodoe = in spe = uo rsis yoa if auou jo spio u pis au u ueue ae ay o iai,
 Of wild-caught and some captive-born animals. (Generally, captive-born animals adapt well with proper conditions.) Second value is
chec
and handled with caution; bites from adult animals may cut skin and may be painful. Fragile = amphibians that may be easily stressed, damaged, or killed by handling.
docile, fragile to
aggressive, sturdy
aggressive, sturdy
 aggressive, sturdy
aggressive, sturdy
 docile, sturdy
docile, sturdy
sturdy
diff; medium 
easy; small+
easy; large+
 medium
easy; large+
Cares
 medium
 medium
easy;
mod;
easy;
Feed4
ar,t
TEA
v,at
IEA
v,ar
oviparous
Repro3
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
oviparous
to mod
 to 22/
H/L
25/low
high
22/mod
25/mod
25/mod
25/mod
25/mod
 for adults of species or typical of genus in captivity.
18
(cm)
2
10
8
8
8
2
2
 arboreal, desert/
Habitat
semiaquatic
temperate
semiaquatic
temperate
terrestrial,
tropical
tropical
terrestrial,
tropical
terrestrial,
tropical
forest
Madagascar
Origin
N America
Australia
 S America
 S America
 Islands
Africa
(ss0
American bullfrog,Rana
Leptodactylidae(Tropicalf
Table 10.1. Continued
Ceratophrys cornuta'
Ranidae (True frogs)
Wright (2001g, 3-14).
Ceratobatrachus
Common name/
(1987).
(9661) 0s0A Pt
Pyxicephalus
(1998).
species name
Eyelash frog,
Lotters (1996).
Walls (1994).
,'dds
208
Amphibians
209
ity of all species of modern amphibians and the major-
 Several South American species (Atelopus spp.) are
ity of captive amphibians.
adapted to cool elevations well over 10,000 feet
are available in the pet trade as captive-born animals.
(Lotters 1996) and some species of North American
 Frogs are to amphibians as lizards are to reptiles. Frogs
frogs ( Rana sylvatica) are known to freeze solid during
hibernation and then thaw following winter to resume
restrial, arboreal, and aquatic (and even several flying
normal physiology (Duellman and Trueb 1994,
or gliding) habitats on earth. Adaptation and special-
Mattison 1987, Stebbins 1985).
ization of skin, diet, and reproductive strategy have all
The veterinary technician should be familiar with
 made this expansion possible. Several species of frogs
herpetological scientific nomenclature and common
are totally aquatic and several are adapted to estivate
terminology. It is not uncommon that scientific order,
 in the driest deserts for months or years. All adult frogs
family, or group names of both plants and animals
are carnivorous and the majority of their larvae, tad-
may be modified for use in general conversation or
poles, are herbivorous. Some tadpoles are omnivorous
 popular and scientific publications. For instance, when
and some are carnivorous. Adult frogs feed on many
speaking of the thre orders of amphibians, frogs
insects, crustaceans, annelids, and other vertebrates,
and toads (Anura) are commonly called anurans.
and some species are specialized to feed primarily on
Salamanders (Caudata) are called caudates. In the
salamanders and frogs the family names are commonly
The known longevity for some species is up to thirty-
modifed when discussing several of the larger families:
six years (Goin et al. 1978).
the mole salamanders (Ambystomatidae) are ambysto-
Amphibians begin development as fertilized eggs,
matids, the lungless salamanders (Plethodontidae) are
 and with most species the eggs hatch into free-swim-
 plethodontids, the poison dart frogs (Dendrobatidae)
ming gilled larvae, and then the larvae metamorphose
are dendrobatids, the tree frogs (Hylidae) are hylids,
into adults. The post-hatching larvae depend upon a
the true toads (Bufonidae) are bufonids, and so on.
moist environment such as water inside a gelatinous
A great deal of this chapter focuses on frogs. This
terrestrial egg (some species undergo direct develop-
is due to the fact that frogs are, by far, the most
ment and metamorphose to adults inside the eggs),
lad au ui dnora ueiqydue peardsapim pue rendod
 inside a brooding adaptation of the parent ( Gastrotheca
industry.1
Much of the medicine, anesthesia, and
cornuta and Pipa pipa), or inside a uterus-like oviduct
 surgery techniques applied to frogs are extrapolated to
(some amphibians are live-bearing or viviparous). Not
 all amphibians. The general discussion of amphibian
all amphibian larvae require standing water to com-
medicine focuses on metamorphosed juvenile and
plete development. Similarly, all adult amphibians do
adult amphibians with a separate general discussion of
not depend on standing water to reproduce, though
larvae. The husbandry and disorders of larvae can
traditionally most amphibians do return to water both
 differ significantly from the adults of some species.
to mate and to disperse eggs. Some amphibians are
entirely aquatic and cannot survive out of water for
any extended periods of time, whereas others inhabit
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
deserts or may estivate for extended period (years)
with no exogenous water. Completely aquatic amphib-
General anatomy is similar across all three orders of
ians are represented in all three families. Some sala-
amphibians and is discussed as applies to all amphib-
 manders are neotenic, in which metamorphosis to the
ians. Anatomical specializations and clinically signif-
typical adult form never occurs yet the larvae develop
cant differences in anatomy are described for the three
gonads internally and the larvae are capable
of
 orders. Physiology varies tremendously, even among
reproduction.
 genera and species of the same order, and clinically
Though most numerous in temperate to tropical
significant(
 differences are noted in the following
environments, amphibians are distributed worldwide.
discussion.
 Frogs are found among nearly every habitat on earth
except the open ocean and Antarctica. Particularly
Integument
interesting among the frogs is their colonization of
The evolutionary development of amphibian skin is
harsh deserts. Adaptation for desert environments is
one of the greatest adaptations that enabled verte-
most widespread among the frogs of Australia as seen
-ida aui puel uo isixa pue raiem aui aaeal oi saieiq
in both terrestrial (Arenopbryne rotunda) (Mattison
dermal layer of amphibian skin is shed routinely
1987) and arboreal (Litoria spp.) species and among
(ecdysis) in a manner consistent with that of lizards
the South African terrestrial species (Breviceps spp.).
and snakes. Ecdysis may occur piecemeal or entirely,
210
Chapter 10
and some caecilians, frogs, and salamanders consume
tions of marine toads (Bufo marinus). In general, all
the shed skin—a process called keratophagy or derma-
terrestrial frogs and toads should be considered poten-
tophagy. The dermis layers of skin serve a respiratory
tially dangerous to dogs and cats. Other captive
function and are highly vascularized. Some caecilians
 amphibians that should be considered toxic include the
possess small scales that are embedded in the skin
European salamander (Salamandra salamandra), the
(Goin et al. 1978, Duellman and Trueb 1994).
American newt (Notophthalmus viridescens), and
The respiratory function of amphibian skin is par-
some mole salamanders (Ambystoma spp.).
ticularly important for larvae, adult caecilians, most
Many of the more toxic amphibians exhibit apose-
adult salamanders, and many frogs. Several species
matic coloration and are conspicuous or active by day.
of  amphibians and one family of salamanders
 Animals that exhibit aposematic or warning colors rely
(Plethodontidae) have absent or greatly reduced lungs
on a learned response of the potential predator to
and rely on cutaneous respiration for the majority of
avoid interaction with the particular animal or
 Oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange. The hellbenders 
suffer distasteful or noxious stimuli. Some of the com-
(Cryptobranchus spp.) and giant Asian salamanders
 monly observed aposematically colored amphibians
(Adrias spp.), both of which are aquatic, have well
include
the
European salamander  (Salamandra
developed lateral skin folds which increase surface
salamandra),
the red eft phase of the American
area for cutaneous gas exchange. An interesting behav-
newt (Notophthalmus viridescens), red salamanders
ior exhibited by Cryptobranchus spp. is a rocking
(Pseudotriton spp.), some poison dart frogs (Dendro-
motion in which the salamander sways the body from
batidae), some harlequin frogs (Atelopus spp.), the
side to side in slow moving or poorly oxygenated
golden mantella (Mantella aurantiaca), and the semi-
aquatic fre-bellied toads (Bombina spp.). As with
and Trueb 1994, Petranka 1998).
some insects and snakes, mimicry in coloration occurs
The amphibian epidermis is rich with glands. Some
in several "non-toxic" species that co-occur with more
epidermal glands produce secretions that moisten the
toxic species.
skin to facilitate cutaneous respiration and some frogs
 Several species of frogs possess unique skin adapta-
(Phyllomedusa spp.) secrete waxy substances that
 tions for raising young. The aquatic female Surinam
protect against dehydration and dessication (Wright 
toad (Pipa pipa) carries eggs on her back over several
2001b). Poison glands are present in all salamanders
months during which time the eggs invaginate into the
 and frogs. These are most notable among the poison
skin and undergo direct development into juvenile
dart frogs (Dendrobatidae) of Central and South
frogs. Upon hatching the juvenile frogs swim out of
America and toads worldwide. Of all amphibians the
the holes in the skin, ending parental care. Another
skin secretions of Phyllobates terribilis, the golden dart
female South American frog, the marsupial frog
frog of Colombia, are the most toxic (Walls 1994).
(Gastrotheca spp.), possesses a pouch on the dorsum
The Chaco Indians of Columbia use skin secretions of
three species of Phyllobates to coat blow darts used to
development in some species) and are then released
hunt monkeys, hence the common family name of
into a suitable aquatic habitat.
these frogs. Of the 170 species of Dendrodatidae, only
 P. terribilis is considered lethal to man from simply
SkeletalSystem
touching the toxin. Interestingly, wild-caught dart
The skeleton of amphibians is comprised of both
frogs of all species fed domestic diets in captivity and
an endoskeleton and exoskeleton that is ossified.
frogs born in captivity lose the majority of their skin
Exoskeleton is bone formed in the dermis that fuses
toxins (Daly et al. 1994).
with underlying endoskeleton and is most notable in
 Several species of toads and salamanders posses
the skull of amphibians, particularly in frogs and
large parotid glands dorsally on the head, just caudal
toads. The amphibian skeletal system has three func-
to the skull. These glands are elliptical and commonly
tions: protection, locomotion, and support for terres-
the site of profuse toxin excretion. Skin toxins from
trial existence. A major adaptation for locomotion on
many frogs and toads are dangerous to domestic
land is the development of pelvic and pectoral girdles.
animals such as dogs and cats. The author has observed
These are absent in caecilians, but well developed in
a 20-kg Labrador Retriever suffer violent vomiting.
most salamanders and all frogs. Great variation of the
diarrhea, and convulsions following the accidental
appendicular skeleton exists among species of frogs
ingestion of a Cuban treefrog (Osteopilus septentrio-
and toads. In most frogs and some salamanders the
nalis). Anecdotal reports exist of deaths in dogs and
hyoid bones are modified to eject the tongue for pre-
cats following exposure to or ingestion of toxic secre-
hension of prey (Figures 10.1, 10.2).
Amphibians
211
PREMAXILI
HALANGES
PTERYGOID
METACARPALS
QUADRATO-
JUGAL
ATLA
CARPALS
SUB-SCAPULA
RADIO-
ULNA
TRANSVERSE
PROCESS
UROSTYLE
PHALANGES
METATARSALS
CALCANEUM
SCHIUM
Figure 10.1. Skeletal anatomy of a frog. (Drawing by Scott Stark.)
Digestive System
cloaca is homologous to that of reptiles. The pancreas
All adult amphibians are carnivorous and have a diges-
and gall bladder are present and aid in digestion. The
tive tract similar to that of higher carnivorous verte-
 liver serves to convert ammonia into nitrogenous waste
brates and similar among the t
 three orders
products, primarily urea. In at least one frog species,
amphibians. The oral cavity of salamanders and frogs
the Australian gastric brooding frogs, Rheobatrachus
is spacious and generally designed for capturing and
SPP., the female ingests the ferilized eggs into the
swallowing whole prey items. A fleshy tongue is present
 pe saopi o  sia an aa 
d e a srs  sads is u
metamorphose into juvenile frogs. During the brood-
fish-like tongue and aquatic frogs (Pipidae) have no
 ing period all digestive secretions are stopped in these 
 tongue (Goin et al. 1978). Amphibian teeth are replaced
species (Duellman and Trueb 1994) (Figure 10.3).
through life when lost (Goin et al. 1978, Duellman and
Trueb 1994).
Respiratory System
 Prehension of prey may occur by one of several
 Amphibians exhibit four modalities of respiration:
modalities
in
amphibians:
suction,
hellbender
 branchial, buccopharyngeal, cutaneous, and pulmonic
(Cryptobranchus spp.) and Surinam toad (Pipa pipa);
(Wright 2001c). Adult salamanders use the four modes
ambush or direct pounce and capture, mole salaman-
of respiration; adult caecilians and frogs do not use the
ders (Ambystoma spp.) and toads (Bufo spp.); luring
branchial mode. In most amphibians the left and right
 and capture, horned frogs ( Ceratophrys spp.); foraging
lungs are of equal size. Some caecilians have a greatly
and prehension with tongue, palm salamanders
reduced or absent left lung, as observed in snakes.
(Bolitoglossa spp.) and dart frogs (Dendrobates spp.);
 Branchial or gill respiration is present in free-
and scavenging, Amphiuma spp., Siren spp., and
swimming larvae of all amphibians and in neotenic or
aquatic caecilians (Typhlonectes spp.) (Helfman 1990).
aquatic salamanders. Those species with external gills
The esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and large
may exhibit varying degrees of gill development depen-
intestine are similar to those of higher vertebrates. The
 dent upon environmental conditions such as dissolved
212
Chapter 10
QUADRATE
RADIUS -
OE
ULNA
PROCORACOID
CARTILAGE
GALLBLADDER
LUNG
HUMERUS
HEART
-LT. LOBE OF LIVER
SCAPULA
LIVER
STOMACH
SPLEEN
PANCREAS
LG. INTESTINE
-LT. KIDNEY
RT.TESTICLE
URINARYBLADDER
TIBIA
FIBULA
PUBOISCHIAC
FEMUR
Figure 10.3. Visceral anatomy of a frog. (Drawing
PLATE
by Scott Stark.)
some freshwater air-gulping fishes such as the electric
eel(Electrophorus electricus) and the lungfishes
(Protopterus spp. and Lepidosiren spp.).
 All terrestrial amphibians, except salamanders of
Plethodontidae, which do not have lungs, use pul-
Figure 10.2. Salamander skeletal anatomy. (Drawing
 monic respiration. Amphibian lungs are sac-like, with
by Scott Stark.)
alveoli most well developed in the Anurans. The lungs
 of some aquatic amphibians serve as hydrostatic or
oxygen. In more stagnant oxygen-deprived environ-
buoyancy organs in addition to the respiratory func-
 ments the gills are larger to increase oxygen-absorbing
tion (Wright 2001c).
surface area. In well-oxygenated water, the gills are
Vocalization is best developed in frogs, but is also
typically smaller. Some aquatic species (Sirenidae,
observed in caecilians and salamanders of various
Proteidae, Pipidae) may rely more on buccopharyngeal
species. Frogs are the only order of amphibians in
and pulmonic respiration by gulping air when oxygen
which anatomic vocal structures are well developed
content is critically low. Cutaneous respiration is dis-
and in which vocalization is known to serve as
cussed in the Integument section.
communication for mating, territorial defense, and
 Buccopharyngeal respiration is primarily driven by
escape from predators (Duellman and Trueb 1994).
air gulping in aquatic species and gular or buccal
Vocalization is unique for every species and is also
pumping in terrestrial species. Atmospheric air is
present in aquatic species. Males are the most vocal of
pulled in through the nostrils to the nasopharynx and
the sexes, but females of some species have “distress
oral cavity by negative pressure during buccal expan-
calls" which are used when escaping predators or
sion and then driven out by the collapse of the gular
"release calls" to signal males when the female is unre-
skin. Oxygen exchange occurs through the thin-walled
ceptive during opportunistic breeding congregations.
buccopharyngeal capillaries. This pumping action also
drives both inspiratory and expiratory pulmonic res-
Excretory System
piration in terrestrial amphibians. Buccopharyngeal
The kidney of amphibians is mesonephric and empties
gas exchange in amphibians is analogous to that of
into a urinary bladder. The urinary bladder of some
Amphibians
213
amphibians may be bilobate. As in reptiles, urine is
 during development. In oviparous species the oviducts
collected by the Wolffian duct (mesonephric duct in
serve to store or hold eggs until spawning occurs. In
amphibians, metanephric duct in reptiles) and then
salamanders a diverticulum of the dorsal wall of the
routed to the cloaca and not the urinary bladder. Urine
cloaca forms the spermatheca, which stores collected
passes retrograde from the cloaca into the urinary
bladder (Goin et al. 1978).
Amphibians, especially frogs, exhibit tremendous
Nitrogenous wastes of primarily aquatic amphibi-
adaptation in parental care of developing egs and
ans are excreted as ammonia, whereas many terrestrial
larvae. These adaptations are discussed throughout the
amphibians secrete urinary wastes as urea or uric acid.
various sections and more specifically in the Behavior
This conversion of ammonia to urea and uric acid
section.
the toxicity of ammonia in the blood. Frogs of the
Cardiovascular System
genus Phyllomedusa are uricotelic, being able
to
The cardiovascular system is comprised of a three-
convert urea to uric acid for excretion (Wright 2001c).
chambered heart, arteries, veins, and lymphatics. The
heart of Siren intermedia and Necturus maculosus
Reproductive System
contains an interventricular septum, making a four-
 Amphibians have paired internal gonads that are hor-
chambered heart (Goin et al. 1978). As with reptiles,
monally regulated.  Collecting 
ducts
(oviducts
 in
Oxygenated and deoxygenated blood mixes minimally
female) transport gametes to the cloaca where they are
in the common ventricle.
expelled from the body. Viviparous species are present
The three orders of amphibians exhibit great varia-
in all three orders and the larvae undergo metamor-
tion in the development of aortic arch vasculature. A
phosis in the oviduct of the female and are born as
prominent ventral abdominal vein is present in amphib-
fully functional juveniles. Fat bodies are located adja-
ians as in reptiles. This is the vein of choice for blood
cent to the gonads of all amphibians and are presumed
collection in large frogs or toads. In salamanders not
to provide nutrient stores for developing gametes.
capable of tail autotomy (release of the tail when
These bodies enlarge during non-breeding season and
stressed), blood can be sampled from the ventral tail
are greatly diminished at the end of breed
eding season.
vein as described for snakes and lizards. Many frogs
The testes of frogs are collection of seminiferous
can also be sampled from the ventral lingual plexus in
tubules connected to the mesonephric ducts by collect-
the mouth (see Techniques).
ing ducts. Frogs exhibit the
greatest organizational
 Lymphatics and lymphatic circulation is well devel-
structure of seminiferous tubules among the amphib-
 oped in amphibians. All blood cells and proteins except
ians. The testes (and ovaries) enlarge dramatically in
erythrocytes are found in amphibian lymph. Lymph
response to breeding season. Copulation is observed
hearts that beat synchronously and independently of
in all caecilians but only one species of frog, and fer-
the cardia control lymph circulation. Diagnostic
tilization is internal in these species. Fertilization for
samples may be retrieved lymph sacs, which are found
all other frogs is external. Interestingly, fertilization for 
in various locations of the body. Most notable of these
all but two families of salamanders (Hynobiidae and
 are paired lymphatic sacs in the skin dorsal and caudal
Cryptobranchidae) is internal with no copulation.
to the pelvis in frogs.
Male salamanders secrete a jellylike substance in the
Amphibian blood and tissue fluids have a lower
 cloaca that encases the sperm, the spermatophore, and
osmolality (200
to 250mOsm) than mammals
expel this structure during breeding. The female sala-
(300 mOsm) (Wright 2001c). Thus, isotonic fluids
mander collects the spermatophore in the cloaca and
used for mammals are hypertonic to amphibians and
fertilization occurs internally. Fertilization is internal 
result in dehydration of the amphibian patient with
in only a few frogs.
long-term exposure. Mammalian saline is 0.9% NaCl.
The amphibian ovaries are located in proximity to
A 0.6% NaCl solution is most appropriate for use with
 the kidneys as seen in higher vertebrates. Following
amphibians.
 ovulation ova are contained within a thin membrane,
the ovisac, which ruptures and releases eggs into the
Nervous System
coelom. Eggs are funneled into the ostium of the
The amphibian nervous system is modified from that
oviduct by cilia lining the coelomic mesentery and then
of fish with the enlargement of the cerebral hemi-
passed to the cloaca to be expelled into the environ-
spheres and the development of more complex neural
ment. The lining of the oviduct of viviparous caecilians
 networks in the spinal cord for the innervation pecto-
is consumed by developing larvae as nourishment
ral and pelvic limbs. A withdra wal response is observed
214
 Chapter 10
in amphibians as a result of trauma such as damage to
Many of the natural history related criteria for
limbs and toes.
evaluating lizards (see Chapter 3) apply to amphibians.
The following list highlights the more pertinent infor-
Sense Organs
mation with which the technician and clinician should
Amphibian eyes, though not as highly adapted as those
be familiar for a given species:
of reptiles for complete terrestrial existence, are greatly
modified from the eyes of most fish. Movable eyelids
1. Origin of the captive patient: Is the patient captive-
and lacrimal glands to moisten the eye are among the
born or wild-caught? For the more common species
most notable adaptations. The eyelids are not present
in captivity, know which of these are more likely
 in amphibian larvae, most aquatic amphibians, and the
caught in the wild or propagated in captivity.
 neotenic axolotl. A third eyelid or nictitating mem-
 2. Preferred microhabitat: Is the patient fossorial, ter-
brane is present in many terrestrial frogs. It is similar
restrial, arboreal, aquatic, or semi-aquatic? What is
to the same membrane of dogs and cats and its closure
the preferred air and/or water temperature of the
is passive, being achieved by contraction of the retrac-
patient? What is the preferred humidity of the
tor bulbi muscle followed by withdrawal of the eye
patient?
into the eye socket. A portion of the levator bulbi
3. Behavior: At what time of day is the patient active
muscle actively controls retraction of the third eyelid
in normal health? Does the patient exhibit seasonal
back to its resting position.
behavioral patterns such as hibernation? Does the
The amphibian auditory system, while anatomically
 patient exhibit certain defensive postures or behav-
and physiologically interesting, has relatively little
iors when stressed or threatened?
clinical significance. Jacobson's organ, the vomerona-
4. Diet: What is the patient's preferred food in nature
sal organ, is present in amphibians, but is much less
and what food items is it known to consume in
developed than in snakes and lizards. This sense organ
captivity? What is the preferred size of food item?
is suspected to function in food recognition and in
 Is the patient an aggressive feeder that may attack
plethodontid salamanders (and possibly other genera)
or consume cage mates? At what time of day or
is thought to function for pheromone detection during
night does the patient feed in habitat? What is
courtship and mating.
the normal feeding behavior of the species in
question?
5. Anatomy and physiology: What is the anatomy of
HUSBANDRY
the normal healthy patient, including size or color-
ation differences between sexes of a given species?
A basic understanding of the life history requirements
Are certain physical characteristics seasonally vari-
of the amphibian species in question (or extrapolated
able? Is the patient potentially toxic to cage mates?
from a closely related species) is needed to gain a thor-
ough history and develop a diagnostic and treatment
The diversity of species’ environmental adaptations
plan for amphibians. Even among different related
necessitates this knowledge of amphibians even more
species of amphibians, however, there may be dramatic
than among the lizards, snakes, tortoises, and terra-
diversity of environmental needs within a single genus.
pins. Unfortunately, the majority of amphibian dis-
 These differences are particularly evident among the
eases progress rapidly or have a narrow window of
genera of Dendrobatidae (Dendrobates, Ameerga,
treatment, making the speed of diagnosis and treat-
Ranitomeya,Excitobates,Phyllobates,Epipedobates)
ment critical.
andthe genera Atelopusand Mantella. The Dendrobatids
 The greatest progress in successfully maintaining
are a diverse and geographically widespread group
amphibians in captivity, particularly with the frogs,
occurring from sea level to 2,600m elevation; some
 may be attributed to an understanding of the captive
species are terrestrial, some are entirely arboreal; some
environment for each species. As with many reptiles,
are 1.5 cm as adults, some are more than 5 cm (Walls
success with captive maintenance and breeding of
1994). Similarly, the Atelopids have species groups that
amphibians has improved dramatically in the last ten
are termed highland (2,600 to 4,500 m) or lowland
to fifteen years through the research and experimenta-
(<1,000 m) (Lotters 1996). If a highland species is main-
tion of zookeepers and private hobbyists.
tained as a lowland species or vice-versa, the frog will
fail to thrive and typically perish within days. Similar
Enclosures and Environment
though less extreme environmental diversity is seen
 The four basic generalized amphibian cage designs are
among Mantella spp. (Staniszewski 1997).
arboreal, terrestrial, semi-aquatic, and aquatic. On
Amphibians
215
 occasion a mix of these designs is appropriate for some
Visual security is provided by both internal and
animals and each design may be slightly modified to
external cage design. Painting the external surfaces of
house a particular species. With each of these habitats,
the terrarium or applying other external visual barriers
there may be dramatic variation between species with
is helpful to prevent incessant escape attempts through
regard to temperature and humidity in any given envi-
the cage walls and to reduce sudden visual stimulation
ronment. With many species in their permanent enclo-
from movements outside the enclosure. Certain cage
sure, effort is made to somewhat reproduce the natural
ornaments, accessories, and artificial or live plants are
 environment to reduce stress and increase adaptability.
applied inside the cage for refuge and visual security.
Once again, having fundamental natural history
Clean plastic pots, sections of PVC pipe, the bases of
knowledge of the patient is essential.
plastic soda bottles, cork bark, sticks or logs, and
The health of the captive amphibian may be directly
rocks are all valuable as refuges. Though less natural,
 proportional to the "health" of the terrarium. Certain
the benefit of plastic refuges is that they are easily
characteristics apply  to all  amphibian enclosures.
 cleaned or sterilized for reuse. Cork bark may be auto-
These include security from escape; visual and noise
claved (if an autoclave is available), though it is not
security; refuges for hiding; substrate; and the environ-
recommended to use certain detergents, ammonia, or
mental parameters of lighting, temperature, humidity,
 bleach on any natural or porous cage accessories for
ventilation, and water quality.
amphibians. Soaking organic items in clean, fresh
 Security to prevent escape is of primary importance.
water for several hours may be required to remove
The most elaborate climate-controlled naturalistic
 cleaning agent residues. Dried hardwood leaves are an
enclosure is of no help to the dried out carcass of an
excellent rene wable refuge for salamanders and smaller
amphibian on the foor of a room. The evolutionary
frogs. It is also possible to clean these items with
development of legs has greatly improved the ability
diluted bleach solution prior to use.
for escape by amphibians when compared to fish; some
Understanding the behavior of a species in nature
 of the most escape-prone amphibians, however, are the
is helpful to proper cage design. Many arboreal frogs,
legless caecilians and the sirens and amphiumas, both
for example, will not use substrate-interfaced or many
of which have reduced limbs. Many fish enthusiasts
horizontally oriented refuges but instead require verti-
can attest to similar escapes with eels, ropefish, lung-
cally suspended flat leaves (Agalychnis spp., Hyla spp.)
fish, and other anguiform fish species. Though many
or horizontal branches ( Phyllomedusa spp.) for resting.
aquatic and semi-aquatic amphibians perish in the dry
Similarly,
1
terrestrial salamanders typically do not
environment of a climate controlled room, some, if
beneft from vertically spacious, heavily planted ter-
they find suitable moist habitat elsewhere in the room,
rariums, though the terrestrial cover provided by such
can survive quite well outside their intended enclosure.
plantings may be beneficial for reducing ground light-
Barnett et al. (2001) mentions the placement of “moist
 ing. Larger terrestrial amphibians such as marine toads
oases" along the walls of such rooms to prevent des-
and mole salamanders seem particularly fond of arti-
sication in case an escape occurs. These may be plastic
ficial refuges in a terrarium and regularly return to
containers lined with moistened moss and an adequate
these areas when inactive. Aquatic caudates such as
opening for entry.
Cryptobranchus spp. and Necturus spp. occur in fast
Visual, noise, and vibration security is essential
moving coldwater streams and require large rocks,
for many species. With the exception of the most
logs, or other submerged refuges to escape the cur-
dominant or agressive species (Ceratophrys spp.,
 rents. Often these animals also forage for food in these
Pyxicepbalus spp., large Bufo spp., large Ranidae
microhabitats because many food items similarly use
SPP., some Ambystoma spp., Amphiuma spp.), many
the refuges to avoid strong currents.
amphibians rely on camouflage or escape as the first
Certain plants provide ideal refuges for some cau-
defense. Thus, when threatened, many frogs attempt
dates and anurans. Bromeliads are an ideal tropical
-ae jo nou ae ssa is  q ade
enclosure plant for smaller hylids, some dendrobatids,
quate size to prevent collision with the cage walls and
and the tropical Bolitoglossa spp. Some bromeliads,
the collisions may stimulate further escape behavior.
however, may have sharp defensive spines that can
Similar evasion may be seen with some salamanders
prove perilous to many amphibians and their owners.
and many aquatic amphibians, though salamanders
(s ds sad) spire rs 
typically seek retreats or subterranean refuge. Physical
are ideal for treefrogs. (Gagliardo, personal communi-
trauma, however, may not be as significant as the
      
stress created and the resultant maladaptation to a
tained in terrariums that are sparsely planted or
captive environment without adequate cover
contain large sturdy plants. Marine toads, horned
216
Chapter 10
frogs, tiger salamanders, and large ranids are quite
coal, and tree fern are all potentially abrasive to
capable of trampling and eventually killing all but the
 amphibian skin. This does not appear to create a
sturdiest plants in a terrarium. In similar fashion,
problem for most small (<5 cm) terrestrial frogs or
toads, but can be irritating to larger frogs and some
aquatic frogs and newts) uproot or damage planted
salamanders.
aquatic terrariums in a matter of minutes to hours,
Another soil suitable for substrate is composted leaf
though these species typically beneft from copious
litter that is free of fetilizers, pesticides, or other
floating or suspended aquatic vegetation.
chemicals. This is particularly useful for salamanders
Plants for the terrarium are selected based on utility
and burrowing frogs. Commercially available topsoil
and aesthetic quality. Consideration must be given to
preparations must be used with caution because they
the possibility for introduction of harmful pesticides,
may contain chemical additives.
fertilizers, detergents, and potential pathogens. All
Proper lighting of a terrarium raises many questions
plants, regardless of their origin, should be cleaned of
regarding the light needs of amphibians. Generally,
all soil and thoroughly washed before planting.
the specific requirements of ultraviolet light (particu-
Furthermore, plants from one established amphibian
larly UV-B required for the synthesis of vitamin
enclosure should never be moved to another amphib-
Ds) are unknown for amphibians (Barnett 1996).
ian enclosure to reduce the risk of parasite or other
 Histopathology studies of se veral Panamanian amphib-
disease transmission to uninfected or otherwise unex-
lans
(Gastrotheca cornuta, Hemiphractus fasciatus)
 posed animals. This must be strictly observed for
indicate that metabolic bone disease occurs in these
plants originating from any enclosures containing
species (personal observation). Certainly, questions
wild-caught amphibians. Avoid using plants that origi-
arise regarding the requirements of nocturnal, fosso-
 -dod o uou are aaq anam soan u 
rial, or fully aquatic amphibians. For terrariums con-
tions inhabiting or contacting the plants.
taining live plants, attempts are made to simulate
 Basic requirements of an ideal soil-type substrate
natural sunlight so that the plants will thrive. The
 are a slowly degradable, well drained, well aerated,
 incidental effects of this lighting scheme on amphibi-
slightly moisture retentive soil that is free of pesticides,
ans may be beneficial. As with most terrestrial verte-
fertilizers, or other potentially toxic chemicals. These
brates some lightisrequired for vision and photoperiodic
soils, though all organic, contain many non-traditional
behavior.
components which include horticultural grade char-
 The amphibian owner should attempt to recreate
coal, orchid bark, tree fern or palm trunk fiber, milled
the lighting scheme of the amphibian in nature. In
sphagnum, and some peat. Generally this substrate is
 general, most terrestrial salamanders and nocturnal
adapted from epiphytic orchid or tropical pitcher plant
1! pioae Ae pue Suua uoq anbau iou op saou
(Nepenthes spp.) soil mixes that are designed to be
altogether. A natural method to reduce lighting on the
well drained and aerated (Gagliardo, personal com-
cage floor is a well-planted terrarium with full spec-
munication). The author has maintained several larger
trum lighting. It is not unusual for some nocturnal
well-planted terrariums of dart frogs with these soil
hylids to rest on leaves or branches that are exposed
mixes for more than years with no soil changing. This
to full sun during some part of the day (White's tree-
soil type is best used for dart frogs, harlequin toads,
frog, Litoria caerulea; green treefrog, Hyla cinerea).
mantellas, hylids, and other arboreal species requiring
Therefore, suitable basking sites should be provided
a well-planted enclosure.
for these species. Light fixtures are suitably placed
The major benefit derived of this soil type is for the
above the enclosure, preferably within 46cm (18
maintenance of plants in the enclosure. An invariable
inches) of the cage floor (Barnett et al. 2001). It is
outcome of most peat based or ready-made houseplant
important to note that ultraviolet radiation does not
soil mixes in terrariums is rapid decomposition, com-
penetrate plastic and glass; thus, any lids that may
paction, and inadequate aeration. As this process pro-
shield the light should be replaced with screen.
 gresses, the roots of plants die and the plants fail to
 Unfortunately, screen also diffuses the penetration of
thrive. Eventually the health of the entire terrarium
UV radiation into an enclosure (author, personal
deteriorates and animals fail to thrive. The bark/char-
observation). Also, when a full aquarium hood is used
coal/peat mix requires a longer time period (two to
as lid and light source for the enclosure, a tight fit is
three years) for decomposition and rarely, if ever,
essential to prevent escape of the inhabitants.
compacts in the terrarium. A disadvantage to the
Commercially available full-spectrum lights  for
" Nepenthes mix", however, is that it cannot be used
terrariums are available as fluorescent tube, coiled
for burrowing species of amphibians. The bark, char-
compact fluorescent, mercury vapor, and compact
Amphibians
217
halogen. Most, if not all, of the incandescent lights
Atelopids, Mantellids) typically do not require basking
available for aquariums and terrariums do not produce
areas in the terrarium. Avoid heating enclosures with
adequate UV-B radiation despite packaging claims.
hot rocks or heating elements with which amphibians
Additionally, because most incandescent bulbs produce
can make direct contact to prevent dessication and
copious heat, they should be used with caution for
thermal burns.
amphibian enclosures. Many brands of full-spectrum
Enclosure humidity and ventilation are somewhat
lights are available for both plants and animals, each
 inversely proportional. Though other factors such as
with their own claims of benefits. To date, coiled
temperature and amount of water in the enclosure
compact fluorescent, mercury vapor, and compact
contribute to humidity, ventilation has the greatest and
halogen lights are the best producers of UV-B
most rapid effect on increasing or decreasing humidity.
radiation.
Ideally the amphibian enclosure should be well venti-
Temperature, humidity, and ventilation for the ter-
lated with appropriate humidity. A partial or full
rarium are all interrelated and their control and man-
screen terrarium lid or cover is ideal for allowing evap-
agement often dictates cage design more than any
 oration and creating ventilation. Partially occluding
-  a  d p 
the screen lid increases or decreases ventilation and
ists can attest, the larger the aquarium the easier it is
inversely raises or lowers humidity. For large or tall
to manage temperature. The same is true for terrari-
terrariums, small ventilation holes may be drilled in
ums. This is particularly true for humidity and venti-
the cage wall and covered with screen to allow ventila-
lation. Surprising to many, amphibians as a group
tion of the otherwise stagnant lower reaches of the
inhabit a wide variety of climates from the equator to
enclosure. A small fan may be placed outside the roof
the Arctic Circle. Caecilians and salamanders
are
 of the enclosure to create cross ventilation from these
somewhat less adapted to extreme climates than are
lower air intake ports.
frogs. Thus, discussion of the more extreme tempera-
Most terrestrial amphibians benefit from a humidity
ture and humidity requirements primarily pertain to
gradient in the terrarium. This gradient is created by
certain species of anurans. Some species of amphibians
shelters in the terrarium, additional ventilation to por-
require seasonal cooling to stimulate ovulation and
tions of the terrarium, and with basking sites as
spermatogenesis for breeding. Knowledge of the spe-
 described with lighting. Small depressions, pools, or
cific patient's natural history with regard to environ-
streams of water may be created in the terrarium with
mental parameters is essential.
pond liner or plant watering trays. For small frogs,
Enclosure temperature for many amphibian patients 
particularly for dendrobatids and mantellids, it is
is controlled by room temperature. The great majority
imperative that even the smallest water reservoir have
of amphibians can adapt to normal household room
 multiple escape routes. Many small frogs are incapable
temperature of 25 *C to 30°C (75°F to 85 *F), though
 of swimming and will drown in even one centimeter
there are some exceptions. Most highland tropical
of water. 
Many salamanders are capable of semi-
frogs (Atelopus spp. and some Mantella spp.) as well
aquatic life and generally can withstand submersion
as most North American salamanders fail to thrive for
for longer periods. Placement of limbs, plants, raised
extended periods at temperatures above 21°C to 24°C
 gravel, or other cage accessories within or around the
(70°F to 75°F) (Lotters 1996, Staniszewski 1997,
water ensures the ability for escape. Similarly, the sides
Obst et al. 1988). The Pacific giant salamander
 of water enclosures for terrestrial amphibians should
(Dicamptodon ensatus), the helbender (Cryptobran-
 have tapered ramps in all directions for small amphib-
chus alleganiensis), and the mudpuppy (Necturus mac-
ians to escape the water.
ulosus)  may all require  refrigerated
1  water or air
 Moving water in the enclosure is also helpful to
 conditioning throughout the year. Aquatic species such
increase both humidity and to a lesser extent ventila-
as the Surinam toad (Pipa pipa) and the African dwarf
tion. Small waterfalls, humidifiers, or vaporizers may
frog (Hymenochirus spp.) require heated water with
 be used for this purpose. Transfer of vaporized air is
 protected submersible aquarium heaters.
achieved by connecting an appropriate size PVC pipe
Supplemental  heating the  terrestrial
amphibian
from the vaporizer outflow into the enclosure at the
enclosure is generally not required, though some
 desired location. Connecting the vaporizer to an auto-
species of frogs and toads benefit from basking lights
matic timer is helpful to create several periodic mist-
or heat sources such as incandescent lights or ceramic
ings per day. The misting effect in the terrarium can
heaters. These species include some toads, monkey
be quite dramatic. Humidifiers and vaporizers must be
frogs (Phyllomedusa spp.), and White's treefrogs
cleaned weekly to prevent the growth of potential
(Litoria spp.). Most diurnal frogs (Dendrobatids,
 pathogenic organisms in the water reservoir. Soaking
218
 Chapter 10
with a dilute bleach solution (1fl oz or 30 ml in 1qt
true cage floor by pilings cut from PVC pipe (Barnett
or 946ml water) for 15 minutes and then thorough
et al. 2001). This false foor is then overlaid with
rinsing is sufficient for disinfecting (Barnett et al.
window screen or horticultural shade cloth and then
2001).
covered by 1 to 2cm of gravel and then the sheet moss
Water for the amphibian enclosure should be free
directly above the gravel. In one corner of the enclo-
of potential pathogens and all treatment chemicals.
sure a 2.5-cm diameter clear plastic tube is placed
Aged tap water (allowed to ventilate in a container for
vertically through the false floor extending to just
twenty-four hours) in many cases is the best water for
below the roof of the cage. This tube allows siphoning
the terrarium (Barnett et al. 2001). Alternatively,
 of the cage floor with a separate smaller siphon tube
carbon filtered water may be used, though this water
passed to the bottom of the cage. An optional but
treatment may result in developmental abnormalities
highly recommended bulkhead and spigot may be
of tadpoles. Water moving in the terrarium over soil,
placed through a drilled hole in the cage floor to allow
gravel, or charcoal will generally be fltered biologi-
drainage and replace the siphon tube.
cally. Water that is stationary in containers should be
The author has used a modified version of this
changed as often as possible. Many terrestrial amphib-
design developed by Ron Gagliardo at Atlanta Botanical
ians defecate in these water bowls and bacterial or
Garden with great success. The egg crate false floor is
fungal growth in these containers
may
ybe rapid.
typically inexpensive, but when using standard fish
Cleaning the water bowls in a dilute bleach solution
aquariums,
prefabricated  under-gravel  filters  (the
as described for vaporizer reservoirs is recommended
economy models) are made to fit the size of the tank
at least weekly.
and come complete with siphon tubes. One or more of
these siphon tubes may be used as access for siphon
drainage of the cage floor. Additionally, an alternative
ENCLOSURE DESIGN
to the use of aquarium gravel between the flter plate
 and the soil is to use washed large or medium horticul-
The Terrestrial Enclosure
tural grade charcoal that is commonly available for
By employing the general principles of security and
orchids or other special planting mixes. The benefits of
environmental parameters, design of the amphibian
the charcoal are lighter weight (especially for large
enclosure, based on the species, is relatively straight-
enclosures) and the gradual fltration of organic and
 forward and dictated by practicality. With the excep-
 inorganic compounds from the water and soil. The
tion of temporary housing or quarantine, the smallest
benefit of gravel is the large surface area for biologic
recommended amphibian enclosure is a 10-gallon
filtration t
that likely also occurs with the charcoal.
aquarium. Though there is no maximum size limit of
 Charcoal has been used as both an enclosure base layer
a terrarium, access for cleaning, visualization, and
and as a component of custom mixed terrarium soils by
environmental control must all be considered.
the Atlanta Botanical Garden for more than years with
An appropriate substrate is most important for
no known adverse effects on various species of frogs.
establishing a well-balanced naturalistic arboreal, ter-
For a planted terrarium a soil depth of at least 5 cm
restrial, or semi-aquatic terrarium and the soil compo-
is recommended. Over time some settling of the soil
sition is quite variable depending upon the species of
will occur. Plants are added bare root (no soil on the
amphibians and plants contained within. The type of
roots) to the soil mix and lightly watered to settle the
soil or gravel, however, is only one part of establishing
surrounding soil. Generally plants smaller than the
a suitable amphibian substrate. Proper design of the
eventual desired size are planted and allowed to grow
cage floor-substrate interface is crucial for maintaining
in the terrarium. Plants in an amphibian terrarium
 a long lasting planted or naturalistic terrarium. Ideally
should never be fertilized. Theoretically, soil decom-
the soil mix should be elevated above the cage floor to
position, animal feces, and microbes provide all the
allow for water and airflow through the soil and the
nutrients necessary for the growth terrarium plants. It
 development of a moisture gradient within the soil and
is common that many suitable plants soon outgrow the
terrarium.
 enclosure and require routine trimming.
 Elevation of the soil above the cage floor is achieved
 The water level of the terrestrial terrarium is main-
by one of several methods. Wright (2001e) uses a
tained to achieve desired humidity and fill pools or
standard  cage  design  at  National  Aquarium i
in
streams contained within. Plumbing for water acces-
 Baltimore (NAIB) by creating a raised platform or false
sories may be achieved through drilled holes or siphon
floor of overhead fluorescent light panels (egg crate)
tubes through the lid of the terrarium. Water pumps,
cut to ft the tank floor and then raised 2 cm above the
 moving part mechanical devices, and electrical cords
Amphibians
219
should never be inside the terrarium proper. These
appropriate so they do not physically injure the animal.
may be routed through sealed conduits or contained
This includes even “natural" elements such as plants.
outside the terrarium entirely. Similarly, outflow
 Sharp spines on certain bromeliads or other plants can
siphon hoses must be fully protected from cage inhab-
be lethal to frogs. Certain plants are toxic to amphib-
itants and preferably are located beneath the false floor
ians. The toxicity is not necessarily from direct contact,
of the enclosure.
but occurs secondary to ingestion by food items such
as crickets or other insects. This is mostly a concern
Tbe Aquatic Enclosure
with the introduction of field-collected insects. For
The aquatic enclosure for many obligate aquatic or
example, some plant-sucking insects such as aphids
facultative aquatic amphibians is somewhat similar to
can feed on toxic plants (such as milkweeds, Asclepias
the basic tropical fish or goldfish aquarium. Large
spp.) and not become distasteful to the smaller amphib-
aquatic amphibians such as Ampbiuma spp., large
ians. In the case of milkweeds, the toxicity usually
sirens, and Cryptobranchus spp. are best housed in a
results in death of the animal.
55-gallon or larger aquarium. Cryptobranchus and
 Substrate ingestion is a major problem for captive
Necturus spp. both require chilled water with very high
 amphibians. The substrate should be either too large
filtration. These animals should not be kept in captivity
to ingest or small enough that ingested particles are
without properly providing for exact water quality
 passed through the digestive tract. This may require
conditions. One requirement for aquatic amphibians is
modifying the substrate in a particular enclosure as the
sufficient access to the water surface to breathe air.
 amphibian pet grows.
 Because a majority of aquatic amphibians are relatively
Almost paradoxically, water in the terrestrial enclo-
large and somewhat active, all refuges and ornaments
sure can result in fatalities of some amphibians. Small
must be secure in their placement. Aquarium heaters (if
terrestrial frogs (mantellids, dendrobatids, and atelop-
required) should be contained within a shroud such as
ids) are incapable of swimming or will exhaust very
PVC or other durable plastic into which numerous
easily in water. If a water enclosure is located in the
holes or slits are drilled to allow water movement over
corner of a terrestrial terrarium with no escape pos-
the element and proper heat dissipation. This is to
sibility against the glass, death of some cage inhabit-
prevent the accidental breaking of glass or ceramic
ants from (
drowning is a certainty. To adequately
heating elements. The lid must be tight fitting and pref-
maintain these :
 species in captivity, standing water is
erably latched to prevent escape. With a swimming
optional or can be provided in the form of a petri dish
start, many larger aquatic amphibians are capable of
or other shallow container. Unfortunately, to success-
 opening lids to a standard aquarium hood.
fully breed both Mantella and Atelopus spp., some
 Some form of water flow is desired for most aquatic
form of moving or standing water is usually required
amphibians, though frogs such as Pipa spp., Xenopus
in the enclosure.
spp., and Hymenochirus spp. adapt well to still water.
Assume that any opening to the outside of the cage
Cleanliness of the terrarium is essential and necessi-
will be used for escape. The lid or covering for the
 tates some type of fltration system. Under-gravel fl-
enclosure must be tight fitting or completely sealed.
 tration as provided for a fish aquarium is ideal for
Even strictly terrestrial frogs are capable of limited
most aquatic amphibians. Those species requiring high
o au jo do ai yoea oi suu pue suq
water flow typically require a canister flter or other
Some salamanders are also capable of climbing glass
high flow rate external water pump and/or filter. Most
or plastic.
-uaddns ou a suqde oen anad
tal heating and adapt well to room temperatures
during the entire year. Tropical species are likely to
AMPHIBIAN-AMPHIBIAN
require some supplemental heating if room tempera-
INTERACTION
tures fall below 72 °F to 75°F
 A common question of many amphibian enthusiasts is
"Can different species be housed together?" The safe
AMPHIBLAN-ENVIRONMENT
answer to the question is "No." Nevertheless, with
INTERACTION
experience and thorough knowledge of the species in
 question, many species that co-occur in nature may be
Several common problems can be avoided in captive
 housed communally with proper cage design.
amphibians with a practical approach to cage design.
The ultimate rule of housing multiple species (or
First, the substrate and cage accessories should be
even the same species from different sources) is that
220
 Chapter 10
wild-caught individuals from different sources should
disease that may manifest itself some time after arrival
 never, ever be housed together. Clinically, amphibians
into the new enclosure
(particularly frogs) appear to be more commonly para-
The quarantine enclosure is quite basic. A 10-gallon
sitized than reptiles, even among captive-born indi-
glass aquarium or plastic sweater box with ventilation
viduals. Exposure of naive animals to certain parasites
holes is ideal for quarantine of most terrestrial amphib-
or bacteria and fungi can result in disaster for an entire
ians. Larger aquatic amphibians should be maintained
collection. An emerging disease concern for terrestrial
in an appropriately sized enclosure. For terrestrial
amphibian owners is the chytrid (Chytridiomycosis)
amphibians the cage substrate should be non-bleached
fungus. This pathogenic fungus is suspected to be at
 paper towel and possibly a hide box or other dispos-
 least one of the causes of worldwide mortality among
able cage ornament to provide security. The quaran-
wild populations of amphibians and it has been iden-
 tine enclosure should be located in a low traffic area
tifed as widespread and easily transmitted among
of the room where the inhabitants may be monitored
captive amphibians (see Common Disorders) (Berger
for activity from a distance. If necessary the sides of
et al. 1998, Daszak et al. 2000, Morell 1999),
the enclosure may be painted or covered with paper to
Aside from contagious disease is the question of
provide visual security. If possible a feeding station
compatibility. For the average amphibian owner, large
should be provided in the form of a petri dish or
frogs and salamanders (Ceratophrys,
,Pyxicephalus,
shallow dish so that the feeding response can be moni-
large Rana, large Bufo, and Ambystoma) are best
tored. Arboreal frogs and salamanders can be quaran-
housed singly in an enclosure. All large amphibians are
tined similarly with the addition of horizontal branches
typically conditioned to feed on anything that is small 
for perching. If forced to remain on the cage floor,
enough to fit in their mouth. Ambystomatids in captiv-
arboreal frogs may become stressed and fail to
ity are particularly conditioned to bite anything that
acclimate.
touches the flanks, even animals larger than they are.
A fundamental purpose of quarantine is the collec-
The author has witnessed numerous leg amputations
tion of fecal material for analysis. This should be per-
 and lacerations of frogs and other salamanders that
formed as soon as the first sample is available.
were temporarily housed with a tiger salamander of
Subsequent fecal samples should be examined every
equal size. Frogs such as Ceratobatrachus guentheri,
three to five days, depending on availability, and then
Ceratophrys,Hemiphractus,Megophrys,and Pyxicep-
rechecked every two weeks following a negative or
 balus spp. prey on other frog species and other verte-
"clean" sample. A final recheck two months after a
brates as a substantial part of their diet and therefore
 negative sample is also advised (Wright and Whitaker
are generally unsuited for cohabitation with any other
2001c).
amphibians.
 The quarantine period should be at least thirty days
Toxicity between different species of amphibians is
following a negative fecal sample for apparently
also a concern, even among the same family of frogs.
   ) s 
Many anecdotal reports exist and the author has wit-
Wild-collected amphibians, despite the status of fecal
 nessed that other amphibians (and other Rana spp.)
testing, should be quarantined for sixty days. Under
enclosed with wood frogs ( Rana sylvatica) die rapidly,
 no circumstances should wild-collected amphibians be
leaving only the wood frogs alive (Duellman and Trueb
introduced into an enclosure with any other animals.
1994, Mattison 1987). The exact nature of this
Despite antiparasiticide, antibiotic, and antifungal
Sus-
pected toxicity is not fully known. It is possible that
Aeo oi senpipu asaq ro aqissod si iu suanl
similar toxicity exists between different species of
undetected infectious diseases and later transmit them
wild-collected dart frogs, though there is no observed
to other naive animals.
toxicity among captive individuals.
Mau iean ioqdord on uoun nou si 1
amphibian arrivals for gastrointestinal parasites and
some cutaneous fungi. Though this practice is no sub-
QUARANTINE
stitute for fecal examination, it can be effective in
eliminating or reducing the burden of some infectious
The role of quarantine for new amphibians in a col-
diseases. Unfortunately, there is a risk of adverse side
lection cannot be overemphasized. Segregation of new
effects with this practice. The author has observed the
arrivals is most important for those animals that will
 death of long-term captive imported frogs following
be introduced into multi-species displays. The quaran-
 deworming with fenbendazole at recommended doses.
tine procedure for amphibians, however, 
ismore
The animals were four green and black poison dart
designed to protect the individual animal from occult
frogs, Dendrobates auratus, which were confirmed
Amphibians
221
infected with various nematodes including great
 much is learned about the proper or improper nutri-
numbers of lungworms, Rhabdias spp. None of the
tion of amphibians through histopathology.
animals had exhibited clinical disease and were breed-
There is great variability in the feeding preferences
ing in captivity. Following a single oral treatment with
of different life stages of metamorphosed amphibians,
fenbendazole at 100 mg/kg two of the four frogs imme-
and this variability has been observed in those animals
diately stopped eating and subsequently died within
that have been successfully bred over several genera-
five days. A third stopped feeding and then resumed
tions. For instance, froglets of the golden mantella
feeding and survived. The fourth frog was not adversely
(Mantella aurantiaca) are no more than 8 mm in length
affected. Both surviving frogs continued to shed
 at metamorphosis. To a frog this small, even the small-
Rhabdias spp. larvae in the feces following treatment,
est of domestic fruit flies is too large to eat. These
yet the numbers of larvae were reduced. The author
froglets must be raised for several weeks on small
has not observed this phenomenon in other similarly
insects called springtails (order Collembola) until they
infected Dendrobates spp. or Mantella spp.
may be fed small fruitflies. Adult mantellas, however,
A common  prophylactic   antiparasite  1
regimen
 are quite ravenous and will eat crickets that are nearly
includes administering fenbendazole orally at 100 mg/
20% of their body size.
kg followed by ivermectin topically at 0.2mg/kg
The feeding method of amphibians is also some-
(Wright and Whitaker 2001c). Repeating the treat-
what important when selecting food items. All frogs
ment in three weeks is recommended, along with
should be considered food gulpers; after capturing the
rechecking a fecal sample prior to treatment.
The
prey item it is swallowed whole with little to no
author has observed that ivermectin treatment may
chewing. In contrast, large salamanders and especially
be fatal is some species including Central American
aquatic amphibians (Necturus, Amphiuma, Siren, and
glass frogs (Centrolenidae) and the lemur leaf frog
Cryptobranchus  spp.)  all  exhibit  some chewing
(Hylomantis lemur). The frog deaths were observed in
motions when feeding. This is especially observed in
frogs that were infected with Rhabdias spp. Ongoing
sirens and amphiumas that may repeatedly move food
research and personal observations on the treatment
items in and out of the mouth while crushing them.
of Rhabdias spp. infections in multiple Central
Choosing appropriate food items, or more impor-
American amphibian species indicates that a complete
tantly, avoiding improper food items for certain
"cure” or elimination of Rhabidias spp. infection may
species, is important.
 not be possible in captive amphibians.
 Another important point to remember regarding
Record keeping of feeding and treatments is essen-
most terrestrial amphibians is that they are sight
tial. The client should record all observations of activ-
feeders. Generally moving food is preferred over sta-
ity, feeding response, food items consumed, and other
tionary food. Some larger frogs, toads, and salaman-
 pertinent behavior. Weekly weights are also beneficial
ders may be conditioned to feed on stationary pre-killed
for healthy individuals when this can be performed
or frozen and thawed food items, but this is more the
 accurately and in a stress-free manner.
exception than the rule. Thus, when approaching the
dilemma of a non-feeding amphibian, always consider
the type and size of food offered.
NUTRITION
Perhaps the most important consideration when
feeding amphibians is the timing of feeding. The client
If the nutritional needs for amphibians were as simple
must be fully informed of the feeding habits of the
as tossing a few crickets into the enclosure from time
species in question. Nearly all terrestrial salamanders
to time, they would all be more popular pets. Instead,
 and many tree frogs are nocturnal and will only feed
the nutritional maintenance for many captive amphib-
at night. Many of the larger nocturnal frogs and toads,
ians is as labor intensive (or more so) as that of insec-
being opportunists, will feed any time in captivity. The
tivorous lizards and the nutritional demands
of
tiger salamander, Ambystoma tigrinum, though noc-
amphibians are more a consequence of the animals
turnal in its native habitat, will readily adapt to day-
being such generalists rather than being specialists on
light feeding. Night feeing may make the monitoring
one food item. The variety of food items consumed in
of food consumption difficult with some amphibians.
the wild likely results in a tremendously varied vitamin,
For newly established pets, encourage the client to
mineral, amino acid, and fatty acid intake that is not
observe the feeding habits with a flashlight or red light
duplicated with captive diets. Very little scientific data
illumination if necessary.
exists regarding the exact diet and its nutritional com-
To compensate for the known vitamin and mineral
position for amphibians in the wild. Unfortunately,
imbalances in food items and for suspected deficiencies
222
Chapter 10
in amino acids, many hobbyists apply several com-
food items because the expense of purchasing food
mercially available vitamin/mineral powders (called
 items can be excessive. The simplest factor dictating
dusting) to the food items prior to feeding. The process 
the feeding of captive amphibians is the size of the
of dusting food items is discussed in Nutrition of the
 animal and the size of the food item. The standard diet
chapter on lizards. Additionally, food products specif-
for most larger salamanders and frogs is crickets and
cally for the prey items to consume are designed to
the diet of choice for smaller amphibians is fruit flies.
enrich the prey item prior to feeding to the amphibian
Some wild-collected insects such as termites may be
pet. This process is called "gut-loading."
 available seasonally or throughout the year in warmer
Based on known dietary disorders, several basic
climates.
provisions must be made for captive amphibians.
 Domestic or gray crickets (Acheta domestica) of
Calcium and phosphorous (Ca:P) should be provided
various sizes are the standard diet for most medium to
in a ratio of 1 :1 to 2: 1 to prevent several nutritional
large terrestrial amphibians. Crickets are commercially
diseases (Wright 2001d, Wright and Whitaker 2001a,
available in sizes ranging from 1/16 inch (pinheads) in
Donoghue and Langenberg 1996). Additionally,
length to 1 inch (adults) from pet shops and mail order
vitamin D, is supplemented in the diet or produced
from a variety of sources. The Ca:P for crickets is
endogenously by the amphibian when exposed to the
0.2:2.6 (Donoghue and Langenberg 1996). Periodic
appropriate quality and quantity of ultraviolet light. A
dusting of crickets with calcium and vitamin Dg
-soud u yi on no  u mol on si 1qn n
 powders is recommended for all amphibians.
phorous may result in metabolic bone disease (MBD).
 A variety of specialized cricket diets are available to
A ratio too high in calcium or vitamin Ds may con-
enrich crickets with nutrients. The efficacy of these
tribute to hypervitaminosis D and secondary renal
 products is debatable. Generations of frogs that have
failure (Wright and Whitaker 2001b). Powdered sup-
been fed crickets raised on fresh vegetables and fruits
plements are available from Rep-Cal (Los Gatos, CA;
such as squash, greens, and oranges have reproduced
www.repcal.com) and Nekton (Clearwater, FL; www.
de ou ym se ao r any r P ue
nekton.de).
 health abnormalities to themselves or offspring.
so aq ot readde sueiqydue suno pue peeuoan
Another cultured food item for medium to large
affected by MBD because of increased calcium demand
amphibians is mealworms. The mealworm is actually
by growing bones. The frequency for calcium supple-
larvae of the beetle, Tenebrio molitor, which may be
mentation of these animals is increased compared to
cultured easily in one of several different grain meals
that of adults. Neonatal or young, growing amphibi-
supplemented with cut pieces of apple or vegetable for
 ans may receive calcium and vitamin D supplementa-
moisture. Because the adult beetles are required to
tion twice weekly when fed daily and most adult
reproduce for new mealworms, a tight fitting, venti-
amphibians should receive calcium supplemented food
lated lid is required to maintain the culture. Mealworms
items once weekly or less often. Larger amphibians fed
are generally a poor food choice for amphibians
whole animal vertebrate diets such as thawed frozen
because of the hard exoskeleton. Though the softer-
rats or mice likely do not require supplemental calcium
 bodied, newly molted larvae are acceptable, the author
in the diet.
has witnessed the unexplained deaths of several frogs
Aquatic or semi-aquatic amphibians fed diets com-
and lizards following the feeding of mealworms.
prised solely of fish may develop thiamine (vitamin B,)
Necropsy on several lizards has revealed peritoneal
deficiency (Wright and Whitaker 2001b, Donoghue
abscessation that was attributed to gastrointestinal
and Langenberg 1996). This disorder is the result of
perforation from the hard body parts or possibly
high levels of thiaminase in the food items that inacti-
chewing of the larvae. Because mealworms do not
vates dietary and endogenously produced thiamine in 
 provide an improved Ca:P ratio (0.1 :1.2) (Donoghue
the amphibian. Several susceptible species include
and Langenberg 1996) as compared to crickets, their
aquatic salamanders, aquatic caecilians, horned frogs
 use as a primary food item for most amphibians is not
(Ceratophrys spp.), African bullfrogs (Pyxicephalus
recommended.
spp.), and other semi-aquatic frogs.
Similarly, most beetles and other large insects with
hard exoskeletons are not a good food source for
amphibians. An exception might be made for large
FOOD ITEMS
frogs and especially toads, which may be observed to
 nearly consume their weight in beetles while feeding
Most clients who maintain breeding colonies or large
in habitat during summer months. Large terrestrial
colonies of amphibians are required to raise their own
salamanders and aquatic amphiumas and sirens are
Amphibians
223
generally capable of crushing these insects following
surface of the soil. The springtails may be introduced
capture and therefore may adequately digest them and
from a decaying leaf from outdoors or from a previ-
have minimal risk of gastrointestinal injury.
ously existing culture. A method for easily removing
The flour beetle, Trilobium spp., which is a relative
the springtails is to place a small block (10cm x 5cm
of the larger Tenebrio spp., is a smaller beetle that can
x X cm) of horticultural tree fern fiber on the soil
re ae saaq as s s o  aq e
surface, then remove and gently tap the block to
mately 5 mm in length as adults with comparable small
 remove springtails when feeding is desired.
larvae. They are raised and harvested similar tO
The only acceptable vertebrate food sources for
Tenebrio spp, though the adult beetle is fed as com-
captive amphibians are fish and thawed frozen pink
monly as the larvae.
 mice or rats. Large frogs, toads, and salamanders with
Wingless or flightless fruit flies are the standard diet
conditioned feeding responses usually accept these
for smaller frogs and salamanders, particularly for
items when offered by forceps, or in the case of fish
 poison dart frogs, mantellas, harlequin frogs, and neo-
when offered in a shallow dish. These larger amphib-
natal amphibians. Two species of flies, Drosophila
ians generally accept other vertebrate prey such as
melanogaster (the small vestigial or wingless fruit fly)
other amphibians, reptiles, large beetles, and grasshop-
and Drosophila bydei (the larger flightless fruit fly),
pers. The client should carefully consider the health
are commercially available. Fruit flies are easily cul-
risk to the amphibian before feeding such items. The
tured by the client and may be the sole food source for
risk of parasitism with endoparasites or bacterial or
 many captive amphibians. They are cultured in reus-
fungal infections is great. Of paramount concern must
able canning jars or disposable plastic cups, both of
 be the Chytridiomycosis fungus when offering any
which are sealed with a permeable (but escape-proof)
amphibians. This disease is extremely serious for
ventilated lid. Fruit fly growing media is available
amphibians and should be viewed on the level of the
from Carolina Biological Supply Co. (Burlington, NC;
immunodeficiency viruses that affect cats and humans
www.carolina.com) or can be made from instant
when considering prevention.
potato flakes, brewer's yeast, and a mold inhibitor.
 Aquatic amphibians consume a wide variety of food
Fruit flies are typically dusted with powdered supple-
items. Earthworms and fish are the standard diets with
ments as with crickets.
other arthropods and some frozen foods occasionally
Another small food item that is relished by nearly
accepted. Ideally the food should be cultured or pur-
 all amphibians is the termite. In warmer climates, such
chased as cultured rather than collected from the wild.
as the southeastern U.S. coastal plain, termites can be
 This reduces the risk of introducing infectious diseases
collected any time of year. There are methods of “cul-
into the enclosure.
turing" termites in the wild that involve burying coffee
Certain amphibians, I
particularly
severalf
frog
cans punctured with drain holes in the ground and
species, are specialists in their feeding choices and
flling them with rolled cardboard. Unfortunately, the
may be difficult to feed in captivity. The bizarre
risk of infestation to homes and other wooden struc-
casque-headed tree frogs, Hemiphractus spp., of
tures is great, so this practice should not be recom-
South America and several species of horned frogs,
mended to clients. Nevertheless, wild collected termites
Ceratophrys spp., are known frog-eating specialists
 do not appear to cause harm to captive amphibians
(Mattison 1987, Obst et al. 1988). It may be necessary
and certain nutrients not otherwise available to these
to feed live frogs to these species while trying to train
animals may be provided. Similarly, parasites or other
them to eat various invertebrate or vertebrate prey
toxins ingested by the termites could put captive
items. Another finicky large frog (8 to 10 cm) is the
animals at risk for disease.
climbing toad, Pedostibes bosei, of southeast Asia.
 An important but often overlooked food item for
 This frog is known to specialize in ants and termites
small frogs is springtails or leafhoppers, of the insect 
and may not accept crickets or other large inverte-
order Collembola. These very small (<l mm) white to
brates in captivity (Obst et al. 1988). This frog may
 gray insects that are commonly seen in most terrariums
be transitioned to a cricket-only diet by feeding smaller
containing soil. They feed on detritus and decaying
size crickets or beetles. Among aquatic amphibians the
plant material and can be easily cultured to feed neo-
hellbenders, Cryptobranchus spp., as adults typically
natal or very small frogs and salamanders. A plastic
feed only on crayfish and must be coaxed to accept
container such as a margarine container or plastic
other aquatic food items if captive.
shoebox flled with approximately 1 to 2 inches of
 Finally, many clients may be misinformed regarding
 potting soil is ideal. The soil is slightly moistened and
the feeding of manufactured pelleted diets. It is unrea-
a few pinches of fish food flakes are sprinkled on the
sonable to expect any terrestrial amphibians to eat
224
 Chapter 10
non-moving prepared foods. It is more likely, though
cytology if possible, from an impression smear or
not common, that aquatic amphibians will readily
tissue sample in formalin may be submitted. In addi-
accept these diets. Salamanders and newts, more than
frogs, will adapt to these diets, but they are rarely
cated. Enrofloxacin at a dose of 5 to 10mg/kg PO or
substitutes for live foods. Clients should be informed
 TO every twenty-four hours for seven days (Taylor
about this fact prior to purchasing amphibian pets. For
2001) is recommended pending culture results. The
some the cost of live foods or the time to culture them
client must be vigilant of the patient with regard to
may not meet their expectations for proper mainte-
healing of these lesions. Amphibians with substantial
nance of amphibian pets. One exception of note is the
rostral abrasions should be maintained in a quarantine
fact that marine toads (Bufo marinus) have been
 enclosure for cleanliness and close observation.
observed and videotaped eating dry dog food from
Traumatic injuries to limbs are similar to rostral
outdoor food bowls in south Florida.
. So,
,one can
abrasions. Trauma may occur secondary to accidents
never underestimate the resourcefulness of t
these
with enclosure lids closing on legs, and bite wounds
animals when it comes to adaptation.
from cage mates are possible with some species. These
wounds typically require aggressive antibiotic therapy
initially rather than just observation. If severe trauma
COMMON DISORDERS
to underlying bone is suspected, amputation is recom-
 mended early in treatment to prevent the development
Amphibian health disorders arise from infectious bac-
of systemic disease.
terial, fungal, and parasitic etiologies to trauma, nutri-
 Bacterial skin infections are common in amphibians
tional, and toxic diseases. Several diseases such as
and may present as discolorations, erosions, abscesses,
metabolic bone disease (MBD) and cutaneous bacterial
and ulcerations. Bacterial dermatitis may be difficult
infection (red leg) are well documented in veterinary
to diagnose on visual inspection alone. Many infec-
scientific and popular literature. Many specific infec-
tions are the result of immunosuppression from a
tious and metabolic diseases, however, are relatively
number of factors including improper husbandry,
unknown.
 inadequate diet, or the stress of shipping. The resultant
-a sd a  ase a se 
Integument
ment or from an apparently unaffected cage mate.
As with snakes and lizards a very common skin disor-
The diagnostic test of choice for any cutaneous
der seen in frogs is rostral abrasion. This is particularly
lesion is bacterial culture and sensitivity followed by
 common in wild-collected animals, but is just as pos-
histopathology of affected tissue if possible. Pending
sible to develop in any species transported in small
 the response to empiric antibiotic therapy, biopsy may
containers. The common etiology is trauma from
 be required. Unfortunately, the risk of septicemia from
escape attempts through clear plastic lids, screens, or
a number of bacterial etiologic agents necessitates the
glass enclosures. Prevention of this disorder is enhanced
initiation of treatment prior to receiving test results.
with opaque transport containers and packing of the
 The commonly referenced “red-leg disease" of frogs is
amphibian with moss or another soft substrate to
actually the result of hyperemia secondary to septice-
reduce movement within the container.
mia rather than simply cutaneous disease. If not treated
The primary concern with rostral abrasions is sec-
d e so as st rdde pe id
ondary infections from opportunistic or pathogenic
 prognosis for recovery.
bacteria and fungus. If the abrasion is clean and
Systemic enrofloxacin is initiated for seven days for
showing no signs of erosion, then no treatment is
the non-septicemic cutaneous disease. For the septice-
indicated. For chronic or more extensive abrasions in
mic patient, a water bath of 0.6% saline to achieve
which active erosion of the skin or exposure of under-
hydration  is  t
the initial therapy (Taylor 2
2001).
lying bone is present, treatment with topical antibiot-
Antibiotic baths with tetracyclines, semisynthetic peni-
ics, i
 including ophthalmic solutions, is
indicated.
cillins (SSP), and aminoglycosides may be indicated.
Gentamicin or triple antibiotic solutions are applied
Many bacteria are implicated in amphibian skin
once or twice daily. Silver sulfadiazine cream is also
disease and septicemia. A large number of these are
efficacious to treat fungal elements in addition to
Gram-negative rods including the widely reported and
bacteria.
Active lesions associated with erosive dermatitis or
Mycobacterium spp. are also implicated in various
osteolysis require aggressive diagnostic and therapeu-
disease
 syndromes in amphibians, particularly skin
tic intervention. Bacterial culture and sensitivity, and
disease. Diagnosis is very difficult pre-mortem because
Amphibians
225
the bacteria is difficult to culture. Isolation and neu-
 opment of clinical disease. Because most amphibians
tralization of affected individuals is recommended
are either nocturnal, fossoreal, or otherwise found in
because there is no known treatment for Mycobacterium
 shaded forests it is possible that oral cholecalciferol
infection.
(vitamin Ds) plays more of a role in calcium absorption
 Fungal infections are a concern for amphibians.
and metabolism than does that of endogenous vitamin
Most notable among these is Chytridiomycosis,
Ds. However, recent studies of juvenile captive-born
"chytrid,” caused by Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis.
Gastrotheca cornuta at the Atlanta Botanical Garden
 The initial clinical sign of this fungal dermatitis is an
 and El Valle Amphibian Conservation Center, Panama,
increased rate of skin shedding with possible associ-
are highly suggestive that a lack of adequate UV-B
ated dermal lesions such as pale skin. It is not known
radiation contributes to both clinical signs and histo-
 how many different species of amphibians are suscep-
 pathologic changes consistent with MBD (author, per-
tible to this fungus, but confirmed cases of chytrid
sonal observation).
have been reported from all continents containing
An occasional suspected clinical sign of MBD in
amphibians.
amphibians is gastrointestinal bloating. If this sign is
Patients are diagnosed with chytridiomycosis by
observed and there is suspicion of MBD based on
presence of the organism in shed skin or in formalin
history or other physical exam findings, a radiographic
fixed skin. Diagnosed cases or prophylactic treatment
study should be initiated to confirm the presence of the
of suspected infected animals is performed with a bath
disease syndrome. Cloacal prolapse may be an addi-
of itraconazole. A 1% itraconazole stock solution in
sas  jo s a   j s po
methylcellulose is diluted to 0.01% in 0.6% NaCl.
(Hylomantis lemur, Agalychnis callidryas). The dem-
Treatment consists of a five-minute bath once daily for
onstration of decreased bone density is diagnostic for
ten days (Taylor 2001). Resolution of clinical signs is
MBD, though in severe cases, especially among young.
rapid if treatment is initiated early.
growing animals, soft pliable bones are highly sugges-
 Ectoparasites are uncommon among amphibians
tive of MBD. Blood calcium testing is not a reliable
and are  clinically most prevalent among 
toads.
method for diagnosing MBD because the blood remains
Treatment consists of ivermectin at 0.4mg/kg PO or
normocalcemic until the body stores of calcium are
 TO given once weekly for at least four weeks (Poynton
depleted.
and Whitaker 2001). Some amphibian species have
Treatment of MBD in amphibians is supportive.
shown sensitivity to higher doses of ivermectin (2mg/
Oral calcium glubionate at a dose of 1 ml/kg/day
kg) (Poynton and Whitaker 2001, Klingenberg 1993).
(Wright and Whitaker 2001b) and dietary correction
Finally, a multisystemic disease most notable in the
is essential. Oral vitamin Dg is recommended to
skin is bloating or edema syndrome. This disease
enhance the absorption of calcium from the gastroin-
 process has several possible etiologies, the most notable
 testinal tract (Wright and Whitaker 2001b, Donoghue
of which is osmotic imbalance secondary to sepsis or
and Langenberg 1996). Patients with neurologic
toxemia. Other possible causes include renal disease
 disease secondary to MBD may require calcium gluco-
 or failure, heart disease, metabolic bone disease, and
nate 10% at 100 mg/kg ICe every four to six hours
environmental factors. Cases in which an individual
until signs resolve. Prognosis for the hypocalcemic
animal is affected may be challenging to diagnose. For
 state of MBD in amphibians as seen in lizards is poor.
cases in which multiple animals in an enclosure are
A mysterious(
disease of newly metamorphosed
 affected, environmental causes and infectious disease
frogs is called spindly leg disease or syndrome. With
are most likely. Prognosis may be fair with a diagnosis
this abnormality tadpoles develop normal or nearly
and rapid treatment. Often, the inciting cause remains
normal hind legs, yet the forelimbs either fail to erupt
unnoticed for some time prior to the onset of clinical
from the skin or are extremely thin and weak, almost
signs and the underlying disease progresses beyond the 
as if there were only skin and bone with no muscle.
 possibility of recovery.
 This syndrome has been reported extensively among
 dendrobatid frogs. This high rate of occurrence may
SkeletalSystem
be due to the fact that these frogs are bred in captivity
Though not as common as in lizards, MBD follows the
in such great numbers and therefore the chance for
same clinical course as in reptiles. Juvenile or rapidly
growing individuals are most susceptible. The patho-
leave the water usually fail to eat and die within days.
physiology of MBD is discussed in the chapter on
The potential causes for this syndrome are diet of
lizards. An unknown factor regarding MBD in amphib-
the tadpole or parents, improper environmental condi-
ians is the role of ultraviolet light (UV-B) in the devel-
tions (temperature, lighting, etc.), genetics, toxins, and
226
 Chapter 10
possibly chytridiomycosis. Presently a dietary cause is
The degree of obstruction, size of patient, and
most likely because there are several anecdotal reports
nature of the foreign body dictate treatment. For
of dietary variation in clutches of tadpoles from the
organic foreign materials, oral laxatives such as
 same parents raised on different foods that may exhibit
psyllium and mineral oil may aid in passage of the
the disease. There is no treatment for this disease
obstruction. For larger amphibians, surgery may be
process.
indicated.
 Intestinal parasitism is clinically widespread among
Respiratory System
terrestrial amphibians and somewhat less common
Clinical respiratory disease is uncommon among
among arboreal species. Amphibians are infected with
amphibians. It is more likely that respiratory infections
a wide variety of protozoa and metazoa parasites. It is
in amphibians are under diagnosed rather than less 
common that routine fecal exams of amphibians reveal
frequent than those seen in reptiles. A common respi-
these organisms in otherwise healthy patients. Some
ratory pathogen is lungworms ( Rhabdias spp.). Though
 protozoans may not be pathogenic and may not require 
this nematode is diagnosed with moderate frequency
treatment. Some protozoan and many metazoan (nem-
atodes,
, trematodes, cestodes) parasites may inhabit
the organism is infrequent. It is likely that the migra-
amphibian tissues and remain in “balance" with the
tion of larvae through host tissues and secondary inva-
host with a competent immune system.
sion of bacteria with or without septicemia contributes
 The onset of stress and subsequent immunosuppres-
 greatly to debilitation of the patient.
sion that results from transport, poor diet, or inap-
Rhabdias spp. infection is diagnosed by demon-
 propriate husbandry can rapidly lead to accelerated
strating larvae on direct fecal examination or floata-
reproduction, migration, and infestation of these para-
tion or by cytology of tracheal wash. Patients exhibiting
sites. Similarly, the direct life cycle of many parasites
apparent respiratory distress in association with
only compounds the reinfection rate when the patient
Rhabdias spp. infection are best treated with anthel-
is subject to confinement in a terrarium. This is the
minthics concurrent with antibiotics such as enrofloxa-
 likely cause for the apparent higher clinical prevalence
cin for secondary bacterial infection. Those patients 
of these parasites in terrestrial rather than arboreal
that exhibit no active clinical disease are treated only
species because there is greater likelihood for contact
with anthelminthics such as fenbendazole 100mg/kg
with the infective oocysts or larvae.
PO every fourteen days for three treatments or iver-
Intestinal parasites are best treated when diagnosed.
mectin at 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg PO or TO at the same
Nevertheless, the client must be educated regarding the
rate of administration (Poynton and Whitaker 2001).
potential side effects of treatment. More commonly
Because the life cycle of this infection (as well as other
there is greater risk of death or debilitation from the
amphibian nematodal infections) is direct, isolation 
host's immune response to sudden parasite death than
 and strict hygiene is essential to reducing parasite
from side effects of appropriately dosed medications.
burdens.
For very valuable animals, treatment of apparently
Though not an infectious disease, drowning is a
healthy animals should be carefully weighed against
 common fatal respiratory disease of captive amphibi-
the potential loss of the patient. When groups of
ans. It is mentioned only because it is a disease of
animals are to be medicated, treatment of a few animals
prevention as described in the section on Husbandry.
in the group is preferable to medicating the entire
This avoidable disease results in the deaths of many
group at once.
valuable amphibian pets.
The most important factor in breaking the life cycle
 of direct parasites is maintenance of the patient in
Digestive System
an immaculately clean, well maintained enclosure.
Another rather common though avoidable non-infec-
Removal of all feces immediately after passage is
tious disease in amphibians is foreign body obstruc-
imperative. Feeding of the patient should only be per-
tion. Typically the result of inappropriate substrate or
formed in an enclosure with no fecal contamination
feeding practices, this problem often goes unnoticed
because food items may browse on contaminated sur-
for some time. The primary presenting complaint is
faces and reinfect the host. Prophylactic treatment for
anorexia or occasionally regurgitation. Gravel, soil
intestinal
1 parasites is discussed in the Quarantine
particles, or rarely invertebrate exoskeleton may cause
section of Husbandry.
obstruction. Diagnosis may be presumptive based on
 Protozoan parasites present both a diagnostic and
history and husbandry practices or
r definitive
with
treatment
challenge.
For
suspected
pathogenic
abdominal palpation and radiographic study.
Trichomonas spp. and Entamoeba spp. Infections,
Amphibians
227
 metronidazole is indicated. Dose ranges for adults vary
Ophthalmology
from 10mg/kg PO every twenty-four hours for seven
Superficial ocular disease in amphibians is commonly
A Od yool oi su ro sep un o
 associated with skin disease or arises from a common
fourteen days for Entamoeba (Poynton and Whitaker
etiology such as bacterial, fungal, protozoal, or viral
2001). Metronidazole baths at 250mg to 500mg/L
disease. Cataracts, corneal lipidosis, and glaucoma
fresh water for six to eight hours once weekly
are
have all been diagnosed. Systemic disease or sepsis
 indicated for larval amphibians (Poynton and Whitaker
such as red leg syndrome may account for uveitis in
2001).
amphibians, as does similar systemic disease in other
Coccidiosis is not uncommon in amphibians, yet its
animals. Diagnosis and treatment of ophthalmic dis-
diagnosis is complicated by the fact that oocysts are
eases in amphibians is approached as in other animals.
intermittently shed in the feces. Thus, repeated fecal
Corneal lipidosis may be commonly confused with
exams over protracted periods are required in some
 infectious or traumatic inflammatory disease and typi-
cases for definitive diagnosis. As seen in mammals,
cally slowly progresses to eventually involve the cornea
coccidiosis is primarily a clinical disease to the very
of one or both eyes. Treatment is supportive and
young, very old, or immunosuppressed animal.
should be directed at reduction of dietary fat or cho-
Nevertheless, treatment is indicated on diagnosis and
lesterol by altering prey item selection and reducing
consists of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole at 15 mg/
frequency of feeding (Wright 2009).
kg PO daily for fourteen days (Poynton and Whitaker
2001). The dosage of TMS in exotic animals is based
Toxicity
on the combined concentration of both the trime-
Amphibians are quite sensitive to environmental con-
thoprim and sulfa medications.
tamination from both naturally occurring and syn-
Nematodes are treated as described for lungworms
 thetic toxins. These include ammonia, nitrites, nitrates,
excessive salts, chlorine, organophosphates, pyrethrins
 and Quarantine for prophylactic treatment. It may be
and pyrethroids, and many solvents used in glues and
difficult to specifically diagnose each species of nema-
 sealants. It is imperative that any cleaning compounds
tode parasite on fecal exam, though the treatment for
used to disinfect enclosures or enclosure accessories be
each is similar.
thoroughly rinsed, soaked, and dried prior to reintro-
Trematodes and cestodes have indirect life cycles in
duction into the enclosure. Diana et al. (2001) reports
 amphibians and interruption of the vector for reinfec-
toxicosis among dendrobatid frogs within enclosures
tion is essential for treatment.
. Treatment consists of
that were misted by a newly constructed system com-
praziquantel at 8 to 14 mg/kg PO every fourteen days
adid aun o saaios oue 'sadid ad ro pasod
for three or more treatments (Poynton and Whitaker
cement were found to be the cause of toxicosis. Similar
2001).
attention must be observed with aquarium glass
sealants.
Excretory System
There are no significant renal diseases of amphibians
Metabolic Disorders
that are not observed in reptiles, birds, or mammals.
Hypovitaminosis A  is a recently recognized and
Renal disease secondary to toxicosis (medications
described disease of captive amphibians (Pessier et al.
 or environmental), mineral imbalances, or gout is
2002). This disease progresses in amphibians similar
possible.
to that observed in reptiles with the hallmark histo-
pathologic change of squamous metaplasia. Multiple
Reproductive System
organ systems may be affected and clinical signs may
Failure to lay eggs or “egg binding" is the most
vary widely. Wright (2009) recommends vitamin A
common reproductive
disorder(
of
 amphibians.
treatment for any clinically ill captive amphibian for
Potential causes are categorized as environmental, in
which there is no clear diagnosis or clinical sign of
which certain a suitable oviposition site is not avail-
disease. Treatment consists of Aquasol A 1 IU vitamin
able, unsuitable mate, or other stress that prevents the
A/g body weight once daily for two weeks or until
release of eggs. Other causes include physical inability
clinical signs resolve (Wright 2009).
to lay eggs that may result from environmental factors.
 If an egg or eggs becomes lodged in the ostium of the
Zoonoses
oviduct or within the oviduct proper, all retrograde
Amphibians are known to carry several bacteria
eggs will be retained. Some cases may require surgery
which are potentially pathogenic to man and other
when possible.
animals. Though not infectious, certain amphibian
228
 Chapter 10
toxins are potentially dangerous to man and domestic
of larval amphibians and some species demand exact-
animals.
 ing environmental parameters, while other are adapted
Bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella
to what might be considered nearly unsurvivable
spp., and Yersinia enterocolitica are all reported as
conditions.
isolated from the feces or digestive tracts of some
 For practical purposes all larval caecilians and sala-
amphibians (Taylor 2001). There is no link to clinical
 manders are carnivorous. Some caeclians are vivipa-
disease in man from these bacteria arising f
from
rous and consume oviductalsecretions while developing
amphibians. Care and common sense, however, must
in the adult female and are then born as juveniles.
be exercised when handling amphibians regarding zoo-
 For salamanders, carnivory leads to cannibalism in
notic potential. Human carelessness is often a contrib-
crowded conditions, particularly as metamorphosis
uting factor to zoonoses when related to exotic animals.
approaches. It is posible that the survival strategy of
It is the responsibility of the veterinary clinician and
some communal pond-breeding salamanders depends
technician to educate the client regarding proper han-
on this strategy for a few animals to survive. In con-
dling of the amphibian pet to reduce the risk of poten-
trast, most frog larvae, tadpoles, are herbivorous.
tial exposure. The following are several guidelines that
There are, however, a few notable exceptions. Though
should be followed:
not commonly bred by hobbyists in captivity, horned
frogs ( Ceratophrysspp. and some other Leptodactylidae)
1. Do not handle amphibians unless absolutely neces-
have carnivorous, or more reputedly cannibalistic, tad-
sary. Most (if not all) amphibians show no apparent
poles. Successful rearing of these tadpoles and larvae
health or quality of life benefit from human contact.
In fact, stress may be increased as well as tissue
individual enclosures for each larva.
trauma that may lead to an increased incidence of
The most critical husbandry issue for larval amphib-
disease to the animal.
ians is water quality. Understanding the natural history
2. Never handle or clean amphibians, amphibian
and reproductive strategy for a particular species is
foods or food containers, or amphibian enclosures
important for proper care of the tadpoles. Most dart
near a human food preparation area or human sani-
frogs, for example, lay eggs out of water on leaves, in
tation area such as a kitchen sink, kitchen table or
leaf axils, or on flat surfaces near the ground. After
countertop, bathroom sink, or bathtub.
hatching, the tadpoles are then transferred to a suitable
 3. Never allow children to handle amphibians without
water area that is generally a small plant with water
direct adult supervision and make sure that hands
supplied only from rain. For these species in captivity,
are washed immediately after handling.
elaborate filtration and moving or constantly fltered
4. Do not allow amphibians to remain loose or uncon-
water is not essential for survival and metamorphosis.
tained in a building intended for human occupation,
sanitation, or food preparation.
 generally yields success.
Unfortunately, the above suggestions may seem to
Species that lay eggs above streams or have tadpoles
which inhabit moving water usually require some
be common sense, but the breakthroughs in common
sense are always reported in the popular press by rela-
water oxygenation or fltration for survival. Some of
these species, such as many larger Central and South
tively uneducated media 
professionals,
implicating
exotic animals in zoonotic disease. Without the respon-
American hylids, feed on particulates suspended in the
sible education of pet owners there is great risk 
of
water and require the water movement to supply a
continued legislation prohibiting private possession of
constant source of food. Many of these species rapidly
 perish if maintained in still or stagnant water.
these animals.
 Feeding of larval amphibians, particularly tadpoles,
is not difficult in most cases. An exceptional food for 
LARVAL AMPHIBIANS
larval herbivorous dendrobatids is spirulina powder
(Earthrise Co., Petaluma, CA) that is available from
Tadpoles and larval salamanders face a variety of dis-
most health food stores. The author has raised many
orders that, for the most part, are never diagnosed or
generations of various species of dendrobatids and
treated. Under controlled conditions with captive
Mantella spp. tadpoles on this diet with absolutely no
breeding the incidence of disease is relatively low, yet
 developmental abnormalities. Overfeeding must be
many may be susceptible to disease when stressed with
avoided, however. Water quality deteriorates rapidly
substandard environmental conditions. There is tre-
without filtration and death is rapid. Many dendroba-
mendous variability in natural and cultural conditions
tids and possibly other frog species give parental care
Amphibians
229
e ,'s , jo  an  s o
Identification to the subspecies level (many salaman-
on these species is available in many hobbyist texts.
ders) or the variety level (many Dendrobatidae) is not
Larval salamanders can be problematic in that
important for developing a history and diagnosis.
many species in early development require live foods.
Establish the origin of the patient; is it captive-born
Daphnia, gammarus (fairy shrimp), and other small
 or wild-caught and imported? This information is par-
crustaceans must be cultured or readily available. Wild
ticularly important for amphibians because the likeli-
collection of these food items is not recommended,
 hood of acclimation to a captive environment and the
because this is commonly a source for infection with
 potential pathogens in wild-caught animals must be
the trematode Gyrodactylus spp., the body fluke.
considered. The client may not know this history, par-
These microscopic parasites can be rapidly fatal to
ticularly if the animal was purchased at a pet store or
larvae, and may be the inciting cause of cutaneous
reptile and amphibian trade show or swap meet. One
ulcers on adults. Treatment may be accomplished with
characteristic  of  captive-born  amphibians  includes
dilute salt or formaldehyde baths (1.5 ml of 10% for-
juvenile age or relatively young animals when obtained
 malin in 1 liter water for ten minutes) and survivability
by the client. Imported animals are usually adults
is good with early diagnosis. The amphibians undergo-
because they are more frequently captured in the
 n     
and
wild and more likely to survive shipping. Today
removed to freshwater at the first sign of distress in
certain species of frogs are almost exclusively captive-
formalin. Dipping the infected animals into the treat-
born. Many salamanders and most caecilians are
ment solution within a net is the most practical method
wild-caught.
for rapid removal.
A particularly important question of the client is the
Larval amphibians are subject to bacterial and
 medical history of the patient; has the patient been
fungal infections as adults. Treatment is with medi-
treated at home prior to or following the client's pos-
cated baths rather than by individual dosing. Diagnosis
session of the patient? Has the patient received treat-
 of a specifc infection is usually obtained by sacrificing
ment from another veterinarian? Home treatment of
one or more larvae from a group for bacteriologic or
exotic pets, particularly reptiles and amphibians, is
microscopic analysis.
common. Occasionally results are favorable with home
treatment, but more commonly the clinical condition
fails to respond or deteriorates.
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAM
All husbandry parameters should be fully investi-
 gated. Descriptions of the enclosure, substrate, acces-
History
 sories, cage mates, feeding schedule, and environmental
A complete and accurate history of the amphibian
conditions of both the enclosure and the room housing
 patient may be the most important procedure in devel-
the enclosure are important. When multiple individu-
 oping a diagnosis of disease (or health). Unfortunately,
als or species of amphibians are housed together, the
amphibian patients are commonly presented moribund
client should be questioned regarding the health of
or altered from the original onset of clinical signs,
these animals as well as any quarantine procedures
making it difficult to diagnose the underlying etiology
that were performed.
based on physical exam. Similarly, the clinician may
The exact nutrition (which food items are con-
be presented with a deceased patient from a group of
sumed) of the captive amphibian is generally not as
animals and a diagnosis may be required to develop a
much of a clinical concern as whether or not the
 treatment plan for the remaining group of apparently
 patient is actually eating. With respect to food items
healthy individuals. Additionally, when gaining new
offered, particularly insects, it is important to learn the
clients who own amphibians (and reptiles), much time
size of insect that is fed and the timing of the feedings.
 n s   d  s s
Also, ask the client if the patient is observed to actually
reluctant to bring the patient into the clinic. Though
tat the food items or if the food simply disappears
there is little substitute for physical exam of the patient,
 from the cage. Many times insects may escape or hide
there is even less substitute for not having patience
beneath cage ornaments, leading the client to believe
with a potential first time client.
that the insects were consumed. This is particularly
The first step in obtaining an accurate history is
true of nocturnal amphibians. Question the client
identification of the correct scientific name of the
regarding food supplements such as vitamin mineral
powders and frequency of application. For aquatic
level. It may be difficult to obtain natural
1history
amphibians it is important to know the exact food
information based on common or colloquial names.
items offered (live or processed). Many captive amphib-
230
Chapter 10
ians refuse prepared diets such as pellets initially and
thumb and index finger. This frees the head, body, and
must be fed live food.
aenape i 'uean no uoeuxa rg sa suon
prevents jumping or escape attempt. Larger frogs and
Restraint
toads may require support by two hands to the body
The primary
y consideration  when restraining an
between the front and hind legs. Medium to large sala-
amphibian is stress on the patient and the potential
manders are restrained with a delicate grip of the fist,
health consequences of handling. The patient should
allowing the head to protrude between thumb and
be touched or restrained only when absolutely neces-
index finger and the tail exiting at the little finger. As
sary. All diagnostic tests or treatments should be pre-
in lizards, tail autotomy is possible for many species
 pared prior to handling to consolidate procedures into
 of salamanders. Most adult anguiform amphibians
the fewest episodes of physical manipulation of the
(caecilians, amphiumas, sirens) are nearly impossible
patient. Consideration must also be given to the safety
to restrain manually and are best examined in an
of the handler. Some species are capable of producing
aquarium or chemically restrained (see Anesthesia).
toxic skin secretions that are irritating and noxious,
but rarely lethal to humans.
Pbysical Examination
The following species when known to be wild-col-
As with all exotic animals, the most important physical
lected should be handled with extreme caution: golden 
 observations of the patient are made without handling.
poison frog (Phyllobates terribilis), black-legged
With the exception of some frogs and in contrast to
poison frog (Phyllobates bicolor), Colorado River toad
most turtles, lizards, and snakes, the posture (
of
(Bufo alvarius), and marine toad (Bufo marinus). It is
amphibians is not as significant in revealing clinical
unlikely that either of the poison frogs listed will ever
 disease. This is due to the fact that many species are
be seen in practice as wild caught individuals because
 nocturnal and cryptic, preferring to remain inactive or
they are relatively inaccessible for collection and
burrowed during the day. Species in which posture is
exportation from Colombia, and both species are now
generally significant are the dendrobatids, atelopids,
widely available as captive-born juveniles and adults.
mantellids, perching hylids such as Phyllomedusa spp.,
Captive-born dart frogs have greatly reduced skin
and most newts. Activity of the patient may be signifi-
toxins and are generally not toxic to humans (Daly
cant for some species. During a daytime examination
et al. 1994). Nevertheless, an imported Phyllobates 
 all of the previously mentioned species (with the excep-
terribilis should be considered lethal to humans.
. The
tion of hylids) should be bright, alert, and responsive.
toxins of P. bicolor are only 1/50 the strength of P.
In contrast,
 nocturnal species such as hylids, some
terribilis, yet a wild-caught frog should be considered
toads, ranids, and salamanders are generally inactive.
dangerous (Walls 1994).
 The Bufo spp. are a concern not as much for their
cally nocturnal, is activity during daylight hours. Red-
degree of toxicity, which is significant, but for the
eyed treefrogs, for example, generally rest on the sides
manner in which the toxin may be secreted. Both
of the enclosure with eyelids shut in daylight. Aquatic
species are capable of ejecting copious amounts of
amphibians, though generally nocturnal, are generally
toxin from the parotid glands. Reports exist of this
active in the enclosure on presentation. Exceptions
toxin spraying six feet or more from the animal ( Wright
may include some aquatic or large semiaquatic frogs
and Whitaker 2001d). Entry of the toxin into an
that, by nature, typically are not very active foragers
unprotected eye can be serious, not just from the
and prefer to wait and ambush prey.
standpoint of direct physical irritation, but also from
Observing the feeding response of diurnally active
absorption and systemic effects. All larger Bufo spp.
amphibians is a practical method to assess overall
 and all wild-caught dart frogs are best handled with
 health. A failure to respond to the proper food item is
 powder-free latex gloves. Additionally, protective
 generally a sign of illness or stress. Nocturnal or shy
eyewear is recommended when handling or manipulat-
 animals, however, rarely feed upon observation in day-
ing larger toad species.
light hours.
When possible, amphibians are best observed in a
With a basic understanding of normal anatomy and
clear enclosure such as a plastic shoebox, deli cup.
body condition of the species in question, the visual
plastic bag, or other small enclosure. Handling of all
exam should frst focus on body condition. Is the
amphibians is performed with a powder-free exam
patient normal weight, underweight, overweight, or
glove that has been cleaned, rinsed, or moistened with
bloated? It is important to remember that some frogs
will inflate with air as a defense mechanism and may
appear bloated, but suffer from no abnormal physiol-
Amphibians
231
ogy. Air inflation is not a physiologic adaptation of
 or focal disease and bilateral ophthalmic abnormalities
salamanders and caecilians. As with other animals,
 are more suggestive of systemic disease. Iris vascula-
emaciation does not occur in hours or days, but in
a e iu  u dde aq a a
weeks or months. Even the smallest frogs have distinct
 There is great variation in pupil structure from circular
muscle groups that reveal weight loss. Poison dart
to horizontally and vertically elliptic. An ophthalmo-
frogs, for example, exhibit emaciation particularly on
scope illuminator or slit lamp is helpful for examina-
the back, scapulas, and pelvis.
tion of the eye. Commonly used mammalian mydriatics
Observe the cloaca for prolapse. This abnormality
such as atropine and proparacaine are not effective in
may remain unnoticed by the client. Also observe a
dilating the amphibian eye. Wright (2001b) recom-
fresh stool sample. For most terrestrial amphibians the
mends the combination of D-tubocurarine and benzal-
feces are ejected as a pellet and should be somewhat
konium
1  chloride
e applied topically for mydriasis
moist and dark brown in color. Abnormalities in color
(Whitaker 2001).
and consistency may be significant. A microscopic
Oral exam requires physical or chemical restraint in
fecal exam is essential for all captive-born and imported
most species. Some species of frog, Ceratopbrys and
amphibians.
Hemipbractus spp., are known to gape as a defensive
 Abnormalities in respiratory effort can be diffcult
tactic, makingoralexamination possible without restraint
to detect in terrestrial amphibians. Normal respiration
on occasion. Similarly, some larger terrestrial salaman-
 is driven primarily by buccal or gular pumping rather
ders (Ambystoma spp., Dicamptodon spp.), particularly
than by diaphragmatic or intercostal muscle contrac-
 those maintained long term in captivity, may exhibit a
tion. There is rarely noticeable variation in this rhyth-
conditioned feeding response and can be coaxed into
mic pumping motion, even in diseased animals.
biting a soft speculum to examine the mouth. Though it
Bubbling from the mouth or nostrils in terrestrial
is not recommended as normal practice, these animals,
amphibians, however, is abnormal and a possible clini-
when routinely hand fed, will bite fingers waved in front
cal sign of respiratory disease.
of the face. It is unlikely that any injury will result to a
 Abnormality of the integument is one of the more
human from the bite of an ambystomatid salamander.
common abnormal physical findings and a common
Large frogs (Ceratophrys,  Pyxicephalus) and large
presenting complaint  for diseased
amphibians.
aquaticsalamanders(Amphiuma,Siren, Cryptobranchus)
Understanding the natural history and normal charac-
are capable of painful bites to humans. These species
 teristics of the integument for a given species is essen-
 generally require chemical restraint for both physical
tial. Most toads, terrestrial newts, and some tree frogs
restraint and oral examination.
have relatively dry skin. Many larger tree frogs such
The clinician and technician should be aware that
 as Phyllomedusa spp. and Litoria spp. can produce
mandibular bones of many small amphibians are easily
waxy secretions to prevent dessication. Amphibians
fractured with improper or forceful techniques to open
slough skin, ecdysis, throughout their lives, and this
the mouth. When properly restrained the mouth of
process should not be confused with disease. Coloration
many smaller amphibians may be opened with a
varies widely, particularly in frogs, and with many
variety of apparatus such as plastic cards, laminated
this coloration is bilaterally symmetric. Even cryptic
paper, coverslips, and small rubber spatulas. Nearly
 amphibians exhibit some color and pattern symmetry;
all amphibians will resist the oral exam if not sedated.
therefore, observe closely for abnormalities in sym-
 Observe for uniformity and symmetry in shape and
 metry of color texture, and morphology. Amphibians
coloration of the oral mucosa and the tongue.
typically do not exhibit color-changing ability as seen
 Occasionally parasites such as flukes and leeches may
in some lizards, though variation will occur from day
be observed attached to the oral mucosa.
to night in many hylids. Ulcers, erosions, plaques, and
 Palpation is easily accomplished for larger amphib-
crusts are not normal. Newly acquired or recently
ians, but should generally be avoided in smaller species 
imported frogs are susceptible to rostral abrasions that
to prevent iatrogenic trauma. Internal organs of the
may rapidly progress into necrotizing ulcerations.
 smallest species may be evaluated by transillumination
Most salamanders and terrestrial frogs have clos-
 of the patient through a clear plastic container This
 able eyelids and frogs possess a nictitating membrane
process is ineffective for large or dark pigmented
that is semitransparent. When awake and alert the
patients. The heart, liver, spleen, gonads, and some
amphibian eye should have eyelids open and clear
vasculature may be observed in this manner. Palpation
corneas. Iris coloration is variable among amphibians,
 of larger species may reveal abnormalities such as
but is always bilaterally symmetric. As with mammals,
foreign bodies and calculi, though normal structures
 unilateral ocular changes are most suggestive of trauma
may be difficult to assess or identify.
232
 Chapter 10
The heartbeat may be visible as pulsations of the
ANESTHESIA AND SURGERY
skin in the region of the xiphoid on the ventral thorax
in some amphibians. Similarly, in some frogs,
Anestbesia
pulsation of the lymphatic hearts is occasionally
Anesthesia for amphibians is useful for physical exami-
observed lateral to the urostyle. Cardiac auscultation
 nation of aggressive or reluctantly restrained patients,
is possible in larger amphibians, though the clinical
certain diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, and
significance of this procedure during wellness exams is
surgery. Reports exist for the use of injectable anes-
question.
thetics in amphibians, though current consensus
regards these medications as impractical and ineffec-
tive for safe chemical restraint. The anesthetic of choice
RADIOLOGY
for amphibians is tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222,
tricaine, FINQUEL, Argent Chemical Laboratories,
As with reptiles, radiology is valuable in the diagnosis
Redmond, WA) (Wright 2001f). It is a white crystal-
of some amphibian disease. This imaging is particu-
line powder that may be mixed with water to anesthe-
larly useful for the diagnosis of skeletal disorders,
tize fish and amphibians. Amphibians are immersed in
urinary tract calculi, tissue mineralization, pulmonary
a bath of tricaine methanesulfonate until anesthesia is
disease, gastrointestinal foreign bodies, and other gas-
achieved and then maintained in fresh water for the
trointestinal disease with the aid of contrast materials.
 particular procedure to be performed. For longer pro-
 Unless abnormality is present, it is generally not pos-
cedures, the patient may be immersed in a 50% dilu-
sible to clearly differentiate coelomic cavity structures
tion of the original induction solution or intubated and
radiographically in amphibians.
maintained on isoflurane.
 Techniques for radiographic exposure are similar to
Preparation of tricaine solution requires dissolving
those described for reptiles. Because of the small size
the powder into clean distilled water. The standard
of most amphibians, a table-top exposure with detail
solution is 0.1% concentration: 1g MS-222 in 1 liter
cassettes yields the best quality image. Generally, an
distilled water. Because tricaine is quite acidic, the
exposure seting consistent with the lowest mamma-
solution must be buffered to a pH of 7 to 7.4, which
lian extremity setting is sufficient, though with smaller
is the physiologic range of amphibian tissue. This is
patients overexposure is still possible. For technician
accomplished
with
1either  sodium biphosphate
safety the use of a collimator to achieve the smallest
(Na,HPO4) or sodium bicarbonate (Na2COg). Wright
exposure field is essential. With this technique, multi-
(2001f) reports the use of 34 to 50ml of a 0.5M
ple exposures are possible on a single cassette.
NazHPO4 solution to the 1 liter stock solution of MS-
 Restraint of the amphibian patient during radiology
 222. Stetter (2001b) applies NazCOs powder (common
is a hands-off affair. Many frogs will sit briefly directly
baking soda) to the stock solution until no more dis-
on the cassette for exposure. For those that are reluc-
solves, yielding the preferred pH range. Ideally pH
tant to remain still, placement of the patient in a plastic
should be tested with a pH meter.
bag facilitates restraint and manipulation for proper
Tricaine is not stable in water when exposed to
exposure (Stetter 2001a). When possible, a lateral and
light. Therefore, unless multiple anesthesia episodes
dorsoventral exposure should be made of every patient
are planned, it should be mixed only in the quantity
imaged. This typically requires the movement of the
desired for a single anesthetic episode. Generally a
radiographic beam into a horizontal beam projection 
1-liter solution is adequate. All dissolved tricaine
as the patient sits on the tabletop or platform.
should be discarded after use and not reused for other
Contrast studies are easily performed in amphibi-
patients.
ans. Barium sulfate is the contrast medium of choice
 Amphibians are induced in a bath of 1 g/L tricaine
 and is given orally via a rubber catheter or feeding
 methanesulfonate in a suitable induction chamber that
tube. The dosage varies greatly based on the size of
 may be a plastic bag or other sealable plastic container.
amphibian. A range of 10 to 15 ml/kg PO is generally
Induction time may vary, but usually thirty minutes
sufficient, though the technician should approximate
exposure achieves surgical anesthesia (Wright 2001f;
the volume of the calculated dose to the patient's body
Stetter 2001b). Loss of the righting reflex and lack of
size and adjust accordingly. Percloacal barium admin-
istration is also performed for suspected colonic foreign
tion. Loss of the withdrawal or deep pain reflex indi-
bodies, strictures, or other disease. Great care must be
cates surgical anesthesia.
used when manipulating catheters with these tissues to
The patient is then transferred out of the induction
prevent iatrogenic trauma.
chamber onto a treatment pan or receptacle and main-
Amphibians
233
tained in clean fresh distilled water or a 50% dilution
be used to maintain a sterile field for surgical
of tricaine (0.05%) for the duration of the procedure
instruments.
(Wright 2001f). The patient's nostrils and mouth must
As with lizards, a paramedian ventral midline inci-
 be maintained above the water level to prevent aspira-
sion is recommended to avoid the large ventral abdom-
tion. At this time, for longer surgical procedures, large
inal vein that lies on the ventral serosal surface of the
amphibians may be intubated and maintained on
coelomic cavity. Closure of surgical incisions is accom-
 Oxygen (with or without isoflurane) with intermittent
plished with non-absorbable monoflament sutures of
positive pressure ventilation (IPPV). Continued expo-
appropriate size.
sure to the 0.os% tricaine bath maintains adequate
anesthesia in the absence of isoflurane.
The patient should be monitored for heartbeat
TECHNIQUES
throughout the anesthetic procedure. Respiration is
reduced or nearly absent and oxygenation of the tric-
Venipuncture
aine bath with oxygen is recommended to enhance
 Blood collection in amphibians can be a challenge, yet
oxygen absorption through the skin. The patient is
 in some species, with proper technique and anatomical
recovered from tricaine anesthesia in clean distilled
knowledge, the task is routine. Prior to sampling the
water, making sure that the nostrils and mouth are not
skin should be prepped with diluted 2% chlorhexidine
under water to prevent aspiration. The recovery period
or 2% chloroxylenol at a 1:40 dilution (Wright
may range from thirty to sixty minutes.
2001f). Alcohol should not be used because of irrita-
An additional anesthetic protocol is the
topical
tion and dessication to the patient. Sampling from
application of liquid isoflurane. A mixture of 3cc
salamanders is performed from the ventral tail vein as
liquid isoflurane with 1.5 cc water and 3.5 cc KY-Jelly
described for snakes and lizards. A 1-cc or smaller
is made in a 10-cc syringe and shaken. The resulting
syringe with a 25- or 27-gauge needle is ideal for most
liquid is then applied to the back of the patient at a
amphibians and the sample is preserved in lithium
dose of 0.025 cc to 0.035 cc/g body weight. The lower
heparin.
dose is applied to frogs and salamanders and the higher
Phlebotomy in frogs and toads is performed from a
dose is for toads. The patient is induced in a sealed
variety of locations. In larger frogs and toads the
container over five to fifteen minutes. Following induc-
ventral abdominal vein is the best choice for both
tion the remaining gel is wiped from the skin and
quality and quantity of the blood sample. Sampling
anesthesia will last for forty-five to eighty minutes.
from this vein is performed in the same manner as
described for lizards. (Figures 10.4, 10.5). Because the
Surgery
 lymphatic system of amphibians courses parallel to the
ou ae suqdue uo sanpaond ens yanou
blood vessels, it is not uncommon to collect lymphatic
routine, several pathologic conditions may require sur-
fluids with peripheral blood. Other sites of blood col-
gical treatment. Celiotomy, mass removal, and limb
lection that are generally accessible in large frogs
amputation are the most commonly
performed
include the femoral vein and the lingual vein located
procedures. Other procedures include enucleation
on the ventral surface of the tongue. The volume of
and orthopedic surgery. All invasive surgical proce-
blood collected should be no more than 1% of the
dures are performed with general anesthesia using
patient's body weight or 0.5% from a debilitated
tricaine or isoflurane. Pre- and post-surgical admini-
patient (Wright 2001f).
stration of antibiotics are recommended for invasive
procedures.
Celiocentesis
The amphibian skin is prepped using 0.2% chlorhex-
This technique is performed to analyze fluid retained
idine (Wright 2001f) or 0.2% chloroxylenol diluted to
in the coelomic cavity of amphibians. It may be both
0.75% with water. Isopropyl alcohol and iodine com-
diagnostic and therapeutic. Fluid may accumulate in
pounds are potentially toxic to amphibians and should
the coelom secondary to cardiac, renal, hepatic, or
be avoided. The surgical prep should have as long a
 other osmotic imbalances. Similar to phlebotomy,
a
nd s on rod issod se a i
25- or 27-gauge needle on a 1- to 3-cc syringe is ideal.
ten minutes. The surgical site should be
moistened
The sample site is prepped with a 1: 40 dilution of 2%
with saline prior to draping and surgery. Depending
chlorhexidine or chloroxylenol. The preferred collec-
on the procedure, draping may not be performed. For
tion site is from the mid lateral flank or mid ventral
celiotomy,
 sterile  clear  plastic 
drape
is
applied.
coelomic cavity. The syringe should fill with fluid on
Peripheral to the plastic drape a sterile cloth drape may
 gentle aspiration and forceful aspiration should be
234
Chapter 10
Sub-Lingual Vein
Abdominal Vein
Femoral Vein
Figure 10.4. Venipuncture sites in a frog. (Drawing by Scott Stark.)
avoided to prevent damage to delicate internal organs.
 amphibian is maintained on paper towel in a clean cage
Fluid may be smeared immediately or submitted in 
such as a plastic shoebox or storage container that is
lithium heparin for cellular and chemical analysis.
adequately ventilated and a sample is collected.
The sample should be examined directly in 0.9%
Fecal Examination
saline and by fecal floatation with standard commer-
 Fecal exam is one diagnostic test that can be performed
cially available fecal floatation solutions. Common
in all terrestrial amphibians and nearly all aquatic
 parasite ova include nematodes, trematodes, coccidia,
amphibians with relative ease. Collection of feces is
various protozoans, and lungworm larvae (see
facilitated particularly well during quarantine. The
Parasitology).
Amphibians
235
create further trauma. Shed skins are particularly
helpful for microscopic analysis and may be fixed in
formalin for histopathologic staining to identify certain
bacterial and fungal pathogens. A skin scraping is per-
formed with the edge of a coverslip and wetmount
examination.
AssistFeeding
 Assist feeding is required for amphibians that are dis-
eased and unable or unwilling to voluntarily feed. It is
important that the owner understand that this proce-
dure may be stressful on the patient and debilitated
less, this may also be a life saving procedure designed
to return the patient to a normal feeding response.
Wright and Whitaker (2001d) list the standard meta-
Figure 10.5. Venipuncture of the midabdominal vein
bolic rates (SMR) for caecilians, salamanders, and
(ventral abdominal vein) in a frog. (Photo courtesy
frogs at temperatures ranging from 5 °C to 25 *C and
of Dr. Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of
they recommend that caloric intake for diseased
Georgia.)
animals should exceed the SMR by 50% on a daily
basis.
Cloacal Wash
An ideal feeding formula for amphibians is Clinical
Cloacal wash is performed in larger amphibians
Care Feline Liquid (Pet-Ag, Elgin, IL), which provides
(>5 cm) to collect fecal material for microscopic analy-
0.92kcal/ml and has a well balanced protein-to-fat-to-
sis when a fresh stool sample is unavailable for analy-
carbohydrate ratio for amphibians (Wright 2001d).
sis. A lubricated semi-rigid plastic or rubber catheter
This liquid product is easy to administer through a
attached to a 1-ml syringe is gently inserted into the
small bore tube and provides nutrients and calories
cloaca and isotonic saline (0.6%) is infused from and
evenly in suspension. The patient's normal food items
retrieved into the syringe. The fluid volume may be
are provided daily under observation to assess for a
between 0.5 and 1 ml and not all fluid will be retrie ved.
return to normal feeding. Force feedings are not made
A portion of the sample is then viewed with a micro-
daily to reduce handling. Instead, the calculated daily
scope for pathogens. For smaller amphibians (<5 cm)
 dose may be multiplied by the number of days between
cloacal wash is generally too traumatic to attempt.
feedings (three, five, etc.) and the total dose for those
Examination of fecal samples is recommended for
days is administered at one time. Wright and Whitaker
these species.
recommend that the volume of feeding should not
exceed 10% of the patient's body weight in a twenty-
Transtracheal Wash
four hour period.
The techniques for tracheal wash are identical to those
The feeding procedure is accomplished in a matter
in other vertebrates. The patient must be anesthetized
similar to that of reptiles. A red rubber catheter, intra-
(see Anesthesia and Surgery) and delicate handling of
venous catheter, tomcat catheter, or ball tipped feeding
the tissues and apparatus must be performed. A sterile
 needle is passed into the stomach and the food prepa-
tomcat or small gauge mammalian intravenous cath-
ration is infused. The technician should be aware that
eter may be inserted into the glottis in the floor of the
the stomach of most amphibians (especially frogs) is
mouth. Depending on patient size, 0.25 to 0.5 cc sterile 
relatively proximal in the coelom; thus, passage of the
isotonic (0.6%) saline is infused and gently retrieved.
tube no more than one-third to one-half of the patient's
The sample may then be smeared and stained for
body length (excluding the tail) is recommended.
microscopic analysis.
An alternative to Clinical Care Liquid is a mashed
or ground mixture of invertebrates such as fruit flies
Skin Scrape and Impression Smear
or crickets administered in the same manner. The
These processes are designed to identify fungal, bacte-
 author has had great success with anorectic dart frogs
rial, and protozoal elements to the skin or wounds on
using this technique on an every seventy-two hours
the skin. An impression smear is performed when
 basis. Several patients have required two weeks or
tissue is damaged or ulcerated and a scraping will only
more of assist feeding before feeding voluntarily.
236
Chapter 10
Therapeutic Administration
administration require  hospitalization  or repeated
Amphibians present fewer problems than one may
visits to the clinic for treatment by the technician or
expect with medications. The semipermeable skin
clinician. Medications should be dispensed in indi-
enables the clinician to apply some medications topi-
vidual syringes with the appropriate amount for each
cally (TO) for systemic absorption, a technique not
dose drawn up and ready to apply. This negates the
applicable to reptiles. Additionally, medicated baths
 possibility of inappropriate dosing by the client. The
may be used to treat both cutaneous and systemic
client should return the used syringes for disposal at
diseases. Oral (PO) administration is possible and
 the end of the treatment period to allow both a recheck
standard for some medications such as deworming
of the patient and to assess compliance of therapeutic
agents and antibiotics. Finally, injections may be given
administration.
intramuscularly (IM) or  intracoelomically (ICe)
in
An important fact regarding amphibian disease is
large amphibians or subcutaneously (SC) in frogs and
 that pharmaceuticals are not required to treat or cure
some salamanders. Intravenous (IV) administration is
every disease. It cannot be overemphasized that dis-
rare and difficult at best in all but the largest amphib-
tases resulting from improper husbandry comprise a
ians. Physical restraint of the patient is required for all
substantial percentage of presenting complaints with
but the topical route of therapeutic administration.
amphibians and reptiles. The number one consider-
The application of injectable medications in atopical
ation when choosing pharmaceuticals for disease man-
manner is very practical for amphibians with perme-
agement is side effects. Though it may be difficult for
able skin. This method likely results in lower percuta-
 the client to appreciate that environmental manipula-
1eun saioads un no speon un sainn uodosqe snou
tion alone can correct improper health, it is even more
produce a waxy skin coating. Antibiotics such as enro-
 difficult to understand further debilitation caused by
floxacin and ivermectin have been applied topically
unnecessary treatment.
with great success for various bacterial and parasitic
diseases. Baths with medications such as gentamicin,
nitrofurazone, itraconazole, sulfamethazine, mettroni-
EUTHANASIA
dazole, and other medications have shown success and
safety in combating various diseases
d n sosan u on p si a
 Oral administration is possible in nearly all sizes of
are too debilitated to withstand treatment and the
amphibians and is the preferred route of treatment
 client elects euthanasia. Amphibians and reptiles can
when possible to achieve maximum systemic absorp-
 pose some problems with euthanasia in that the heart
tion. This route is contraindicated in those species that
may continue to beat for some time after neurologic
S d     
incapacitation or death has occurred.
Metal feeding tubes or rubber catheters are used in
Reducing patient suffering and pain and client dis-
large animals and microliter pipettes are used for small 
comfort with the euthanasia process may be difficult.
 patients. Dilution of the commercially available prepa-
If possible the patient may be sedated with one of
rations or compounding of medications is required for
se veral anesthetic agents prior to administering eutha-
smaller amphibians. Dosing for most oral medications
nasia injections. Ketamine at a dose of 100 mg/kg IM
 is daily or less often depending on the drug.
or telazol (tiletamine-zolazepam) at a dose of 10mg/
 Injections are possible in amphibians,
，but carry
kg IM (Wright 2001f) is sufficient to achieve sedation
 moderate risk of trauma to muscles or internal organs
for euthanasia. The clinician and technician should
and may result in chemical trauma or excessive pain
  a so a p q r s
 and disability at the injection site. Many injectable
cause pain and discomfort to the patient at the injec-
o sors sude u o pe su
tion site. Alternatively, tricaine (MS-222) may be used
systemic absorption. This is particularly true of enro-
as a pre-euthanasia sedative or if overdosed as a eutha-
floxacin that may be otherwise irritating to amphibian
nasia solution (Wright and Whitaker 2001b).
skin and may cause skin irritation, discoloration, or
 Administration of a barbiturate euthanasia solution
sloughing from topical administration or injection.
such as pentobarbital at a dose of 100 mg/kg intracar-
The intracoelomic route is preferred for fluid adminis-
diac (if possible) results in instant death. Alternatively,
tration in critically ill or dehydrated amphibians. The
the injection may be given intracoelomically or intra-
method of injection is similar to that of celiocentesis.
cranially through the foramen magnum, though
A considerable benefit to choosing the topical route
cardiac death may be delayed.
for medicating the patient is allowing the client to treat
If histopathology is required of the patient, then
at home for non-critical cases. All other routes of
 minimizing trauma to vital organs is essential. In this
Amphibians
237
case, an overdose of tricaine given intracoelomically
Petranka JW. 1998. Salarmanders of the United States and Canada.
or immersion of the sedated patient in 20% ethanol
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Poynton SL, Whitaker BR. 2001. Protozoa and Metazoa Infecting
will result in death (Wright and Whitaker 2001d).
Amphibians. In: Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry.
Most importantly, clients should be informed of the 
Edited by Wright KM, Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger
euthanasia alternatives and fully understand the pro-
Publishing Co.
asand aq on ysim aue f! paoad aq on aipa
Stebbins RC. 1985. Peterson Field Guide to Western Reptiles and
during the euthanasia process.
Amphibians. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.
Stetter MD. 2001a. Diagnostic Imaging of Amphibians. In:
Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright
KM, Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Stetter MD. 2001b. Fish and Amphibian Anesthesia. Veterinary
REFERENCES
Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice. 4(1): 69-
82.
Barnett SL. 1996. The Husbandry of Poison-Dart Frogs {Family
Taylor SK. 2001. Mycoses. In: Amphibian Medicine and Captive
Dendrobatidae). Proceed. Assoc. Amphibian and Rept.
Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM, Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL:
Veterinarians, 1-6.
Krieger Publishing Co.
Barnett SL, et al. 2001. Amphibian Husbandry and Housing. In:
Walls JG. 1994. Jewels of the Rain Forest—Poison Dart Frogs of
Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright
the World Neptune City, NJ: TFH Publications.
KM, Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Whitaker BR. 2001. The Amphibian Eye In: Amphibian Medicine
Berger L, et al. 1998. Chytridiomycosis Causes Amphibian Mortality
and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM, Whitaker BR.
Associated with Population Declines in the Rain Forests of
Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Australia and Central America. Proc. Nat Acad. Sei. 95:
Wright KM. 2001a. Amphibian Hematology. In: Amphibian
9031-9036.
Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM,
Daly JW, et al. 1994. Dietary Source for Skin Alkaloids of Poison
Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Frogs {Dendrobatidae)? Journal of Chemicat Ecology 20 (4):
Wright KM. 2001b. Anatomy for the Clinician. In: Amphibian
943-98.
Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM,
Daszak P, et al. 2000. Emerging Infectious Diseases of Wildlife
Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Threats to Biodiversity and Human Health. Arm Assoc. for the
Wright KM. 2001c. Applied Physiology. In: Amphibian Medicine
Advancement of Science 287: 443-449.
and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM, Whitaker BR.
de Vosjoli P. 1996. Care and Breeding of Popular Tree Frogs. Santee,
Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
CA: Advanced Vivarium Systems, Inc.
Wright KM. 2001d. Diets for Captive Amphibians. In: Amphibian
Diana SG, et al. 2001. Clinical Toxicology. In: Amphibian Medicine
Medicine and Captive Husbandry.
Edited by Wright KM,
and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM, Whitaker BR.
Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Wright KM. 2001e. Evolution of the Amphibia In: Amphibian
Donoghue S, Langenberg J. 1996. Special Topics: Nutrition. In:
Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM,
 Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Edited by Mader DR. Philadelphia:
Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
W.B. Saunders Co.
Wright KM. 2001f. Surgical Techniques. In: Amphibian Medicine
Duellman WE, Trueb L. 1994. Biology of Amphibians. Baltimore:
and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM, Whitaker BR.
 Johns Hopkins University Press.
Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Gagliardo R. Atlanta Botanical Garden. Personal communication.
Wright KM. 2001g. Taxonomy of Amphibians Kept in Captivity.
Goin CJ, Goin OB, Zug GR. 1978. Introduction to Herpetology.
In: Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by
3rd ed New York: W.H. Freeman and Co.
Wright KM, Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Helfrman GS. 1990. Mode Selection and Mode Switching in Foraging
pp.3-14.
Animals. Aduances in the Study of Behavior 19: 249.
Wright KM, Whitaker BR. 2001a. Nutritional Disorders. In:
Klingenberg RJ. 1993. Understanding Reptile Parasites. Lakeside,
Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright 
CA: Advanced Vivarium Systems.
KM, Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Lotters S. 1996. The Neotropical Toad Genus Atelopus. Koln,
Wright KM, Whitaker BR. 2001b. Pharmacotherapeutics.
In:
Gerrmany: M. Vences and F Glaw Verlags GbR.
Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright
Mattison C. 1987. Frogs and Toads of the World. New York: Facts
KM, Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
on File Publications.
Wright KM, Whitaker BR. 2001c. Quarantine. In: Amphibian
Morell V. 1999. Are Pathogens Felling Frogs? Science 284:
Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Edited by Wright KM,
728-731.
Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co.
Obst FJ, et al. 1988. The Completely Illustrated Atlas
of
Wright KM, Whitaker BR. 2001d. Restraint Techniques and
Reptiles and Amphibians for the Terrariurm. Neptune City, NJ:
Euthanasia. In: Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry.
TFH.
Edited by Wright KM, Whitaker BR. Malabar, FL: Krieger
Pessier AP, Roberts DR, Linn M, et al. 2002. “Short tongue syn-
Publishing Co.
drome", lingual squarmous Metaplasia and suspected hypovita-
Wright KM. 2009. Three things you must know to see amphibians.
minosis A in captive Wyoming toads. Proceedings, Association
Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference (23).
of Reptilian and Amphibian Veterinarians, pp 151-153.
Gainesville, FL, 1822-1825.
Section 5
Mammals
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Ferrets
James R. McClearen, Julie Mays, and Tarab Hadley
INTRODUCTION
vary according to season, similar to dogs and cats
(Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997).
The art of veterinary medicine has extended into many
families of creatures. Among small mammals, also
Skin and Hair Coat
known as "pocket pets," the ferret has become one of
 There are three naturally occurring coat color patterns.
the more popular pets in today's society. Although the
Sable is the most commonly observed but albino and
practice of medicine in ferrets is still viewed as being
cinnamon are also seen. The sable ferret, known also
different from the traditional feline and canine prac-
a uamiaq ssorn e se padan uaaq su <'oiu, s
tice, the same techniques that are used in small animal
European polecat and ferret. They typically have
-d e ns oi pde iea aq Ae ad
black-tipped guard hair, a cream undercoat, black feet
tice. It is important for the veterinary team to recog-
and tail, and a black mask. In the United States, enthu-
 nize that there are similarities and differences in the
siasts have developed more than thirty color combina-
application of these techniques compared to small
tions, including silver, chocolate, panda, and Siamese.
animal practice. Other novel medical approaches may
One of the first observations that handlers of ferrets
also be used to provide solutions to problems.
notice about this animal is that there is a distinct odor.
The domesticated ferret found in the United States
This odor is primarily from oil glands and not from
is commercially raised for the pet industry and medical
the anal glands, as many people tend to think. The
research. It is conjectured that domesticated ferrets
odor may become more obvious when the ferrets are
 a  sd s    
excited or during breeding season. There are numerous
settlers more than 300 years ago. They are most likely
commercial bathing products that help to make these
a domesticated variety of the European ferret (Mustela
creatures more
"house friendly." Descenting at a
putorius furo). The black-footed ferret (Mustela
 young age is a popular procedure performed at breed-
nigripes) is an indigenous species of the southwestern
ing farms but unfortunately it has limited effects in
 United States. There are strict fish and wildlife regula-
preventing the odor.
tions that vary from state to state regarding the pos-
 Ferrets have no sweat glands in their skin. As a
session of these animals. Veterinary facilities, which
result, the veterinary staff must be aware of the pos-
often serve as the first point of contact for the pet-
sibility of hyperthermia.
owning public, must be acutely aware of these
requirements.
Skeletal
The vertebral formula for the ferret is C7, T15, L5 (6),
S3, Cd18 (Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997). The ana-
ANATOMY
tomical considerations of interest include a small
sternum and thoracic inlet, nonretractable claws, and
a J-shaped os penis. Skeletal anatomy is depicted in
Conformation
Figure 11.1.
 The ferret has an elongated body that allows it to enter
small areas and holes for to pursue prey. This feature
Digestive Tract
provides challenges for both owner and veterinary
The ferret has thirty deciduous teeth and thirty-four
staff in caging and handling. Remember: wherever the
permanent teeth. The permanent teeth erupt between
head goes so follows the rest of the body. The males
ffty and seventy-four days. The upper teeth are as
are larger than females and their weight fluctuations
follows: six incisors, two canine, six premolars, and
241
242
Chapter 11
SCAPULA
PATELLA
HUMERUS
STERNUM
ILIUM
FEMUR
FIBULA
TIBIA
RADIUS
ULNA
METATARSALS
ISCHIUM
PUBIS
CALCANEUS
Figure 11.1. Ferret skeletal anatomy. (Drawing by Scott Stark.)
two molars. The bottom arcade has six incisors, two
canine, six premolars, and four molars (Fox 1998).
 Ferrets have five pairs of salivary glands. Care must
be taken not to confuse the mandibular salivary gland
with the lymph nodes in that area. The stomach of the
Lt
ferret is simple and can expand to accommodate large
[ung
amounts of food (Figure 11.2). The small intestine is
short in length and has an average transit time of three
to four hours (Fox 1998).
Heart and Lungs
The heart lies approximately between the sixth and
Heart
eighth ribs. In comparison to other mammals such as
Diaphragm
cats and dogs, the location of the heart in ferrets is
Stomach
relatively more caudal than expected for auscultation.
Pancreas
The lungs consist of six lobes. The left lung has two
lobes and the right has four (Fox 1998).
Rt
Kidney
Spleen
The ferret spleen varies greatly in size, depending on
the animal's age and state of health. When enlarged,
the spleen extends in a diagonal fashion from the
upper left to the lower right quadrant of the abdominal
Small
cavity. An enlarged spleen tends to be a very distinct
Intestine
finding during physical examination (Hillyer and
Quesenberry 1997).
Urogenital Tract
The right kidney is cranial to the left kidney and is
covered by the caudate lobe of the liver. The bladder
holds approximately 10cc of urine. In the male the
 prostate is found at the base of the bladder.
Gender is easily determined in males, which have a
Figure 11.2. Ferret visceral anatomy. (Drawing by
ventral abdominal preputial opening similar to dogs.
Scott Stark.)
Ferrets
243
In females the urogenital opening has the appearance
Fertility in both genders depends on the photope-
of a small slit (Figure 11.3). During estrus, the vulva
riod. Females are seasonally polyestrous and induced
becomes enlarged. The natural breeding season is from
ovulators. Ovulation occurs thirty to forty hours after
March to August.
copulation. Gestation typically lasts forty-one to forty-
two days. If fertilization does not occur, pseudopreg-
nancy often occurs and that will last forty-one to
forty-three days. If these females are not bred, a large
percentage of these individuals will remain in estrus
with the potential for developing bone marrow sup-
 pression secondary to elevated estrogen levels (Hillyer
and Quesenberry 1997).
Adrenal Glands
Both adrenal glands lie in the fatty tissue anterior to
the cranial pole of the kidneys. The left gland is located
medial to the kidney and is approximately 6 to 8 mm
in length. The right adrenal gland is more dorsal than
the left. It is covered by the caudate lobe of the liver
and is attached to the caudal vena cava. It is larger
than the left with an overall length of 8 to 11 mm. This
knowledge is important when assessment of adrenal
gland disease is attempted either surgically
or
ultrasonographically.
Biological and Reproductive Data
 Table 11.1 provides basic biological and reproductive
 data necessary for proper examination of a ferret or
A
answering common client questions.
BEHAVIOR
 Ferrets are active litle animals and the trouble that
l jo azis au Aq Auo pal si ou a ueo aui
head. The adult males are called hobs, intact females
are called jills, spayed females are sprites, and juveniles
are called kits. The ferret has been and still is used for
hunting, biomedical research, and most recently as a
 pet. The domesticated ferret does not fear humans or
unfamiliar environments unlike its counterpart, the
European polecat (Fox 1998). In pairs they constantly
play fght, expelling sounds from a low growl to a
high-pitched scream when challenged or in pain. They
continuously roll and bite their opponent on the face
and feet, with their favorite spot being the nape of
the neck.
Many times in the heat of play with humans or
companions, ferrets back up across the room chatter-
B
ing and hissing at the same time. They are attracted to
quick movements, an instinct developed primarily for
Figure 11.3. (A) Male reproductive anatomy. (B)
hunting prey. Their eyesight is only good up to short
Female reproductive anatomy. (Drawings by Scott
distances and they depend upon their excellent sense
Stark.)
of smell and acute hearing to help them maneuver in
244
Chapter 11
Table 11.1. Physiologic values for domestic ferrets.
tion of household items such as insulation for wiring
and pipes, packing material, rubber bands, soft rubber
Adult weight
material for shoes, or other pet toys. These latter items
Male
1-2kg
are particularly dangerous because ferrets seem to have
Female
600-950g
an affinity for materials made out of rubber.
Life span
 5-8 years average in the
Gastrointestinal obstruction is a common problem
 United States. Some may
seen in young ferrets.
 reach 12 years of age
Caging should be of adequate size with minimum
Sexual maturity
 4-8 months of age (usually
dimensions of 24 inches X 24 inches × 18 inches
 reached in first spring
(Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997). Ideal caging should
 after birth)
provide multiple levels and a hiding or den area, suf-
 Gestation period
41-42 days
ficient area for a liter box, and space for food and
Normal weight at
8-10g
water. However, some owners may also set aside an
birth
entire room as living quarters for their ferrets. Food
Eyes and ears open
21-37 days of age (usually
bowls should be made of a nontoxic product and safe
30-35 days)
water bottles are available commercially. Litter pans
Weaning age
6-8 weeks
 in a household seting may consist of a small plastic
Rectal temperature
37.8°C-40*C
litter box similar to cat pans but may require lowering
(100°F-104*F)
one side of the pan for entry. In a veterinary hospital,
Average blood volume
Mature male, 60mL;
small, low cardboard boxes are useful with debilitated
Mature female, 40mL
or postsurgery animals. They are also conveniently
Heart rate
180-250 beats per minute
disposable.
 Urine volume
26-28mL/24 hours
-dyouou 'prey paaordde raa, aq pnous sro
Source: Hillyer and Quesenberry (1997).
ping rubber bals, metal toys that make noise, and
" ferret" jungle gyms made of PVC pipes provide good
entertainment.
their environment. Due to their sense of smell, ferrets
  an i as sasou  aa 
predisposes them to loud sneezing, which often alerts
NUTRITION
their owners as to their location. Ferrets are active
about 25% to 30% of the day and asleep the remain-
The domestic ferret, European polecat, and black-
ing 70% to 75% (Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997)
footed ferret are predatory animals that feed primarily
 on small mammals and birds. Early ferreters fed their
animals bread or corn meal soaked with milk. They
HUSBANDRY
survived on this diet as long as it was supplemented
with fresh meat.
The word "ferret" means to search out something, to
Most ranch ferrets are fed commercial pelleted
ferret it out, or to find something. This is a pet ferret's
foods. Initially, mink diets were fed but they lacked
whole existence and an extremely important factor in
important nutritional components due to their protein
providing a safe and an environmentally rich habitat
base of fish (Bell 1999).
for these animals. Assume that ferrets can go any-
The ferret is an obligate carnivore with a very short
where. The limiting hole diameter for escape is usually
intestinal tract. Compared to a cat, the ferret has
less than 1 inch; anything over that they can easily
relatively about one-half the intestinal length. They
explore. Cages in the home setting and the veterinary
are spontaneous secretors of hydrochloric acid, like
hospital must reflect this attitude. All potential open-
humans and unlike dogs, cats, and many other preda-
 ings to the outside such as heating and air conditioning
tors. These animals often hide food in various locations
vents and tubing, dryer vents, doors, and windows are
 in their environment for future consumption. Because
all possible routes of escape.
of the inefficiency of the ferret's digestive tract, ferret
Ferrets do not fare well outdoors because of their
diets must be high in protein and fat and low in fiber.
domestication. Inside the house, reclining and other
Traditional ferret diets include 30% to 40% protein
furniture, bedding, appliances, and electrical cords
and 15% to 30% fat. The type of diet depends on the
Aissod e se yep uaa pue anu puod ra
ferret's health status and life stage, such as if they are
Owners must be acutely aware of the dangers of inges-
growing kits or lactating jills (Bell 1999).
Ferrets
245
It is important to feed a high-quality domestic ferret
central nervous signs such as ataxia, torticollis, and
food in dry form. Dry food is preferred over moist due
nystagmus.
to the health beneft for the mouth, teeth, and gums.
 Intestinal obstructions are very common in young
Young kits require some moistening of the kibble
inquisitive ferrets. These individuals present with or
foods until they get their adult teeth. At about ten
without vomiting, they may have diarrhea, they are
weeks of age they should begin to handle dry kibble.
lethargic, and in most situations there is a palpable
 There are numerous commercial foods available either
abdominal mass. Bruxism, which is when a ferret
from pet stores, veterinary clinics, or the Internet. If
 gnashes its teeth from side to side and may froth at the
food availability is difficult, a high quality dry kitten
mouth, is a common sign of pain.
food may be substituted. Some ferret food manufactur-
 Epizootic catarrhal enteritis (ECE) or green slime
ers also have senior diets available.
disease is a debilitating disease of young and old
Supplements may be warranted in some situations,
ferrets. ECE is usually brought into the house via intro-
such as medical problems, surgery recovery, or cold
 duction of a new young ferret. It is a highly contagious
environmental conditions. Products such as Linatone
 disease of ferrets characterized by profuse green diar-
(Lambert Kay) and Nutrical (Evsco Pharmaceuticals;
rhea, dehydration, anorexia, and progressive wasting.
Division of IGI Inc.) are available through veterinary
Tumors present themselves in many ways with
offices. A common over-the-counter product, Ferretone
ferrets. The most common tumors involve the adrenal
(8-in-1 Pet Products), is also a good choice. Snacks
 gland (Figure 11.4). These tumors may be benign or
and treats should be held to a minimum because ferrets
 malignant. Adrenal gland disease most often presents
will over indulge on their favorite foods and run the
as a dermatological concern. Hair loss on the tail,
long-term risk of malnutrition. Commercial meat or
bilateral hair loss along the abdomen, and vulvar
liver snacks for cats or ferrets are acceptable, and an
enlargement in spayed females are consistent findings
occasional raisin may add a little variety to a ferret's
with adrenal gland involvement. Adrenal tumors can
 diet. In some medical conditions, such as insulinoma,
also cause behavior change and generalized muscle
a i s ui i ae i sidns ro si
wasting. Secondary complications of the disease found
to
be avoided except at the direction
of
in male ferrets involve the prostate in the form of
veterinarian.
prostatic hyperplasia or cysts and they commonly
Water should be fresh and available at all times.
COMMON AND ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Influenza (orthomyxovirus) is the only documented
zoonotic disease of ferrets. In most cases the transmis-
sibility from humans to ferrets is much higher than
ferrets to humans. Owners should be aware of that
risk to their pets when they have upper respiratory
problems. Other potential zoonotic diseases include
leptospirosis, listeriosis, salmonellosis, campylobacte-
riosis, tuberculosis, and rabies. There are no known
cases of transmission of rabies to humans from ferrets.
Cryptosporidiosis has the potential of transmissibility
 to immunosuppressed individuals (Hillyer and Quesen 
berry 1997).
Many disease syndromes are found in ferrets.
 Upper-respiratory infections are common with ferrets
as well as with their owners. Canine distemper is occa-
sionally found manifesting itself in various forms.
Early signs include mucopurulent ocular nasal dis-
charge, crusty facial and eyelid lesions, and hyperkera-
tosis of the footpads. In some individuals there is an
orange color change to the skin. These animals are
Figure 11.4. Adrenal gland disease in a ferret.
often anorexic, and in advanced cases may show
(Photo courtesy of Dr. Sam Rivera.)
246
Chapter 11
 present with dysuria. Bacterial or fungal bladder infec-
tion, or is it straining to urinate? Is your ferret active
tions can be a sequela to prostatic disease in males with
and alert?
adrenal disease. This problem may be extremely chal-
Physical examination should also be consistent.
lenging to treat.
Begin at the facial region and work caudally. Make
Lymphoma is found in the ferret in numerous
sure that all areas are searched. Look for discharge
forms. It may involve the lymph nodes, spleen, liver,
from the eyes, nose, or ears. Examine the ears for
intestines, kidneys, lung, and bone marrow. Squamous
 masses or signs of mites. Remember, dirty ears do not
cell, mast cell, basal cell, and sebaceous gland tumors
necessarily need to be cleaned. A certain amount of
are the most common tumors of the skin.
 discharge is normal and is present for protection. Are
 Insulinoma, a type of pancreatic cancer, is very
the eyes uniform in appearance and are there any
challenging to manage. Ferrets present very weak and
signs of cataracts? Are all adult teeth present or are
sometimes with seizures. Due to the excessive insulin
there remaining deciduous teeth? Does the rest of
produced by this pancreatic tumor blood glucose
the
  oral  cavity appear normal?  Gingivitis and
levels in affected ferrets are very low. These animals
tartar are common findings in the oral cavity that
often present with significant weight loss, dehydration,
should be noted if present. Often the best way to evalu-
moderate to severe depression, anorexia, or in a coma-
ate the oral cavity is by gently scruffing the nape of the
tose state.
neck and waiting for the ferret's characteristic yawn
 Renal cysts are found in many ferrets and often are
reflex.
 only coincidental findings.
Are there any signs of lymph node enlargement?
Ectoparasites such as feas, ear mites, S
sarcoptic
 Heart and lung fields are evaluated in the same respect
mites, and ticks are common in ferrets and are easily
as with other small animals with one slight change.
treated. Endoparasites are uncommon but coccidia
Due to the more caudal location of the heart, ausculta-
and giardiasis are occasionally found. There is some
tion of the heart in ferrets typically occurs at the caudal
 geographic prevalence to ringworm (mycotic) in some
chest area as opposed to the mid chest area. Are the
individuals
lung sounds normal and is there any indication of a
Posterior weakness is a frequent observation in sick
heart murmur? Does the animal appear normal and of
or debilitated ferrets. This is also a common sign seen
good conformation? Muscle and skeletal systems
 in hypoglycemic animals.
should be symmetric and show no sign of dysfunction.
 Myofacitis is a new emerging disease that has been
Do the limbs move in a normal manner? How is the
documented in at least a dozen ferrets. This disease is
appearance of the skin and hair coat? Canine distem-
characterized by severe inflammation of muscles and
 per may cause crusty lesions on the skin or an orange
surrounding fascia. Ferrets with this condition tend to
color change. E
Hydration is also measured by skin
be young (six to eighteen months of age) and have
turgor. Always be aware of masses of the skin and
multiple clinical signs including pain, high fever, a
subcutaneous tissue.
reluctance to move, diarrhea, vomiting, and anorexia.
Individuals also develop a neutrophilic leukocytosis.
vating the ferret above the examination table by the
None of these symptoms typically respond to antibiot-
nape of the neck or by gently holding it around
ics or anti-inflammatories. The cause of this disease,
the neck. Most of these individuals accommodate the
which is rapidly progressive and fatal, is unknown
examination without too much struggle. Keep in
(Garner 2007).
mind that the spleen in many ferrets may be
enlarged with no other indication of disease or illness.
Examination of the prepuce and penile region in
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL
the male and vulvar area of the female is important to
EXAMINATION
look for infection or any indication of endocrine
problems.
The procedure for taking a history and performing a
For neurologic problems consider the overall
physical examination on ferrets should follow routine
behavior of the ferret. Is it aware, alert, and curious,
small animal veterinary protocol. Questions should
or does it appear to be stargazing and unconcerned
 include: Has your ferret been coughing, sneezing, vom-
with its surroundings? Is the ferret having trouble
iting, or having diarrhea? Has there been any discharge
standing? Ferrets with evidence of neurologic disor-
from the eyes, nose, or any other body orifice? What
ders, depending on the clinical signs, may have a life-
Jnos sao raiadde sii st mou pue iaip siad inos s!
threatening illness that requires immediate medical
ferret drink water excessively, have increased urina-
intervention
Ferrets
247
PREVENTIVE MEDICINE
The primary focus for preventive care in ferrets should
be centered on annual or bi-annual physical examina-
tion. An early vaccination program is imperative in
 young ferrets. These individuals should be vaccinated at
six to eight weeks, ten to twelve weeks, and thirteen to
fourteen wee ks for distemper ( Purevax Ferret Distemper;
Merial, Inc., Athens, GA). Rabies vaccination is strongly
recommended in environments with risk of infection
and may also be required by law in individual states or
municipalities. A rabies vaccine (Imrab3, Rhone Merieux
Inc., Athens, GA) may be given as early as three months
of age. Both canine distemper and rabies boosters are
given yearly along with a physical examination.
Despite the creation of safer ferret vaccines, vaccine
reactions still commonly occur in some ferrets. Vaccine
reactions seen include lethargy, depression, seizures,
and cardiac arrhythmias. Veterinary hospitals have
Figure 11.5. Ferret restraint using the scruffng
method. (Photo courtesy of Dr. Sam Rivera.)
adopted various protocols for dealing with newly vac-
cinated ferrets. Some hospitals monitor these ferrets at
least thirty minutes after vaccination. Other hospitals
may provide premedication with an antihistamine
the safety of the assistant. Although ferrets are usually
 prior to vaccination. Whatever the protocol, be aware
active creatures, they are easily managed in the clinic
that vaccine reactions have been known to occur at
setting. Young ferrets and occasionally adults that are
least twenty-four hours post vaccination. Owners
less frequently handled may have a tendency to nip.
should be alerted to the clinical signs and take appro-
Some of these individuals may latch onto a finger and
priate measures to seek veterinary care should these
require a gentle extraction.
signs appear after discharge from the hospital.
The preferred methods for injections and examina-
Heartworm disease is found in ferrets. Prevention of
tion are scruffing the neck or forming a ring around
heartworm disease may be accomplished by off-label
the neck using the index finger and thumb (Figure
use of Heartgard 68μg (Heartgard-30, Merck Agvet
11.5). The rear legs and rear quarters are firmly pulled
Division, Rahway, NJ). Give one-fourth tablet once
caudally but not at full extension. Another method
monthly. The remainder of the tablet should be dis-
involves wrapping the ferret in a towel "burrito" style
carded because the remaining preparation will deterio-
(Figure 11.6). This is very effective for jugular veni-
rate. A liquid ivermectin preparation may also be used
puncture. Many ferrets may be vaccinated or treated
by mixing 0.3 ml of injectable ivermectin (Ivomec 1%
without any physical restraint other than using a treat
injection for cattle, Merck Agvet Division, Rathway,
as a distraction.
NJ) in 28 ml (1oz) of propylene glycol. Administer
A few individuals may require restraint with light
0.2 ml/kg PO (0.02 mg/kg) once per month. This prepa-
sedation prior to the performance of any procedures.
ration is light sensitive and should be stored in a light-
Chamber or mask induction with gas anesthesia is
blocking container. The expiration date is two years as
usually all that is needed. Besides the risks of anesthe-
long as the time period falls within the expiration date
 sia, minor changes may occur in the results from blood
of the stock bottle (Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997).
drawn in the anesthetized patient. The advantages are
 Internal parasites are not commonly seen in ferrets;
that procedures may be performed quickly and with
however, an annual fecal examination is strongly
less stress and struggling on the part of the patient and
recommended.
handler.
RESTRAINT
RADIOLOGY AND ULTRASOUND
As with any animal, proper restraint involves the
As with many small animals, it is difficult to radio-
humane handling of the patient with consideration for
 graph a part without radiographing the whole indi-
248
 Chapter 11
Common procedures in ferrets include gastroto-
mies, enterotomies, adrenalectomies, cystotomies,
partial pancreatectomies, lymph node biopsies, and
mass excisions of the dermis. Most orchiectomies and
ovariohysterectomies are performed at the breeding
farms prior to entry of the ferret into the pet popula-
tion. Every state has its own regulations regarding
breeding, spaying, and neutering. Hepatic and splenic
biopsies are employed as diagnostic tools and may be
 performed surgically or through the use of ultrasound-
guided biopsy forceps. Ferrets often have enlarged
 jo  a aq ro  n   saids
 Many orthopedic problems common in dogs and cats
are not found in the ferret. However, fractures and
dislocations do occur in pet ferrets.
Figure 11.6. Ferret restraint using a towel. (Photo
PARASITOLOGY
courtesy of Dr. Sam Rivera.)
 Fecal examinations are routinely performed in young
vidual. Obviously, one should measure the body part
ferrets and in ferrets presenting with clinical signs of
of interest and set the machine according to the thick-
illness. Intestinal parasites are uncommon compared
ness and the machine's technique chart. Small mammal
to dogs and cats. Coccidiosis (Isospora spp.), when
technique charts must be tailored to each clinic's
 found, occurs in young animals. The oocysts are shed
equipment. Contrast radiography is employed as a
between six and sixteen weeks of age and can be dem-
diagnostic tool in ferrets. The most common use is in
 onstrated in fecal examination. The Isospora spp. that
 gastrointestinal studies. The protocol, though similar
affects cats and dogs may cross-infect ferrets.
to the cat, should keep in mind the fast gastrointestinal
Giardiasis may be seen in ferrets housed in pet store
transit time of the ferret.
settings. Cryptosporidiosis is a common finding in
Ultrasound studies are easily performed and readily
tolerated by ferrets with only light restraint. Whole
individuals for months. No treatment exists in ferrets
body scans are performed, often with special attention
 and one must keep in mind the zoonotic potential in 
to the stomach, pancreas, lymph nodes, liver, kidneys,
 the immunocompromised human population.
adrenal glands, and bladder, and the prostate in males.
Ear mites often produce a persistent brown-red
aural discharge without clinical significance. These
parasites also cross-infect dogs and cats. Ear swabs are
ANESTHESIA AND SURGERY
the key to diagnosis.
Heartworm disease (Diroflaria immitis) occurs in
Inhalation anesthesia is the recommended product for
ferrets, especially in endemic areas. Heartworm pre-
 induction of ferrets. Isoflurane is the most common
vention is unapproved but recommended.
 product in use. Sevoflurane has more recently been
 Flea infestation ( Ctenocephalides spp.) is a common
used and lacks the irritating taste of isoflurane. The
finding in ferrets housed with dogs and cats. Flea
main disadvantage is the cost of se voflurane. Intubation
control methods for cats, particularly Advantage
may be a challenge with ferrets but is similar to that
(Bayer, Shawnee Mission, KS) and Revolution (Pfizer,
of cats. The technique may require the use of a stylet.
New York, NY), have been used but are not approved.
Gas anesthesia is then continued for the duration of
 e an ae s edo as
the procedure. Use of a forced-air patient warming
smaller doses (Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997).
system (Bair Hugger, Arizant, Eden Prairie, MN) helps
to prevent hypothermia. Pulse oximeters, respiratory
monitors, and cardiac monitors work well with ferrets.
URINALYSIS
Analgesia is an important element in the recovery of
postsurgical ferret patients. Butorphanol (0.1 to 0.5 mg/
Collection is achieved by one of three methods. Gentle
kg IM or SC every twelve hours) is effective in ferrets.
expression, catheterization, and cystocentesis have all
Ferrets
249
Table 11.2. Urinalysis normals for ferrets.
ronmental setting in which people have respiratory
illness or where new ferrets have been introduced.
Color
Clear to yellow
Ill ferrets require minimal handling. Young and old
 Specific gravity
1.015-1.055
ferrets are susceptible to green slime disease (epizootic
Ph
6.0-7.5
catarrhal enteritis). Vaccine reactions were more
Protein
0-1
common with previous vaccine protocols but have
Glucose
0-Trace
improved with the introduction of the new ferret dis-
Ketones
Negative
temper vaccine (Purevax Ferret Distemper, Merial,
Bilirubin
Negative
Inc., Athens, GA).
Occult blood
Negative
Standard methods of restraint for ferrets include
WBC
0-5
wrapping the ferret in a towel or grasping the nape of 
RBC
0-3
the neck. TPR, physical examination, and history are
Casts
Occasional
important to establish a good baseline.
Crystals
Occasional
Hospitalization of critical ferrets requires a quiet,
 Epithelial cells
0-Few
temperature-controlled cage with oxygen capabilities.
Bacteria
Negative
 Anorexic ferrets are at risk due to hypoglycemia or
Urine volume (ml/24hr)
8-140 ml (Mean
hepatic lipidosis. The gums of the lethargic ferret may
26-28 ml)
be rubbed with supplements containing high levels of
sugar to provide an immediate energy boost to the
Source: Antech Diagnostics.
ferret until other life-saving measures may be per-
formed. Later on, force-feeding A/D Diet (Hill's Pet
been successfully used. Catheterization is difficult in
Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS), Eukanuba Recovery Diet
both males and females due to the small size of the
Proctor and Gamble, Cincinnati, OH), or Critical
urethra and the anatomically challenging os penis.
Care Diet for Carnivores (Oxbow, Murdock, NE) via
There are manufacturers that produce
specialized
syringe or tongue depressor provides good nutritional
equipment for these purposes (Cook
Veterinary
support. Other preparations are available or can be
Products, Queensland, Australia). However, size 3.5
formulated in the hospital.
French red rubber catheters have been successfully
Basic diagnostic tests include a blood chemistry,
used to catheterize male ferrets.
hematology, and fecal examination. A blood glucose
 Due to the activity of the animal, cystocentesis may
can be performed on a human glucometer or blood
 be best performed under anesthesia using a 25-gauge
chemistry analyzer, or with less accuracy using a blood
needle attached to a 1-cc or 3-cc syringe. Care should
glucose stick. The blood chemistry analyzer offers the
be taken to avoid using a large needle because it may
best accuracy providing the blood sample has been
lacerate the bladder.
 Urine dipstick, specific gravity, and sedimentation
ferrets is the jugular vein with the saphenous and
are used for standard analyses. Urinalysis normals are
cephalic veins serving as secondary sites.
presented in Table 11.2. Urine culture should be
Catheter placement is intravenously either in the
performed in cases of suspected kidney or bladder
lateral saphenous or cephalic veins. Jugular catheter-
infection, preferably using a sample obtained via cys-
ization can be used but is not tolerated well by ferrets.
tocentesis or sterile catheterization.
They often become depressed due to the required ban-
daging around the neck. Cut downs of the jugular and
cephalic veins in severely dehydrated ferrets may be a
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
consideration. Sometimes the vascular system of the
dehydrated patient may require re-hydration with
The normal life span of a ferret is five to seven years.
fluids delivered via the subcutaneous route hours prior
 In an emergency, as with any animal, a history and
to attempted placement of IV or IO catheters.
physical examination are crucial in determining the
Intraosseous catheter placement can be performed
 magnitude of the situation. Insulinoma, adrenal gland
in the humerus, femur, or tibia; the femoral placement
disease, and cardiomyopathy occur most often in older
is best. This procedure is best done under anesthesia.
ferrets. Mediastinal lymphosarcoma, diarrhea,
or
Anesthesia may not be a safe option in animals that
foreign body ingestion are found commonly in emer-
e ped s aanrd s eap aaaas ar
gencies of young animals. Infectious diseases affect
may require local block of the periosteum and sur-
ferrets of any age and are a consideration in an envi-
rounding soft tissue.
250
Chapter 11
The fluid administration requirement for ferrets is
d. Use the nasolacrimal cannula or a blunt-tipped
70 ml/kg/day. Dehydration and losses are the same as
needle as a stylet, and insert the lubricated tip of
in other small animals. With critical animals it is
the cannula or catheter into the urethra orifice.
important to use the IV or IO route. Use of an IV pump
Keep in mind that the orifice is not directly at the
designed for small mammals is recommended.
tip of the penis but ventral to the end of the penis.
Medications are administered via IV or IO cathe-
There is often a small flap of penile tissue that must
ters, IM injection in the quadriceps, and oral routes.
be elevated to access the urethral opening.
Oral preparations are accepted best in liquid form
e. Advance the catheter until urine begins to flow.
ferrets. Oral medications may be made more palatable
Females:
with special flavorings that encourage better compli-
ance from the patient.
a. Prepare supplies and anesthetize the patient.
Cystocentesis may require sedation due to the thin
b. Place the animal in ventral recumbency with ele-
wall of the bladder and the potential for laceration.
vated hind quarters.
Ultrasound-guided centesis is also a consideration
C.
 Aseptically prepare the vulva and perivulvar area.
Urethral catheterization requires anesthesia in all
d. Locate the urethral opening using a vaginal specu-
 patients regardless of condition. Locating the urethral
lum or otoscopic cone.
opening is a challenge in both males and females. Male
e. View the urethral opening on the ventral floor of
ferrets present more often in an emergency situation
the vaginal vestibule, approximately 1 cm cranial
due to urethral obstruction from prostatic disease sec-
to the clitoral fossa (Quesenberry and Carpenter
ondary to adrenal gland problems or cystic calculi
2004).
(Orcutt 1998).
f. Insert the catheter and advance until urine flow is
achieved.
SEX DETERMINATION
Collect voided sample from examination table or
empty litter box: Many ferrets will urinate and defe-
 Sex determination is not as difficult as in many small
cate after their temperature is taken.
mammals. Adults are similar to the dog. Neonate
males have a urogenital opening on the ventral
TPR
abdomen. Female ferrets have a narrow anogenital
The same procedure employed with the dog and cat is
distance (Fox 1998, 106) (Figure 11.3).
used in the ferret.
Medication Administration
TECHNIQUES
 Injectable medications and fluid administration require
 proper restraint.
Urine Collection (Sterile)
IV sites: Normally given via IV catheter
Cystocentesis: Use a small syringe attached to a 25-
 gauge needle. Palpate the bladder in the caudal
a. Jugular vein
abdomen or use an ultrasound-guided technique.
b. Cephalic vein
Urinary catheterization: Use a 3.5 French red rubber
c. Lateral saphenous vein
or other specialty catheter, nasolacrimal cannula or
small gauge needle, water-based lubricant, sterile
IM sites:
gloves, hemostats, forced-air warming blanket, and
gas anesthesia.
a. Quadriceps
Males: The male anatomy is complicated by
b. Lumbodorsals
the J-shaped os penis and the small diameter penile
c.
Triceps
urethra.
d. Semitendinosus and semimembranosus. Use caution
to avoid the sciatic nerve.
a. Prepare supplies and anesthetize the patient.
b. Estimate the length of the catheter from the center
Subcutaneous sites: Can be given in a fold of skin
of the urinary bladder to the urethral entrance
anywhere along the dorsum.
c. Position the ferret into ventral recumbency
Per os: Administered by tilting the head back and
and
retract the prepuce.
placing the syringe through the side of the mouth or
Ferrets
251
placing the syringe in side of the mouth while ferret is
sure to the vein on either side of the manubrium
standing.
and the sample is drawn from the jugular vein.
c. The ferret may be positioned similar to a cat for a
Venipuncture (Figure 11.7)
jugular venipuncture. The head is elevated dorsally,
Jugular vein:
the front legs are extended downward, and blood
is drawn with the needle approaching the same
a. Sternal recumbency with one hand pulling the front
direction as the head.
legs off the table and the other pulling the head
back.
Cephalic vein:
 b. Using a towel, wrap the ferret tightly with only the
animal's head exposed. With the animal in dorsal
a. Use normal restraint using the scruff of the neck.
recumbency the ferret's head is flexed dorsally
b. Extend the foreleg.
toward the person responsible for drawing the
c.
Hold off the vein.
 blood sample. The assistant should apply light pres-
d. Draw the sample using a 25- or 22-gauge needle.
The Jugular Vein.
The Caudal Artery.
The Cephalic Vein.
Figure 11.7. Venipuncture sites. (Drawing by Scott Stark.)
252
Chapter 11
Saphenous vein:
a. Used as a last resort.
b. The technique is the same as for the cephalic vein
Cranial vena cava: This site has become more and
more popular as veterinary personnel become comfort-
able with its use. The risk of cardiac puncture is low
due to the length of the vena cava and caudal thoracic
placement of the heart along with the proper use of
short needles and proper placement. Sedation or anes-
thesia may be required unless the patient is calm and
adequately restrained. Practice with an anesthetized
ferret can aid in mastery of this venipuncture (Lennox
Figure 11.8. Cephalic catheter placement. (Photo
2009).
courtesy of Dr. Sam Rivera.)
 a. The ferret is restrained in dorsal recumbency with
its neck extended. Alternatively, it can be wrapped
rinized saline and replace the cap. Remember that
in a towel.
a smaller amount of flush will be used to accom-
 b. Choose a one-half inch needle of 25- or 27-gauge.
modate the smaller patient.
c. Insert the needle in the area to the right or left of
g. A small drop of surgical glue may be placed at the
the manubrium of the sternum at a slight angle,
catheter-skin junction. Tape the catheter in place,
aiming it toward the opposite hip.
aul oi ainssad yonu ooi Aidde oi iou areo bui
d. Advance the needle while applying negative pres-
skin and resulting constriction of the vein.
sure. Deep penetration is not necessary because the
h. Connect the IV line to the patient using a minidrip
vessel is fairly close to the surface at the cranial
set and/or an IV pump with the potential to cali-
aspect of the sternum.
brate fluid rates for smaller patients.
e. Look for a flash. Once one is obtained, blood should
be obtained with ease. If no blood is seen, redirect-
ing the needle may be necessary or the needle may
Intraosseous Catbeter Placement
go through the vessel.
Sites: Include humerus, tibia, and femur (Figure 11.9).
f. Use of this technique is strongly recommended only
Technique:
by experienced veterinary team members.
a. The femur is the best site that causes the least
N Catbeter Placement
restriction in movement.
Sites: Include jugular, saphenous, and cephalic veins
b. Use 20- or 22-gauge catheters. A stylet or larger
(Figure 11.8).
 needle may be used to create a pilot hole, or entry
Technique:
 point, for the catheter.
c. General anesthesia is recommended except in debili-
a. Materials required: 24- or 26-gauge IV catheter,
tated individuals. Local anesthetic blocks may be
clippers and surgical preparation supplies, tape,
used for the surrounding soft tissue and periosteum.
flush, tourniquet if needed.
b. Prepare the site using aseptic technique.
Enema
c. Apply a tourniquet as needed.
Materials needed: Small rubber urinary catheter,
d. Use a 22-gauge needl to penetrate the skin lateral
water-based lubricant, enema solution (warm soapy
to the vein in the area where the catheter will enter
water), syringe.
just prior to entering the vein. In general, ferret skin
Technique:
is difficult to penetrate.
e. Visualize the vein, insert the needle, and advance
a. Insert the lubricated tip of the rubber urinary cath-
the catheter until blood enters the hub of the needle.
eter into the rectum of the restrained animal.
f. When the catheter is properly seated in the vein and
b. Attach the syringe full of enema solution to the end
blood is flowing freely from the catheter, flush the
of the catheter and gently flush the colon using
catheter thoroughly with about 0.2 to 0.3 ml hepa-
constant steady pressure.
Ferrets
253
through physical examination, baseline blood work
evaluation, fecal examination, assessment of adrenal
hormone levels, and possibly radiographic and ultra-
 sonographic examination. These ferrets also need pre-
ventive medical care, including heartworm prevention,
regular deworming, and vaccination for rabies and
FEMUR
 canine distemper viruses.
The amount of blood available for transfusion is
based upon body weight. The compatibility of
donor and recipient ferrets should be determined
according to previously described methods in canine
and feline practice. The donor ferret should be
sedated with gas anesthesia to avoid any struggling
and to provide a complication-free needle stick,
which will prevent contamination of the sample with
disruptive clotting factors. The transfusion recipient
may receive the blood sample via fluid pump. Prior to
 transfusion, necessary premedication with anti-hista-
   d q  
reactions.
The donor ferret should be kept warm, receive
replacement fluids and, depending upon the amount of
blood removed, will then be designated as unavailable
for transfusions for a period of time as determined by
the veterinary facility.
Euthanasia
Figure 11.9. 1O catheter location. (Drawing by
Euthanasia is best performed by sedating the patient
Scott Stark.)
using chamber or mask induction with gas anesthesia.
As an alternate method, telazol (0.2 cc/10 Ib IM) may
also be used. After the ferret has been sedated, the
c. Remove the catheter and cleanse the surrounding
euthanasia solution can be administrated via the IV or
intracardiac routes.
skin.
Bandage and Wound Care
 The same procedures used on other small animals may
REFERENCES
be used with ferrets. A separate small mammal bandage
box with ready-to-go materials may be used. The
Bell JA. 1999. Ferret nutrition. Veterinary Clinics of North America.
materials should include small-scale items, such as
Exotic Animat Practice, Criticat Care, January, 169-192.
Fox JG. 1998. Biology and Diseases of the Ferret. 2nd ed.
small scissors and one-half inch tape or materials cut
Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger. 5-106.
to scale from larger diameter supplies.
Garner MM, Rammsell K, Schoemaker NJ, Sidor IF, Nordhausen
RW, et al. 2007. Myofascitis in the ferret. Vet Pathot 44(1):
Blood Transfusion
25-38.
Hillyer EV, Quesenberry KE. 1997. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents,
Blood transfusions may be used if a local donor system
Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB. Saunders
is in place. Many facilities that see large numbers of
Company. 4-70.
ferrets may keep healthy donor ferrets on site 
in
Lennox AM. 2009. Proceedings of the North American Veterinary
case a transfusion is needed. Other ferrets may be
Conference, 1867-1870.
 privately owned and available as needed on an emer-
Orcutt CJ. 1998. The Veterinary Clinics of North America. Exotic
Animat Practice, Critical Care, September, 99-126.
 gency basis.
Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW. 2004. Ferrets, Rabbits, and
 Donor ferrets, similar to their canine and feline
 Rodents, Clinical Medicine and Surgery. St. Louis W.B. Saunders
counterparts, require regular screening for disease
Company. 21-22.
CHAPTER TWELVE
Rabbits
Douglas K. Taylor, Vanessa Lee, Deborah Mook, and Michael J. Huerkamp
INTRODUCTION
tates litter box training. If caged, those of a timid
nature retreat to the back of the enclosure when
The domestic rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) is a lago-
 approached and may thump a hind foot-the latter is
morph of the family Leporidae that descended from
a general warning or alarm call. Aggressive rabbits
wild rabbits found originally in the area of modern day
may growl or grunt, charge, flail with the front feet,
Spain. Cottontail rabbits are related, but in the genus
and attempt to bite. Biting is fairly rare, but rabbits
Sylvilagus. The early domestication of the rabbit began
may scratch, especially with the powerful rear limbs.
in western Europe and northwestern Africa in the first
They scent mark by rubbing the chin on objects and
century B.C. By the mid-1600s, rabbits were raised all
they enjoy chewing on wire, wood, cardboard, paper,
over Europe for meat and fur and were in the course
hay, or other materials they encounter. Sexually intact
of dissemination all over the world via sailing vessels
rabbits of either gender, but particularly males, may
that stocked them as a source of meat supply. Female
fight, and this should be taken into account in counsel-
rabbits are called "does," males are "bucks," and neo-
ing owners toward neutering or recommending indi-
nates are termed “kits." Those rabbits raised for food
vidual housing. Compatible groups of does, particularly
are termed "fryers."
if formed in small clusters while young, can be main-
 Rabbits are attractive as pets because they are quiet,
( au) a jo spd u og p
gentle, and relatively odor-free, they rarely bite, and
 Sexually intact, mature rabbits of either gender may
they can be trained to use a litter box. They generally
also spray urine and mark territory (Stein and Walsha w
suuo Arenues rapun ida ji yeau poo kotua
1996).
receive adequate water and nutrition; and are pro-
 Abnormal and stereotypic behaviors that might be
tected from predators, environmental extremes, drafts,
elicited during the acquisition of a history include cage
 and trauma. Today in the United States, in addition to
bar chewing, excessive fur plucking, psychogenic water
being kept as pets, rabbits are exhibited for showing.
consumption, head swaying or weaving, head pressing,
used in scientific research, and used for food and fur
obsession with pawing or digging at the cage foor or
production. Depending upon the locale and nature of
food hopper, rapid circling, or sitting with the head
the veterinary practice one could be presented with
lowered (Bayne 2003). Although not backed by any
rabbits from any of these general areas of use.
scientific evidence, stereotypies and abnormal behav-
iors are most likely to be disproportionately high in
rabbits kept singly and confined to hutches as com-
BEHAVIOR
pared to those that are more free-roaming in the home.
As such, the rabbit hutch should be designed and
Rabbits are a generally timid and often submissive
outfitted to encourage species-typical behavior and
prey species with a propensity for chewing and
enhance the well-being of the inhabitant.
gnawing. If given the space and social opportunities,
 In confined conditions, enrichment devices have
they will chase, jump, gambol, rear, bat at objects,
been documented to decrease the incidence of undesir-
gnaw, and explore (Bayne 2003). Episodes of cavort-
able behaviors and increase overall activity of rabbits
ing and exploration tend to be intermittent and inter
(Bayne 2003, Johnson et al. 2003). The devices that
spersed with longer periods of huddling or resting
have been used most successfully to encourage the
against a wall or surface. Overall, rabbits are generally
species-typical nudging, playing, and investigative
quiet, not particularly playful with humans and tend
behaviors of rabbits are chew-resistant plastic toys and
to urinate and defecate in a chosen area, which facili-
balls, Nylabone? products, sections of PVC tubing.
25.5
256
Chapter 12
metallic washers suspended from chains, stainless-steel
 gathering and heat dissipation and are highly sensitive
rabbit rattles on spring clips, and hay and other food
and fragile. Consequently, rabbits should never be
items specially formulated for rabbits (Bayne 2003,
restrained or carried by the ears.
Johnson et al. 2003).
Rabbits have a high muscle-to-bone ratio. While
Mating of rabbits should be supervised because
13% of the body weight is comprised of bone in the
does may be aggressive toward bucks. A buck will
cat, only 8% is bone in the rabbit (Harkness and
circle a receptive doe and then quickly mount and
Wagner 1989). Because they are engulfed in large
copulate. Mating is an amusing ritual to observe as the
 muscle masses, the long bones and lumbar spine are
 post-coital male swoons off of the back of the doe.
particularly at risk of fracture or luxation, respectively.
Kits are born in a nest that the doe makes from hair
 For rabbits used as pets and in research, this is an
plucked from the dewlap and other materials that it
unfortunate characteristic that can be attributed to a
may scavenge from the cage or environment. The kits
 heritage of development for maximal meat production.
are born hairless and blind, an attribute that differenti-
 Three in five rabbits will have atropinesterase in the
ates rabbits from hares, which are born furred and
serum, which rapidly hydrolyzes atropine, essentially
 s ae s    s o 
rendering the agent unpredictable to worthless in
once per day. Lactation peaks at three weeks postpar-
 effect. Like cats, rabbits are prone to laryngospasm
tum. The kits start eating solid food at two weeks of
and may be a challenge to intubate owing to the com-
 age and cecotrophy commences about a week later.
bination of a small glottis, narrow oropharynx, rela-
Weaning should be done at five to six weeks.
tively large and fleshy tongue, and other anatomic
factors. The skeletal anatomy of the rabbit is shown
in Figure 12.1.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The predominant white blood cells are lymphocytes
and heterophils, the rabbit equivalent of a neutrophil
 Rabbits have a number of distinguishing morphophys-
(Color Plate 12.1), which may be mistaken for an
iologic attributes that make them interesting and
eosinophil because of the presence of numerous small
differentiate them from more traditional pets. H
For
intracytoplasmic eosinophilic granules. Unlike cats
example, rabbits importantly use cecal bacterial fer-
and dogs, lymphocytes are generally more common
mentation in digestion, cannot vomit, have a narrow
than granulocytic cells (heterophils). Basophils (2% to
pylorus, and engage in cecotrophy. In some part due
 7%) are more common in rabbits than other species
to the latter three characteristics, they rarely have an
(Harkness and Wagner 1989). Reticulated red blood
empty stomach. They have large, accessible veins and
cells may also be encountered more frequently in
arteries in the ears, facilitating fluid administration,
rabbits than in dogs or cats.
intravenous injection of therapeutic agents, blood-gas 
Clinical chemistry values observed in rabbits are not 
analysis, and direct blood pressure measurement. The
remarkable as compared to dogs and cats with the
ears, in addition to high vascularization, serve in sound
exception of serum amylase and calcium levels.
Scapula
Pelvis
Hlumerus
Radius
Fcmur
-Tibia
Ulna
Figure 12.1. Rabbit skeletal anatomy
Rabbits
257
The rabbit is most interesting and unique from the
 perspective of digestion. It is a nonruminant herbivore
dietarily preferring the tender succulent parts of
plants. The teeth are open-rooted and grow continu-
ously. The normal dental formula is I2/1, C0/0, PM
3/0, and M3/3, and is unique because the upper dental
arcade includes two sets of incisors with a small, sec-
 ondary pair, the peg teeth, situated immediately to the
lingual side of the larger labial pair. The single pair of
lower incisors occludes with the upper secondary inci-
sors. The void between the incisors and premolars that
is devoid of canine teeth is called the diastema (Figure
12.3). The incisors may grow at a rate of up to 1 cm/
month.
Rabbits have a glandular stomach that functions
essentially as a storage organ. The cardiac sphincter
Plate 12.1. Rabbit blood smear showing heterophil.
 has tone to the degree that true vomiting is prevented.
(Photo courtesy of Dondrae Coble.) (See also color
 The stomach is never empty and even after a twenty-
plates)
four-hour fast will typically be more than half full
(Griffiths and Davies 1963). The stomach of the adult
Calcium is absorbed from the gut efficiently at a high
rabbit is noteworthy for having a gastric pH that is
rate. Consequently, blood levels relate directly
to
significantly lower than that of other species (Cheeke
dietary levels, often resulting in a dietary nonpatho-
1987). This renders the upper gastrointestinal tract
genic hypercalcemia. Rabbits on high calcium diets
sterile, serving partly to protect against the oral route
may have blood levels meeting or exceeding 15 mg/dL.
 of inoculation by pathogens. The gastric pH is higher
e  a  oq  o rea si 
in sucklings, permitting bacterial colonization of the
excreted in the urine. Most other species excrete
hindgut by cecotroph-oral inoculation from adults
calcium primarily in the bile (Cheeke 1987). Rabbits
in the population. Unfortunately, it also provides a
are susceptible to arteriosclerosis as a consequence of
window of opportunity for entry of bacterial gastro-
dietary calcium imbalance or vitamin D excess. Serum
intestinal pathogens, particularly at or around the time
amylase values are considerably lower than those
of weaning.
found in dogs and cats (McLaughlin and Fish 1994).
 The small intestine, similar to most species, is the
Blood gas values of normal rabbits and their interpre-
 major site of acid neutralization, protein and carbohy-
 tation are essentially identical to other species.
 drate digestion, fat emulsification, and absorption of
Reproductively, does have a duplex uterus with
many nutrients. Rabbits are hindgut fermenters, similar
each uterine horn having its own cervix and eight to
 to the horse, with digestion characterized by selective
ten mammary glands. Does can rebreed within twenty-
 excretion of fber, cecal fermentation, and reingestion
four hours of parturition, termed “kindling” in the
of cecal contents. The spacious cecum, comprising
parlance of rabbit users, and produce up to eleven
about 40% of the total gastrointestinal capacity, is a
litters per year. Kits may show growth rates of up to
site of constant peristalsis with mixing and remixing
35 to 40 grams per day. Like cats, ovulation in rabbits
of its contents and where an intricate and delicate
is coitus-induced. Unlike cats, the receptive does are
relationship exists between nutrients, the microflora,
 not likely to drive owners to distraction, but intact
 and motility. It is the primary site of bacterial fermen-
bucks, especially those that are house pets, regularly
tative digestion and water absorption. The anaerobic
mount seemingly everything in sight, and not uncom-
flora important in cecal fermentation are comprised of
monly the owner's slippered foot after sitting down in
Bacteroides and other species (Cheeke 1987, Davies
 the evening to relax. The inguinal canals remain open
and Davies 2003).
for the life of the buck and the testicles may inter-
Fermentation of carbohydrates results in the pro-
changeably be found in the scrotum or retracted into
duction of volatile fatty acids, in a process similar to
the abdomen. Herniation of other intraabdominal
that of rumination, which are absorbed through the
pa siodap ieg are Aq pauard si sueo
cecal wall and used as a source of energy (Cheeke
covering the canals (Swindle and Shealy 1996). Figure
1987). The colon, characterized anatomically by serial
12.2 shows rabbit visceral anatomy.
sacculations (termed haustrae), contracts and moves
258
Chapter 12
Righl Atrium-
Ileart-
Lt.Lung
Gall Bladder
Liver (Reflected)
Small
Stomach
Intestine
Appendix
Spleon
-Left Kidney
Colon:
Ureter
Descending
Colon
Figure 12.2. Rabbit visceral anatomy.
fluid and small digestible particles back into the cecum
and propels large pieces of fiber distally where they are
formed into the excreted hard pellets that are typically
 observed in litter boxes and fecal pans.
At intervals, the cecum contracts and the fluid,
protein, and vitamin-rich cecal contents are expelled
into the colon, formed into small, soft balls, covered
with mucin, consumed directly from the anus, and
swallowed whole by the rabbit (Davies and Davies
2003). This process is known as cecotrophy and it
serves to recycle vitamins, amino acids, volatile fatty
acids, and digested bacteria to the upper GI tract for 
absorption or further digestion as needed (Davies and 
Davies 2003). The unique separation of the nutritive
 products of cecal fermentation and fecal waste allow-
ing for the reingestion and absorption of bacteria and
their by-products in the small intestine results in more
efficient use of forage proteins than rumination. It is
品
enabled by the fusus coli, a muscular thickening at
the termination of the transverse colon exclusive to
Figure 12.3. Rabbit dentition.
lagomorphs that regulates contractions that separate
Rabbits
259
Anatomically, the rabbit gastrointestinal tract is
also unique with respect to the presence of a lymphoid
mass, the sacculus rotundus, at the termination of the
ileum into the cecum. Lymphoid tissue is also found
DUODENUM -.
in the appendix at the cecal tip (Figure 12.4).
PYLORUS
BIOLOGIC AND REPRODUCTIVE DATA
JEIWNUY
In the interpretation of laboratory tests, one should
ideally rely upon a normal reference range for the
species provided by the diagnostic laboratory that has
conducted the test(s). When such values are not pro-
vided by the laboratory, the ranges in the tables that
follow can be used as an approximation of what can
SACCULUS
 be expected in the normal healthy rabbit (Tables 12.1,
ILEUM
ROTUNDUS
12.2, 12.3). However, one should appreciate that
"normal values" may be influenced by laboratory
variation, sample collection technique (e.g. extent of
ASCENDING
restraint), type of anesthesia (Gonzales et al. 2005),
COLON
hemolysis, post-collction sample handling (e.g. refrig-
eration), time to centrifugation, centrifugation charac-
teristics, breed and age of the subject, and other factors.
The numeric data provided in the tables below are
normal values obtained from research populations of
CENTKAL
rabbits that were of fairly uniform genotype and age
APPENDIX
LOOP
and maintained under standard conditions. They are
presented as the normal distribution about the mean
of a healthy population of rabbits. Presentation of
DISTAL LOOP
values in this format merits several comments. First,
DESCENDING
some parameters may not have a Gaussian distribution
COLON
 %S puos idde iou aeu uonqns jeou e pu
RECTUM
of normal, healthy animals have values that lie outside
and at the extremes of the normal range. The interpre-
tation of laboratory data, as in any other circumstance
with any other species, should take into account for
Figure 12.4. Rabbit GI tract.
interpretation the history, findings from a physical
examination, and results of any other diagnostic tests.
digestible  from  indigestible material  (Davies and
Davies 2003)
HUSBANDRY
 Morphologically, the cecotrophs appear as clumps
of smaller, soft, moist fecal pellets that glisten from
Rabbits can be housed either indoors or outdoors, the
their gelatinous coat. This mucus-like membrane serves
latter with appropriate shelter from the elements.
to protect the cecotrophs, and fermentative commen-
Rabbits can be litter box trained and, for this reason,
sals contained therein, from the gastric pH. Cecotrophs
make suitable indoor pets, but their proclivity for
gnawing is a drawback. Furniture, carpets, window
general rule, cecotrophy generally follows about four
dressings, toys, electrical cords, and shoes provide
hours after consumption of a meal (Davies and Davies
numerous indoor targets for gnawing. Where ver they
2003). While wire caging has no effect upon cecotro-
are housed it is critical to protect rabbits from drafts,
phy given the consumption of the cecotrophs directly
temperature extremes, predators, flying insects, and
from the anus, the act can be prevented through the
environmental intoxicants. Rabbits are cold-weather
application of an Elizabethan collar.
tolerant and are best kept at temperatures of 55*F to
260
Chapter 12
Table 12.1. Hematology and blood
coagulation
Table 12.2. Clinical chemistry values.
values.
Normal
Normal
Parameter
distribution
Reference
Parameter
distribution
Reference
AST (U/L)
0-30
Yu et al. 1979
Total WBC (10²/μl)
4.6-13.2
Wolford et al.
ALT (U/L)
0-60
Yu et al. 1979
1986
GGT (U/L)
8-0
Hewitt et al.
Heterophils (%)
<50%
Wolford et al.
1989
1986
SAP (U/L)
0-139
Hewitt et al.
Lymphocytes (%)
>50%
Wolford et al.
1989
1986
CPK (U/L)
<700
Hewitt et al.
Monocytes (%)
0-3%
Wolford et al.
1989
1986
BUN (mg/dL)
9-22
Hewitt et al.
Eosinophils (%)
0-2%
Wolford et al.
1989
1986
Creatinine (mg/dL)
0.6-1.5
Hewitt et al.
Basophils (%)
0-7%
Wolford et al.
1989
1986
Glucose (mg/dL)
86-137
Hewitt et al.
Platelets (102/μl)
300-700
Wolford et al.
1989
1986
Amylase (U/L)
270-700
Yu et al. 1979
PCV (%)
33-45
Wolford et al.
 Total bilirubin
0.4-9.2
Yu et al. 1979
1986
(mg/dL)
RBC (10°/μl)
5.5-7.5
Wolford et al.
Sodium (mEq/L)
138-150
Gillett 1994
1986
Chloride (mEq/L)
92-120
Gillett 1994
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
11-15
Wolford et al.
Calcium (mg/dL)
6-15
Yu et al. 1979
1986
Hewitt et al.
MCV (fl)
56-66
Wolford et al.
1989
1986
Gillett 1994
MCHC (%)
32-36
Wolford et al.
 Phosphorus (mg/dL)
3-5
Yu et al. 1979
1986
Potassium (mEq/L)
3.5-7
Gillett 1994
MCH (pg)
19-22
Wolford et al.
Total protein (g/dL)
5.3-7.6
Yu et al. 1979
1986
Albumin (g/dL)
3.1-4.7
Yu et al. 1979
Reticulocytes (%)
<4
Wolford et al.
1986
 Bleeding time
0.8-2
Livio et al.
box containing straw, shavings, or other insulative
(minutes)
1988
bedding. In hot weather, generally temperatures above
Clotting time
1.1-5.5
Livio et al.
 85°F, rabbits require shade and plenty of cool water.
(minutes)
1988
Heat stress is a significant risk at this temperature and
OSPT (seconds)
7.9-17.9
Gentry 1982
 above. In extreme heat, consideration should be given
APTT (seconds)
19.5-22.5
Gentry 1982
 to moving the hutch to a breezy garage or patio with
Prothrombin time
6.9-8.1
Lee and
a fan. Moving the rabbit indoors to an air conditioned
(seconds)
Clement
area may be too much of an acute environmental
1990
stressor and such drastic actions on the part of an
Thrombin time
5.7-14.1
Lee and
 owner should be discouraged.
(seconds)
Clement
 Plans for rabbit hutches and nesting boxes can be
1990
obtained from libraries, extension agents, or feed com-
 panies. Assembled cages suitable for rabbits often can
be obtained from pet stores. At a minimum, rabbits
72°F or slightly below and 30% to 70% relative
 confined to cages should be given sufficient floor space
humidity (Patton 1994). Rabbits can be housed out-
to stretch out to full length with sufficient head room
doors if protected from cold below 40*F in the winter
 to permit sitting on the haunches. Hardware cloth of
and excessive heat in the summer.
1.25- x 2.5 cm-grid is suitable for flooring, but the
Protection from cold, drafts, and moisture in winter
animal should have access to other surfaces as well
can be accomplished by providing a covered nesting
because wire flooring can predispose the rabbit to
Rabbits
261
Table 12.3. Normative and reproductive values.
contain 14% to 18% crude protein, 40% to 50%
carbohydrate, 2% to 4% fat, 10% to 22% crude fiber,
Normal
 and appropriate vitamins and minerals in the proper
Parameter
distribution
Reference
balance. Indigestible fiber, although discriminately
Life span (years)
5-7 (1.5
Gillett 1994
excreted and not an important source of nutrients, is
maximum}
important in digestion; normal health; and the preven-
Gestation (days)
31-32
Gillett 1994
tion of fur pulling, gastric trichobezoars, enteritis,
Litter size (kits
4-10
Gillett 1994
mucoid enteropathy, and other gastrointestinal mala-
born)
dies (Cheeke 1987). Fiber stimulates ceco-colonic
Weaning age
5-6
Gillett 1994
motility promoting the peristaltic activity critical to the
(weeks)
hindgut fermentative process. Without sufficient long
 Rectal temperature
101-104
Gillett 1994
particle length (>0.5 mm) fiber, hypomotility is induced,
(°F)
floral alterations occur, the digestive process grinds to
Heart rate (bpm)
200-300
Gillett 1994
a halt, and disease may be induced (Davies, et al.
 Respiratory rate
30-60
Gillett 1994
2003). For growth, 10% to 15% dietary fiber is
(bpm)
optimal, while less than 10% predisposes to GI disease.
Blood pressure,
90-130
Gillett 1994
Adult rabbits should be kept on rations containing
systolic (torr)
15% to 22% fiber.
Blood pressure,
06-08
Gillett 1994
 The pelleted diet should be supplemented with hay
diastolic (torr)
 because this indigestible fiber helps maintain a healthy
Food intake (g/kg/
50
Harkness and
weight, gut motility, and dental health. Timothy and
day)
Wagner
 alfalfa hay are available in many pet stores, but alfalfa
1989
has high calcium content and so should not be given
Water intake (ml/kg/
100
Harkness and
to rabbits predisposed to urinary sludge.
day)
Wagner
Fresh greens and vegetables can also be given in
1989
Blood pressure values are given for instrumented conscious
liflower leav
s.broc
rabbits with central arterial catheters. Values average 10 torr
mustard greens. Other greens, such as sunflower leaves,
carrot tops, or green bean vines, can also be offered.
less if the central auricular artery is used (Edwards et al.
There is little to no information on the effect of herbs
1959).
on rabbit nutrition or health and they should be used
with caution. Overfeeding of fresh greens predisposes
pododermatitis. Wire flooring should be cleaned regu-
to starch overload, cecal pH extremes, and enteric
larly to remove suspended hair and feces. Sexually
 diseases. In addition, to prevent gastroenteritis, it is
mature rabbits, whether male or female, should be
important not to feed spoiled foods or those discarded
individually housed, known to be compatible,
or
in the trash at restaurants or groceries.
closely monitored because they may attack one another.
Another option is to permit grazing on clover or
dandelions under supervised conditions in a fenced,
 on providing hiding places, material for chewing (card-
covered enclosure in the yard. This should only be
board, paper), or nutritional supplements such as hay.
 done in areas where fertilizers, herbicides, and pesti-
cides have not been used. This practice also carries
some risk of exposure to parasite oocysts shed by wild
NUTRITION
rabbits other forms of wildlife, dogs, cats, and other
species. Grazing on forages other than clover or dan-
Rabbits should be fed a rationed amount of pellets
delions is not recommended. For example, crown
supplemented with free choice hay and small amounts
vetch contains glycosides that may be toxic and
of fresh foods. Rabbits should be fed and will readily
Bermuda grasses, kudzu, and birdsfoot trefoil have
eat extruded pelleted diets specially formulated for
low feeding value (Cheeke 1987).
their species. These can be found in feed mills and
Some rabbits may relish human breakfast cereal
major pet stores. Pelleted diets should be stored at
 products, such as shredded wheat biscuits or grain
72°F or lower and used within three to six months of
cereals, as a treat. Fruits, whole grains, fat-based
the milling date (PMI Nutrition International 1998).
treats, and high carbohydrate supplements should be
Pelleted diets are nutritionally complete and typically
avoided (Davies et al. 2003). It is not necessary, and
262
Chapter 12
 may actually be harmful in some cases, to supplement
position, and health (e.g. lactation). Lactating does
 a proper pelleted diet with minerals.
consume water up to 90% equivalent of their body
As a rule of thumb, a rabbit generally consume 5%
weight daily (Harkness and Wagner 1989).
of its body weight in dry feed and 10% in water.
Rabbits kept as pets or used in research typically are
limit fed pelleted diets, while those grown for food
COMMON AND ZOONOTIC DISEASES
production or that are lactating are fed ad libitum.
Peak food consumption in ad libitum fed rabbits is
The medical management of rabbits can generally be
biphasic, occurring in the interval from late afternoon
accomplished by meeting a few basic goals. The tenets
to approximately midnight and again shortly after
of preventive care are good nutrition and sanitation
dawn (Davies and Davies 2003). Limit or controlled
combined with protection from predators, drafts, envi-
pp au jo %s/ o %os supaay Aq auop si supaay
ronmental extremes, environmental intoxicants, and
libitum consumption once per day and is important in 
trauma.
 preventing obesity and urolithiasis and otherwise opti-
 Rabbits commercially reared are often raised in pole
mizing health.
barns and, for the most part, are free of infectious
 For a medium-sized rabbit (4- to 6-kg adult), limit
 agents. Pasteurella-free flocks are not uncommon, but
feeding is done by providing 120 to 180 g pelleted diet
most sources have some problems with coccidiosis,
/day. This translates to 3 to 4oz or about 2/3 cup.
encephalitozoonosis, and, on occasion, internal and/or
Administration of the ration by limit feeding encour-
external parasites. New Zealand white and Dutch
ages daily observation of the pet and prompt detection
belted rabbits are often available as specific pathogen-
of anorexia as a tip-off to an underlying health
free animals from rabbitries. Other outbred stocks
problem. Pregnant does should be fed 175 to 225 g/
or domestic breeds are generally not pathogen-free
day and at parturition they should be gradually
and typically are colonized by Pasteurella multocida.
increased over a few days to ad libitum feeding. Limit
 Rabbits obtained from pet stores, unless the vendor
feeding is especially important at weaning during the
can make a specific claim otherwise, should be assumed
dietary transition from milk-based diet to plant-based
 to be Pasteurella-infected. Clients considering the pur-
food when there may not be sufficient brush border
chase of a rabbit should be counseled to obtain it from
enzymes in the gut to digest plant carbohydrates and
a source with a Pasteurella-free colony or to obtain a
protective maternal antibodies are  waning.
Limit
kit at weaning or as close to weaning as possible. This
feeding of weanlings protects them from osmotic over-
is arguably the best advice, from a preventive medicine
 load, pH extremes, and enteric disease. Weanlings of
standpoint, that can be given to a client desiring a pet
 medium-sized breeds should be given 60g/kg/day up
rabbit.
to a maximum of 120 to 180g/day.
 In private practice, a domestic or wild rabbit is most
Rabbit kits are entirely dependent upon milk until
likely to be encountered in the clinic for interventional
ten days of age and then they progressively begin to
 purposes rather than preventive medicine. There are
consume solid foods and maternal-origin cecotrophs
 no effective vaccines for specific rabbit diseases avail-
up until weaning at around four weeks of age (Davies
 able in the U.s., for example, and, other than neutering
and Davies 2003). Kits typically nurse once daily with
over-sexed males or performing ovariectomies on
 ingested milk forming a semi-solid curd protected in
females, there is little in the way of preventive medical
the stomach by an antimicrobial fatty acid product
formed by the action of the kit's digestive enzymes on
However, clients that otherwise own dogs or cats may
 , ro  s, P  s  a
seek the advice of a clinic in providing proper care for
(Davies and Davies 2003). This curd gradually passes
their rabbits. Knowing a little bit about rabbits may
into the intestine over the time between feedings
not only be good for the occasional rabbit patient, but
(Davies and Davies 2003). Rabbits fed on milk substi-
it may also be valuable in maintaining business.
tutes or milk from another species fail to develop the
The most common presentations of rabbits to a
 protective fatty acid products and are devoid of colos-
veterinary clinic are for abscesses, malocclusion, elec-
tral antibody, making them susceptible to bacterial
tive surgical procedures such as ovariohysterectomy
 enteric infections (Davies and Davies 2003).
and orchiectomy, and possibly nail trimming. Rabbits
Water should be given free choice and is generally
also may experience respiratory, gastrointestinal, or
consumed at twice the feed intake quantity or about
integumentary illnesses, as well as neoplasia. The
100 120 ml/kg/day. Water consumption varies with
rabbit diseases of greatest clinical importance
are
factors such as environmental temperature, diet com-
grouped into those affecting the respiratory, digestive,
Rabbits
263
and integumentary systems and by infectious, inher-
There are no effective vaccines, commercially avail-
ited, or traumatic/environmental etiology.
able or otherwise, to prevent pasteurellosis or control
its clinical signs, although there have been many
Respiratory Infectious Diseases
attempts at generating them. Veterinary care is primar-
Bacterial upper respiratory tract disease in rabbits is
ily supportive and symptomatic, and may be dissatisfy-
commonly referred to as “snuffles," and is character-
ing for all parties. Antibiotics, such as marbofloxacin
ized by sneezing, mucopurulent nasal discharge, and
(Rougier et al. 2006), sulfas, chloramphenicol, tetra-
conjunctivitis. This syndrome is the most common
cyclines, or enrofloxacin, may be given for a month or
infectious illness in pet rabbits, and the usual etiologic
more and result in improvement of clinical signs, but
agent is the bacterium Pasteurella multocida. The
 it is diffcult to eliminate the organism. Upon comple-
organism is part of the normal nasal flora of cats, as
tion of a course of therapy, symptoms may recrudesce
well, but the serotypes that cause disease in rabbits
and worsen over time. Consequently, for the most
differ from those in cats. Other bacteria have been
severe cases, antibiotics may simply buy time for an
identified in cases of rabbit snuffles, including
owner to come to terms with the prospect of euthana-
Bordetella bronchiseptica and Staphylococcal species,
sia. Less severe cases may improve and stabilize, but
but their importance to the pathogenesis is unknown
 animals may remain carriers. Supportive care delivered
and may be trivial (Deeb and DiGiacomo 2000). In
by a veterinary technician is symptom-directed and
rabbitries and/or pet stores where Pasteurella is enzo-
may include regular cleaning of obstructed nares,
otic, up to 90% to 100% of adult rabbits are infected.
flushing of the nasolacrimal duct in cases of severe
Inapparent carriers of Pasteurella occur frequently,
conjunctivitis, nebulization or vaporizer treatments,
 and subclinical infections localized to the nasal pas-
 and excision or incision/drainage of abscesses.
sages or tympanic bullae are common. On the other
 The proportion of rabbits with pasteurellosis
side of the clinical spectrum, the bacterium may cause
increases as rabbits age. By adulthood, 90% or so of
a chronic, progressive, incurable, potentially fatal,
 animals from a rabbitry with enzootic infection become
multi-systemic disease, starting with the upper respira-
colonized. Preweanling rabbits have a low rate of
tory tract. Most commonly, the syndrome presents
infection and early weaning can be used as a tool to
with frequent sneezing or mucopurulent nasal dis-
obtain Pasteurella-free animals. Additionally, treat-
charge (Langan et al. 2000).
ment of pregnant does prior to kindling and through
Pasteurella may be transmitted from rabbit to rabbit
lactation with antibiotics such as furazolidone, oxytet-
by direct contact, close contact aerosol, or, less fre-
racycline, or sulfaquinoxaline in the diet or drinking
quently, venereal routes. The role of fomites in trans-
water suppresses the bacterium and promotes the
mission is unclear. Pasteurella multocida is harbored in
weaning of pathogen-free kits.
the nasal cavity and/or tympanic bullae where it may
remain
localized.
Harborage
in
these
areas
Diseases of tbe Digestive System
 protects the bacterium from antibodies and adminis-
Rabbits, particularly weanlings and young kits, are
tered antibiotics. The organism is capable of dissemina-
commonly subject to diarrheal disease. Infectious
tion from the nasal passages to other parts of the body,
agents that play an important part in the gastrointes-
leading to a constellation of clinical manifestations
tinal illnesses of rabbits include coccidia; rotaviruses
including conjunctivitis, skin abscesses, inner ear infec-
and coronaviruses; and the bacterial agents E. coli,
tion, pyometra, orchitis, pneumonia, or septicemia.
Lawsonia, and Clostridium. Diet plays a vital role in
In a rabbits with suppurative clinical signs, diagno-
maintaining gastrointestinal health, and the provision
sis of pasteurellosis can easily be confirmed by bacte-
of a high fiber diet will in many cases be preventative
rial culture. When septicemic Pasteurellosis is suspected,
or ameliorative.
the organism should be recoverable from the blood.
Coccidiosis, caused by enteric or hepatotrophic
Asymptomatic carriers may prove more difficult to
species of the genus Eimeria, is a major disease problem
diagnose, because even deep nasal swabs may not iden-
 in young rabbits. Infection can be subclinical or mild,
tify all organisms. When carriers are suspected, deep
but clinical disease is characterized by  fulminant
nasal swabs may be attempted under anesthesia/seda-
diarrhea, and occurs in juveniles, especially recent
tion, for both culture and polymerase chain reaction
weanlings, kept under poor conditions or stressed by
amplification, using an alginate swab. Alternatively,
transportation.
 Unlike enteric coccidial species,
the serum can be assessed for antibodies against
Eimeria stiedae parasitizes the liver and bile duct.
Pasteurella multocida that may be suggestive of expo-
Infection is often subclinical, but in young rabbits the
sure and infection (Sanchez et al. 2004).
 agent may cause fatal hepatic failure characterized by
264
 Chapter 12
icterus, hepatomegaly, elevated hepatic enzymes,
of gut contents may show typical coiled bacteria.
wasting, and anorexia. The transmission of coccidia in
Anaerobic culture can positively identify the organism,
rabbits is by the fecal-oral route and the diagnosis is
 and several methods exist to assay for the enterotoxin.
made by fecal examination for oocysts or at necropsy.
 Treatment consists of a combination of nursing care,
Administration of sulfa drugs, ivermectin,
, and/or
fluid therapy, antibiotics, and increasing the fber
toltrazuril are treatment options (Cam et al. 2008).
content of the diet, aiming toward a normalization of
Because oocysts require a day or more to sporulate at
the gut microflora. The importance of sanitation, for
room temperature, the ingestion of night feces is not
removal of spores from the environment, should be
considered to play a role in the dissemination of
stressed to the client.
disease, and aggressive sanitation is an effective means 
Tyzzer's disease is caused by Clostridium piliforme,
of control. If housing and fomites are not cleaned
 a Gram-negative obligate intracellular bacterium with
effectively, oocysts remaining in the environment may
vegetative and spore forms. Like coccidiosis, it causes
be a source of reinfection for months. Vitamin E defi-
disease most commonly in recent weanlings, especially
ciency may potentiate coccidiosis.
in the face of crowding, poor sanitation, or deprivation
Rotavirus is enzootic in many rabbitries where it is
of food or water. Natural infection is thought to be by
 of mild pathogenicity. It destroys enterocytes that syn-
 ingestion of spore-contaminated food or bedding. The
thesize disaccharidases, consequently causing diarrhea
spores are hardy and can persist in the environment
due to maldigestion. Infection may be fatal in young
for years. Mortality can be acute and high. The diag-
kits that are not protected by maternal antibodies
nosis can be difficult to establish and is often made
under epizootic conditions. As with enteric viral dis-
 using special stains (silver) of specimens obtained at
 eases of other species, treatment is directed at sup-
necropsy. Serologic assays exist for the agent, but
portive care.
suffer from non-specific cross-reactivity leading to
Coronaviruses have been found in association with
false positives.
diarrhea in young rabbits. One survey of commercial
Enteropathogenic strains of E. coli are also impor-
rabbitries in North America showed a prevalence of
tant pathogens of young rabbits. The bacterium is
antibodies detected by serology to be as much as 40%
normally found as part of the commensal flora, but
(Deeb et al. 1993). Definitive diagnosis requires dem-
proliferates in the cecum in disease-causing yellow
onstration of coronaviral particles in gut contents by
diarrhea and leads to high mortality within forty-eight
electron microscopy. Thus, diagnosis of pet rabbits is
hours (Wales et al. 2005). Sucklings within two to
unlikely, and treatment remains directed at supportive
eight days of birth and weaned kits less than three
care.
months of age are most at risk. The organism can be
Clostridial enterotoxemia is caused primarily
by
identified by culture, and characterization of the isolate
Clostridium spiroforme. This Gram-positive, anaerobic
assists in predicting its virulence. Good sanitation,
bacterium is not normally a part of the gastrointestinal
fluid therapy, body temperature maintenance, and
flora or is suppressed to a very low and nonpathogenic
antibiotics are important in treatment.
level in healthy adults. The normal gut microflora is
Lawsonia intracellularis is the cause of proliferative
protective, and its disruption appears to be required for
colonization by C. spiroforme. Changes caused
by
Although infection is characterized by a one- to two-
weaning, following environmental stress, or by disrup-
week course of diarrhea, depression, and dehydration,
tion of the normal flora through concurrent infection or
it is rarely fatal. The organism is diffcult to culture;
the use of antibiotics with anaerobic and Gram-positive
histopathology or molecular diagnostic assays are
spectra can be predisposing factors.
.Antibiotics that
usually necessary (Horiuchi et al. 2008). Severely diar-
have been incriminated in the disease include clindamy-
-adan apoq pue ader p aa sqeu sia
cin, lincomycin, ampicllin, penicillin, metronidazole,
ture management.
and erythromycin.
 These antibiotics should be used
There are few helminth parasites of clinical impor-
clinically with caution, with the informed consent of the
tance in domestic rabbits. The rabbit pinworm,
client, and not on a herd-wide basis.
 Passalurus ambiguus, is not contagious for humans
Clinical signs include anorexia, wasting, and diar-
and is largely nonpathogenic. It is found in the cecum 
rhea, and are usually the result of enterotoxins which
and large intestine of wild rabbits and occasionally
damage normal gut function. The disease is suspected
domestic or laboratory rabbits. The life cycle is direct
based on a combination of signalment (the condition
sisoei au usau aq paboe si unu pu
usually occurs in young rabbits) and a history of recent
[ q sisoo jo uop q a aq e
change in environment and clinical signs. Gram stains
floatation examination techniques or observation of
Rabbits
265
expelled adult nematodes on the feces. The eggs
 action is more likely to be based on the hydration of
(43 um x 103um, flattened on one side) are laid in
the mass than a chemical decomposition. If necessary,
embryonated, infective form. Common anthelmintic
the rabbit should be administered subcutaneous or
agents used in dogs and cats, such as ivermectin, fen-
intravenous fluids. Provided there are no signs of
bendazole, and pyrantel pamoate, have high effcacy
impaction, metoclopramide for three to five days
 in rabbits (Carpenter et al. 2001, Curtis and Brooks
should assist in restoring normal gastrointestinal
1990, Diwel and Brech 1981).
motility.
Mucoid enteropathy syndrome is a mucoid diar-
Additionally, it is important to appreciate that
rheal disease of grave prognosis that is particularly
healthy rabbits commonly harbor gastric trichobe-
severe in weanling rabbits. The pathogenesis remains
 zoars without pathologic effect. Slaughter checks of
largely conjectural, but dietary factors have been
208 healthy rabbits in one study, for example, showed
implicated. Commercial rabbit feed is high energy and
that 23% had trichobezoars (Leary et al. 1984). In the
low in fiber, and rabbits on low fiber diets have lower
same study, infusion of rabbit stomachs with latex
acetate levels. This fatty acid is thought to be a com-
causing a large space-occupying mass had no effect on
ponent of the protection offered by the normal gut
the immediate or long-term health of the rabbits.
environment. When levels are low, microorganisms
 Consequently, trichobezoars can be incidental findings
may proliferate, further altering the fermentative
in rabbits and should not be considered to be patho-
microflora. The imbalance, in the presence of as yet
logic until proven otherwise.
 unidentified microorganisms, progresses to profuse,
mucoid diarrhea (Percy and Barthold 2007). Affected
Integumentary Infectious Diseases
rabbits are thin with a hunched posture, anorectic,
The most important integumentary disease of rabbits
dehydrated, hypothermic, and mildly bloated. Dietary
is ear mite infestation by the ectoparasite Psoroptes
change and other stressors, such as painful injections,
cuniculi (Figure 12.5). The condition, most properly
Overheating, or inadvertent water deprivation (includ-
 called otoacariasis, may be referred to as ear mange or
ing excessively warm, yet plentiful, water in the
ear canker by rabbit keepers. Exudate and inflamma-
summer months), may also predispose to disease.
tion in the ear canal can be extensive and the mites
Treatment is generally unsuccessful with the case fatal-
may also parasitize periauricular areas, including the
ity rate approaching 100%. This is clearly a disease in
face and neck. Transmission of the parasite is direct
which an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of
from rabbit to rabbit and the life cycle requires twenty-
cure. Mucoid enteropathy can be prevented by feeding
one days for completion. Tens of thousands of mites
high fiber rations and restricting the pelleted diet to
may be found on a single animal (Bowman et al. 1992).
60 g/kg body weight.
 Mites can survive off of the host for weeks at a time
Gastric stasis syndrome may occur in rabbits of all
(Hess 2004). Infestation causes pruritus, head shaking,
 ages, and generally presents as an anorectic rabbit with
stress, and competition for nutrients. The ears may be
decreased or no fecal production, but otherwise
painful to touch and, in advanced cases, are heavily
 appears normal. It may be possible to palpate a doughy
encrusted with exudate. The mites are large enough to
mass (the stomach) in the cranial abdomen, but
abdominal palpation may also be normal. Gut stasis
can be caused by environmental changes, stress includ-
ing postoperative stress), or excessive amounts of a
high energy, low fiber diet. The gut contents may or
may not be predominantly composed of hair, and the
presumptive diagnosis of trichobezoar may occasion-
ally be made more rapidly than is warranted. Due to
gastric hypomotility, the stomach contents, whether
hair or ingesta, become dehydrated and difficult to
 pass. Treatment consists of rehydrating the contents of
the stomach, maintaining hydration of the animal, and
stimulating motility. The rabbits should be force-fed
liquids and/or fruit and vegetable purees (e.g. baby
food). The use of pineapple juice for the bromelin has
been advocated as a method for breaking down the
mass. The juice may well work, but the mechanism of
Figure 12.5. Ear mite infestation.
266
 Chapter 12
be seen with the unaided eye, but the diagnosis usually
 and the organism will be eliminated within three weeks
 is made by otoscope examination of the large adults
 of the start of treatment.
(males, 431 to 547um x 322 to 462 um; females, 403
Ulcerative pododermatitis presents as decubital
to 749 um × 351 × 499 um) in the aural canal or micro-
ulcers, typically on the plantar surfaces of the hind feet
scopic observation of mites from exudate swabbed
(Figure 12.6). Superficial ulcers and scabs may prog-
from the ear.
ress, without intervention, to abscesses or granulomas,
Treatment is with ivermectin by SC injection every
and further progression could lead to osteomyelitis or
two weeks for a total of three treatments, and aggres-
sepsis. The lesions are pressure-induced and predis-
sive environmental sanitation (Curtis and Brooks
posed commonly by a genetically-related decrease in
1990, Wright and Riner 1984). Although the antipara-
hair density on the feet. Poor sanitation, excessive
sitic agents selamectin and moxidectin are not labeled
environmental moisture, foot stomping, large adult
for rabbits, both have been used to eradicate Psoroptes
size, and wire-bottomed caging all may be contribu-
cuniculi without ill effects (McTier et al. 2003, Wagner
tory factors. Treatment consists of debriding and
and Wendlberger, 2000). Alternative methods for
 cleaning the site, and topical application of antibiotic
creams with bandaging and rebandaging for weeks at
oils, have been advocated (Fichi et al. 2007) and may
a time.
 be effective, but thorough environmental sanitation is
 Other interventions should include improving sani-
still required and cases treated thusly should be closely
tation and changing the flooring from wire to flat
monitored.
metal slatted flooring or solid flooring with use of a
Venereal spirochetosis is caused by a spirochete
litter box. The latter, however, may become soiled and
bacterium, Treponema paraluis cuniculi. The disease
 aggravate problems. When rabbits must be kept on
is known by a number of synonyms including trepo-
wire the strategic placement of a flat, solid resting
nemiasis, cuniculosis, vent disease, and rabbit syphilis.
board in an area of the cage preferred for rest and
Transmission may be horizontal by the 
venereal
away from areas used for urination/defecation may be
(coitus) or extragenital (facial-genital contact) routes.
helpful. Successful treatment is lengthy and the condi-
Fomite inoculation is also a possibility. In contrast to
tion often recrudesces, particularly if housing condi-
many other infectious diseases of rabbits, young
tions are not changed. Stapbylococcus aureus is the
rabbits are relatively resistant to infection, but inci-
most frequently identified associated organism (Percy
dence increases with time in a breeding program.
and Barthold 2007).
Following infectious contact, organisms localize and
Moist dermatitis (blue fur disease) may be seen in
proliferate at mucocutaneous junctions, causing ery-
the perineal area subsequent to urine or diarrhea scald,
thema and edema of prepuce, vulva, scrotum, perineum,
known colloquially as "hutch burn," or around the
or anus. The nose, eyelids, lips, and extremities can
face, neck, or dewlap as a consequence of malocclu-
also be affected. The lesions become vesicular; exude
sion or continual moistening of the fur by drinking
serum; and then become dry, scaly, and crusty. In the
from a water bowl. The latter presentation may be
natural course of the disease, lesions persist for at least
called "slobbers" by fanciers and breeders. The initial
one to three months and often for five months or so
(Delong and Manning 1994). During the course of
infection, the bacterium then colonizes regional lymph
nodes where it remains even after lesions fade. Overt
clinical disease is then precipitated by stress. Venereal
spirochetosis may be confused with and should be dif-
ferentiated from traumatic or chemical dermatitis,
localized  nontreponemal  bacterial  pyoderma  (e.g.
"hutchburn"), dermatophytes, and ectoparasites. The
diagnosis of treponemiasis is by history, physical
examination, and in vitro tests such as darkfield
microscopy and various serologic assays.
 Penicillins, given for periods ranging from five to
twenty-eight days, are the treatment of choice. A less
intensive penicillin regimen involving weekly injections
for a total of three treatments has also been advocated
(Delong and Manning 1994). Lesions generally resolve
Figure 12.6. Pododermatitis.
Rabbits
267
physical insult may lead to secondary bacterial derma-
antibiotics, warm compresses, f
fluid therapy, and,
titis caused by the bacterium Pseudomonas aerugi-
where indicated, incision and drainage.
nosa, which originates from feces or fecal-contaminated
drinking water. Pseudomonas species elaborate a blue-
Other Infectious Diseases
 green pigment that discolors the affected area. Rabbits
Cerebral larval migrans and fatal central nervous
so afflicted are often described as having blue fur. The
system disease may be seen in rabbits that acquire
treatment is by correcting the initiating cause, drying
aberrant infections with Baylisascaris species. Disease
the environment, clipping fur in the area of any lesions,
may occur where raccoons or skunks contaminate
and treating the lesions with astringents and topical or
stored feed or hay, gain acces to barns or cages
systemic gentamicin. The condition is prevented by
housing rabbits and defecate from the cage top into
good sanitation, controlling obesity, and not offering
the interior of the cage, or where pet rabbits have
water from bowls or crocks.
grazed contaminated forage or been housed on con-
Necrobacillosis (Schmorl's disease) is a syndrome
taminated hay (Deeb and Digiacomo 1994, Jensen et
that most commonly refers to dermatitis of the face
al. 1983, Kazacos and Kazacos, 1983). Signs of infec-
and neck area caused by excessive salivation, usually
tion include progressive torticollis, ataxia, tremors,
due to malocclusion or other dental disease. Skin
and falling (Deeb and Digiacomo 1994). The diagnosis
lesions may be found elsewhere on the body, however,
is based on clinical signs and histopathology, but fresh
and infection is typically associated with flthy condi-
 minced brain can be placed in a Baermann apparatus
tions or skin trauma. The microorganism generally
to separate the larvae for specific identification. The
associated with this condition is the Gram-negative
condition is untreatable. Rabbits are a dead-end host
anaerobic bacterium, Fusobacterium necrophorum.
for this disease and cannot pass it on to humans.
 This bacterium is a normal inhabitant of the gastroin-
There are a number of other infectious diseases of
testinal tract and causes ulceration and necrosis of the
rabbits that are not likely to be encountered in pet
skin when inoculated into it. Fecal contamination from
rabbits, but are worth mentioning. Obeliscoides cunic-
cecotrophy may be a source of oral inoculation. The
uli, the rabbit stomach worm, is common in wild
diagnosis is made by a combination of clinical signs
rabbits and may be found in laboratory rabbits that
and anaerobic bacterial culture. Treatment consists of
are fed contaminated feed or grazed on contaminated
debriding wounds and applying topical antibiotics.
forages. It is a trichostrongyle, embedding in the gastric
Systemic drugs with an anaerobic spectrum such as
mucosa with a direct life cycle with shedding for sixty-
penicillins, cephalosporins, or chloramphenicol may
one to 118 days (Jenkins 2004). Staphylococci may
be used in severe cases. Prevention is achieved by main-
cause septicemia, suppurative disease (including cuta-
taining a high level of sanitation, providing dental care
neous abscesses or mastitis), and conjunctivitis. It is
where indicated, and eliminating sources of trauma
most severe and common in young or distressed
such as coarse feed or sharp edges in cages.
animals. Rabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD) is caused
Fly strike is not uncommon in rabbits housed out-
by a calicivirus and targets rabbits after weaning. The
doors. Larvae of Cuterebra species can be found in the
disease is acute and highly fatal, showing few clinical
subcutis, causing 1- to 3-cm swellings, each housing a
signs. The virus usually presents as an explosive out-
single larva and each having a breathing hole. Larvae
break with high mortality in rabbitries, with rabbits
should be surgically removed carefully, so as not to
succumbing to a severe and widespread intravascular
damage them, because crushed larvae can cause an
coagulopathy (Xu and Chen 1989, Percy and Barthold
anaphylactic reaction. Maggots of non-Cuterebral
2007). Slaughter and disinfection are standard proce-
species may be found anywhere on the body, but have
dures in rabbitries where outbreaks have occurred.
a predilection for the perineal skin folds of aged or
Rabbits are also susceptible to toxoplasmosis (Leland
 obese rabbits. For all fly species, the treatment is to
et al. 1992) and may be an accidental host for the
remove the larvae and clean the wound site under
canine heartworm (Narama et al. 1982) and other
sedation, provide antibiotics and fluid therapy, and
diroflarial species if housed outdoors.
administer ivermectin for two doses at two-week inter-
vals. Preventive strategies consist of fly control mea-
Inberited Diseases
sures including screening outdoor pens.
Buphthalmia (glaucoma, ox eye) is not uncommon in
Mastitis can occur in lactating does, and also is
New Zealand white rabbits and is due to inadequate
 possible independent of lactation. The offending bac-
drainage of aqueous humor from the anterior chamber
teria are typically Staphylococcus aureus, streptococci,
(Tesluk et al. 1982). It occurs unilaterally or bilaterally
or Pasteurella (Pare et al. 2004). Treatment consists of
and is usually detectable by the time the rabbit is three
268
Chapter 12
to five months old. Buphthalmia in rabbits is charac-
Traumatic vertebral subluxation or fractures may
terized by megaloglobus, increased intraocular pres-
 occur secondary to struggling against restraint,
sure, and increased corneal diameter. The condition is
 improper handling or sudden jumping, or startling a
generally not painful, at least in the early stages, but
caged rabbit. Injury is predisposed by the high muscle-
may cause blindness. Medical treatment with anti-
 to-bone ratio in rabbits. The lumbosacral joint acts as
glaucomatous agents generally is not successful.
a fulcrum for the hind limbs with subluxation or frac-
Consequently, affected rabbits should be monitored
ture generally occurring at L7 or the caudal vertebrae.
regularly for pain or distress. Clients should be cau-
Diagnosis is made by clinical signs (i.e. posterior
tioned not to breed affected rabbits.
paresis or paralysis, loss of pain sensation, urinary
Splay leg, a developmental musculoskeletal disor-
retention, and fecal incontinence), palpation, and/or
der, is seen in young rabbits; the rear limbs splay and
radiography. Sequellae include decubital sores and
will not bear weight (Cohen 1969, Deeb and Carpenter
 perineal dermatitis from urine scald, along with uremia
2004). The condition varies in severity, with relatively
from urine retention. To treat, provide shock doses of
mild cases showing only clumsiness when ambulating.
methylprednisolone sodium succinate if the injury is
to severe cases, which are completely paralyzed. In the
acute. Long-term prognosis depends on the degree of
latter cases, euthanasia is warranted. As is the case
injury, with mildly injured rabbits responding to a
with most inherited disorders, clients should be cau-
course of treatment including bladder expression and
tioned not to breed affected rabbits.
anti-inflammatory drugs. Severely injured rabbits are
 Depending upon the breed and genotype, rabbits 
likely incurable and may require euthanasia.
may be afflicted by any number of other genetic and
Pregnancy toxemia is uncommon, but may be seen
metabolic diseases including epilepsy, hydrocephalus,
especially in Dutch or Polish breeds. It is most common
arteriosclerosis, cataracts, Pelger-Huet anomaly, cleft
in pregnant does in the last week of pregnancy, but a
palate, lymphosarcoma, and hypertension (Lindsey
similar metabolic toxemia may also be seen in pseudo-
and Fox 1994). Arteriosclerosis is a polygenic 
or
pregnant, postparturient, or obese does. Obesity and
familial trait that can be seen in all breeds, with calci-
fasting are considered to be predisposing factors, and
fed vessels visible on radiographs. Clinical signs are
 there is some evidence that hereditary factors play a
vague and may include general malaise, lethargy, and
role. There is often hepatic fatty infiltration and necro-
weight loss. Hydrocephalus is often associated with
sis. Clinically-affected animals are depressed and have
dwarfism and brachygnathia, although vitamin A defi-
acetone breath, dyspnea, and decreased urine produc-
 ciency in pregnant does will produce identical clinical
tion. Abortion, incoordination, convulsions, and coma
signs in offspring (Cohen 1969, Lindsey and Fox
may precede death. Death without premonitory signs
1994).
 can be a presentation. Treatment with lactated Ringers
 or 5% dextrose, steroids, and empiric use of calcium
Skeletal,Traumatic,and
gluconate is recommended, but is rarely successful.
Environmental Diseases
 Prevention is accomplished by providing an adequate
Malocclusion of the incisors (mandibular progna-
nutritional plane, including a high-energy diet late in 
thism, walrus teeth, and buck teeth) may be inherited
gestation balanced with obesity prevention.
due to the shortening of the maxillary skull relative to
the mandible of normal length with the lower incisors
Neoplasia
extending cranial to the upper incisors and growing
 Retrospective assessments of tumor incidence in rabbits 
into the mouth. Malocclusion may also be caused from
are confounded by the fact that case reports and his-
tooth loss due to trauma. More commonly, malocclu-
torical surveys have been largely derived from colonies
 sion results from high-energy diets causing excessive
 of research animals in which rabbits, for the most part,
tooth
1 growth and resulting in teeth that are not
rarely live longer than one to two years (Weisbroth
worn down adequately (Crossley and Aiken 2004).
1994). While tumor incidence increases with age, there
Uncontrolled growth of the incisors or “spikes" which
is no comprehensive tumor incidence information for
develop as a result of incomplete or inadequate wearing
aging rabbits.
Uterine adenocarcinoma is the most common neo-
variable drooling and oral lesions. The treatment for
plasm of female rabbits with a high incidence in the
malocclusion is periodic tooth trimming with
an
Dutch, Californian, and New Zealand white breeds.
appropriate power dental bur or extraction. The owner
The incidence is less than 5 % in does under two years
should be counseled against breeding the animal when
 of age, but in certain populations it may affect 80%
the cause is suspected to be genetic
of does over five years of age (Percy and Barthold
Rabbits
269
2007). Clinical signs include vulvar bleeding, anemia,
 monocytogenes causes acute, sporadic disease in many
and a palpable abdominal mass. The prevention and
species. In rabbits, it most commonly causes septice-
attempted treatment of the disease is by ovariohyster-
mia, abortion, and fatality of pregnant does.
ectomy (OHE). Unless does are to be bred, OHE is
Encephalitozoonosis, caused by the protozoan
recommended universally. In young rabbits, the most
Encepbalitozoon cuniculi, has a tropism for the brain,
common neoplasm is lymphosarcoma. Unlike other
 kidney, and eyes, and may cause neurologic signs, pri-
species, in which lymphoid organs are the most
marily head tilt, in rabbits. It may also infect immuno-
 common sites of involvement, in rabbits it is the kidney
compromised humans, with diarrhea, renal disease, and
and gastric mucosa (Percy and Barthold 2007).
keratoconjunctivitis associated with encephalitozoono-
 Interstitial cell tumors and seminomas have been
 sis in AIDS patients. Encephalitozoonosis may be found
reported in male rabbits (Weisbroth 1994). Other neo-
 in up to 30% of asymptomatic rabbits in certain colo-
plasms that have been reported with some frequency
 nies, and a survey of neurologic pet rabbits revealed
in rabbits include embryonal nephroma, leiomyoma/
 69% to be seropositive (Harcourt-Brown and Holloway
leiosarcoma, lymphosarcoma, cutaneous papilloma,
2003). In cases in which encephalitozoonosis is sus-
 and mammary adenocarcinoma (Weisbroth 1994).
pected, definitive diagnosis is difficult because it has
historically relied on visualization of lesions in brain
Zoonotic Diseases
tissue or PCR of the same. Thus, antemortem diagnosis
Domestic rabbits harbor few zoonoses of any signifi-
is based on clinical signs and serology, although a recent
report cites positive PCRs obtained from liquefied lens
the most important. Trichophyton mentagrophytes is
material in cases of uveitis and lens rupture (Kunzel et
most common, but Microsporum canis and other
al. 2008). Infection is acquired by ingestion, usually of 
species may cause infection (Bergdall and Dysko 1994,
food contaminated with infected urine, or nasal inocu-
Vogtsberger et al. 1986). Typical red, raised lesions are
lation. Little scientific evidence is available regarding
 usually found around the head and ears, and diagnosis
treatment of rabbits for encephalitozoonosis, although
can be made from a skin scraping placed in dermato-
albendazole  and corticosteroids  have  anecdotally
phyte test medium or cleared with 10% KOH. There
resulted in improvement in some cases (Harcourt-
is a demonstrated association with marginal husbandry
Brown and Holloway 2003), and fenbendazole has
 practices, poor nutrition, environmental or internal
been shown to resolve others (Suter et al. 2001).
stress factors, overcrowding, excessive heat and/or
Certain
ectoparasites, such
i as the
fur mite
humidity, genetics, ectoparasites, extremes of youth or
Cheyletiella parasitovorax, and burrowing sarcoptid
old age, and pregnancy. Direct contact or fomite trans-
mites may be transmissible from rabbits to humans.
missions are not uncommon and rabbits may be
 Of lesser importance are diseases such as leptospirosis,
asymptomatic carriers (Lopez-Martinez et al. 1984).
tularemia, and endoparasitism. Francisella tularensis,
The disease is readily transmissible to humans.
the etiologic agent of tularemia, rarely infects domestic
Individual animals can be isolated and treated with
lagomorphs, but may cause acute, febrile disease. It is
[id  (o u Ai o ) ua
 noteworthy that exposure to wild rabbits is associated
 povidone iodine (Bergdall and Dysko 1994).
with the vast majority of human cases. Zoonoses gen-
Salmonellosis, often presenting as a peracute fatal
erally can be prevented by wearing gloves and long-
disease subsequent to a stressor (e.g., anesthesia, envi-
sleeved clinical garments when handling rabbits and
 ronmental extremes), has been reported in rabbits. The 
hand-washing upon the removal of gloves.
diagnosis is based on culture and identification of the
organism from blood, bile, feces, lymph nodes, or
 affected organs. Treatment is ineffective in eliminating
TAKING A HISTORY
the carrier state and, due to the public health risks,
infected animals should be euthanized.
The basic fundamentals of the history for rabbits are
 Rabies virus has been identifed in pet rabbits in
similar to those for other animals, and are summarized
New York state, serving as a reminder that any pet
 in Table 12.4. As with other species, the first informa-
animal with access to the outdoors requires adequate
tion to document should be the signalment. Certain
protection.T
There are currently no rabies vaccines
rabbit breeds may be predisposed to particular dis-
available for pet rabbits.
tases, so breed is an important component of the sig-
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis is acquired by ingestion
 nalment, as it would be for dogs. There are currently
and causes emaciation and swollen lymph nodes with
forty-seven breeds in the United States recognized by
variable incidence of septicemia or diarrhea. Listeria
the American Rabbit Breeders Association (ARBA),
270
Chapter 12
Table 12.4 History questions for rabbit owners.
Topic
Questions
Comments
Signalment
Age
Owners may not be correct about the sex of the
Sex
 rabbit and education might be necessary.
Neutered status
The age when the animal was neutered may also be
Breed
relevant.
Acquisition
Location (pet store, breeder, etc.)
How many owners the animal has had may be
When the animal was acquired
important for behavioral problems.
Housing
Cage type
 If the animals have wire bottom cages, ask about
 Flooring substrate
 access to areas away from the wire.
 Exercise amount/frequency
Amount of time per day or week available out of the
 Frequency of cage cleaning
cage for exercise is important.
Environment
 Other animals in the house
Newly acquired rabbits or wild animals may be a
Indoors/outdoors
source of infectious disease.
Potential environmental hazards
 Rabbits may like to chew objects when roaming the
house.
Diet
Types of food: hay, pellets, fresh foods
Make sure to ask about treats and if the pellets are
Amount offered and eaten
 just pellets or have other items (corn, seed, etc.).
Animal
 Changes in feces or urine
 If there are changes in appetite/drinking, ask about
 Changes in appetite or diet preferences
 any environmental changes such as a new diet,
Changes in behavior
stressful situation, or new water or food
Coughing, sneezing, or nasal discharge
dispensers.
Any medications, including herbal and
nutritional supplements
ranging in size from 1kg dwarf/small breeds to 5 to
 perhaps the most significant question for many rabbit 
8kg or greater giant breeds. Many of these breeds can
 owners. This requires specifically asking not only what 
have multiple colors called "varieties." Rabbit breeds
is
offered, but what the animal actually eats.
 are made distinctive by a combination of body size and
Unfortunately, many commercial rabbit pellets are
shape, ear carriage, and pelt coloration. If the ears
mixed with unhealthy items such as corn and seeds,
"flop" down alongside the head, rather than stand
and rabbits may selectively eat high carbohydrate and
erect, the breed is of the lop-eared variety. Some non-
high fat items, leading to obesity or gut stasis
, sa yoq ro o q  s  mous
(Harcourt-Brown 2002). Pellets can also be composed
copter” by projecting horizontally. Many rabbits
 of different types of hay that may have different nutri-
presenting to a veterinary practice, particularly if
ent values.
acquired from a pet store, are not purebreds or do not
 After questions about husbandry, the general ques-
 meet the breed standards. However, some breeds are
tions about the rabbit are similar to those for other
commonly seen, such as the Dutch, Holland lop, Mini-
animals. Decreased appetite/anorexia is one of the
lop and Rex (Table 12.5). The best method to become
 most common presenting complaints for rabbits, but
familiarized with rabbit breed is to visit the ARBA web
this can indicate a wide variety of diseases. Respiratory,
site at: http://www.arba.net.
dental, dermatological, and gastrointestinal problems
The realities of rabbit medicine are such that most
are common issues for rabbits presenting to the veteri-
are presented to a clinic for intervention for a clinical
narian. Sometimes rabbits, especially unspayed adult
problem and there are few presentations for wellness
females, may present because of increased aggression.
exams, which requires a detailed history about both
 The etiology for aggression can vary from hormonal,
the routine care of the animal and the presenting com-
normal exploratory behavior, overzealous grooming,
 plaint. To obtain accurate information, it is important
pain, deafness, and even infectious diseases, so these
to be non-judgmental and carefully ask questions
are all important aspects of the history to address in
because owners may be reluctant to admit what they
addition to the standard questions (Harcourt-Brown
do not perceive as the “correct" answer. The diet is
2002).
Rabbits
271
Table 12.5. Common purebred rabbit breeds.
Breed
Size range (Ibs)
Color and markings
Other characteristics
Californian
8-10.5
White with colored nose, ears, tail,
Compact body type and pink
and feet
eyes
Checkered giant
>11
White with colored nose, ears,
Hare-like posture
eye-rings, cheek spots, a stripe
 down length of spine, and a pair of
spots on each side of body
Dutch
3.5-5.5
White forequarters and thorax with
Short, blocky, compact body
tars, cheeks, and back half of body
type
colored
Himalayan
4-5
White with colored nose, ears, feet,
Small and slender body type
and tail
with a long, pointed head,
 erect ears, and pink eyes
Holland lop
<4
Variable
Short, blocky, compact body
type
Rex
7.5-10.5
Variable
 Short and upright fur
Mini-lop
4.5-6.5
Variable
 Short, blocky, compact body
type
New Zealand white
9-12
Albino
 Compact body type
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND
malocclusion. Dacryocystitis is usually secondary to
PREVENTIVE MEDICINE
dental disease, particularlyofthe incisors. Conjunctivitis
can be associated with primary bacterial infections,
As with cats, clients should be advised to bring the
environmental irritants, or eyelid abnormalities, or it
rabbit to the clinic concealed in a secure carrier in
 can be secondary to dacryocystitis or an upper respira-
which the rabbit should remain until in the exam
tory infection (Harcourt-Brown 2002). Conjunctivitis
room. A normal rabbit typically rests compactly on all 
in combination with nasal discharge is commonly
four limbs with its mouth closed and regular twitching
caused by Pasteurella multocida. Throughout the
of the nostrils. A rabbit presenting with severe pain
examination be mindful of sneezing or evidence of
will show a hunched posture and immobility and may
obstructed breathing that may suggest pasteurellosis.
grind its teeth. Those in acute pain or distress, espe-
 Rabbits are fastidious groomers; therefore, the eyes
cially upon handling, may emit a haunting,
，high
 and nose may be dry while the inside of the front paws
has evidence of discharge that has been groomed away.
aggressive if in chronic pain or distress.
The ears should be examined for crusts or discharge
An appreciation of the normal protrusion of the
that may indicate bacterial or mite infections. Lop-
eyes is necessary to recognize buphthalmia or exoph-
 tared rabbits in particular are prone to accumulations
thalmia. The eyes may protrude more in some breeds,
of exudate in the ear canals. The
scrotum of mature
males during breeding season,
and
when
1 fearful
males and the internal pinnae of the ears are the only
(Harcourt-Brown 2002). Rabbits may
not I
menace
because of their natural tendency to freeze, so this
noted, but small areas of alopecia can occur normally
response is not an adequate test for vision (Vernau
as part of the molting process in some breeds. Mature
et al. 2007). Ocular examinations can be done as for
females can have a large fold of skin over the throat
other species, but keep in mind the caveat that atropine
called a dewlap, which is particularly prone to derma-
may be unreliable or ineffective as a mydriatic owing
titis in animals that drink from water bowls or have
to the presence of serum atropinesterase
：inmany
excessive saliva secondary to dental disease. Older cas-
rabbits. There should be no ocular or nasal discharge.
trated males can develop skin folds as well, so do not
 Periocular depilation or discharge may suggest con-
confuse these with a female's dewlap.
junctivitis or dacryocystitis/nasolacrimal duct obstruc-
The hair should be examined for evidence of para-
tion that can occur with bacterial infections 
or
sites, especially on the dorsum, such as fleas or
272
Chapter 12
Cheyletiella. If the rabbit spends time outside, look
carefully through the hair for signs of maggot infesta-
tions or Cuterebra larvae. Cuterebra larvae cause
cystic structure or fistulas, and usually the small
breathing hole is the only superficial indication of their
presence. Skin turgor is the best assessment for hydra-
tion, and rabbits do not tend to develop appreciably
sunken eyes. When dehydrated, the skin can become
wrinkled and the hairless skin on the scrotum of the
males or the inguinal skin in females/neutered males is
the best place to assess skin tenting.
Gentle palpation of the trunk should show the ver-
tebrae and ribs to be detectable, but not pronounced.
The abdominal organs, such as the stomach, kidneys,
and spleen, can be easily palpated. With respect to vital
signs, the heart rate (130 to 325 beats per minute) and
respiratory rate (thirty to sixty breaths per minute) are
Figure 12.7. Sex determination of a female rabbit.
more rapid than other more commonly encountered
(Courtesy of Dondrae Coble.)
species. Temperature is not usually taken during the
exam unless the animal is critical, but the body tem-
perature of the domestic rabbit is significantly higher
than that found in other species. The normal range is
101°F to 104°F (Harkness and Wagner 1989). Animal
 and human tympanic thermometers are sometimes
used, but these produce more variable readings and
may read lower than rectal temperatures, although
implantable microchip transponders correlate well
with rectal temperature (Chen and White 2006).
Ausculted airway sounds should be short, regular, and
rapid in progression with obviously dry bronchovesic-
ular sounds. Auscultation of gut sounds may be helpful
if the rabbit has a decreased appetite, but keep in mind
 that gut sounds are not always present, even in healthy
animals.
As described in the restraint section, cradle or lift
Figure 12.8. Sex determination of a male rabbit.
the animal to look at the ventrum. The chain of
 mammary glands of intact does should be palpated for
(Courtesy of Dondrae Coble.)
evidence of mastitis. Not only lactating or pseudopreg-
nant does are susceptible to this condition, but also
length of nails and evidence of pododermatitis. Obese
non-gravid females with uterine hyperplasia or adeno-
 or mature, potentially arthritic animals may have urine
carcinoma (Mullen, 2000). The urinary and genital
scald or the presence of a fecal impaction in the fur
openings are located immediately below the anus
and perineal skin folds because of their inability to
(Figures 12.7, 12.8). The testes descend at about twelve
 groom themselves.
weeks of age in the buck, but, due to the open inguinal
 The oral exam is usually the least appreciated part
canals, may be present in the scrotum or retracted
of the physical, so it is often saved for last. A non-
 partly into the abdomen. The testicles can be gently
invasive indicator of dental disease may be saliva stain-
manipulated from the inguinal canals into the scrotum
ing around the mouth. The incisors can be easily
 aun u ansnd p huidde Aq uoedied no
viewed for length and symmetry by retracting the lips.
inguinal area. Look for any signs of crusts in the
 Dwarf rabbits in particular are prone to congenital
genital region suggestive of ectopic ear mites or syphi-
incisor malocclusion (Figure 12.9). The molars are
lis. Rabbits have inguinal glands, which are folds of
diffcult to examine without sedation, except in the
skin by the anal orifice that normally have a brown,
hands of experienced and skillful individuals. An oto-
foul smelling deposit. At this time, also look at feet for
scopic cone, commonly used for examining dog ears,
Rabbits
273
Figure 12.9. Malocclusion.
Figure 12.10. Restraint for transport. (Courtesy of
 or stainless steel nasal speculum with an attached light
Vanessa Lee.)
source can be used to aid visualization in an awake
nel can become quite adept at this technique, it is not
cal. One appropriate method of restraint is to grasp
a substitute for an anesthetized exam if intraoral
the scruff of the neck with one hand and support the
disease is suspected.
body and hindquarters with the other arm. While in
There are no vaccines or monthly prophylactic
this position, use the scruff to tuck the head of the
dewormers standardly recommended for pet rabbits in
rabbit into the crook of the elbow of the arm, which
the United States. Owners should bring their rabbits
is used to support the body weight (Figure 12.10). This
for a wellness check when they are first obtained and
will conceal the rabbit's eyes and make it less likely to
for annual exams thereafter with blood work and
become startled. Never handle a rabbit by the ears or
screening tests as recommended by the veterinarian.
allow its back feet to dangle. When returning a rabbit
 Fecal exams may also be recommended, especially in
to its cage, carrier, or setting it on a surface, such as
 new rabbits or those housed outdoors. The best pre-
an examination table, do not allow it to leap or hop
ventive health measure is to spay female rabbits at
from the arms because this a common time for back
about five months of age, depending on the breed, to
injuries. If possible, place the rabbit down rear end
eliminate the potential for uterine adenocarcinoma.
first, especially when placing it back in the cage. This
Neutering both males and females decreases the chance
way, the rabbit is less likely to kick from your arms,
of aggressive behaviors. Remember that males should
which predisposes it to back injury. Alternatively,
be separated from intact females for about four weeks
continue to grasp the scruff of the neck with one hand
after neutering, because they can maintain fertile sperm
 and support the hindquarters with the other and place
during this time period.
it on the surface with the rabbit's head concealed in
the elbow throughout the process. It will be disinclined
to jump and instead often will simply turn away from
RESTRAINT
the handler. Remember that even a seemingly immo-
bilized rabbit can kick its back legs and obtain a back
 Rabbits are at significant risk of injury from improper
injury.
handling due to their general timidity and musculosk-
 For examination, rabbits should be placed on an
eletal conformation. Something seemingly as innocu-
examination table and never left unattended due to the
ous as permitting a rabbit to leap from one's arms into
risk that they may jump off of the table. A bathmat or
a cage may result in a vertebral luxation or fracture,
large towel can help the animal have traction and feel
especially of the caudal lumbar vertebrae. Additionally,
secure so that it is less likely to kick while trying to
if rabbits are improperly restrained, they may inflict
gain its footing. When restraining a rabbit, stand
painful scratches to a handler from the claws on their
facing the flank of the patient while placing one hand
powerful rear limbs.
gently over the thorax and the other upon the hind-
The safest way to transport a rabbit is in a small
quarters, with the purpose of maintaining the position
carrier suitable for a cat, but this is not always practi-
of the rabbit should it attempt to make a sudden and
274
Chapter 12
dangerous jump forward. If alone, the hindquarters
the diastema and administer the agent. Restraint for
can be braced against the restrainer's abdomen. With
 specific procedures is further described in “Clinical
one hand on the thorax, the other can be used for the
Techniques."
physical exam. Most rabbits, providing they are not
 agitated, will sit quietly in a compact posture, occa-
sionally raising the head to look about or sniff.
RADIOLOGY
Examining the ventrum and genital region is very
important but can be difficult to do safely, and is
 The common indications for radiography include con-
easiest done with an assistant. Some animals will
frmation or evaluation of dental disease, vertebral
become immobile when placed in dorsal recumbency,
luxation, limb fracture, respiratory disease, and gastro-
which can be advantageous for the exam, but realize
intestinal diseases or other intraabdominal disease such
that some argue that the animal is "freezing" because
as uterine adenocarcinoma. Positioning for radiogra-
of undue stress (Harcourt-Brown 2002, Mader 2004).
 phy is often facilitated by the use of sedation or general
One technique is to cradle the rabbit in one arm with
anesthesia. Otherwise, it is not possible to stretch the
each foot securely held with each hand. Some rabbits
rabbit and properly position it for lateral or ventro-
may be too large or unruly to safely do this, so they
dorsal vie ws without risking serious injury to the animal
can be lifted, allowing them to rest the rear legs on the
or movement during the exposure, which may degrade
table for observation.
the quality of the image. The DV view, rather than the
An oral exam requires two people if the animal is
VD, is preferred in rabbits because it minimizes the risk
not sedated. It is easiest to wrap the animal in a towel
of torso rotation along its sagittal axis, enhances spino-
and tuck the back end into the restrainer's abdomen
sternal alignment, and does not impair respiration. In
(Figure 12.11). Place each arm along the flanks to
general, and because of the relatively rapid respiratory
restrain the body, leaving the hands free to restrain the
rate, short exposure times (0.017 second) are most
head and neck area. The restrainer should be careful
desirable (Morgan and Silverman 1984).
not to occlude nasal passages because rabbits are obli-
 If the practice encounters a significant number of
gate nasal breathers and will not breathe through their
lapine patients, it is most advantageous to develop a
mouth, even though is it open during the exam.
technique chart for the various anatomic structures
Chemical restraint with inhalants (often isoflurane or
given the capacity of the X-ray generator, the film
sevoflurane) or injectable anesthetics are useful for
speed commonly available, and the qualities of the
radiography, thorough oral exam, or collection of
 intensifying screen. An alternative is to use a feline
laboratory samples. For administration of oral medica-
technique chart, but to shorten the exposure time,
tions or assisted feeding, the rabbit can be similarly
 compensate with increase mA, and, given the less
wrapped in a towel and either restrained on a table or
 dense bones, reduce the KVp to preserve resolution.
in the restrainer's lap. While holding the head with one
Without a custom technique chart, a good starting
hand, use the other to insert the syringe or pill giver
 point for rabbits is to use a focal film distance of 40
into the commissure of the mouth at the proximity of
 inches and an intensifying screen. For a thoracic expo-
sure, use 60 kilovolts, 300 milliamperes, and an expo-
sure time of 0.008 second for an 8-cm thick chest
(Morgan and Silverman 1984). For a similarly thick
abdomen, increase the exposure time to 0.034 second,
reduce the mA to 100, and reduce kVp to 58 (Morgan
and Silverman 1984).
 Dental radiographs should include lateral, DV/VD,
and two lateral oblique skull films; rostral and intra-
oral views may also be helpful (Capello and Gracis
2005). Obliques are used to thoroughly evaluate the
tooth roots, and are obtained by placing the animal
laterally and rotating the side of the mouth that is
07 ot ol Apaeixondde Alesop premdn su
degrees.
 Mammography flms and high quality dental radio-
graphic units obtain the best images, but standard
Figure 12.11. Restraint using a towel. (Courtesy of
radiographic machines are adequate for most diagnos-
Vanessa Lee.)
tic purposes. Be very careful when positioning a
Rabbits
275
veterinary clinics, this does not need to be the case.
The rumors regarding rabbit anesthesia, for example,
that rabbits are difficult to intubate, can be overcome
by a veterinary technician who is knowledgeable and
balances caution with confidence. In any event, it is
important to keep the rabbit calm and isolated from
perceived threats such as noisy dogs. A frightened
rabbit can be so permeated with catecholamines that
anesthesia can be adversely affected (Jenkins 2000).
Preanesthesia
As with other companion animals, obtaining a thor-
ough history and a preanesthetic physical examination
are important in detecting underlying medical condi-
Figure 12.12. Lateral radiograph. (Courtesy of Ryan
tions, such as rabbit pasteurellosis, that may compli-
Cheek.)
cate anesthesia. For rabbits, the nares should be
 txamined for rhinorrhea sugestive of bacterial respi-
ratory disease, the thorax should be carefully auscul-
tated for evidence of cardiac or pulmonary disease,
and the rectal temperature should be determined. Once
 admitted to the clinic, rabbits should be kept in escape-
 proof cages in a quiet area.
 Rabbits have high metabolic energy requirements
and are unable to vomit; therefore, the need for pre-
operative fasting is a topic of debate. Mature, non-
obese rabbits may be fasted for twelve hours to
decrease the amount of ingesta in the cecum and
stomach that may result in anesthetic overdosages due
to overestimating the real body weight. In addition,
rabbits breathe primarily by diaphragmatic movement,
so fasting to decrease stomach volume will enhance
respiration during anesthesia. However, this may have
variable effect due to cecotrophy and given that rabbits
will drink water to excess when fasted (Chew 1965).
Fasting may also cause mild metabolic acidosis or
 postoperative gastrointestinal disturbances (Flecknell
et al. 2007). Short preoperative fasting periods between
two hours (Jenkins 2000) and up to four hours (Heard
Figure 12.13. VD radiograph. (Courtesy of Ryan
2004) are recommended. Fasting in excess of twelve
Cheek.)
 hours is contraindicated because it may promote hypo-
glycemia and more severe metabolic acidosis and, in
sedated animal for radiographs, especially a rostral
young rabbits or adults of small breeds, fasting for
view, because flexing the neck can obstruct the airway.
more than a few hours may induce the same condi-
The neck should always be extended whenever possi-
tions. Fasting of obese, pregnant, or postparturient
ble (Figures 12.12, 12.13).
rabbits is contraindicated because it may predispose to
ketosis and liver necrosis.
Preanesthetic medications are not typically used,
ANESTHESIA
with the exception of anticholinergic drugs, because
 single injection anesthesia techniques have been devel-
 Rabbits may present an anesthetic challenge to veteri-
oped that minimize the handling stress and eliminate
narians or veterinary technicians unfamiliar or inexpe-
the discomfort associated with multiple injections. A
rienced with them. However, because virtually all
sedative or tranquilizing preanesthetic agent should be
drugs, equipment, and resources necessary for safe and
used if, in the opinion of the anesthetist, the animal
humane anesthesia of rabbits are available in most
would benefit from such agents. Serum and tissue atro-
276
Chapter 12
pinesterases found in many rabbits render the anticho-
 Omy; therefore, the use of ketamine combined with
linergic agent atropine sulfate of unpredictable efficacy.
 medetomidine is gaining favor. Additionally, ketamine/
In the presence of atropinesterase, atropine must be
medetomidine has been shown to maintain cardiovas-
given in high doses (1 to 2 mg/kg) with redosing every
cular parameters more effectively than ketamine/xyla-
ten to ffteen minutes (Lipman et al. 1997). Therefore,
zine when administered IM (Difilippo et al. 2004).
0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg subcutaneous (SC) administration
While there are choices for the route of administration
of glycopyrrolate, a quaternary ammonium para-
for ketamine/medetomidine, it has been shown that SQ
sympatholytic, should be administered to reduce
administration causes less discomfort for the patient
salivary and bronchial secretions and prevent vagal
(Williams and Wyatt 2007).
bradycardia.
Anesthesia with either combination is fully induced
within ten to fifteen minutes and typically lasts twenty-
Types of Anesthetic Agents Used in Rabbits
five to forty-five minutes, but total time unconscious
For practical purposes, anesthetics used in rabbits can
may be up to two hours (Flecknell 1996). When ket-
be divided into injectable and inhalation agents.
amine/xylazine must be used, 0.1 mg/kg butorphanol
Historically, injectable drugs have been popularly used
tartrate or,
less ideally, 0.75 mg/kg acepromazine
for anesthesia of rabbits because they are inexpensive,
 maleate, can be given to augment muscle relaxation
require no specialized equipment as do inhalant agents,
and
analgesia. These triple combination regimens
and are typically safe and effective. However, disad-
provide anesthesia lasting sixty to ninety minutes.
vantages attendant to anesthesia by injection include
Acepromazine should be used with caution in ill
the lack of precision in anesthetic depth control, pro-
animals, however, because it may further contribute to
longed recovery time, and physiologic changes such as
hypotension, bradycardia, and respiratory depression.
hypotension,
hypoxemia, and acid-base disorders
If it is necessary to further extend anesthesia, incre-
 mental doses of one half the original ketamine dose
cedures involving healthy animals, these drawbacks
can be given.
may not be of consequence, but when used in ill 
Telazol (Aveco Co. Inc., Fort Dodge, IA), tiletamine
animals, some injectable agents carry unacceptable
combined with zolazepam, has been shown to be neph-
risk of untoward events.
rotoxic for rabbits at doses of 7.5 mg/kg and its use is
Ketamine HCl is the anesthetic agent most com-
contraindicated (Brammer et al. 1991, Doerning et al.
 monly used in rabbits, but as a sole agent, it does not
1992). It is possible that the reported toxic effects of
provide sufficient analgesia or muscle relaxation for
telazol are breed-specific and there are those who
surgical purposes at any dose. For minimally invasive
advocate its use. This being the case, the authors rec-
diagnostic procedures requiring immobilization (i.e.
 ommend judicious use of this anesthetic agent, should
radiography); surgical procedures of moderate inten-
it be chosen.
sity (i.e. wound suturing, tissue biopsies) lasting less
 If for some reason, such as debilitation or disposi-
than thirty to forty-five minutes; or anesthesia permit-
tion, injection is not feasible, the intranasal route is an
ting preparation of a surgical field, placement of intra-
optionf
for administration of induction agents
vascular catheters, and intubation for subsequent
(Robertson and Eberhart 1994). The onset of effect is
administration of gas anesthetics, ketamine is most
 generally rapid (less than three minutes) and the dura-
commonly combined with xylazine HCl or medetomi-
tion of effect may be thirty minutes or more. Midazolam
dine and given intramuscularly as a single injection
alone for sedation and xylazine-ketamine for low
into the cranial muscles of the thigh or the lumbar
 grade anesthesia can be given effectively by this route
epaxial musculature. The ketamine dose is 35 to 45 mg/
(Robertson and Eberhart, 1994).
kg with xylazine (5 mg/kg) given IM or IV, and 15 to
For procedures anticipated to last one to four hours,
25 mg/kg with medetomidine (0.5 mg/kg) (Flecknell
when inhalation anesthesia is unavailable, and the
1996, Flecknell et al. 2007, Orr et al. 2005)) given SQ.
 patient is healthy, administration of a constant infu-
It is worth noting that some question the effectiveness
sion of xylazine and ketamine can be done. Over com-
of SQ administration, but it continues to be adminis-
parable periods of time, anesthesia by controlled
tered commonly in this way. The combination of xyla-
infusion provides stable anesthesia with a decreased
 zine and ketamine alone may be unreliable in inducing
total anesthetic drug requirement and reduced recov-
and/or maintaining an adequate anesthetic plane for
ery time as compared to anesthetics given periodically
by multiple bolus (Wyatt et al. 1989). Rabbits to be
adequate analgesia for procedures with intense sympa-
anesthetized by intravenous infusion are frst given
thetic stimulation such as laparotomy and thoracot-
xylazine (5 mg/kg) and ketamine (35 mg/kg) by intra-
Rabbits
277
muscular injection to induce anesthesia. Following
placement of an indwelling catheter in a lateral ear
vein, as described elsewhere, a constant infusion of
xylazine (0.04mg/kg/minute) and ketamine (0.4mg/
kg/minute) can be given in 0.9% saline. A working
infusion solution is made by adding 4ml of ketamine
HCl (100 mg/ml) and 2ml of xylazine (20 mg/ml) to
 94 ml 0.9% saline. The infusion solution is given at a
rate of 6ml/kg/hour to maintain anesthesia. This
method of anesthesia should be done with an infusion
pump or precisely controlled use of a mini-drip
(60drops/ml)  and  vital signs should be monitored
closely.
The use of inhalation anesthesia is feasible in rabbits
 n omi s srd r prd uo pue
hours because it is precise, rapidly adjustable, and safe
and effective. In addition, postoperative recovery is
 more rapid and less complicated than with injectable
anesthetics. An Ayre's T-piece or other non-rebreath-
 ing circuit is most appropriate for rabbit inhalational
 anesthesia (Flecknell 1996). For anesthetic induction,
an intravenous injection of propofol (1.5 mg/kg slowly
Figure 12.14. Inhalation anesthesia using a face
to effect) or an SC or IM injection of xylazine and
mask.
ketamine are preferred.
The use of ultra-short-acting thiobarbiturates is not 
technician. Prior to intubation, diazepam or mid-
recommended due to their narrow margin of safety,
azolam can be given IV to effect if additional relax-
slow elimination in obese animals, and resultant respi-
ation is necessary. Intubation should be done with a
ratory depression or fatal apnea that can occur if intu-
transparent, cuffed (e.g. Murphy), 14-cm long, 3- to
bation is not performed in a timely manner. Induction
4-mm internal diameter endotracheal (ET) tube for
using a mask or induction chamber is not recom-
rabbits weighing 3 to 6 kg or an uncuffed 1- to 2.5-mm
mended because of the high incidence of struggling,
endotracheal tube for rabbits weighing less than 3 kg.
distress vocalization, and breath-holding (Flecknell
The key to intubation by direct visualization is to bring
1996, Hedenqvist et al. 2001). This technique is com-
the mouth, larynx, and trachea into linear alignment
monly used in practice, however, and can be done
by positioning the rabbit in dorsal recumbency and
without harm to the patient with proper restraint
hyperextending the head. One way this can be achieved
(Figure 12.14).
is by placing a rolled towel under the cervical spine or
The anatomy of the rabbit oropharynx makes endo-
permitting the head to overhang a table edge. The
tracheal intubation challenging (Tran et al. 2001). The
 tongue should be retracted laterally through one of the
oral cavity is long and narrow, the mandible has a
 diastema, the bilateral spaces between the incisors and
limited range of abduction, and entry into the oral
premolars, to prevent laceration on the incisors and an
p sos e a q p Ad si A
inverted laryngoscope with a #1 Miller blade should
cheek teeth. The tongue protrudes dorsally; the epi-
be inserted into the contralateral diastema and main-
glottis is relatively large, U-shaped, soft, and flexible;
tained either between the incisors in alignment with
and the larynx slopes ventrally. Just beyond the epi-
the midline or lateral to the incisors at a slight angle
glottis is a deep sagittal niche, bordered on both sagit-
to the sagittal plane of the body. Gentle pressure
tal recesses by the friable hamuli epiglotti which are
should be directed ventrally with the blade tip while
easily damaged. Additionally, laryngeal tone and the
slight rostrodorsal traction is placed on the head until
propensity to laryngospasm are high. All of these
the epiglottis and arytenoid cartilages are seen.
factors combine to obscure visualization and access to
To assist in intubation a metal dowel or cotton-
the glottis and make endotracheal intubation of the
tipped applicator used as a stylet to prevent bending
rabbit challenging.
of the tube can be employed. If a 3-mm or larger
These challenging anatomic features aside, rabbits
internal diameter ET tube is used, intubation can be
can be reliably and easily intubated by an experienced
done using the polypropylene guide technique (Gilroy
278
Chapter 12
1981). A 56-cm, 8 French polypropylene catheter
 laryngospasm and enhance passage of the tube, it also
should be passed through the endotracheal tube lumen
suppresses the convenient forward motion of the
from the connector to the distal end until the blunt
glottis during swallowing that may enhance intuba-
rapu aaaq ai ised oo oi si spuxa dn raia
tion. If a topical anesthetic is desired, lidocaine 10%
direct visualization using a laryngoscope, the tip of the
 oral spray should be judiciously misted on the glottis
catheter should be cautiously advanced through the
to prevent laryngospasm and facilitate intubation.
diastema, past the vocal folds, and into the trachea.
 Topical benzocaine should not be used, because it may
Once the guide is in the trachea, the laryngoscope can
cause methemoglobinemia.
be removed and the ET tube advanced as a sheath over
An alternative to endotracheal intubation to main-
the stationary catheter into the trachea. Following
tain a patent airway during inhalation anesthesia is the
intubation, the stylet or guide should be immediately
use of a laryngeal mask airway (LMA). The principle
removed and the ET tube secured. Alternative intuba-
advantage that the LMA can offer over an ET tube is
tion aids are described in the literature, including
that it requires less technical skill to place, which is
otoscopes (Heard 2004) as well as endoscopes (Tran
highly beneficial for those with little experience or in
et al. 2001)
cases of emergency. LMAs have been used in human
 If preferred, intubation can be performed blindly.
pediatric patients for many years and their use in
After induction, the rabbit should be placed in sternal
rabbits has been recently described (Kazakos et al.
 recumbency with the head extended dorsally such that
2007, Smith et al. 2004). These reports indicate that
the alignment of mouth, larynx, and trachea is perpen-
LMAs size 1 to 1.5 perform the best. One problem
dicular to the table surface. An endotracheal tube
with the use of LMAs is the possible inability to com-
should then be advanced to the proximal aspect of the
pletely protect the airway from gastric contents;
larynx. This can be confirmed by visualizing the
however, in a species with the inability to vomit such
fogging of the tube interior with every exhalation and
as the rabbit, this should not be a concern.
listening for respiratory sounds through the endotra-
Once intubated, the rabbit should be connected to
cheal tube. The position of the tube should be adjusted
a gas anesthesia machine with a closed breathing
until the sounds are at maximal intensity. At this point,
circuit for ventilation with a mechanical respirator at
the endotracheal tube should be gently advanced into
a rate of thirty to forty breaths per minute and a tidal
the trachea. If breaths are shallow, it is sometimes
volume of 11 to 15 ml/kg. The inspiration-to-expira-
helpful to have an assistant administer gentle chest
tion ratio should be 1:2 or 1:3 and airway pressures
 compressions and to advance the tube timed with the
should not be permitted to exceed 20cm HzO because
release of a compression (inhalation). A cough reflex
barotrauma will occur at higher pressure (Reuter et al.
often confirms correct insertion. A capnograph can
 2005). Gas flow rate of 200 ml/kg is sufficient (Heard
also help to confirm proximity of the tube tip at the
2004). If mechanical ventilation is not available, spon-
oropharynx. This blind technique carries a risk of
taneous ventilation should be accommodated with a
trauma and should be abandoned in favor of direct
semi-closed pediatric breathing circuit. Spontaneous
observation if intubation is not successful after se veral
respirations should be regular and deep and occur at
gentle attempts.
a rate of ffteen or more breaths per minute. The anes-
Regardless of the intubation technique, intubation
thetist should be cognizant of the risk of apnea in this
should never be forced, because the trachea, tracheal
circumstance and be prepared to evaluate the depth of
bifurcation, and tissues of the oropharynx are easily
anesthesia and assist ventilations.
damaged and the vagus nerve may be stimulated.
Anesthesia should be maintained with 2% to 3%
Correct placement in the trachea should be further
isoflurane in 100% oxygen. This requirement for rela-
confirmed by visualizing the respiration-associated
tively high isoflurane concentration in rabbits is due
condensation of water vapor on the internal surface of
partly to their tendency to take shallow breaths com-
the endotracheal tube, by auscultation in conjunction
pared to other species, although intubation and
with manual respiration using an Ambu bag, or cap-
mechanical ventilation can reduce the requirement.
 nography. Mechanical ventilation should not be done
Although not routinely done because combination
until intubation is confirmed, because overzealous ven-
 anesthetic regimens can allow for the reduction of gas
tilation into the stomach can lead to acute dilatation
concentration needed to maintain anesthesia, yohim-
and rupture.
bine or atipamezole can be given shortly after gas
There is no consensus on the use of topical anesthet-
anesthesia is commenced to reverse the hypotensive
ics to enhance intubation. While spraying of the
effects of xylazine or medetomidine if those agents
pharynx, larynx, and trachea will reduce the risk of
were used at induction.
Rabbits
279
Perioperative Considerations
Where sophisticated cardiovascular monitoring is
While anesthetized, rabbits should have bland oph-
not practical, reflex assessment is the most accurate
thalmic ointment placed in the eyes to prevent expo-
 determinant of adequate anesthesia depth. Traditional
sure keratitis. The maintenance of normothermia from
reflexes used in the monitoring of rabbit anesthesia
induction through recovery is very important and can
include righting, palpebral, corneal, pedal withdrawal,
 be accomplished through the use of circulating water
and pinna reflex. The pinna reflex is the most accurate
blankets such as the Gaymar-T (Gaymar, Orchard
measure of depth of anesthesia followed by pedal with-
 Park, NY) or hot air blankets such as the Bair Hugger
drawal, corneal, and palpebral reflexes, in that order.
(Arizant Healthcare, Eden Prairie,
MN)(Sikoski,
Corneal reflex may be preserved until very deep levels
Young, and Lockard 2007). An intravenous catheter
 of anesthesia are reached. Muscle tone, jaw tone, and
should be placed for administration of parenteral
purposeful movements in response to surgical stimuli
fluids. Because fasting generally induces mild meta-
may also be used as indicators of anesthesia depth.
 bolic acidosis, warmed lactated Ringer's solution, pro-
When reflex assessment is used as the sole determinant
viding the kidneys are functioning normally,.
or
ofa
anesthetic depth, more than one reflex should
half-strength saline-dextrose solutions with sodium
be monitored to ensure adequate anesthesia. At a
Pi on leapi iso are uouadns anuoqrn
minimum, anesthetic depth should be monitored tem-
administration in surgery. These should be given at a
porally by constantly assessing reflexes, cardiac rate
- /do-09 8 1 1o07 01 01 1 
and rhythm, and respiratory rate.
nous fluid administration set. If it is desirable to gain
arterial access for blood-gas analysis or blood pressure
Analgesia
monitoring, a 22-gauge catheter can be placed in the
 Rabbits experiencing pain often exhibit changes in
central auricular artery and secured with a heparin-
appetite, reduced grooming, reduced activity, and
lock (for blood gases) or connected to a transducer (for
teeth grinding (bruxism), and monitoring for such
 continuous arterial pressure monitoring).
behavior can help the technician effectively manage
pain (Kohn et al. 2007). As a general rule, analgesics
Anesthesia Monitoring
should be first administered before the animal is fully
Because controlled ventilation may increase mean intra -
recovered from anesthesia, but stable, and should be
 thoracic pressure, decrease venous return, compromise
continued for the next forty-eight to seventy-two
cardiac output, and cause hypotension, blood and
hours. Rabbits may self-mutilate areas that are painful
airway pressure should be monitored. The systolic/
 or irritating and if self-mutilation is a concern, a 12-
diastolic arterial pressure of an anesthetized rabbit is
inch Elizabethan collar can be used in conjunction
approximately 95/75 (Huerkamp 1995). As a rule, arte-
with administration of analgesics. Be aware that
rial pressures should not be permitted to decrease below
rabbits typically tolerate these collars very poorly
 80/60. Intubated animals undergoing lengthy proce-
and long-term maintenance will prevent cecotrophy,
dures should have cuffed tubes deflated, rotated, and
which could lead to B vitamin and other nutritional
reinflated hourly because there is evidence suggesting
deficiencies.
 injury can occur during prolonged procedures Phaneuf
There are essentially two classes of drugs available
et al. 2006), while those that are not intubated should
for pain management, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
be positioned to maintain an open airway. Alterations
drugs (NSAID) and opioids. Oten, analgesia is most
 in heart rate and blood pressure are the most reliable
effectively provided by using these agents in combina-
indicators of anesthetic depth with changes of 20% or
tion. NSAIDs inhibit the production of chemical medi-
more from baseline usually mandating modifications in
ators such as prostaglandins that activate peripheral
 management to ensure an adequate plane of anesthesia.
 nociceptors and are sufficiently potent to treat muscu-
 The monitoring of heart rate and rhythm can be done
loskeletal, incisional, and acute, mild visceral pain.
with an esophageal stethoscope or electrocardiography.
There are several effective NSAIDs from which to
 In addition to direct blood pressure monitoring via the
choose, but the authors prefer newer, more specific
central auricular artery, indirect monitoring can be
 inhibitors of cyclooxygenase 2 activity such as meloxi-
attempted with cuffs placed on a limb. Capnography
cam, a drug which can be given orally or injected
(end tidal CO, determination), blood-gas analysis, and
subcutaneously once per day at 0.3 or 0.2mg/kg
pulse oximetry are useful in evaluating the adequacy of
respectively. These newer NSAIDs are often as effec-
ventilation. Ventilation-perfusion efficiency can also be
tive as some opioids for the control of pain.
assessed through observation of mucous membrane
Opioid agents act by binding to specific receptors
color and capillary refill time.
in different parts of the nervous system. Those most
280
 Chapter 12
commonly used are buprenorphine, butorphanol, fen-
suspended wire cages because heat loss will be
tanyl, morphine, meperidine, and oxymorphone; all
accelerated.
are controlled substances. Opioids are typically used
 If an incubator is not available, supplemental
in their injectable form, but fentanyl is also available
heating can be provided with a water-circulated
as a dermal patch, which is advantageous because it
 heating pad or a heat lamp judiciously placed outside
abrogates the need to handle the patient for drug
of the cage. It is important to remember that rabbits
administration. A 25 ug/hour fentanyl patch can be
 are gnawing species that, left unattended following
used and should be applied before or at the time of the
recovery, may mutilate heating pads or wiring. The
painful procedure (Foley et al. 2001). Because twenty-
ambient temperature in the recovery area should be
four hours is required for dermal fentanyl to reach
29°C to 32°C. The temperature of the animal and the
therapeutic levels, administration of an additional
recovery area should be monitored as regularly as for
agent such as an NSAID during that time period and
dogs and cats.
beyond if necessary should be considered.
Animals slow to recover from anesthesia should be
Opioid agonist-antagonists, such as butorphanol,
turned every thirty to sixty minutes to prevent hypo-
or buprenorphine, have relatively long half-lives and
static lung congestion and should be given warmed,
offer the advantage of attenuating or ablating visceral
parenteral fluids to compensate for metabolic needs
 pain while minimizing the undesirable respiratory and
and for losses during surgery. Extubation should be
cardiovascular side effects compared to morphine and
done only when chewing begins or coughing is elicited.
meperidine. Buprenorphine can be given by injection 
 If not done beforehand, yohimbine or atipamezole can
every six to twelve hours to rabbits (0.01 to 0.05 mg/
 be given to reverse the effects of xylazine and medeto-
kg IM, SC). Anecdotally, the authors have observed
 midine. Where reversal is not possible, respiratory
frequent cases of postoperative anorexia and ileus in
depression can be treated with 2 to 5 mg/kg doxapram
rabbits given intensive treatment with buprenorphine
given SC or IV every fteen minutes.
injections. In these cases, appetite return was associ-
ated  with discontinuance of analgesic
treatment.
Buprenorphine given at the high range of recom-
COMMON SURGICAL PROCEDURES
mended levels in rats has been shown to cause anorexia
 and weight loss (Jablonski et al. 2001). Others have
The duties of a veterinary technician supporting a sur-
also questioned the efficacy of buprenorphine in
gical procedure for a rabbit are identical to those
rabbits (Wixson 1994).
duties for other species, with the focus on preoperative
 preparation of the surgical patient and intraoperative
Immediate Post-anestbetic Care
support of the procedure, including anesthesia man-
Following completion of surgery under inhalation
agement. The surgeon and operating room attendants
anesthesia, recovery is rapid and rabbits typically are
should prepare and dress as for procedures done on
conscious and regain the righting reflex within twenty
other pet species. Sterile instruments and draping
to thirty minutes. The most likely causes of delayed or
should be used. When post-op care is expected to be
complicated recovery from general anesthesia are
extensive, a nasogastric tube can be placed to permit
hypothermia and anesthetic overdosage followed by
feeding of liquid diets and evacuation of any gastric
complications related to lengthy procedures or a pre-
gas (Mullen 2000). Rabbits with a history of pasteurel-
senting medical condition such as hypoglycemia and
losis should be started on a preoperative course of
dehydration. Anesthetic agents impair central and
antibiotics for a duration (days) sufficient to suppress
peripheral thermoregulatory mechanisms and rabbits
 any clinical manifestations or prevent septicemia (one
are prone to radiative and conductive heat losses
 to two hours pre-operatively IV).
because of their relatively high body surface area to
As would be customary in any species, the fur at
body weight ratio. Because the pharmacokinetics of
the surgical site should be clipped and the skin should
 anesthetic metabolism are partially temperature depen-
be decontaminated with alcohol and disinfectants.
dent, maintaining body temperature is critical to
Rabbits have thick hair coats and thin skin, which
recovery from anesthesia. Ideally, recovering animals
renders clipping of the hair from a surgical site more
 should be kept in an escape-proof incubator
on
time-consuming and puts a premium on clipper blade
a clean, dry towel or blanket. The use of an incubator
sharpness. It is critical that sharp, spare blades be
permits careful control of the ambient temperature
available and that all clipper blades be properly cleaned
and enables supplemental oxygen administration.
and restored after use. The rabbit skin easily lacerates
Recovery should not be done on metal flooring or in
or tears in cases in which clipping is done hurriedly or
Rabbits
281
carelessly or where dull clipper blades are used. The
 or space-occupying lesions. Enucleation may be neces-
 technician should concentrate on keeping the skin taut
sary for ocular trauma, severe buphthalmia, or retro-
 in front of the clipper blade and the head of the blade
bulbar abscess. The retrobulbar venous sinus is
flat against the skin. The best skin preparation comes
extensive and there is a risk of severe and difficult-to-
from using a combination of no. 10 and no. 40 blades
control hemorrhage (Mullen 2000). It is important to
to prepare the skin. This is an area where patience and
have considerable sterile methylcellulose on hand to
careful attention to detail are most important. In fact,
 pack the ocular defect. Likewise, bulla osteotomy for
gentle handling of the skin perioperatively and all
drainage of middle ear infections, such as for pasteu-
tissues intraoperatively is critical in reducing the inci-
rellosis, is fraught with risks of post-operative pain and
dence of postoperative automutilation of incisions for
 drainage complications (Swindle and Shealy 1996) and
which rabbits are notorious. Some people choose to
iads e on panar isaq Aeqord aanord e si
wear a mask while shaving a rabbit to preclude float-
surgical practice.
ing hair from entering their mouth or nose.
Absorbable polymer suture materials, such as
The surgical procedures most commonly performed
 monoflament polyglyconate, are preferred by many
 in rabbitsinclude spay, castration, drainage ofabscesses,
for internal use, due to their minimally reactive nature.
cutaneous mass excision, and exploratory laparotomy.
 Because they are not exposed and are less likely to be
Enucleation, perineal dermatoplasty in cases of relent-
chewed, subcuticular sutures are preferred for skin
less urine scald, cystotomy, large bowel, and renal sur-
closure. Generally, sutures in sizes appropriate for cats
gical procedures have also been described in rabbits
(3-0, 4-0, and 5-0) are most appropriate for rabbits.
(Mullen 2000, Jenkins 2004). Castration and ovario-
Cyanoacrylate tissue adhesives also provide satisfac-
hysterectomy (OVH) are often done for the same
tory closure, as long as they are used in clean, dry,
 reasons that these procedures are done in dogs and cats.
incisions. Wound clips are a viable alternative and are
Castration should be recommended to clients as a
advocated by some for skin closure. Regardless of
 measure for bucks housed indoors to prevent urine
which material is used for skin closure, it is important
spraying and mounting, reduce aggression toward other
to keep in mind the proclivity of rabbits for chewing
rabbits and owners, and eliminate the risk of testicular
at their wound closure materials and monitor animals
cancer. OVH is recommended as a preventive measure
closely during the wound healing period.
for group-housing and uterine diseases such as uterine
Following acute recovery from anesthesia, the most
adenocarcinoma. Both procedures are performed with
 reliable indicator of post-operative well-being, includ-
the patient in
1  dorsal  recumbency.
The
surgical
ing the effectiveness of analgesia, is the daily assess-
approaches for these two procedures are similar to
ment of body weight and food and water consumption.
those used for dogs and cats, with castration commonly
 Because rabbits are prone to hypoglycemia because of
done by the scrotal approach ( Jenkins 2000), prescrotal
high metabolic rates and, in juvenile animals, limited
approach, or abdominal midline incisions for crytorchi-
fat reserves, a nutritious pelleted diet should be pro-
dism (Swindle and Shealy 1996). The OVH requires a
vided as soon after surgery as feasible. Inappetant
standard, mid-line abdominal approach, and surgical
animals can be offered supplements such as hay, other
site preparation should reflect this. It is important to
supplements, or treats as described under *"Nutrition,"
express the urinary bladder during preparation for an
or herbivore liquid dietary products. In some cases, the
OVH to avoid complications during surgery.
stress associated with surgery will cause pH changes
 A variety of other surgical procedures can be safely
in the cecum that result in alterations of commensal
 performed in rabbits, and the preparation of the surgi-
and fermentative bacteria. When chronic anorexia and
cal site varies by location and surgeon preferences.
ileus that is nonresponsive to treatments described
Cystotomy is indicated for urolithiasis. Although the
above  is  the
result,
, specific bacteriotherapy, as
bladder wall is thin, which may be discouraging to
 described in the "Critical Care” section, may be useful
some surgeons, it holds suture well (Mullen 2000) and
 in recolonizing the gastrointestinal tract.
can be closed in a single layer (Swindle and Shealy
1996). Most rabbits with urolithiasis are overweight
and probably overconsuming calcium (Mullen 2000);
PARASITOLOGY
therefore, the post-operative instructions given to the
 owner should include an exhortation to limit feed and
The most important diagnostic tools used in the diag-
not provide mineral supplementation. Exploratory
 nosis of parasitism in rabbits are essentially the same
laparotomy is required in cases of gastrointestinal
as for dogs and cats. These comprise the fecal floata-
obstruction from trichobezoars, other foreign bodies,
tion examination, fur exam, skin scraping, and exami-
282
Chapter 12
nation of the ear canals. With respect to skin scrapings,
CLINICAL TECHNIQUES
bear in mind that the skin of rabbits is thin relative to
dogs and cats and may lacerate easily. The examina-
Blood Collection
tion of the ear canals should be done using an oto-
Blood is most often obtained from the ear arteries or
scope. This is sufficient in many cases to diagnose aural
veins or jugular or saphenous vein, and may also be
acariasis caused by Psoroptes cuniculi. The mites
collected from the cephalic (Figures 12.15, 12.16).
are easily seen with low magnification crawling in
Blood collection from the ear vessels carries a risk of
the beam of light emitted from the otoscope. The diag-
hematoma or bruising that may be unacceptable to an
nosis can be confrmed, and mites demonstrated for
owner. It also has a small risk of thrombosis and sub-
the owner, by swabbing exudate from the 
canal
sequent sloughing of the skin, which is more likely in
with a cotton-tipped applicator and 
mineral
oil
 breeds with small ears or if the artery is used (Mader
and examining it under a microscope. For rabbits
2004, Harcourt-Brown 2002). The preferred location
housed outdoors, one important consideration 
is
depends on the techniques developed by the phleboto-
that flies are attracted to rabbit droppings and owners
mist. Rabbit blood can clot quickly, so heparinizing
may confuse the recently hatched fly larvae with
the syringe and needle may be helpful.
parasites.
The auricular artery is central, while the veins are
found along the margins of the ear (Color Plate 12.2).
The hair may be shaved and a warm towel may be
URINALYSIS
applied to help dilate the vessel. A topical anesthetic,
such as EMLA cream or lidocaine cream, can be used
The urine pH ranges from 6 to 8.2 with alkaline urine
in an awake animal to reduce head shaking. These
(pH > 8) generally associated with good health and
agents may reduce the restraint that is required, but
 acidic pH with anorexia or fasting. The normal range
keep in mind the time it takes for the creams to have
 of urine specific gravity is 1.003 to 1.036 with 1.015
an effect (Flecknell et al. 1990). The size of the needle
representing the normal mean in a healthy population 
depends on the size of the vessel, and generally a 22- to
of rabbits (McLaughlin and Fish 1994). The urine
27-gauge needle is used. The needle is inserted into the
typically is turbid due to calcium carbonate excretion
 vessel and if the vessel is large enough may be aspirated
and is also pigmented ranging from light yellow to
with a syringe. For small breeds, suction from a syringe
orange to various combinations of red with brown.
 may collapse the vessel and so blood can be collected
Certain porphyrin pigments in the urine may cause a
as it drips from the needle hub. Upon removal of the
reddish appearance and elicit concerns of hematuria
needle, it is necessary to apply pressure for three to
(Garibaldi et al. 1987). Consequently, any suspected
five minutes if using the artery and monitor thereafter
cases of hematuria in the rabbit should be confrmed
 for ten to fifteen minutes recrudescence of bleeding;
     e  
 less time may be needed if using a vein.
hematuria are from uterine adenocarcinoma, uterine
The lateral saphenous is easily accessible in an
polyps, uterine hyperplasia, abortion, urolithiasisis,
 appropriately restrained rabbit. The restrainer should
cystitis, septicemia, DIC, and certain renal diseases.
hold the animal wrapped in a towel in his lap and hold
The urine should be free of protein, casts, blood,
off the back leg just below the stifle. The vein is seen
glucose, ketones, and bilirubin. An occasional white
where it crosses from medial to lateral, usually in the
blood cell per high-powered feld in an examination of
area of the middle third of the lateral tibia. Sometimes
the sediment is within the realm of normal. The urine
the vessel can be visualized with just alcohol, but often
output ranges from 20 to 350ml/kg/day and is influ-
shaving is required. A butterfly catheter attached to a
enced by many factors related to the diet, animal, and
syringe is often the easiest way to obtain blood.
environment (McLaughlin and Fish 1994). Ammonium 
The jugular can be used in some cooperative awake
magnesium phosphate (struvite) and calcium carbon-
patients, but this technique may require sedation. If
ate are the two most common uroliths of rabbits
the animal is sedated, place it in dorsal recumbency
(Bergdall and Dysko 1994). Struvite uroliths are
and shave the neck area. If the animal is awake, it can
usually the consequence of urinary tract infection.
be restrained in the same way as a cat for jugular
Calcium carbonate uroliths may precipitate and form
venipuncture. The rabbit is wrapped in a towel and
uroliths when the urinary pH exceeds 8.5 (Leck 1988).
held at the edge of the table. One hand is used to hold
Infection, inadequate water intake, genetic predisposi-
the head up and the other restrains the front legs.
tion, metabolic disturbances, and nutritional imbal-
Venipuncture from the cephalic is difficult, particularly
ances enhance the development of urolithiasis
in small breeds.
Rabbits
283
THECENTRALARTERY
AND MARGINALVEIN
THE LATERAL
Figure 12.15. Venipuncture sites.
SAPHENOUS
THEJUGULAR
Figure 12.16. Blood sampling using the central
auricular artery with a butterfly catheter.(Courtesy
of Ryan Cheek.)
Placing a Catheter
 The marginal ear veins and cephalic are the easiest and
Plate 12.2. Marginal lateral ear vein on the left and
most frequently used to place an intravenous catheter.
the prominent central auricular artery. (Photo
As with venipuncture, catheterization of the ear vessels
Courtesy of Ryan Cheek.) (See also color plates)
carries a small risk of necrosis, so the cephalic is often
used (Mader 2004, Harcourt-Brown 2002). The
saphenous can also be used for venous access, and the
central ear artery can be used if arterial access is needed
284
Chapter 12
for direct blood pressure measurement or periodic
blood-gas analysis in surgery. For any catheter, an
 E-collar may be used to prevent the animal removing
it, but should be avoided in cooperative animals.
 E-collars can be stressful and pre vent the animal from
engaging in cecotrophy, so they are not ideal for long-
term use.
The principles of preparation are the same as for
other species, but the animal may require sedation for
vasodilation and to enhance cooperation. As with
venipuncture, EMLA cream may facilitate placement
of the catheter in an awake patient. A 24-gauge cath-
eter is appropriate for most rabbits, but a 22-gauge
may be used in large vessels of some large rabbits.
Occlude the vessel by compressing proximal to the
A
location of the catheter. After puncture of the vessel
wall, the catheter should be advanced over the stylet
and into the vessel lumen. The thin walls of the vessel
make it easy to visualize the threading of the catheter
into the lumen of the vein to the hub. Due to the rela-
tive small volume of blood in the vein and the low
venous blood pressure, it is unlikely to obtain a back-
flow of blood into the catheter flange or hub. If in
doubt, a small quantity of saline can be injected via
the catheter for observation of the telltale blanching of
the vessel with infused fluid. For the ear, a roll of four
to five gauze 4 x 4 sponges should be placed in the
concave pinna and then the catheter secured using tape
in a butterfly application and a circumferential wrap
of tape over the roll of gauze in the ear The IV line
B
should also be secured with a circumferential wrap of
tape. The principles of fluid therapy are identical to
those for other species. See Figure 12.17 for illustra-
tions relating to placing an IV catheter.
Intraosseous infusion is indicated when intravenous
access is not possible or difficult and a delay in access
may affect survival. The common locations for cath-
eterization are the humerus, tibial crest, and femur. A
20- to 22-gauge spinal needle that is about half the
length of the bone is appropriate for most situations.
If a spinal needle is not available, use an appropriately
sized hypodermic needle. If the hypodermic needle
plugs, a thinner, sterile Kirschner wire can be used as
 a plunger to push bone cortex from the needle lumen
(Anderson 1995). The procedure is done using a
similar approach and equipment as for cats and can
C
be done in kits as small as 200 grams, although poten-
tial risk to active growth plates must be considered in
juvenile animals (Bielski et al. 1993, Harcourt-Brown
Figure 12.17. (A) Initial insertion of the catheter in
the vein; note the “flash." (B) The catheter is seated
2002).
into the vein and the cap bas been applied. (C) A
Preparation of the area should follow strict aseptic
tongue depressor was added for additional support.
technique because of the risk of osteomyelitis, and if
 it is necessary in an emergency situation in a conscious
Rabbits
285
animal, a local anesthetic such as lidocaine can be
Urine Collection
used. The humerus may be the easiest location for
 Urine may be collected from rabbits into a clean cage
placement, where the needle is inserted through the
 pan, by catheterization as for cats, by cystocentesis, or
greater trochanter (Harcourt-Brown 2002). For the
from anesthetized rabbits by expression. The bladder
tibial crest, the needle should be inserted at the medial
wall is thin and susceptible to trauma or puncture;
aspect of the proximal tibia of the flexed stifle at an
therefore, cystocentesis, manual expression, or cathe-
angle of about 30 degrees (Anderson 1995, Bielski et
terization should be done with care. If doing cystocen-
al. 1993, Otto and Crowe 1992). Because of the curved
tesis, use a small needle appropriate for the patient (23
cortex of the tibia, it may be difficult to keep the needle
to 25 gauge).
in the medullary cavity and instead go into the cortex.
The femur can be difficult because of the well devel-
Administration of Medication
oped trochanteric fossa, and the catheter often needs
to pass through three layers of cortical bone. Although
Intravenous Injection
placement of the catheter may be more diffcult in the
The marginal ear veins are the easiest to access for IV
rear leg, some rabbits may be less inclined to disturb
 injection, but the cephalic and saphenous can also be
a catheter that is not by the face (Jenkins 2004).
used. The technique is the same as described for veni-
For any location, the needle should be advanced in
 puncture. Typically volumes of up to 5 ml can be given
a distal direction away from the physis until there is a
by bolus by this route (Flecknell 1987). Be careful not
dramatic reduction of resistance, indicating penetra-
to inject into the central auricular artery, which may
tion of the marrow cavity, and one aspirates slightly
be fatal (O'Malley 2005).
to obtain marrow to confirm that the needle is in the
desired location. Once in the marrow cavity at the
Per Os
desired depth, the needle should be sutured to the skin
Rabbits may accept oral medications when mixed with
 and protected and further immobilized with a sterile
small amounts of preferred food items, such as bananas
wrap and bulky bandage. Any drug, agent, or fluid
or bread. Rabbits can be difficult to pill, but may
that can be safely given intravenously can be given by
accept palatable medications when placed through the
the intraosseous route. The maximal rate of infusion
diastema as far back in the mouth as possible. A pill
is about 10ml/minute by this route (Anderson 1995).
"gun,” as used in cats, may be useful for this proce-
dure. Alternatively, the pill should be crushed and
Bandaging and Wound Care
given in suspension. Suspensions or liquid medications
The principles of bandaging and wound care are essen-
may be eaten from the syringe if palatable, and rabbits
tially the same for rabbits as they are for other species.
usually like sweet formulations such as juice or fruit
Ulcerative pododermatitis is one of the most frequent
baby foods. Otherwise, the rabbit can be restrained as
 indications for bandages, and these bandages are gen-
previously described and volumes should be limited to
erally well-tolerated by the rabbits being treated.
less than about 5 ml of liquid. In some cases it may be
Bandages of the feet should relieve pressure on the
tempting to give drugs via the drinking water; however,
affected area, such as with a doughnut bandage. The
this is imprecise. Depending on their level of consump-
bandages should extend above the hock and be secured
tion, the palatability of the liquid, and stability of the
 at the proximal aspect with loosely wrapped adhesive
 drug, animals may be overdosed or underdosed.
tape extending from the bandage to the fur, so that the
bandage is not kicked off.
Subcutaneous Injection
Rabbit skin is very thin, so bandages must be
 The methodology for a subcutaneous injection is the
changed frequently and carefully observed for signs of
same as for other species with the interscapular region
urine contamination, irritation, constriction, or slip-
preferred. A 21- to 25-gauge needle should be inserted
 page. Tight or contaminated bandages can themselves
under the lifted loose skin over the scapulae and paral-
cause dermatitis and even tear the skin. As opposed to
lel with the underlying muscle. Volumes of 10 to 20 ml/
dogs, dermatitis should not be treated with ointments
kg can be given by this route (Harcourt-Brown 2002).
containing steroids because rabbits are particularly
sensitive to their side effects, including adrenocortical 
Intraperitoneal Injection
suppression, delayed wound healing, and immunosup-
This route is rarely used in rabbits, but should be
pression (Graham 2004). If topical antibiotics are
considered in neonates or moribund, hypothermic
used, make sure the animals cannot ingest the oint-
animals in which vasoconstriction may be pronounced
ment because of their sensitivity to some antibiotics.
 and there is a need to rapidly attempt fluid therapy or
286
Chapter 12
administer medications. For intraperitoneal injection,
animal. This should be done, however, with great
the rabbit ideally should be held on its back with the
caution and the obvious consent of the owner.
head slightly lower than the hindquarters to allow the
Specialized equipment is available that significantly
stomach and intestines to fall cranially. However, if
aids rodent and rabbit dentistry (Cappello and Gracis
dorsal recumbency is at all resisted, the animal can be
2005), but readily available items can also be useful,
positioned on its side or in ventral recumbency. A
such as a tongue depressor or the barrel of a syringe
second individual should insert a 21- to 25-gauge
through the diastema to serve as a gag to open the
needle at a 45 degree angle through the skin and
mouth slightly and as a backstop when trimming the
abdominal wall slightly to the right and just caudal to
incisors. Extraction is also an option for severely
the umbilicus. Aspirate before injecting to reduce the
affected teeth, but is much more difficult for cheek
chance of injecting into an organ. For fluid therapy or
teeth than incisors. Rabbits can actually do very well
injection of a volume of material in excess of a few
with all of their incisors extracted by using their lips for
milliliters and to prevent accidental laceration of the
 prehension. In cases of malocclusion, teeth trimming
internal organs, a catheter can be inserted and the
 may need to be repeated every six to eight weeks for the
stylet immediately removed after puncture of the
lifetime of the animal (Swindle and Shealy 1996).
abdominal wall. Volumes of up to 100 ml of warmed
fluids can be given to a 4- to 5-kg rabbit by the IP
Nail Trimming
route (Flecknell 1987).
Nail trimming can be done with any conventional nail
trimmer used for dogs or cats. The quick is generally
 Intramuscular Injection
tasy to visualize, and overly aggressive trimming
The restraint for injection is similar to that for exami-
causing bleeding should be managed as for dogs and
nation, remembering to always hold the hindquarters 
cats. Owners can be taught to trim the nails of their
and keep the rabbit from jumping forward with the
pets because nails may grow long with rapidity in
other hand. If alone, the animal should be held with
sedentary animals. Similar to dogs, declawing should
the flank against the restrainer's side/abdomen and the
 not be done in rabbits unless medically necessary for
head tucked into the elbow of the dominant arm, with
a particular digit. Unlike cats, rabbits use the last
the dominant arm wrapped around the exposed flank
phalanx for weight bearing and traction, and removal
of the animal and the hand curled around and restrain-
can lead to abnormal weight distribution and foot
ing the hindquarters. The free hand is then used for
 injuries. Excessive scratching should be dealt with by
the injection. Fractious rabbits may need two people
behavior management and frequent nail trims.
for injection or to be wrapped in a towel. Lumbar
muscles (cranial to the pelvis) or the cranial aspects of
Assisted Feeding
the rear leg (quadriceps) are the sites of choice to avoid
 Nutritional support is important for rabbits that are
damage to the sciatic nerve (Mader 2004). Aspirate to
anorexic because, like cats, they are predisposed to
confrm that blood is not obtained before injecting.
hepatic lipidosis. Critical care diets specifically for her-
Any volume greater than 0.5 ml/kg should be divided
bivores are available (Critical Care, Oxbow Animal
and given in two sites.
Health, Murdock, NE), but ground-up pellets can be
A Pa as aq u sr  lm s pa
Teeth Trimming
restraining the animal with a towel and gently placing
Conventional dog nail trimmers should not be used for
a catheter tip syringe in the diastema as previously
trimming the incisors because of the risk of complica-
described. Rabbits that do not readily accept food
tions, including 
 longitudinal fissures, periodontal
 from a syringe may be tube fed.
abscesses, and damage to the germinal tissue (Gorrel 
 Restraint for tube feeding is similar to that used for
1996, Malley 1996). Nail trimmers can also leave sharp
oral examination. A second person should place an
edges that may lacerate the tongue, cheek, or lips.
oral speculum behind the incisors, in the diastema.
Ideally, the teeth should be reduced using high speed
 Select a tube that should be larger than the trachea and
dental equipment with a water-cooling system (Capello
premeasure to the last rib on the left side and mark
and Gracis 2005). Alternatively,
a Dremel
tool
the tube. Once the tube is passed, proper placement
(Dremel, Racine, Wl) can be used, but these have a
can be confirmed by aspirating stomach contents or
lower speed and increased torque that increases the
 injecting 5 to 10 ml of air through the tube while aus-
chance of thermal damage to tissues. These procedures
cultating the stomach for the telltale sounds of bub-
generally require sedation, although rarely veterinary
bling fluid or turbulent airflow. The tube should be
personnel may be able trim the incisors in a conscious
tasy to pass, and if the rabbits struggles excessively the
Rabbits
287
procedure should be stopped. The animal may need to
ensheathed penis of the buck is also located directly
be sedated for this procedure.
below the anus, similar to cats, and it has an
 If a suitable mouth gag is not present on the prem-
obvious scrotum with palpable testes (Figure 12.8).
ises, a gag can be made by taping two tongue depres-
However, due to open inguinal canals the testes may
sors (0.75 inch width) in flat alignment with medical
migrate back and forth from the scrotum to the
adhesive tape. A hole should be bored through the
abdomen.
center of the taped tongue depressors, using a scissors
tip or other sufficiently sharp instrument, of such size
to permit passage of the stomach tube. An alternative
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
is to remove the plunger from a syringe, bore a hole
through the cylinder walls, and use the empty barrel
Emergency and critical care are action-oriented and
as a gag. Mouth gags for rabbits should be of sufficient
immediate with the goals of interventions being to
height or diameter to prohibit occlusion of the incisors
stabilize the rabbit and afford the opportunity to then
and sectioning or damage to the tube. Tongue depres-
 pursue the diagnosis of the primary problem. There
sors that are 0.75 inches wide or the barrel of a 10-ml
 may be any number of presentations requiring critical
syringe are generally sufficient as gags for rabbits 4 to
care, including gastrointestinal disorders, trauma,
6kg in weight.
environmental exposure (hypothermia, hyperthermia),
Although of arguable value given the confounding
intoxications, respiratory distress, neurologic symp-
effects of the bactericidal low gastric pH, force-feeding
toms, and urinary obstruction. Identical presentation
may be attempted for transfaunation in cases of cecal
directed interventions constitute the tenets of care
dysbiosis. This procedure is accomplished by outfitting
 including fluid therapy, body temperature mainte-
a healthy donor rabbit with an Elizabethan collar
 nance, oxygen administration, and control of hemor-
overnight to prevent cecotrophy. The collected ceco-
rhage. If in shock, rabbits rarely present in a
trophs should be mixed and suspended in warmed
'spq pue shop ui uaas aq eu se aheis Aroiesuado
(37°C), nonbacteriostatic saline and strained through
and instead usually have signs of decompensation such
gauze prior to administration with a stomach tube.
as
hypothermia,  
 bradycardia, hypotension, pale
A volume of 40 to 60ml of this suspension can be
mucous membranes, and prolonged capillary refill
safely given to a 4- to 5-kg rabbit using a 12 French,
time (Lichtenberger 2007). Rabbits are obligate nasal
16-inch Sovereign Feeding Tube (Kendall
1Co.,
breathers, so a rabbit that is open mouth breathing is
Mansfield, MA).
in severe respiratory distress. Acute respiratory distress
If a permanent tube is needed, nasogastric tubes can
 can occur with bacterial infections of nasal passages,
be placed using a technique similar to that used in cats.
 bacterial pneumonia, trauma, or cardiac disease (Paul-
 The disadvantage of nasogastric tubes is that solutions
Murphy 2007).
designed for nutritional support of rabbits will clog a
If CPR is required, immediate action is directed at
tube this small. Although it is common to use human
the "ABCs “ of emergency care as in other species:
nutrition products such as Ensure for rabbits, these
Airway, Breathing, and Circulation. An airway should
are not ideal for herbivores. Solutions available for
be established with either intubation or a tracheos-
herbivorous reptiles will pass through these tubes,
tomy tube and the animal placed on oxygen. If an
although no solution will be able to provide appropri-
airway cannot be established, high flow oxygen with
ate insoluble fiber because it would clog the tube (Paul-
tight-fitting mask can be used at a rate of twenty to
 Murphy 2007). Surgical placement of pharyngostomy
thirty breaths/minute, but monitor the animal for signs
and gastrotomy tubes have also been described (Smith
of bloat (Lichtenberger 2007). Chest compressions at
et al. 1997, Rogers et al. 1988).
 a rate of at least eighty times/minute and medications
are used to address circulatory issues, but remember
that some rabbits have serum atropinesterases so atro-
SEX DETERMINATION
 pine is not the preferred anticholinergic if one is
indicated.
Gender determination in rabbits is similar to that in
 More advanced care and monitoring includes intra-
cats with the exception that does also show sexual
venous fluids, ECG, blood-gas analysis, end tidal CO2
dimorphism by virtue of a pendulous fold of skin at
measurements, and temperature. The use of corticoste-
the caudal mandibulocervical region. This redundant
roids in shock therapy is controversial in dogs and cats
skin is termed the “dewlap." The vulva in does is
and not recommended for rabbits (Lichtenberger
located directly below the anus (Figure 12.7). The
2007). The treatment may also need to include address-
288
Chapter 12
ing metabolic disturbances that may be the cause or
tion, and obstruction. Ileus and diarrhea can both lead
consequence of the shock.
to
In addition to shock, hypothermia is a risk in suck-
 Ileus is more common than diarrhea, and is a common
lings, rabbits housed outdoors in winter, and those
problem given the intricate, complex and delicate
recovering from anesthesia, especially if room-temper-
interrelationship between diet, other environmental
ature fluids were administered. Therapy centers on
factors, t
the commensal,
,fermentative microflora,
slowly warming the animal and restoring circulation
and gut motility in rabbits of all ages. Diarrhea can
with warm, isotonic fluids in conjunction with 
lan
also occur due to these factors or associated with
external heat source such as warm water bottles,
other conditions, such as infection or antibiotic
water-circulated heating pads, or a Bair-Hugger. The
administration.
goal in treating hypothermia, as it is with other species,
Fluids and nutritional support are the most impor-
is to raise the body temperature slowly. Otherwise,
, in
 tant aspect of treatment for these animals. Even if there
theory, the cure may be worse than the disease. A rapid
is no appreciable fluid loss because rabbits cannot
rise in body temperature without control may increase
vomit and diarrhea is not observed, colonic hypomotil-
brain metabolic demands above that which can be
ity leads to decreased water absorption and dehydra-
 provided and expose the heart, liver, and lungs to cold,
tion (O'Malley 2005). Cecotrophs contain high levels
acidotic blood from the periphery. Overzealous body
of vitamins B and K, so supplementation of B vitamins
warming also could result in hyperthermia. Failure to
 in particular should be considered for animals that are
restore fluids in any hypothermic animal can result in
unable or unwilling to eat their night feces. Additional 
acute tubular necrosis. Hypoxemia should be consid-
treatment may include analgesics, motility agents, anti-
ered as a possible complication in downer and hypo-
 biotics, anthelmintics, anti-ulcer medications, or other
thermic animals, and animals may require oxygen
 agents as indicated. For diarrhea, transfaunation with
delivered via a face mask.
cecotrophs collected from a healthy donor rabbit to
Hypoglycemia is generally a risk in neonatal or
re-establish the enteric flora may be considered. It
small breed animals either on an inadequate nutri-
  e   pu aq o
tional plane or recovering from surgery. High meta-
 probiotics have not been shown to be effective in floral
bolic energy demands and low depot fat reservoirs
reconstitution for rabbits (Myers 2007).
coupled with postoperative anorexia make these
Gastric dilation is rare, but must be excluded in an
 animals particularly at risk. It could be a companion
anorexic rabbit, because the animal may need to be
to hypothermia. In a pinch, however, response
to
 decompressed and prokinetic agents may be contrain-
glucose therapy can be used as a diagnostic tool. Acute
dicated. Gastric dilation can occur secondary to small
hypoglycemia should be treated as for other species by
intestinal obstruction because of the inability to vomit,
intravenous or oral bolus of 50% dextrose (e.g. 2 ml/
leading to fluid and gas accumulation in the stomach.
kg). Parenteral administration of glucose is preferred
This must be differentiated from gut stasis based on
 because excessive administration of oral carbohydrates
radiographs. Initial treatment includes passage of a
may create conditions that upset the enteric microflora
 r p p sp o a s
and predispose to cecal dysbiosis. For those animals
subsequent decisions regarding whether surgery is nec-
that are both hypoglycemic and hypothermic, intrave-
essary (Harcourt-Brown 2007).
nous glucose provides fuel to the brain
during
Traumatic presentations may include fractured
rewarming.
limbs,
 traumatic vertebral luxation or fractures,
 Hyperthermia is associated with rectal temperatures
and fight-related lacerations, including those of the
higher than 104°F. Rabbits are prone to hyperthermia
scrotum. Limb fractures should be stabilized by splint-
if housed outdoors because they cannot sweat or effec-
ing if possible, but often this is difficult and surgery
tively pant. It may also be caused iatrogenically by
may be indicated. Radiography should be done to
overzealous rewarming during anesthetic recovery or
characterize the fracture and permit the development
can be associated with certain toxicoses. The treat-
 of a plan for reduction and stabilization. Unfortunately,
ment, as for other species, is to cool the rabbit slowly.
vertebral injuries are rarely curable and often eutha-
Hyperthermia can be treated with room-temperature
 nasia is the most humane option. Rabbits presenting
intravenous fluids and tepid water, especially on the
acutely for vertebral injury should be radiographed to
ears. Animals need to be monitored for kidney failure
confrm the diagnosis and should be kept clean, padded
and other metabolic abnormalities.
to retard the development of decubital ulcers, and
Rabbits may present with a variety of gastrointesti-
provided fluid and dietary therapy as needed. Spinal
nal emergencies, such as ileus, diarrhea, gastric dila-
surgery is not commonly done in rabbits, but a referral
Rabbits
289
center can be contacted to determine if someone is
REFERENCES
capable of performing this procedure. For especially
dedicated and competent owners, the use of carts has
Anderson NL. 1995. Intraosseous fluid delivery in small exotic
been described for paraplegic rabbits (Boydell 2000).
animals. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl: Small
Trauma to the scrotum or testes may require surgi-
Animal Practice, Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 1331-1335.
Bayne K. 2003. Environmental enrichment of nonhuman primates,
cal castration. Steroids for trauma should be used with
dogs and rabbits used in toxicologic studies. Toxicologic
caution in rabbits because they are sensitive to their
Pathotogy 31(Suppl): 132-7.
side effects (Paul-Murphy 2007).
Bergdall VK, Dysko RC. 1994. Metabolic, traumatic, mycotic and
The principles of treatment for toxin exposure are
inherited diseases and variations. In: The Biology of the
also similar to those for cats and dogs, with some
Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed., edited by Manning PJ, Ringler DH,
Newcomer CE, Orlando: Academic Press. 293-319.
notable exceptions. Emetics such as apomorphine are
Bielski RJ, Bassett GS, Fideler B, et al. 1993. Intraosseous infusions:
 ineffective for the physiologic reasons mentioned. It
Effects on the immature physis—an experimental model in
may also be necessary to apply an E-collar for seventy-
rabbits. J Ped Orthopedics 13(4): 511-515.
two hours to keep rabbits from eating cecotrophs that
Boydell P 2000. Nervous system and disorders. In: Manual of
may still contain the toxic substance. Therapy should
Rabbit Medicine and Surgery, edited by Flecknell PA, 57-62.
involve fluid administration, gastric lavage, bathing,
British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Bowman DD, Fogelson ML, Carbone LG. 1992. Effect of ivermectin
 and activated charcoal as indicated, depending on the
on the control of ear mites {Psoroptes cunicuti) in naturally
substance and route of intoxication. Toxicoses have
infested rabbits. Armer J Vet Res 53: 105-109.
 been associated with a variety of chemicals, pesticides/
Brammer DW, Doerning BJ, Chrisp CE, et al. 1991. Anesthetic and
rodenticides, 
 antibiotics, t
tiletamine, and 
various
nephrotoxic effects of Telazol in New Zealand white rabbits.
Lab Anim Sei 41(5): 432-435.
household plants (Johnston 2008). Although rabbits
Cam Y, Atasever A, Eraslan G, Kibar M, Atalay O, Beyaz L, et al.
are resistant to many plant toxins such as ragwort,
2008. Eimeria stiedae: experimental infection in rabbits and the
nightshade, comfrey, and laburnum, they are sensitive
effect of treatment with toltrazuril and ivermectin. Exp Parasitot.
to aflatoxins that may be present in the feed (Harcourt-
119(1):164-172.
Brown 2002). Lead toxicosis can occur in rabbits in
Capello V, Gracis M. 2005. Rabbit and Rodent Dentistry Handbook,
edited by Lennox AM. Lake Worth: Zoologic Education
older houses that like to chew the baseboards, which
Network Inc.
can cause anorexia or neurologic signs.
Fipronil
Carpenter JW, Mashima TY, Rupiper DJ. 2001. Exotic Animal
(Frontline) or high doses of permethrins or pyrethrins
Formulary, 2nd ed., 301-326. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
can be toxic, especially in small rabbits.
Company.
 Hemorrhage should be controlled by stopping the
Cheeke PR, Cunha TJ. 1987. Rabbit Feeding and Nutrition.
Orlando: Academic Press.
 bleeding, including surgical interventions, if needed.
Chen PH, White CE. 2006. Comparison of Rectal, Microchip
 Intravenous fluids should be given for significant blood
Transponder, and Infrared Thermometry Techniques for
loss. Transfusion should be considered for rabbits
Obtaining Body Temperature in the Laboratory Rabbit
based on the same principles as in small animals, and
(Oryctolagus cuniculus). J Am Assoc Lab Anir Sci 45: 57-63.
although it is used clinically, blood groups have not
Chew RM. 1965. Water metabolism of mammals. Physiol Mamrmat
 been studied in rabbits and a cross-match is recom-
2: 43-178.
Cohen C. 1969. Genetics of the Rabbit. In: Laboratory Animal
 mended (Lichtenberger 2004). Rest, oxygen therapy,
Medicine, NAS Publication 1724, Washington DC.
iron supplementation, and nutritional s
support
may
Crossley DA, Aiken S. 2004. Small Mammal Dentistry. In: Ferrets,
also be important in the treatment of anemia.
.The
rabbits and rodents: clinical medicine and surgery, edited by
most likely causes of hemorrhage are trauma and inter-
Quesenberry KE and Carpenter JW, St. Louis W.B. Saunders
Co.370-382
nal hemorrhage or hematuria in intact does from
Curtis SK, Brooks DL. 1990. Eradication of ear mites from naturally
uterine adenocarcinoma.
infested conventional research rabbits using ivermectin. Lab
Anim Sci 40: 406-408.
Davies RR, Davies JA. 2003. Rabbit gastrointestinal physiology.
EUTHANASLA
Veterinary Clinics of North America. Exotic Animat Practice.
6(1):139-153.
Deeb BJ, Carpenter JW. 2004. Neurologic and Musculoskeletal
Methods should conform to those listed as acceptable
Diseases. In: Ferrets, rabbits and rodents: clinical medicine and
by the 2007 AVMA Guidelines on Euthanasia. In a
surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry KE and Carpenter JW,
 practice setting, the most preferable method is by injec-
St. Louis W.B. Saunders Co. 203-210.
tion of a barbiturate overdose (50 to 100mg/kg) into
Deeb BJ, DiGiacomo RF 2000. Respiratory diseases of rabbits. Vet
Clin Narth Am Exot Anim Pract 3(2): 465-480, vi-vii.
the lateral marginal ear vein. This can be facilitated by
Deeb BJ, DiGiacomo RF, Evermann JF, Thouless ME. 1993.
first sedating or anesthetizing the rabbit as described
Prevalence of coronavirus antibodies in rabbits. Lab Anirm Sei
in the preceding section on surgical anesthesia.
43:431-433.
290
Chapter 12
Deeb BJ, Digiacomo RF 1994. Cerebral larval migrans caused by
Harkness JE, Wagner JE. 1989. In: The Biology and Medicine of
Baylisascaris species in pet rabbits. JAVMA 205:1744-1747.
 Rabbits and Rodents, 3rd ed., Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.
Delong D, Manning PJ. 1994. Bacterial Diseases. In: The Biology of
9-65.
the Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed., edited by Manning PJ, Ringler
Heard D. 2004. Anesthesia, analgesia, and sedation of small
DH, Newcomer CE, Orlando: Academic Press 131-170.
mammals. In: Ferrets, rabbits and rodents: clinical medicine and
Difilippo SM, Norberg PJ, Suson UD, Savino AM, Reim DA. 2004.
surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry KE and Carpenter JW.
A comparison of xylazine and medetomidine in an anesthetic
St. Louis: W.B. Saunders Co. 356-369.
combination in New Zealand White Rabbits. Contemp Top Lab
Hedenqvist P, Roughan JV, Antunes L, Orr H, Flecknell PA. 2001.
Anim Sei 43: 32-34.
Induction of anaesthesia with desflurane and isoflurane in the
Doerning BJ, Brammer BW, Chrisp CE, et al. 1992. Nephrotoxicity
rabbit. Lab Anim 35: 172-179.
 of tiletamine in New Zealand white rabbits. Lab Anim Sci 42(3):
Hess L. 2004. Dermatologic Diseases. In: Ferrets, rabbits and
267-269.
rodents: clinical medicine and surgery, edited by Quesenberry
Diwel D, Brech K. 1981. Control of oxyuriasis in rabbits by fen-
KE and Carpenter JW, 194-202.
bendazole. Lab Anim 15: 101-105.
Hewitt CD, et al. 1989. Normal biochemical and hematological
Edwards AW, Korner PI, Thornburn GD. 1959. The cardiac output
values in New Zealand White rabbits. Clin Chem 35:
of the unanesthetized rabbit, and the effects of preliminary anes-
1777-1779.
thesia, environmental temperature, and carotid occlusion. Q J
Horiuchi N, Watarai M, Kobayashi Y, Omata Y, Furuoka H. 2008.
Exp Physiol 44: 309-321.
Proliferative enteropathy involving Lawsonia intracelualaris
Fichi G, Flamini G, Giovanelli F, Otrant D, Perrucci S. 2007.
infection in rabbits (Oryctolagus cunicutus). J Vet Med Sci.
Efficacy of an essential oil of Eugenia caryophyllata against
Apr;70(4): 389-392.
Psoroptes cunicuti. Exp Parasitol. Feb;115(2): 168-172.
Huerkamp MJ. 1995. Anesthesia and postoperative management of
Flecknell PA. 1987. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia: An Introduction
rabbits and pocket pets. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
for Research Workers and Technicians. London: Acadermic
XIl: Small Animal Practice, Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Press.
1322-1327.
Flecknell PA, Liles JH, Williamson HA. 1990. The use of lignocaine-
Jablonski P, Howden BO, Baxter K. 2001. Influence of buprenor-
prilocaine local anesthetic crearm for pain-free venipuncture in
 phine analgesia on post-operative recovery in two strains of rats.
Jaboratory animals. Lab Anim. 24: 142-146.
Lab Anim 35: 213-222.
Flecknell PA. 1996. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia, 2nd ed.,
 Jenkins JR. 2004a. Gastrointestinal Diseases. In: Ferrets, rabbits and
London: Academic Press. 182-193.
rodents: clinical medicine and surgery,
，2nd ed., edited by
Flecknell PA, Richardson CA, Popovic A. 2007. Laboratory Animals.
Quesenberry KE and Carpenter JW, St. Louis: W.B. Saunder Co.
 In: Veterinary anesthesia and analgesia, edited by Tranquilli WJ,
161-171.
Thurman JC, Grimm KA. Ames: Blackwell Publishing, 766.
 Jenkins JR. 2004b. Soft Tissue Surgery. In: Ferrets, rabbits and
Foley PL, Henderson AL, Bissonette EA, Wimer GR, Feldman SH.
rodents: clinical medicine and surgery, 2nd ed., edited by
2001. Evaluation of fentanyl transdermal patches in rabbits:
Quesenberry KE and Carpenter JW, St. Louis W.B. Saunders
blood concentrations and physiologic response. Comp Med 51:
Co.221-230.
239-244.
 Jenkins JR. 2000. Surgical sterilization in small mammmals. Spay and
Garibaldi BA, Fox JG, Otto G, et al. 1987. Hematuria in rabbits.
neuter. Vet Clin N A Exot Anim Pract 3(3): 617-627.
Lab Anim Sci 37: 769-772.
Jensen LJ, et al. 1983. Natural infection of Obetiscoides cunicuti in
Gentry PA. 1982. The effect of administration of a single dose of
a domestic rabbit. Lab Anim Sei 30: 231-233.
T-2 toxin on blood coagulation in the rabbit. Can J Comp Med
Johnson CA, Pallozzi WA, Geiger L, Szumiloski JL, Castiglia L,
46: 414-419.
Dahl NP, Destefano JA, Pratt SJ, Hall SJ, Beare CM, Gallagher 
Gillett CS. 1994. Selected drug dosages and clinical reference data.
M, Klein HJ. 2003. The effect of an environmental enrichment
In: The Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed., edited by
 device on individually caged rabbits in a safety assessment facil-
 Manning PJ, Ringler DH, and Newcomer CE, Orlando: Academic
ity. Contemporary Topics in Laboratory Animat Science. 42(5):
Press. 467-472.
27-30.
Gilroy BA. 1981. Endotracheal intubation of rabbits and rodents.
Johnston MS. 2008. Clinical Toxicoses of the Dormestic Rabbit. Vet
JAVMA 179: 1295.
Clin Exot Anim 11: 315-326.
Gonzales GA, Silvan G, Ilera JC. 2005. Effects of Barbiturate
Kazacos KR, Kazacos EA. 1983. Fatal cerebrospinal disease caused
administration on hepatic and renal biochemical parameters in
by Baylisascaris procynosis in domestic rabbits. JAVMA 183:
New Zealand white rabbits. Contemp Top Lab Anirm Sci 44:
967-971.
43-45.
Kazakos GM, Anagnostou T, Savvas I, Raptopoulos D, Psalla D,
Gorrel C. 1996. Teeth trimming in rabbits and rodents. Vet Rec
Kazakou IM. 2007. Use of the laryngeal mask airway in rabbits:
139(21):528.
placement and efficacy. Lab Anirm (NY) 36: 29-34.
Graham JE. 2004. Rabbit Wound Managerment. Vet Clin Exot
Kohn DF, Martin TE, Foley PL, Morris TH, Swindle MM, Vogler
Anirm 7: 37-55.
GA, Wixson SK. 2007. Public statement: guidelines for the
Griffiths M, Davies D. 1963. The role of soft pellets in the produc
 assessment and managerment of pain in rodents and rabbits. J
tion of lactic acid in the rabbit stomach. J Nutr 80: 171-180.
Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 46: 97-108.
Harcourt-Brown F 2002. Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. Oxford:
Kunzel F, Gruber A, Tichy A, Edelhofer R, Nell B, Hassan J, et al.
Alden Press.
2008. Clinical symptoms and diagnosis of encephalitozoonosis
Harcourt-Brown FM, Holloway HK. 2003. Encephatitozoon cunic-
in pet rabbits. Vet Parasitof. Feb 14;151(2-4): 115-124.
uf in pet rabbits. Vet Rec. Apr 5;152(14): 427-431.
Leary, SL, Manning PJ, Anderson LC. 1984. Experimental and
Harcourt-Brown TR. 2007. Managerment of Acute Gastric Dilation
naturally-occurring gastric foreign bodies in laboratory rabbits.
in Rabbits. Journal of Exotic Pet Medicine 16: 168-174.
Lab Anim Sci 34: 58-61.
Rabbits
291
Leck G. 1988. Removing a calculus from the urinary bladder of A
Patton NM. 1994. Colony husbandry. In: The Biology of the
rabbit. Vet Rec 83: 64-65.
Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed., edited by Manning PJ, Ringler DH,
Langan GP, Lohmiller JJ, Swing SP, Wardrip CL. 2000. Respiratory
Newcomer CE, 27-45. Orlando: Academic Press.
diseases of rodents and rabbits. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Paul-Murphy J. 2007. Critical Care of the Rabbit. Vet Clin Exot
Pract. Nov;30(6): 1309-1335, vii.
Ani 10: 437-461.
Lee MJ, Clement JG. 1990. Effects of soman poisoning on hematol-
Phaneuf LR, Barker S, Groleau MA, Turner PV. 2006. Tracheal
ogy and coagulation parameters and serum biochermistry in
injury after endotracheal intubation and anesthesia in rabbits. J
rabbits. Mif Med 155:244-249.
Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 45: 67-72.
Leland MM, Hubbard GB, Dubey JP. 1992. Clinical toxoplasmosis
Percy DH, Barthold SW. 2007. Rabbit. In: Pathology of Laboratory
in domestic rabbits. Lab Anim Sei 42: 318-319.
Rodents and Rabbits, 3rd ed., edited by Percy DH and Barthold
Lichtenberger M. 2004. Transfusion Medicine in Exotic Pets.
SW, Ames: Blackwell Publishing. 253-308.
Clinicat Techniques in Smattl Animat Practice 19: 88-95.
PMI Nutrition International. 1998. LabDiet: Product Reference
Lichtenberger M. 2007. Shock and Cardiopulmonary-Cerebral
Manual. SL1-5.
Resuscitation in Small Mammals and Birds. Vet Clin Exot Anim
Reuter JD, Fowles KJ, Terwilliger GA, Booth CJ. 2005. Jatrogenic
10: 275-291.
tension pneumothorax in a rabbit. Cont Top Lab An Sei
Lindsey JR, Fox RR. 1994. Inherited diseases and variations. In: The
44(4):22-25.
Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed., edited by Manning
Robertson SA, Eberhart S. 1994. Effcacy of intranasal route for
PJ, Ringler DH, and Newcomer CE. Orlando: Academic Press.
administration of anesthetic agents to adult rabbits. Lab Anir
293-319.
Sci 44(2): 159-165.
Lipman NS, Marini RP, Flecknell PA. 1997. Anesthesia and anal-
Rougier S, Galland D, Boucher S, Boussarie D, Valle M. 2006
 gesia in rabbits. In: Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
Epidemiology and susceptibility of pathogenic bacteria respon-
Animals, edited by Kohn DF, Wixson SK, White WJ, and Benson
sible for upper respiratory tract infections in pet rabbits. Vet
GJ, Boston: Academic Press. 205-232.
Microbiof. 115(1-3): 192-198.
Livio M, et al. 1988. Role of platelet-activating factor in primary
Rogers G, Taylor C, Austin JC, et al. 1988. A pharyngostomy tech-
hemostasis. Arm J Physiol 254: 218-223.
nique for chronic oral dosing of rabbits. Lab Anim Sci 38:
Lopez-Martinez R, Mier T, Quirarte M. 1984. Dermatophytes iso-
619-620.
lated from laboratory animals. Mycopathologica 88: 111-113.
Sikoski P, Young RW, Lockard M. 2007. Comparison of heating
Mader DR. 2004. Rabbits: Basic Approach to Veterinary Care In:
devices for maintaining body temperature in anesthetized labora-
Ferrets, rabbits, and rodents: clinical medicine and surgery, 2nd
tory rabbits (Oryctolagus cunicutus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci
ed., edited by Mader KE and Carpenter JW, St. Louis: W.B.
46: 61-63.
Saunders Co. 147-154.
Smith DA, Olson PO, Mathews KA. 1997. Nutritional support for
Malley D. 1996. Teeth trimming in rabbits and rodents. Vet Rec
rabbits using the percutaneously placed gastrostomy tube: a pre-
139(24): 603.
liminary study. J Am Ani Hosp Assoc 33: 48-54.
McLaughlin RM, Fish RE. 1994. Clinical chemistry and hematol-
Smith JC, Robertson LD, Auhll A, March TJ, Derring C, Bolon B.
ogy. In: The Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed., edited
2004. Endotracheal tubes versus laryngeal mask airways in
by Manning PJ, Ringler DH, Newcomer CE, 111-127. Orlando:
rabbit inhalation anesthesia: ease of use and waste gas ermissions.
Academic Press.
Contemp Top Lab Anim Sei 43: 22-25.
McTier TL, Hair JA, Walstrom DJ, Thompson L. 2003. Effcacy
Sanchez S, Mizan S, Quist C, Schroder P, Juneau M, Dawe D, et al.
and safety of topical administration of selamectin for treatment
2004. Serological response to Pasteurella multocida NanH siali-
of ear mite infestation in rabbits. JAVMA 223{3): 322-324.
dase in persistently colonized rabbits. Clin Diagn Lab Immunot.
Morgan JR, Silverman S. 1984. Techniques of Veterinary
11(5):825-834.
Radiography. 4th ed. Davis: Veterinary Radiology Associates.
Stein S, Walshaw S. 1996. Rabbits. In: Handbook of Rodent
Mullen HS. 2000. Nonreproductive surgery in small mammals. Vet
and Rabbit Medicine, edited by Laber-Laird K, Swindle MM,
Clin NA Exot Anim Pract 3{3): 629-645.
and Flecknell P, Tarrytown: Elsevier Science Inc. 183-
Myers D. 2007. Probiotics. J. of Exotic Pet Medicine 16:
217.
195-197.
Suter C, Muller-Doblies UU, Hatt JM, Deplazes P. 2001. Prevention 
Narama I, et al. 1982. Pulmonary nodule causes by Diroflarid
and treatment of Encephalitozoon cuniculi infection in rabbits
mmitis in a laboratory rabbit. J. Parasitol. 68: 351-352.
with fenbendazole. Vet Rec. 148(15): 478-480.
Orr HE, Roughan JV, Flecknell PA. 2005. Assessment of ketamine
Swindle MM, Shealy PM. 1996. In: Handbook of Rodent and
and medetomidine anaesthesia in the domestic rabbit. Vet
Rabbit Medicine, edited by Laber-Laird K, Swindle MM, and
Anaesth Anatg 32: 271-279.
Flecknell P, Tarrytown: Elsevier Science Inc. 239-254.
Otto CM, Crowe DT. 1992. Intraosseous resuscitation techniques
Tesluk GC, Peiffer RL, Brown D. 1982. A clinical and pathological
 a aa    e 
Study of inherited glaucoma in New Zealand white rabbits. Lab
 Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company
Anim. 16: 234-239.
Co.
Tran HS, Puc MM, Tran JL, Del Rossi AJ, Hewitt CW. 2001. A
O'Malley B. 2005. Rabbits. In: Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of
method of endoscopic endotracheal intubation in rabbits. Lab
Exotic Species: Struture and function of mammals, birds, r-
Ani 35: 249-252.
tiles, and amphibians, Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders.
Vernau KM, Osofsky A, LeCouteur RA. 2007. The neurological
173-196.
examination and lesion localization in the companion rabbit
Pare JA, Paul-Murphy J. 2004. Disorders of the Reproductive and
(Orytolagus cunicutus). Vet Clin Exot Anim 10: 731-758.
Urinary Systems. In: Ferrets, rabbits and rodents: clinical medi-
Vogtsberger LM, et al. 1986. Spontaneous derrmatophytosis
cine and surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry KE and
due to Microsporum canis in rabbits. Lab Anim Sei 36:
Carpenter JW, St. Louis: W.B. Saunders Co. 183-193.
294-297.
292
Chapter 12
Wagner R, Wendlberger U. 2000. Field efficacy of moxidectin
Wright F, Riner J. 1984. Comparative efficacy of injection routes
in dogs and rabbits naturally infested with Sarcoptes spp..
and doses of ivermectin against Psoroptes in rabbits. Armer J Vet
Demmodex spp. and Psoroptes spp. mites. Vet Parasitol 93:
Res 46: 752-754.
149-158.
Wyatt JD, Scott RW, Richardson ME. 1989. The effects of pro-
Wales AD, Woodward MJ, Pearson GR. 2005. Attaching-effacing
longed ketamine-xylazine intravenous infusion on arterial blood
bacteria in animals. J Comp Pathot. 132(1): 1-26.
pH, blood gases, mean arterial blood pressure, heart and respira-
Weisbroth SH. 1994. Neoplastic diseases. In: The Biology of the
tory rates, rectal temperature, and reflexes in the rabbit. Lab
Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed., edited by Manning PJ, Ringler DH,
Anim Sei 39: 411-416.
Newcomer CE, 259-292. Orlando: Academic Press.
Williams AM, Wyatt JD. 2007. Comparison of Subcutaneous and
Wixson SK. 1994. Anesthesia and analgesia for rabbits. In: The
intramuscular ketamine-medetomidine with and without rever-
 Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed., edited by Manning
sal by atipamezole in Dutch belted rabbits (Oryctolagus cunicu-
PJ, Ringler DH, Newcomer CE, 87-109. Orlando: Academic
lus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sei 46: 16-20.
Press.
Xu ZJ, Chen WX. 1989. Viral hemorrhagic disease in rabbits: A
Wolford ST, et al. 1986. Reference range data base for serurm chem-
review. Vet Res Commum 13: 205-212.
istry and hematology values in laboratory animals. J Toxicof
Yu L, et al. 1979. Biochermical parameters of norrmal rabbit serurm.
Environ Heatth 18: 161-188.
Clin Biochem 12: 83-87.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
Anne Hudson and April Romagnano
INTRODUCTION
Mice, rats, gerbils, and hamsters all share a dental
formula of 2 (I 1/1, C 0/0, P 0/0, M 3/3), with hamsters
This chapter focuses on the mouse (Mus musculus), rat
having incisors at birth (Harkness and Wagner 1995).
(Rattus norvegicus), gerbil (Meriones unguiculatus),
The incisors are open rooted and grow continuously;
 and hamsters: golden or Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus
the molars do not. Incisors develop a yellow-orange
auratus), European hamster (Cricetus cricetus), and
color as the animal ages. Classically the incisors are
 Russian dwarf hamster (Phodopus spp.). They are
used for rostrocaudal gnawing during eating. A near
described as follows:
vertical biting motion also exists, but is more common
Mice: Small, busy rodents; long, hairless tail; 20 to
in defensive or offensive behaviors (Quesenberry and
63g.
Carpenter 2003). Gnawing naturally wears down the
Rats: Large, intelligent rodents; long, hairless tail;
surface of the incisors, but a malocclusion of the inci-
225 to 500 g.
sors precludes normal wear and makes trimming of the
Gerbils: Desert-adapted rodents but need fresh
teeth necessary. Malocclusion is especially problematic
water access; produce concentrated urine; long, hairy
in weanlings and if not caught early can lead to starva-
tail; 46 to 131 g.
tion and death. Malocclusion can be genetic, or it can
Hamsters: Stocky, loose-skinned rodents; cheek
occur secondary to a fractured tooth which grows
pouches and short tail; 87 to 130g.
back crooked, causing misalignment of teeth and pre-
venting proper wear.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Basic anatomy and physiology of mice, rats, gerbils,
ATLAS
and hamsters is like that of other mammals, so only
the significant differences are addressed in this section
(Figure 13.1). Please note the following: Male mice
have 50% bigger spleens then females. Rats have no
gallbladder and their Harderian glands are known to
produce red porphyrin staining around the eyes; this
is related to stress. Some gerbils have seizures, a thymus
through adulthood, and a large adrenal-weight-to-
body ratio. Male hamsters have larger adrenals than
females (Harkness and Wagner 1995, Quesenberry
ILILM
EMUK
and Carpenter 2003).
ULNA
The teeth of mice, rats, gerbils, and hamsters are
FIBULA
divided into two separate functional units, the incisors
 and the cheek teeth. These two units are separated by
a long gap called the diastema (Quesenberry and
Carpenter 2003). The diastema is shorter in the man-
dible than in the maxilla, giving rodents their normal
brachygnathic appearance ( Quesenberry and Carpenter
2003).
Figure 13.1. Rodent skeletal anatomy.
293
294
Chapter 13
Rats, mice, and gerbils possess long tails; hamsters
have very short tails. It is very important to exercise
caution when handling the tail because improper
restraint can cause trauma. In gerbils the skin can actu-
ally slip "tail-slip" or deglove with improper handling
(Harkness and Wagner 1995). When held distal to the
base, the animal can go into a spin and twist the distal
part of the tail off in all three, which is an escape
mechanism. Further, rodents, mainly rats and gerbils,
can regulate their temperature via thermoregulatory
 activities, such as tail extension. Hence, damage to the
tail can indeed affect temperature regulation in these
species.
Mammary tissue is extensive, reaching cranially
between the front legs and up over the shoulders, and
Figure 13.2. Cheek pouch.
caudally toward the inguinal area. Therefore, mammary
masses can be located well away from the teats. The
mammary glands are paired, with rats having four to
six pairs; mice, five pairs; gerbils, four pairs; and ham-
sters, six to seven pairs.
Harderian glands are specialized glands located
behind each eye. They secrete a substance containing
Trachea
Lt.Lung
porphyrin, giving the secretion a red tinge. An animal
I'hym
experiencing stress or illness may have a buildup of the
 secretions around the eyes and may appear to the client
Rt.
to be bleeding from the eyes and nasolacrimal duct,
Lung
and hence the nares. This collection of secreted mate-
Hlcart -
-- Liver (Reflected)
common in stressed rats.
Diaphragm
Additional glandular structures include bilateral
Liver
Stomach
flank glands in the hamster and a ventral gland in the
gerbil (Harkness and Wagner 1995). These sebaceous
Sm. Inlestine
· Splecn
glands are brown in color and play a part in mating
behavior, territorial marking, and marking of pups.
Ig.Intcstinc
The animals spend time grooming these areas and are
often observed rubbing the glands over surfaces.
Small rodents are seasonally polyestrus and are
spontaneous ovulators. Mating behavior results in the
production of a whitish-tan collection of secretions,
called a copulatory plug, that is often found lying in the
bedding of the cage. Most male rodent species have an
Figure 13.3. Rodent visceral anatomy.
os penis and open inguinal canals, allowing them to
 retract the testicles into the abdominal cavity (Harkness
 a  assd    p
The digestive systems of mice, rats, gerbils, and
abdomen will force the testicles into the scrotal sac.
hamsters have some differences from other mammals,
Hamsters have large cheek pouches that extend
 including an inability to regurgitate. Hamsters have an
back to their scapulae (Figure 13.2). These pouches
esophageal pouch that allows for pre-gastric fermenta-
can distend to quite a large size, allowing the hamster
tion of food prior to reaching the stomach. Rodents
to transfer food and bedding from one point to another.
are monogastric, with their stomachs divided into two
A startled mother may move her offspring from one
areas: a glandular portion and a non-glandular portion.
area to another via her cheek pouches; however, the
The practice of coprophagy is believed to assimilate
pups can suffocate inside a pouch. Hence, great care
certain nutrients, such a B vitamins, that are produced
should be taken not to disturb females with litters.
by bacterial action in the colon (Quesenberry and
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
295
Carpenter 2003, Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997). Rats
sequeale to wire botom caging. Cleaning tunnel-type
do not have a gallbladder; therefore, bile continuously
cages frequently solves some of their ventilation
flows into the duodenum. The pancreas of rodents is
problems. Further, plastic caging with tunnels and
arranged in diffuse lobes, making palpation diffcult.
toys provides more environmental enrichment and
Brown fat in rodents seems to provide a source of
exercise for the animals than simple wire caging. If
energy, and is found deposited around the kidneys and
kept clean, these tunnel-type caging environments are
thymus and between the shoulders. The rodent's vis-
indeed best.
ceral anatomy is shown in Figure 13.3.
A variety of bedding materials have been available
for sometime, including ash and pine wood shavings
 and corncob. More recently, various absorbent paper
BIOLOGIC AND REPRODUCTIVE DATA
products, developed for rodents and birds, have
become available. The paper products are safer. They
It is important for a technician to know physiologic
are not irritating to the feet and toes, and they are
data for small rodents (Table 13.1). This aids in deter-
designed to break down if ingested and therefore
mining an animal's state of health and also helps
usually do not cause impactions. Wood shavings can
answer questions that owners commonly ask. It should
be too rough, or pointed, and cause lesions and abra-
be noted that gerbils form monogamous pairs, which
sions, especially on the feet and toes, leading to podo-
should be set up before the animals reach maturity.
dermatitis. Due to the sensitive respiratory system of
Im ed ae e iid-an pue aeedas on sid
rats, wood shavings in general are not recommended
result in fighting and may result in death.
because they produce so much dust. The use of cedar
wood shavings is completely contraindicated; the aro-
matic oils are irritating and alone can cause pododer-
HUSBANDRY
matitis. If cleaning is performed adequately (two or
 more times a week), scented bedding, such as danger-
Rodent housing should be escape proof, chew proof,
ous cedar shavings, is unnecessary. Further, many
and easily cleaned. A variety of metal and plastic
wood shavings have chemical products in them that
caging is available. Solid flooring is easy to clean and
can adversely affect the liver and can also cause eye
may help prevent trauma to the toes, feet, and legs.
damage, among other problems. Corncob is the most
Breeding animals should be housed on solid flooring.
absorbent, but is prone to fungal growth and if fine
Adequate ventilation is important because the buildup
can be ingested by some species, leading to fatal GI
of ammonia from urea breakdown contributes to
impactions. In summary, the most important consid-
upper respiratory disease (Harkness and
Wagner
eration is that the bedding be clean, dry, nonabrasive,
1989). Wire caging promotes better ventilation than
non-nutritional, and supplied in ample quantities, so
plastic-shoebox-type or tunnel-type caging, but wire
that the animal can dig or burrow.
bottom cages are dangerous for toes, feet, and limbs
 In addition to the bedding substrate, breeding
 and are thus not recommended. Lameness is a common 
 animals should be provided with some form of nesting
Table 13.1. Physiological data of selected rodents.
Physiological data
Mouse
Rat
Gerbil
Hamster
Lifespan
1-3 years
2-4 years
3-4 years
18-24 months
Adult weight M/F
20-40 g/25-40 g
300-520g/250-300g
65-120g/55-95g
85-130g/95-150g
 Body temperature °F
98-101
96.6-99.5
98.6-101.3
98.6-101.4
Heart rate (bpm)
300-750
250-450
360
300-500
Respiratory rate
70-120
90
3.5-135
(bpm) 60-220
Puberty
35 days
37-67 days
70-84 days
45-75 days
 Estrous cycle
4-5 days
4-5 days
4-7 days
3-4 days
Gestation
19-21 days
21-23 days
24-26 days
15 days
Weaning age
21-28 days
21 days
21-30 days
20-25 days
296
Chapter 13
material. Lack of appropriate nesting material can
foods are not removed, spoilage can occur, fostering
result in the death of offspring (Harkness and Wagner
both fungal and bacterial growth.
1995), either through abandonment or cannibalism, as
Crocks are recommended over plastic bowls that
can disturbing the nest in an effort to clean the cage.
 the animal may chew on and wire hoppers, which may
Commercial nesting products such as “nestlets" are
cause facial abrasions (Harkness and Wagner 1989.
available, or white tissue paper or paper towels can be
 Mothers with litters should have their food placed in
used. Do not use old cotton towels because the animals
a crock and directly in the cage on top of dry bedding
can get entangled in the cotton fibers. This entangle-
for easier access.
ment can cause constrictions leading to loss of toes,
 Fresh water should be provided daily, and water
feet, or limbs. Further, be sure that the cages are
bottle mechanisms need to be checked each day to
cleaned just prior to parturition and stocked with all 
 ensure that they are functioning properly. Sipper tubes
that the dam will need. Ensure that the soon-to-be-
or drinking valves may become clogged with bedding
lactating dam will have enough food to last about a
or other foreign material, preventing the animal from
week, and do not disturb the nest in any way. Do not 
having access to water. Intelligent, bored rodents are
handle the young at all during this time unless abso-
 notorious for placing food or bedding directly into
lutely necessary, because cannibalism of offspring
their water bottles through the valve. Alternately, a
is most common within the frst five days
of
 malfunctioning water bottle may leak into the cage or
parturition.
 not function at all, leading to dehydration. The bottle
Exercise wheels and balls are popular with pet
should be mounted on the outside of the cage with
owners and provide the animal with a healthy activity.
only the metal tube extending into the cage. This pre-
 Routinely check the wheels for any rough or sharp
vents the animal from chewing any plastic or rubber
areas, and caution owners using plastic balls to keep
parts. The water bottle should never be flled com-
them away from stairs and other pets. Most rodent
pletely. An air bubble is needed to ensure the water
 species are more active at night, so placing the animal
will come out of the sipper tube when licked.
in an area other than the bedrooms might be a good
idea. A small amount of vegetable-based oil applied on
the axle of a metal wheel temporarily helps eliminate
COMMON PARASITES, DISEASES,
 any squeaking.
AND ZOONOSES
Many of the medical problems seen in rodents, and
especially pet mice, are associated with the skin.
NUTRITION
Acariasis is the skin condition that results from mite
infestation. Most species of mites are host specific.
Monogastric mice, rats, gerbils, and hamsters are
Rodents can be affected by several species of skin
omnivores and will eat anything—plant, animal,
mites; however, the most commonly encountered mites
plastic, rubber etc. if they get hungry enough
1or
are the Myobia sp., Myocoptes sp., and Radfordia sp.,
 curious enough. Therefore, offer a fresh pelleted diet,
which are spread through exposure to infected animals
such as those used for laboratory rodents, daily
in
and bedding
ample amounts. Be sure to buy the standard rodent
 Signs include alopecia, dermatitis, rough hair coat,
chow pelleted diet from a reliable dealer who sells
and skin lesions from excessive scratching. The rump
a lot and maintains fresh stock. In addition to the
area is typically involved and the lesions present as
pelleted diets, all rodents are coprophagic and eat a
scaly, scabby dermatitis. These signs are most com-
fair amount of fecal pellets, providing them with B
monly seen in mice and hamsters. Further, geriatric
vitamins produced by their colonic bacteria.
male hamsters over 1.5 years of age typically develop
 Pelleted diets are preferred over seed mixtures,
 dermatitis secondary to chronic kidney disease, lowered
which contribute to nutritionally related diseases.
 immune system, systemic disease, or malnutrition.
Seeds can be given, but are best saved for an occasional
Some mite species can be visualized with a hand
treat or a flushing food given during pre-breeding and
lens, or microscopically with a skin scraping.
 breeding periods, and as a supplement during lacta-
 Ectoparasites can be treated with a variety of antipara-
tion. A small amount of fresh foods can be given as
sitic agents including ivermectin and amitraz (Mitaban)
snacks (carrots, sliced apple, or greens) but should be
(Quesenberry and Carpenter 2003). Caging must be
removed if not eaten within four to six hours. If fresh
concurrently cleaned. Alopecia in mice housed in
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
297
rare condition. This condition is also rare in gerbils
Stapbylococcus aureus ulcerative dermatitis occurs in
rats secondary to self-inflicted scratching wounds or
fur mite infestation, or over inflamed salivary glands.
Avascular necrosis of the tail, or ring tail, occurs in
 both mice and rats. Ringtail can be caused by several
factors, but is most commonly associated with low
humidity (less than 20%) and is more commonly seen
during winter months when heating devices may be
used. It is more common in laboratory rodents, but
can be seen in pet mice and rats. Treatment involves
tail
amputation below the necrotic annular
constriction.
Common endoparasites include pinworms and
tapeworms. Clinical signs may not be present, but
may include weight loss, diarrhea, and rectal prolapse
Figure 13.4. Barbering on a mouse. (Courtesy of
in young animals. Detection of parasites is performed
Animal Care Services, University of Florida.)
either
through
examination of  fecal
matter,
through fecal floatation, or, for pinworms, by the cel-
 lophane tape test. The cellophane tape test is only
 about 30% accurate. A more accurate diagnosis is a
groups may be a result of barbering rather than an
cecal smear.
 infestation with an ectoparasite.
To perform the cellophane tape test:
Barbering behavior occurs when dominant mice
chew on the whiskers and hair around the muzzle and
1. Assemble the following supplies: cellophane tape,
eyes of subordinate mice. Usually, barbering occurs in
microscope slide, microscope.
 a symmetrical pattern that is consistent with all animals
2. Press a small piece of the cellophane tape against
in the cage. Barbering is not normally associated with
the perianal area. For pinworms, testing is best done
dermatitis but can lead to it (Figure 13.4) . Typically
in the early afternoon, around 2 pm, when the
a cage of mice will be suspected if one mouse in an
pinworm ova are exiting the animal's rectum.
affected group is not suffering from hair loss. Usually
 3. Place the tape on a microscope slide, sticky side
the unaffected mouse is the dominant mouse, and it
down, for examination (Quesenberry and Carpenter
should be removed from the group to stop the cycle.
2003, Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997).
 Barbering is most common in female mice and can also
4. Examine the slide for the slightly banana-shaped
be seen in breeding pairs (including pups). Groups of
pinworm ova.
 male mice are usually fine, if litters are raised together
from birth. However, unknown males put together in
Note: Pinworm eggs are known to be sticky and
the same cage will fight ferociously. The most com-
very difficult to eradicate in the environment. Treatment
monly affected areas during fighting are the rump.
is long and arduous.
back, shoulders, tail, feet, and genitals (Figure 13.5).
Neoplasia occurs in rodents, with mammary tumors
 It is not uncommon for the entire penis (including os
a common finding in females (Figure 13.7). Rats get
penis) to be bitten off in severe cases of fighting. Any
predominately benign mammary fibroadenomas and
genital wounds should be monitored closely to ensure
 mice get predominately malignant mammary adeno-
the animal can urinate with no problems.
carcinomas. Extensive mammary tissue may result in
Mechanical abrasions result from self trauma on
the tumor being located on the abdomen or shoulders.
cage bars, equipment, etc. This type of alopecia is
The tumors often interfere with the animal's ability to
husbandry related, and most commonly occurs around
walk normally, and chronic mechanical irritation can
the lateral muzzle. Alopecia in this area is secondary
cause them to become ulcerated (Harkness and Wagner
to chafing on drinking valves, metal feeders, or metal
1989). Systemic and cutaneous lymphoma is common
cage tops, and may be followed by dermatitis.
in hamsters both old and young. Young hamsters
Mange in a rat is shown in Figure 13.6. Mange is
develop lymphoma secondary to hamster polyoma
typically caused by Demodex nanus in rats, but is a
virus (HaPV). Male gerbils get squamous cell carci-
298
Chapter 13
Figure 13.7. Neoplasia in a rat.
Figure 13.5. Male rat with fght wounds on its back.
(Courtesy of Animal Care Services, University of
Florida.)
A
Figure 13.6. Mange with a bacterial infection in
 noma (SCC) of the ventral marking gland and female
gerbils get ovarian granulosa cell tumors.
 Malocclusion results when the continuously erupt-
ing incisors are misaligned (Figure 13.8). This mis-
alignment prevents the teeth from being worn down
during normal daily activities. Common signs of mal-
occlusion include weight loss, drooling, and oral
trauma. Malocclusion is genetic. Breeding animals
B
with malocclusion should be avoided at all costs.
 Other causes include malnutrition, disease, and injury
Figure 13.8. (A) Malocclusion in a mouse.
(Harkness and Wagner 1989). Periodic trimming with 
(B) Malocclusion in a rat. (Courtesy of Animal
a dental burr, clippers, or a sharp pair of scissors must
Care Services, University of Florida.)
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
299
be done carefully to avoid splitting the tooth; rough
help prevent the seizures from occurring (Harkness
edges should be filed smooth. Splitting teeth can result
and Wagner 1989).
in the formation of abscesses.
From a zoonotic perspective, the following infec-
Moist dermatitis commonly occurs in rodents that
tious diseases are of concern because they are common
are chronically exposed to wet conditions, or in those
and transmissible to humans: lymphocytic chorio-
with trauma to the skin from urine scald, diarrhea,
meningitis (LCM), a virus; and Stapbacoccus sp.,
abrasions, cuts, or other breaks in skin integrity.
Streptacoccus sp., Pasturella sp., Klebsiella sp., and
The most common condition affecting gerbils, facial
 Salmonella, bacterial diseases.
eczema “sore nose,” causes a moist dermatitis lesion
Other relatively common diseases of rodents
on the face and nose caused by an accumulation
include mouse hepatitis virus (MHV), mouse par-
of Harderian gland secretions. (Quesenberry and
vovirus (MPV), mouse norovirus (MNV), mycoplas-
Carpenter 2003, Hillyer and Quesenberry
1997).
mosis, sialodacryoadenitis virus, and lymphocytic
Other causes should be ruled out, such as malocclu-
choriomeningitis.
sion, damaged crockery
y or caging, and abrasive
 LCM is found naturally in wild mouse populations
bedding. Treatment involves clipping the hair from the 
and can be passed via arthropod vectors and through
lesion, cleaning the area, and removing any known
bodily secretions and bite wounds. Clinical signs, if
causative agents. The veterinarian may prescribe sys-
 present, include a hunched posture, unthrifty appear-
temic and or topical antibiotics.
 ance, photophobia, and convulsions. LCM is zoonotic;
Hamsters with diarrhea are often referred to as
humans can become infected through contact with
having “wet-tail" (Figure 13.9). Young animals are
infected tissue, urine, or a bite wound. Clinical signs
 particularly sensitive to proliferative ileitis, especially
are similar to those associated with influenza and
if recently weaned. Multiple bacteria are implicated in
include headache, fever, muscle aches, malaise, and
the cause, as well as improper diet and stress. Signs are
meningitis.
hunched posture, matted hair, watery diarrhea, leth-
MHV is a highly contagious disease that can cause
argy, rectal prolapse, and death. Careful husbandry
severe diarrhea and death in very young (one- to two-
may help prevent the disease, and the veterinarian may
week-old) mice. MNV is fairly new a subclinical virus.
 prescribe antibiotic therapy (Harkness and Wagner
MPV also results in enteritis, but can be both subclini-
1989).
cal and devastating.
Gerbils are susceptible to epileptiform seizures that
 Chronic respiratory disease (CRD) in rodents may
can result from excitement related to handling.
. The
be caused by Mycoplasma pulmonis. Animals can be
seizures can be mild, resulting in a dazed or hypnotic
carriers of Mycoplasma pulmonis but never show
appearance, or severe, and the activity may last only
any signs. CRD is very common in rats and clinical
a few seconds to a minute or more. There is no treat-
signs will be amplified if unsanitary living conditions,
ment and anticonvulsant drugs are not indicated.
 improper husbandry materials, and increased ammonia
 Exposure to frequent handling at a young age may
content are present. Respiratory disease, caused by
infectious agents, is the most common health
concern in rats. CRD is also referred to as murine
respiratory mycoplasmosis in mice. Clinical signs
include
 general upper respiratory signs; severe
porphyrin staining around the eyes, nose, and mouth;
as well as rhinitis and a possible head tilt associated
with otitis. Antibiotics can be employed to help control
the signs, but will never completely eradicate the
disease.
Sialodacryoadenitis virus is a coronavirus related
to MHV and is spread through respiratory secretions.
Infection causes the cervical lymph nodes to swell
and   the 
salivary glands to become inflamed.
Affected animals may continue to eat despite swelling
in the neck. A very noticeable sign is chromodacryor-
rhea, or porphyrin staining or “red tears." The animal
may be sensitive to light and develop ophthalmic
Figure 13.9. Wet tail.
lesions.
300
Chapter 13
Tyzzer's disease is a fatal hepatoenteric infectious
disease that hamsters and gerbils may also contract.
Tyzzer's is caused by Clostridium piliforme. Mice
and rats that contract this disease can overcome it.
Clinical signs in hamsters and gerbils include sudden
death, listlessness, rough hair coat, and weight loss.
Stress is a major contributing factor in addition to
exposure to infected bedding. In general, gerbils do not
contract many diseases, when compared to other
rodents,
There are diseases with zoonotic potential aside
from LCM, Staphylococcus sp., Streptacoccus sp.,
Pasturella sp., Klebsiella sp., and Salmonella, many of
which are more common in wild rodent populations
than in domestic rodents. According to the Centers for
Disease Control, the risk of a human contracting
 Korean hemorrhagic fever or the organism responsible
for bubonic plague from a pet rodent is extremely
Figure 13.10. Hamsters are best kept as
solitary pets.
remote in the United States (CDC, personal communi-
cation). People with immunosuppression are at higher
risk, and practicing good hygiene is essential. Rat bite
fever is a bacterial infection causing chills, fever,
myalgia, localized swelling at the wound site, and
headache. It is also possible to contract hymenolepid
tapeworm infection, which causes enteric disease in
humans (Quesenberry and Carpenter 2003, Hillyer
and Quesenberry 1997, Harkness and Wagner 1989).
Other zoonotic concerns include rabies, which is
extremely rare in rodents, and rodent allergies from
urine and dander, which are very common and of great
concern to the CDC.
Figure 13.11. Rats are very social and non-
aggressive and should always be housed with a
BEHAVIOR
cage mate.
Most rodents are nocturnal but are easily awakened
during the day. Gentle handling will prevent a startled
animal from biting out of defense. Male mice, gerbils,
and hamsters fight with each other, and should
of both sexes can be grouped together and females
be housed alone unless raised together since birth.
with litters can be left in communal housing with rela-
Hamsters of either sex are better housed singly than
 tive safety, provided conditions are not overcrowded.
1oj raqaon nyanonq aq Ajuo pinous pue sdnone u
 Females will share in caring for and nursing young
mating (Figure 13.10).Gerbils are known to establish
animals.
monogamous pairs, but fighting in older gerbils that
Cannibalism of young may occur if nests are
previously seemed to peacefully coexist may develop,
disturbed or the mother is overly nervous. This behav-
and can result in serious wounds. Because many
ior is most often associated with hamsters and
rodents are kept as pets for small children, separate
 mice; gerbils seem less sensitive to disturbance and rats 
housing is recommended because  witnessing such
rarely cannibalize their offspring. It is imperative to
activity could be traumatic.
ensure the cage is supplied with clean bedding and
The exception to the housing recommendation is
adequate food and water prior to parturition to prevent
the rat. Rats are very social animals and tend to do
having to disturb the nest once the offspring have been
better if housed with a cage mate (Figure 13.11). Rats
born.
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
301
HISTORY AND
signs of aggression or agitation (chattering, vocalizing.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
rolling onto their backs, and in gerbils, thumping of
the hind feet) can be picked up with an empty plastic
 Rodents should be brought to the hospital in the cage
container or lifted with a small towel folded for thick-
in which they are normally housed. The cage should
ness. Gloves may be needed to handle some rats, but
be covered to protect the rodent from temperature
they are often unwieldy and can make it difficult to
changes, noise, and disease exposure. The person
feel what the animal is doing. Therefore, care must be
scheduling the appointment should advise the client
-p Ariedsan aue rg ieue aun aiasqo o u
not to clean the cage prior to coming into the hospital.
culty. Laboratory animal supply companies (i.e., Kent
This allows the staff to observe the condition of the
Scientific, Torrington, CT) have plastic restraint
cage, the presence of fecal material, type of bedding.
devices.
and so on. Ideally, the client should sit away from cats
To handle gerbils, mice, and rats:
 and dogs once at the hospital to prevent further stress.
 The exam room should be stocked with urine dipsticks
1. The animal should be scooped up. The base of the
for immediate sampling because most rodents urinate
tail should be gently grasped only if need be, prior
as soon as they are handled or touched in the genital
to scooping.
area (Quesenberry and Carpenter 2003, Hillyer and
2. The animal should then be lifted out of its enclo-
Quesenberry 1997).
sure, and the animal's body allowed to rest on a
 As with any patient, clients should be asked where
hand, arm, or table. A hold should be maintained
they obtained the pet, how long they have had it, what
 on the tail while supporting the animals body to
they feed it, and if this is the first time they have owned
prevent escape
(gerbils  are excellent jumpers)
this particular species. Discuss with clients when they
(Figure 13.12).
first noticed any signs of illness, how long the problem
 3. Rats can be lifted by placing a hand over the dorsum
has existed, and what, if anything, they have done in
a rapun rai sqao a sssard au pue
response to the signs. Rodents must be weighed using
rat's chin with the thumb and index finger.
a gram scale, and in a small container to prevent
escape. Unless the practice has a thermometer specifi-
To handle a hamster:
cally designed for use in rodents, forgo obtaining a
rectal temperature. Standard thermometers are too
1. If the animal is awake, it can usually be scooped
large to use safely.
up gently using both hands; use caution if the
 hamster is sleeping because startled hamsters may
bite.
2. If there is concern that the hamster may react
RESTRAINT AND HANDLING
aggressively, a piece of toweling or an empty plastic
container may be used to lift the animal up.
Firm but gentle handling is important when working
with rodents. They may bite out of fear, and also jump
 For injections or other procedures that the rodent
or run quickly in an effort to escape. Falls to the floor
may object to, the animal may be scruffed:
are survivable, but could easily result in fracture of the
liver, feet or limbs, ribs, or spine.
1. It is helpful to place the rodent on a towel or the
Most rodents are amenable to being gently scooped
top of a wire cage while maintaining a gentle hold
up into the hands to lift them from their cages. This is
on the tail.
indeed the best way to pick them up. Rats and mice
2. Slight traction should be applied to the base of the
can be briefly lifted by the base of the tail onto a table
tail, which will encourage the animal to grip onto
or other surface if scooping does not work with the
the surface with its front feet.
animal in question. Gerbils should never be restrained
3. Grasp the loose skin over the neck, using the little
 or held by their tail. Prolonged handling of the tail can
finger of the restraining hand to hold the tail.
cause trauma, such as sloughing of the skin and expos-
4. Scruffing a hamster can be more difficult; the abun-
ing the vertebrae, especially in gerbils. Sloughing can
dance of loose skin can still permit the animal to
also occur in rats and mice. Grasping the tail at its base
turn and bite if the restrainer has not grasped a
prevents tail trauma. Use of a towel, screen or barred
sufficient amount. An indication of a sufficient
lid of the animal's cage gives it something to hold onto
amount of skin grasped is when the hamster "smiles"
when being restrained on a table. Rodents showing
(Figure 13.13).
302
Chapter 13
A
Figure 13.13. Hamster restraint.
RADIOLOGY
Sedation is usually needed for most radiography to
 have proper positioning. Whole-body studies are often
employed due to the size of the patient. Animals may
be placed in radiolucent tubing or briefly positioned
with paint/masking tape. Exposure times of 1/60 of a
second are best due to the rapid respiratory and heart
rates of rodents.
B
SURGERY AND ANESTHESLA
Common surgical procedures include ovariohysterec-
tomy, castration, tumor excision, and abscess drain-
 ing. Surgical preparation is similar to that of any small
 animal, except pro-longed fasting of the animal prior
to anesthesia is not necessary and could result in hypo-
glycemia, because it reduces glycogen stores in the
liver. Surgical scrub solutions should be warmed, as
should the surgical tables (using a warm water circu-
lating pad), the peri-operative fluids, and the recovery
incubator. This prevents unnecessary heat loss to the
patient. Hypothermia is the number one killer of
C
rodents, especially mice, that undergo surgery. All
rules of aseptic technique apply, and the surgical suite
Figure 13.12. (A) Mouse restraint. (B) Rat restraint.
and equipment should be prepared accordingly. Sterile
(C) Gerbil restraint.
surgical tape can be used to restrain the animal on the
table post induction.
Rodents can be chamber or face-mask induced
using isoflurane gas. Intubation is diffcult in rodents,
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
303
but they can be maintained using a face mask or a
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
plastic syringe case modified to use as a nose cone. A
non-rebreathing system should always be used
Unfortunately, many of infectious diseases of rodents
(Quesenberry and Carpenter 2003, Hillyer and
are challenging to treat and historically, harsher anti-
Quesenberry 1997).
biotics were known to cause fatal reactions. Today,
The technician should monitor the depth and quality
 enrofloxcin is an example of a safe and effective rodent
of respiration. The deeper the animal's anesthetic
antibiotic. It can easily be delivered through the drink-
plane becomes, the more the abdominal muscles will
ing water, thus decreasing the stress of handling.
move with each breath. The animals normally breathe
Supportive care in the form of subcutaneous fluids,
with their abdomen/diaphragm. When they start to use
dextrose, calcium, adequate dietary support such as
their chest and move their forelimbs, they are having
diet gel (a fluid and food combination choice), and
problems. Lightly anesthetized rodents will still blink
 heat and oxygen must be administered immediately.
when the eyelashes are touched. The palpebral reflex
Wet tail or proliferative ileitis in hamsters may
will be diminished as the animal enters a surgical
respond to improved diet, sanitation, and aggressive
plane. The ears or toes can be pinched to evaluate the
supportive care, including enrofloxicin parentally ini-
animal's ability to react; if the animal reacts, the plane
tially and later in the drinking water, but the animal's
of anesthesia is still light (Quesenberry and Carpenter
prognosis is guarded (Plunkett 1993)
2003, Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997). Ears are best
Animals suffering from bite wounds or lacerations
on mice, and toes are best on rats.
may be extremely stressed and vocal. Be cautious when
Mucous membranes should be pink, and the color
attempting to pick up an animal in this condition,
can be evaluated using the pads of the feet, ears, eyes
because it may respond aggressively. The patient
if albino, and gingiva. Pulse oximeters are commonly
should be kept warm and quiet until it can be anesthe-
found in most small animal hospitals and can be placed
tized with isoflurane, if necessary, for wound care.
on the tail, tongue, or foot pad.
Recovery from surgery should be in a pre-warmed
incubator as described above; the incubator should be
SEX DETERMINATION
situated in a quiet area. The technician should gently
turn the animal from side to side every few minutes to
 Males and females can be distinguished by comparing
prevent pooling of blood on the dependent side.
anogenital distance. The distance from the anus to the
Rodents will attempt to chew sutures and bandages;
genital papilla is greater in the male than in the female.
surgical glue, staples, or subcuticular sutures are best.
This can be difficult to assess if there are no other
Elizabethan collars are available commercially. Those
animals present for comparison purposes. In hamsters,
with Velcro closures are tolerated the best. The seda-
the male has a rounded posterior when viewed from
tive effects of opioid analgesics, such as buprenor-
above due to the scrotum, whereas the female's poste-
phine, often are enough to prevent self-trauma to the
rior appears more square (Figures 13.14, 13.15). Male
surgical site. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
gerbils have a larger mid-ventral scent gland (Figure
such as meloxicam, may also be used in rodents for
13.16).
minor surgery.
TECHNIQUES
BANDAGING AND WOUND CARE
Administration of Medications
Parenteral administration sites include IV (difficult),
Rodents easily become stressed and daily wound care
 IM (may cause necrosis and is usually not recom-
may do more harm than good. Wounds should be
mended due to the small muscle mass), IP (common
cleaned as thoroughly as possible during the initial
in lab animals), and SQ (preferred site, safest and
 treatment phase. The use of intact white paper towels
easiest).
for the frst forty-eight hours post-surgery allows for
tasier observation, keeps the wound cleaner, and
IV
enables better drainage. After this initial time period,
Intravenous injection of drugs is difficult to accomplish
advise the owner to increase the frequency of bedding
in rodents. The most commonly used site is the lateral
changes to keep the healing wounds as clean as
tail vein in mice, rats, and gerbils. Four vessels are
possible.
present on the tail, two veins and two arteries. Veins
VULVA
ANUS-
A
PENILE
OPENING
SCROTAL
SAC
B
Figure 13.14. Sex determination. (A) Female.
(B) Male.
B
Figure 13.16. (A and B) Gerbil scent glands.
Figure 13.15. Hamster testicles.
304
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
305
are located laterally on the tail and arteries are dorsal/
2. Have an assistant restrain the animal if a commer-
ventral (Figure 13.17).
cial restraint device is not available.
For IV injection:
 3. Always aspirate prior to administering any medica-
tion to ensure correct placement.
1. Assemble supplies: 27- to 30-gauge (mice) 22- to
4. Inject drug and withdraw the needle.
25-gauge (rats and gerbils) needles, tuberculin
5. Dispose of needle into a puncture-proof biohazard
syringes, chlorohexidine, and alcohol swabs.
container.
2. Unless a restraint device is used, a second individual
will need to restrain the animal.
IP
3. Clean the venipuncture site with chlorohexidine
 IP injections allow for larger volumes of drug to be
and alcohol. Warming the tail with a focal heat light
injected than can be safely given IM or IV. However,
(penlight) may be useful to help visualize the vein
SQ injections are safer than all of the above-mentioned
and cause vasodilation.
 injections, and allow for larger volumes of drugs to be
 4. Always slowly aspirate to ensure proper placement.
 injected. IP injections are not without risk and should
Note that due to the low blood pressure of the
have limited applications in pet medicine. Care must
mouse, there will not always be a flash of blood
dl 'sueo jeuopqe Aue anound on iou uaxen aq
when in the vein.
 injections in rats require injecting into the left caudal
5. Once the injection is completed, apply gentle pres-
quadrant, rather than the right, as in gerbils, mice, and
sure as the needle is removed to allow for clot
hamsters (Figure 13.18). The rat's cecum is located in
formation.
the right caudal quadrant. Slight resistance may be felt
 6. Dispose of the needle into a puncture-proof biohaz-
 as the needle penetrates the abdominal muscles.
ard container.
For IP injection:
IM
1. Assemble the following supplies: 21- to 27-gauge
 The quadriceps muscle can be used to administer injec-
needles, syringes, chlorohexidine, and alcohol swabs.
tions in all four rodents discussed. Only very small
2. Restraining the animal in one hand by scruffing the
amounts of drug can safely be injected into this site
loose skin over the back of the neck and shoulders
due to the small size of the patient (0.05 ml in mice,
is required. The little finger of the same hand can
up to 0.3ml in rats) or necrosis will result. Care must
be used to keep the tail pressed against the palm of
be taken not to inject into the posterior thigh because
the hand.
irritation of the sciatic nerve may result. It may help
3. The animal's head should be tilted lower than the
to “pinch up" the muscle mass between the fingers of
 rest of the body to cause the abdominal organs to
one hand while injecting with the other.
fall forward.
For IM injection:
1. Assemble supplies: 25-gauge needles for mice, up to
22-gauge needles for larger rats, tuberculin syringes,
chlorohexidine, and alcohol swabs.
Figure 13.17. Dorsal tail artery on a mouse; note
Figure 13.18. IP injection in a mouse. Note that for
tail injections and bloodvenipuncture areperformed
the mouse it is injectedfrom the animal's right and
via the tail vein, located bi-laterally on the tail.
in rats it is injected from the animal's left.
306
Chapter 13
4. The needle should be inserted, bevel up, at an angle
1. Gather the following supplies: a gavage needle of
of about 20 degrees into the right caudal quadrant
appropriate gauge and length attached to a syringe
unless it is a rat, in which case use of the left caudal
large enough to hold the entire dose of medication.
quadrant is required.
2. The top of the gavage needle should be lined up
 5. The syringe should be aspirated to ensure no organs
with the animal's nose, and the ball of the needle
have been punctured with the needle. If any yellow
lined up with the animal's last rib to gauge depth
or greenish-brown fluid or any blood is aspirated,
of gavage needle insertion.
the needle and syringe should immediately be with-
3. Wetting the ball of the needle with water may help
drawn and discarded. The procedure should be
it slide down more easily.
attempted again with a new needle and syringe, and
4. The animal should be restrained by scruffing the
the animal should immediately be started on paren-
loose skin over the back of the neck, tucking the tail
teral antibiotics.
under the little finger. The animal should be held
6. The needle should be disposed of in a puncture-
vertically with the head up.
 proof biohazard container.
 5. The gavage needle should be inserted into the space
behind the incisors, and the needle gently pushed
SQ
into the animal's mouth, allowing it to follow the
 Larger drug volumes can also be given subcutaneously
curve of the mouth down into the esophagus.
(1 to 3 ml in mice, up to 5 to 10 ml in rats). The injec-
6. If any resistance is felt, or the animal becomes cya-
tion can be given under the skin along the flank, or in
notic (indicating you are probably in the trachea),
the loose skin of the neck, which is simultaneously
 being scruffed for restraint purposes.
For SQ injection:
1. Assemble the following supplies: a 22- to 25-gauge
needle for mice, 20-gauge needle for rats, syringes.
2. The animal's loose skin over the neck should be
scruffed. This is the best area for SQ injections.
3. The needle should be inserted into the tented skin
between the fingers. It is often easier to position the
syringe over the animal's head and point the needle
toward its hindquarters if doing this alone.
 4. Aspirate prior to injecting the medication to ensure
proper placement.
5. The needle should be disposed of in a puncture-
 proof biohazard container.
Oral Administration
A
Unprofessionally compounded medications mixed into
food or water can affect the taste, leading to the ani-
mal's refusing to eat or drink. Liquid medications can
be more accurately administered to awake animals by
gavage, or slowly and carefully by tuberculin syringe.
Gavage needles have ball-like tips to prevent trauma
to the animal, and may be straight, curved, or bent
(depending on the operator's preference). Professionally
compounded medications can be made up without
flavor, color, or odor, or they can be made up in the
flavor, color, and odor of the rodent's own pelleted
P ad asr sdo omi su 
decrease stress because the animal can receive its medi-
cations in its own food or water and not know it.
B
Gavaging
Figure 13.19. (A) Gavaging a mouse. (B) Gavaging
 For gavaging:
a rat.
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
307
immediately remove the needle, put the animal on
6. After blood collection, apply pressure to the veni-
oxygen, treat with parenteral antibiotics, and repeat
puncture site as the needle is withdrawn to prevent
if the animal fully recovers
hematoma formation (Figure 13.20).
7. When inserted to the level measured in step 2, inject
the contents of the syringe and withdraw the gavage
 Blood can also be collcted retro-orbitally by punc-
needle (Figure 13.19).
turing the venous sinus or plexus with a microhema-
tocrit tube or a beveled micropipette tip inserted into
Blood Collection
the medial canthus of the eye. This procedure requires
 In all rodents, except the hamster, blood can be col-
the animal to be anesthetized briefly with isoflurane
lected from the tail veins located laterally on the tail.
(Figure 13.21). There is a risk of causing damage to
It is recommended that no more than 0.14 ml of blood
the eye, so this procedure should only be performed
be collected from mice, 0.3 ml collected from a gerbil,
0.65ml from a hamster, and 1.3ml from a rat
(Quesenberry and Carpenter 2003, Hillyer and
Quesenberry 1997). The saphenous vein is another
 option and works quite well in rodents.
To collect blood:
1. Assemble the following supplies: 23- to 27-gauge
needles, tuberculin syringes or 3 cc syringe if a rat,
chlorohexidine and alcohol swabs, restraint device
if available (rodent restrainers that leave the tail free
are commercially available and work quite well).
2. Have an assistant restrain the animal if no restraint
device is available.
3. Warming the tail with a warm water compress or
low-wattage light may help to visualize the vein and
will cause vasodilation.
4. Pressure must be applied proximally to the veni-
puncture site, and can be accomplished using a
Figure 13.20. Blood collection from the saphenous
rubber band and hemostats.
vein in a rat. Note that sterile KY lubrication is used
5. The needle should be inserted bevel up into the vein
to part the fur and enable drop blood collection into
the collection tube.
A
B
Figure 13.21. Blood collection from the venous sinus. (A) Restraint of a mouse during the initial insertion of
a microhematocrit tube into the medial canthus.(B)Blood collection after successful puncture of the venous
sinus withthemicrohematocrit tube.
308
Chapter 13
Figure 13.24. Blood being drawn from a rat using
the cranial vena cava,an uncommon route.
Figure 13.22. Submandibular blood collection in
amouse.
To collect blood at the medial canthus of the eye:
1. Assemble the following supplies: microhematocrit
tubes or beveled micropipette tips, gauze sponges,
ophthalmic ointment, isoflurane machine.
2. Insert the microhematocrit tube into the eye at the
 medial canthus, rotating the tube gently to puncture
the sinus.
3. Blood will fill the tube by capillary action.
4. Following the collection of blood, the tube
should be removed, excess blood wiped from the
site, and the eyelids gently held shut until hemosta-
sis occurs.
5. Apply a sterile ophthalmic ointment into the eye
(Quesenberry and Carpenter 2003, Hillyer and
Quesenberry 1997).
The jugular vein is the preferred and recommended
site for venipuncture and blood collection in rats
(Figure 13.23). While not a common venipuncture
route, blood can be drawn from the anterior vena cava
in rats. Further, anesthesia is required for venipuncture
Figure 13.23. Blood collection from the jugular vein
of the anterior vena cava, the method has inherent
Of a rat.
risks, and is generally highly discouraged (Figure
13.24). Additional information about venipuncture
using the anterior vena cava can be found in the tech-
nique section of Chapter 11.
by highly skilled personnel and never with the owner
 present. Alternatively, submandibular bleeds can be
performed on the mouse and the rat (Figure 13.22).
EUTHANASIA
This method is easier and safer. It also enables more
blood to be collected and is best performed without
 As with any pet, the owner may request to be present
anesthesia.
during the euthanasia procedure. An overdose of iso-
Mice, Rats, Gerbils, and Hamsters
309
flurane is effective. If the induction chamber is rela-
ADDITIONAL READING
tively large, pre-fllit with the anesthetic to decrease
the amount of time it will take before having the
Bechtold S, et al. 2007. Laboratory Animal Technician: LAT
desired effect. Staff members not fond of rodents must
Training Manual. American Association for Laboratory Animal
Science (AALAS).
keep in mind that pet rodent owners can be just as
Bratcher C, et al. 2008. Laboratory Animal Technologist Training
emotionally attached as the more familiar dog and cat
Manual. American Association for Laboratory Animal Science
owner can. Remains should be treated with the same
{AALAS).
respect afforded to all deceased pets.
Harkness JE, Wagner JE. 1989. The Biology and Medicine of Rabbits
Dr. Romagnano would like to express gratitude to
and Rodents. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger. 2-179.
Harkness JE, Wagner JE. 1995. The Biology and Medicine of
James B. Nichols, DVM, MS, for his critical review
 Rabbits and Rodents, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Williams and Wilkins.
Of the chapter and his expertise. She is also grateful
28-34.
to Shannon Sunday, CVT, SRA, LAT,
for her
Hillyer EV, Quesenberry KE. 1997 Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents:
critical review of the chapter and expertise, and would
 Clinical Medicine and Surgery Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
like to thank both Shannon and Raul Ortiz-Umpierre,
296-389.
Plunkett SJ. 1993. Emergency Procedures for the Small Animal
DVM, for taking pictures for the chapter. She would
Veterinarian. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. 177.
liketothankDr.TarahHadleyforthepicture
Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW. 2003. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
conversion.
Clinical Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Sauders.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Chinchillas
Trevor Lyon and Bonnie Ballard
TAXONOMY/COMMON SPECIES SEEN
protrude from the jaw. The grinding and cutting teeth
IN PRACTICE
continuously. Therefore, the correct positioning of
The chinchilla is classified as a rodent and is most
each tooth is crucial because it assures that each tooth
closely related to the guinea pig. There are three sub-
is being constantly ground down. There may be slight
species of chinchilla; Chinchilla langier is the most
 differences in dentition among the different species.
commonly available in the pet trade. These animals
The most distinctive part of the mouth is the palatal
inhabit the Andes Mountains of South America and
ridges. Each chinchilla, no matter how closely related,
are adapted well to living on cold and rocky slopes.
has palatal ridges that distinguish it from any other
Their average life span in captivity is ten years but they
chinchilla (Kraft 1987). Their dental formula is 2(11/1
can live to the age of twenty. Because they are closely
 C0/0 PM1/1 M3/3 = 20. (Quesenberry and Carpenter
related to the guinea pig, similarities in their physiol-
2004)
Ogy, care, and treatment will be apparent.
The stomach is located in the abdominal cavity
behind the diaphragm. It is similar in shape to that of
a horse or pig. The duodenum has several afferent
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
ducts from the pancreas as well as the bile duct. The
longest portion of the small intestine is the jejunum
External Anatomy
and in conjunction with sections of the large intestine,
There are two distinctive features in the external
it takes up a large portion of the abdominal cavity.
anatomy of the chinchilla. The first is the very dense
The ileum is the shortest section of small bowel that
fur that covers the entire body. It is so dense, in fact,
makes up the transition to the cecum. The cecum in
that up to ninety individual hairs can come from each
  i    on   
root (Hayes 2000). The second is the locomotory
located on the left side of the abdomen and under
apparatus, which can be compared to the rabbit but is
normal conditions, its contents are of liquid consis-
closer to that of the nutria. Chinchillas have very short
tency. The cecum and the ascending colon help to fill
front legs that are used for support and to hold food.
the remainder of the abdomen, as it is the segment with
These small legs have four digits (numbers 2, 3, 4, and
the greatest volume. The ascending portion of the
5; digit 1 is lost). The rear legs, however, are very large
colon is also the longest section of the large bowel. The
and powerful. Designed for jumping, they have three
descending portion of the bowel and the rectum are
digits varying in size (numbers 2, 3, 4). The frst and
usually filled with compact fecal matter and can be
fifth digits are rudimentary only.
easily palpated if the animal is relaxed. It is difficult to
determine the end of the colon and the beginning of
Digestive Tract
the rectum. The end of the rectum widens slightly
The mouth is largely filled by the tongue. The two
before reaching the anus. The posterior end of
lateral areas of the tongue are wider than the dorsal
the rectum is surrounded by glandular packets;
side, giving it an unusual shape.
these packets in females appear to be thicker ventrally.
The adult chinchilla has four incisors and sixteen
 In males, these packets are twice the circumference
e  a s ad  ai a
of the females' packets. The skeletal anatomy is
right angle indentation, while the lowers are ground
shown in Figure 14.1; the visceral anatomy is shown
down to a point. Only about one third of the incisors
in Figure 14.2.
311
312
Chapter 14
Scapula
Spleen
Pelvis
The spleen is of similar shape and location of other
rodents. It is triangular in cross section and in the
shape of an "L." The bottom of the "L" is located near
Humerus
the last rib on the left side.
Feniut
Radius
Respiratory Tract
Tibia
Starting with the head of the chinchilla, the first portion
of the respiratory tract visualized are the nostrils. To
the outside of each narrow nostril is a "false" nostril.
The nasal cavities arch upward and are interconnected
Figure 14.1. Skeletal anatomy. (Drawing by Scott
along the upper portion. The chinchilla's nasal cavity
Stark.)
is very large for an animal of this size. The trachea is
dorsoventrally compressed as it moves down toward
the lungs. The trachea splits at the level of the fourth
and ffth vertebrae, descending toward the lungs.
The right lung has four distinct lobes and the left
only three.
Trache
Ieart (Not showil,
dorsal to lungs.)
Reproductive Organs
 Female sex organs (ovaries) are located just below each
kidney and are very small, about the size of a grain of
rice. As the female reaches maturity, small lumps
Rt.
appear on the ovary, giving it an unusual shape. These
ng
S'1,
lumps are caused by eggs migrating to the surface of
lnlestine
the ovary. Several eggs mature at the same time, which
means that several eggs can be fertilized at the same
time. Unlike other mammals, as the eggs migrate down
Rt.
the oviduct they do not go into the ovarian pouch.
Kitlney
Cecurn
They remain in the wall of the pouch where they are
fertilized. After fertilization, the eggs move via peri-
Lt. Testicle
staltic action to the uterus. The reproductive tract ends
with the vagina, which becomes very visible when the
animal is in heat. It is visualized as a horizontal slit
between the anus and the urethra. Unlike many other
mammals, the urethra of the female chinchilla termi-
Figure 14.2. Visceral anatomy. (Drawing by Scott
nates outside the vagina. There are no labial folds
Stark.)
present.
 The male sex organs are somewhat different from
most other mammals. The testicles do not descend
down into the scrotum and are considered incomplete.
Liver
Only the epididymis is located outside the abdominal
The liver is located between the diaphragm and
cavity and there is no scrotum. The sperm cells mature
stomach. There is very little lobulation visible and the
in the epididymis before they move to the sperm duct,
 gallbladder is located between the right and median
and from there, they move across the mesentery of the
sides. In the adult chinchilla, the liver weighs about 8
urinary bladder. The sperm ducts open right next to
to 10g (Kraft 1987).
each other into the urethra, along with the openings
of the other sex glands. The penis is S-shaped when in
Pancreas
 In the chinchilla, the pancreas can be difficult to locate
 minating below the anus. Because the foreskin extends
because it has many lobes. In addition, the surround-
all the way to the anus, the actual opening is very
ing fatty tissue and lymph nodes can make it difficult
narrow. A small bone about 1cm long supports the
to distinguish with the naked eye.
penis during copulation. As blood fills the penis,
Chinchillas
313
pushing the tip forward, small backward facing spines
 and Tully 2009). Chinchillas are much easier to keep
can be seen. These assure better attachment during
than guinea pigs or rabbits because they seem to def-
copulation.
ecate and urinate less, so the cage stays cleaner.
However, the cage should be cleaned at least once a
Urinary Tract
week.
The chinchilla's urinary system is similar to that of
The teeth of the chinchilla grow constantly, so they
Other mammals, in that it has two kidneys, two ureters,
 need ample objects for gnawing. Branches, wood
a bladder, and a urethra.
blocks, pumice stones, and salt blocks are all good
choices.
Anal Sacs
The most specific requirement for chinchilla care is
Located just inside the lower corner of the anal slit is
 'siseq Aep e uo aqee ceq snp, e hu
a yellow nodular anal sac. Similar to dogs and cats,
helps to keep the coat and skin healthy. There are
the chinchilla can expel the contents of this sac. It is a
se veral commercial dust baths on the market; however,
foul-smelling substance, which is probably used as a
they can be made by using cornstarch or unscented talc
 defense against natural enemies.
 powder mixed with sand. Diatomaceous earth can be
used in place of sand. The bath mixture should be dry
before allowing the chinchilla to use it. The mixture
REPRODUCTION
 of choice should be placed about one to two inches
deep in the bottom of a litter box, large bowl, or glass
The following are average numbers for the different
jar (one gallon or larger).
species of chinchillas:
First "heat": Three to four months of age
NUTRITION
Gestation period: 110 to 138 days
 Number of young: One to three per pregnancy
Chinchillas are herbivorous and because their digestive
Number of litters: One to two per year
tract is similar to that of the horse, they need large
Young: Born precocial
amounts of roughage. As in other rodents, chinchillas
are coprophagic. In captivity a diet of hay supple-
The female returns to heat every twenty-five to
mented with a good quality pelleted diet should be
thirty-five days if she does not conceive. The most reli-
offered. Pellets that have 16% to 20% protein, 2% to
able method of determining if the female is in heat is
 5 % fat, and 15 % to 3.5% bulk fiber should be obtained
the behavior of the male (Johnson-Delaney 1996,
 for feeding (Quesenberry and Carpenter 2004). If the
Kraft 1987).
amount of hay is inadequate, the low amount of fiber
may lead to enteritis. The quality of the hay must be
monitored closely. Small amounts of fruits, veggies,
HUSBANDRY
seeds, and grains may be offered as treats. Finally, as
with all animals, fresh water must be made available
Because the chinchilla's normal habitat is the Andes
at all times. Chinchillas, because they are so active, can
 Mountains in South America, it does not tolerate heat
be messy when it comes to water bowls. They will
or humidity. Therefore, they should not be housed in
either knock them over or manage to get substrate in
a location where there is no protection from the heat.
them. A water bottle is a preferable way to provide
 The enclosure should be large and made of material
water, because it keeps the water and cage cleaner
that they cannot chew through. The enclosure must
(Quesenberry and Carpenter 2004).
have ample hiding places because chinchillas in the
wild live mostly in caves. It is in their nature to jump,
so it is recommended that the enclosure have multiple
COMMON AND ZOONOTIC DISEASES
levels. Small platforms on which they can perch are
also helpful. All items should be made of materials that
Dental Diseases
are easily cleaned.
A common problem in chinchillas is "slobbers,” or
 Suitable bedding includes aspen shavings, newspa-
malocclusion (Hayes 2000). This can occur in the inci-
per, or recycled newspaper products. Because of their
sors, premolars, or molars. As the teeth overgrow, they
aromatic oils, pine and cedar shavings are not recom-
cause ulcers of the buccal mucosa and the tongue.
 mended and can lead to respiratory problems (Mitchell
Clinical signs may be drooling, pawing at the mouth,
314
 Chapter 14
weight loss, anorexia, and decrease in stool volume.
fber, and proteolytic enzymes (pineapple juice) (Hayes
Malocclusion can be caused by hereditary factors or a
 2000). If the animal is anorectic, then force-feeding
lack of objects in the environment to gnaw on. Routine 
may also be necessary.
teeth trimmings may be necessary in cases of heredi-
tary problems.
Enteritis
 Proper diet for chinchillas is one of the most important
Skin Diseases
factors when discussing their care. An improper diet
Husbandry issues are the leading cause of skin disor-
can be one of the most likely causes of enteritis,
 ders in chinchillas. Bite wounds, traumatic injuries, fur
although a sudden diet change may also be a factor
chewing, and unthrifty coat can all occur when the
(Hayes 2000, Kraft 1987, Ritchey et al. 2004). If the
environmental conditions are poor. These disorders 
 animal is not offered hay, the hay is of poor quality,
seo e ul pasnoq are seouo ju Aipideu ieadde ues
 or the animal is eating a large amount of pellets or
that is too small or if two incompatible animals are
fruit and green vegetables, this may cause a change in
housed together. The animals may chew on themselves
 the normal flora and fauna of the gastrointestinal tract.
or their cage mates, which may lead to other injuries.
 The motility of the gut and the fermentation process
 Inadequate access to a dust bath may also cause a poor
may also be altered, leading to an overgrowth of
coat quality.
 pathogenic bacteria. Other less common causes of
 Dermatophytosis is a disease usually caused by the
 enteritis are parasitic infection and prolonged or inap-
introduction of contaminated hay or bedding to the 
 propriate use of antibiotics (Hayes 2000, Lightfoot
chinchilla's housing. As in other species, scaly, circular
 1999). Animals may present with anorexia and bloat-
areas of hair loss around the face, feet, and ears are
 ing. Those who have had chronic enteritis may present
the most common presentation. A fungal culture
 with constipation, impactions, intussusceptions, and
should be done to confirm the diagnosis. This disease
 rectal prolapse.
has zoonotic potential.
 Determining the cause may be difficult because of
the multiple factors involved. Radiographs, fecal floa-
Gastrointestinal Diseases
tation for parasites, and fecal cultures may be needed
to determine an etiology. Symptomatic treatment is
Choke
usually best with fluid therapy, antibiotics, and anti-
Like rabbits and rats, chinchillas cannot vomit, so
parasitics given as indicated.
esophageal choke can result if the animal ingests an
object too large to swallow. The most common objects
Constipation
are bedding and treats. The animal usually presents
As mentioned above, improper diet is one of the most
with excessive salivation, dyspnea, and anorexia. The
common problems associated with caring for a chin-
object may be palpated on physical exam or diagnosed
chilla. In most cases owners feed a diet of pellets
with radiographs.
almost exclusively, which can lead to many of the
 problems mentioned before. The pelleted diets are high
Bloat
 in protein as well as calories, but are low in fber. This
 Bloat can occur for many reasons, as in other species.
low-fiber diet can also lead to constipation, which may
The chinchilla presents similarly to other animals with
be seen more often than diarrhea (Hayes 2000, Kraft
 a distended and painful abdomen, dyspnea, and reluc-
1987, Johnson-Delaney 1996). Clinical signs are
tance to move. Many treatments are recommended,
straining to defecate and fecal pellets that may be
from exercise in mild cases to decompression by trans-
small, hard, and in some cases, bloodstained. Treatment
abdominal trocar.
involves slowly increasing the amount of fiber in the
chinchilla's diet by feeding a small amount of fresh
Hairballs
vegetables or good quality hay.
Hairballs are as common a problem in chinchillas as
they are in rabbits. They are usually caused by exces-
Respiratory Diseases
sive fur chewing in combination with low dietary fiber.
Chinchillas are susceptible to pneumonia; however,
The animal usually presents with lethargy, reluctance
these cases usually occur when there are large numbers
to move, and anorexia. The hairball may be palpated
of animals housed together and the husbandry is poor
on physical exam or diagnosed with contrast radio-
(Kraft 1987). Most pet owners should not have any
graphs. Treatment protocols are similar to those for
 problems in this area. Clinical signs include depres-
rabbits: fluid therapy, feline laxatives, increased dietary
 sion, dyspnea, and a nasal discharge. The treatment
Chinchillas
315
protocol includes antibiotics administered by nebuliza-
if given the materials to do so, will jump high in the
tion if conditions allow.
air to reach a ledge or run around the walls of their
enclosure. Their level of activity does not seem to
Neurologic Diseases
diminish with age. Because by nature their means of
 Chinchillas are highly susceptible to Listeria monocy-
defense is flight, they are very fast on their feet. If a
togenes infection; however, it is unlikely that pet chin-
chinchilla is allowed to get loose in a house, it will be
chillas would be exposed (Hayes 2000). Ataxia and
a challenge to catch it.
circling are usually followed by convulsions and death.
 Treatment protocols have been ineffective once clinical
signs are noticed.
TAKING THE HISTORY AND
PERFORMING THE PHYSICAL EXAM
Heat Stroke
Chinchillas are very prone to heat stroke and should
An accurate history is vital when working with chin-
y ym Hoog ro sanada u! pasnoq aq nou
chillas, because husbandry is often the most significant
humidity. A chinchilla's cage should be away from
factor. These animals can be difficult to handle, because
windows that provide direct sunlight as well as heater
they are very quick and agile, and in most cases do not
vents. Just as with any other pet, they should never be
want to be touched. A good preliminary exam should
left in a car during hot weather. The treatment for this
be done prior to actually handling the animal. A visual
condition is the same as would be given to a dog or
exam may be performed if the owner has brought the
cat (Quesenberry and Carpenter 2004, Mitchell and
 pet in a wire cage. If not, then placing the chinchilla
Tully 2009)
 on the floor of the exam room and allowing it to move
around normally is the best option. Be sure that all
Zoonotic Diseases
 doors are closed, because they are very curious about
Pet chinchillas may be exposed to Baylisascaris pro-
their surroundings. A healthy chinchilla should be alert
cyonis in contaminated hay (Ness 1999). This nema-
with bright eyes and a twitching nose. It may breathe
tode infects the cerebrospinal fluid, causing ataxia,
rapidly, but it should not open-mouth breathe. The tail
torticollis, and paralysis. There is no treatment for this
should be erect and its hair coat should be thick, soft,
condition and there is zoonotic potential for anyone
and smooth.
handling the contaminated bedding and feed. Strict
hygiene practices, including wearing gloves and
washing hands, should be followed.
HANDLING AND RESTRAINT
While not common, dermatophytosis has been diag-
 nosed in chinchillas. It is treated with oral or topical
 Chinchillas can be very difficult to restrain and should
medications just as in dogs and cats. And also just as
be handled with care. Because they are very excitable
in dogs and cats, this disease poses a zoonotic risk for
 and nervous, handling a sick or debilitated patient can
the owner. Owners should be instructed to wear gloves
pose a challenge. A chinchilla should never be scruffed.
when treating their pet and cleaning its cage. Children
The base of the tail and hind legs should be held gently
should not handle their pet during treatment.
with one hand while the other hand supports the chest
Salmonellosis has occurred in fur production
and shoulders (Figure 14.3). Some patients may be
herds of chinchillas, but healthy chinchillas have had
easier to handle if allowed to hide their face in the bend
Salmonella isolated from them as well. It is not recom-
of the handler's elbow. Making the patient feel secure
mended that clinically normal chinchillas be treated,
is of the utmost importance; if not, it may attempt to
but owners should practice strict hygiene when han-
 jump from the handler's grasp. If this is the case, sitting
dling them (Mitchell and Tully 2009).
 on the floor while completing the exam may be neces-
sary. This allows for better support and if the chin-
chilla does get away, it will not fall and sustain a
BEHAVIOR
traumatic injury. If the patient is frightened while
being restrained, it may release a large portion of
Chinchillas are usually nocturnal, but may be active
fur in areas where it is being held. This is called a
during daylight hours. They have become popular as
"fur-slip” (Lightfoot 1999). This can also occur due
pets because of their curious personality, gentle nature,
to rough handling. Great care should be taken while
and the fact that they rarely bite. They are very enter-
handling chinchillas, because no one wants to have a
taining pets to watch because they are very athletic and
hairless patient leave the facility.
316
Chapter 14
able difference on a radiograph is the very small thorax
in comparison to the abdomen.
ANESTHESIA AND SURGERY
Very few surgical procedures are commonly performed
 on chinchillas. However, on occasion there may be
need to neuter a male chinchilla to allow it to be
housed with others. With this procedure and some of
 the others listed above, isoflurane or sevoflurane gas is
the preferred anesthetic agent. A face mask or induc-
tion chamber should be used to administer the anes-
thetic gas. Intubation is not recommended because
blind intubations can cause trauma, which can lead to
epiglottal edema and dyspnea.
 Injectable anesthetics can be used such as aceproma-
zine, butorphanol tartrate, and ketamine hydrochlo-
ride in combination with diazepam or xylazine.
 However, gas anesthesia such as isoflurane or sevoflu-
rane is highly preferred for surgical procedures, veni-
 puncture, radiographs, and catheter placement
PARASITOLOGY
 Fecal flotations and direct smears should be performed,
chillas. Depending on the organism, the patient may
Figure 14.3. Restraint of a chinchilla. (Photo
be asymptomatic or present with diarrhea. Protozoal
courtesy of Dr. Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers,
infestations by Trichamonas spp., Balantidium spP.,
University of Georgia.)
Cryptosporidium, and Eimeria chinchillae may occur.
The latter is the chinchilla coccidian that has been
shown to be transmissible to other rodents. Nematode
Once the patient is comfortably restrained, the
infestations by
 Physoloptera and
Haemonchus
examination can begin. The average weight of a chin-
contortous have been reported. It is also possible
chilla is 400 to 600g, with the male usually being
for chinchillas to have flea infestations, so they may
smaller than the female (Johnson-Delaney 1996,
also have tapeworms, usually Hymeolepsis nana
Lightfoot 1999). The temperature can be taken rec-
(Ness 1999). One unusual aspect of the life cycle is
tally, although chinchillas may object to this proce-
that the same animal can be the intermediate and
dure. The normal temperature is 97*F to 102°F
permanent host.
(Johnson-Delaney 1996, Lightfoot 1999). The heart
rate and respiratory rate can be obtained by normal
means. The normal HR is 200 to 350 beats/minute and
URINALYSIS
the normal RR is 40 to 80 breaths/minute (Johnson-
Delaney 1996, Lightfoot 1999).
Normal urine values are as follows:
Color: Yellow to slightly red
RADIOLOGY
Turbidity: Most often cloudy
pH: 8.5
If the circumstances allow, radiographs are most easily
Protein: Negative to trace
obtained if the animal is anesthetized, because the
Glucose: Negative
chinchilla may be difficult to restrain. The most notice-
Ketones: Negative
Chinchillas
317
Bilirubin: Negative
Urobilinogen: 0.1 to 1 ng/dl
Nitrates: Negative
Blood: Negative
Specific gravity: Usually > 1.045
 During a urine sediment examination of a normal
chinchilla, some calcium carbonate crystals may be
found along with amorphous debris. Casts, bacteria,
erythrocytes, and leukocytes are rare in a normal
CephalicVein
patient, but occasional squamous epithelial cells are
common (Ness 1999).
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
Most of the diseases and ailments discussed previously
are not considered emergencies. However, in the
case of an emergency with a chinchilla, protocols
similar to those of other small mammals should be
followed. For example, an IV catheter can be very
helpful in an emergency as well as in a critically ill
patient. Once the patient has been stabilized, a calm
Femoral Vein
and quiet environment is also very important for the
recovery process.
Figure 14.4. Venipuncture sites. (Drawing by Scott
Stark.)
SEX DETERMINATION
 Determining the sex of a chinchilla can be very diff-
1. Place the patient in sternal recumbency.
cult, especially in young animals. The testicles can be
2. Extend the head and neck to make the lateral aspect
visualized in adult males but the lack of a scrotum can
of the lower cervical region accessible.
make this more of a challenge. The fact that the clito-
 au yo as au on asd a ad 'e
ris, because of its size and shape, can often be mistaken
inlet to occlude the vessel.
for a penis, provides another obstacle when sexing
4. Wet the area with an alcohol swab and visualize the
chinchillas. The location of the penis versus the clitoris
distended vein.
can often be the determining factor because the dis-
 5. Using a 23- to 25-gauge needle attached to a 1- t0
tance from the rectum to the penis is greater than that
3-ml syringe, insert the needle into the vein at
of the clitoris.
approximately a 45 degree angle.
6. Draw back slowly if using a 3-ml syringe so as not
to collapse the vein.
TECHNIQUES
A 25- to 27-gauge needle on a 0.5- to 1-ml syringe
Venipuncture
should be used to collect samples from the other sites
 For a procedure of this nature, it is preferable to have
 mentioned above. The femoral and cephalic veins are
a chinchilla anesthetized. There are several sites for
the most commonly used of those mentioned.
venipuncture; the jugular vein being the most common
site, and it allows larger blood volumes to be obtained.
Intravenous Catheter Placement
There are five other sites for venipuncture: the cephalic,
The cephalic vein is the most common site used for
saphenous, femoral, lateral abdominal, and tail vein
catheter placement. The procedures are the same as in
(Figure 14.4).
        
The process for collecting blood from the jugular is
Technique section for ferrets. Note that a small
as follows (Ness 1999):
cutdown may not be necessary.
318
Chapter 14
Intraosseous Catbeter Placement
Per os: Medication is usually liquid and can be given
While in most cases the chinchilla's peripheral veins
by needleless syringe in the side of the mouth just
are readily accessible, in an emergency it may be neces-
behind the incisors.
sary to place an intraosseous catheter. In critical
Subcutaneous: 23- to 25-gauge needle under the
patients, sedation or anesthesia is not usually required
skin in the flank or neck area.
for this procedure. The steps for placement are as
Intravenous: 25- to 28-gauge needle, preferably
follows:
an insulin
syringe in the lateral saphenous
or
cephalic.
1. Locate the site for placement of the catheter. The
Intramuscular: 23- to 25-gauge needle with no
two sites used in chinchillas are the femur or tibia.
more than 0.3 ml/site. Recommended sites include the
The femur is preferred due to its size and location,
semimembranosus, quadriceps, and semitendinosus
so this one will be discussed.
muscles (Ness 1999).
2. Locate a syringe needle or catheter stylet of the
largest bore possible for the patient (usually 22-
 gauge is sufficient). A spinal needle may also be used.
EUTHANASIA
A syringe of heparinized flush will also be needed.
3. Clip and surgically prep the site.
As with most other small animals, the preferred method
4. Once the site has been prepped, the greater trochan-
of euthanasia is lethal injection. If an IV catheter has
ter should be palpated and stabilized for insertion
been placed in the cephalic vein, it can be used for
of the needle. The needle is then inserted and with
administration of the euthanasia solution. If a catheter
 a gentle twisting motion, advanced slowly. The
is not available, either an IV or intracardiac injection
needle should continue to be advanced through the
(after anesthetized) with a syringe can be used. It is
bone and into the marrow cavity. Aspiration with
frequently easiest to first use isoflurane or sevoflurane
the flush syringe until blood is visualized in the hub
to anesthetize the patient and then follow up with
should be performed. It should be flushed quickly
injectable euthanasia solution.
because the marrow can clog the needle.
5. The needle should be secured with tape and in some
cases, it may need to be sutured in place to provide
REFERENCES
more stability.
6. This catheter may be used for up to seventy-two
Hayes PM. 2000. Diseases of Chinchillas. Philadelphia: W.B.
hours, after which a replacement in another loca-
Saunders Company.
 Johnson-Delaney CA. 1996 Exotic Companion Medicine Handbook
tion will be required.
for Veterinarians Lake Worth: Wingers Publications.
Kraft H. 1987. Diseases of Chinchillas. Neptune City: TEH.
Once the catheter is in place, great care must be
Publications.
taken to maintain it. Its location may inhibit normal
Lightfoot TL. 1999.Clinical Examination of Chinchillas, Hedgehogs.
movement and cause some discomfort. This in turn
 Prairie Dogs, and Sugar Gliders. Veterinary Clinics of North
America:Exotic Animat Practice 2(2): 447-54.
may cause the patient to attempt to remove the cath-
eter by chewing or rubbing.
Mitchell M, Tully T. 2009. Manual of Exotic Pet Practice. St. Louis:
Saunders.
Ness RD. 1999. Clinical Pathology and Sample Collection of Exotic
Administration of Medication
Small Animals. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic
In the event that medications need to be given, there
Animat Practice 2(3): 591-619.
Quesenberry K, Carpenter J. 2004. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
are several routes of administration. As with many
Clinical Medicine and Surgery. St. Louis: Saunders.
other exotics, one must make sure to downsize the
Ritchey L, Cogswell EL, Cogswell M. 2004. Joy of Chinchillas. Self
equipment and the volume of medications used.
published.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Guinea
Anne Hudson and Maria Crane
COMMON TYPES
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The domestic guinea pig, Cavia porcellus, also referred
Guinea pigs have short, stocky, tailless bodies with one
to as a cavy, has been raised as a meat animal in South
pair of inguinal teats. The legs are short, and the front
America. Guinea pigs are considered rodents, despite
feet have four toes and the rear feet have three toes.
several differences between guinea pigs and other
Like all rodents, they have open rooted incisors.
-sy se padnon are Aaui 'saoads suapon iad uo
 sred paor-do ssssod oe siid ea
tricomorphic rodents along with porcupines and chin-
molars, and malocclusions seem to occur more
chillas. Male guinea pigs are called boars, and females
frequently with these teeth than the incisors. The
are called sows. The American or English variety, the
dental formula is 2 (I—1/1, C—0/0, P—1/1, M—3/3)
Abyssinian, and the Peruvian are the most commonly
(Harkness and Wagner 1989).
seen in companion animal practice. English cavies have
The soft palate is continuous with the base of the
short, smooth hair coats. Abyssinians have a rougher
tongue, forming a membranous covering of the poste-
coat that looks swirled; the hair is described as growing
rior pharynx. Food, water and air pass through an
in rosettes. Peruvian guinea pigs have long hair coats
opening called the palatal ostium. The cecum in the
that require grooming to maintain good condition.
guinea pig is very large, occupying a large portion of
Guinea pigs are available in a wide variety of colors
the abdominal cavity.
and combinations of colors.
Male guinea pigs have open inguinal canals, allow-
ing them to retract their testicles into the abdominal
cavity, and an os penis. Females have two uterine
BEHAVIOR
horns and a single cervix. A thin membrane covers the
vagina except for during estrus and parturition. The
Guinea pigs are docile animals that rarely bite. They
 symphysis pubis of the guinea pig is fibrocartilaginous
are sociable and will share housing with another if
 and is capable of separating during parturition. Failing
introduced at an early age; however, crowded animals
to breed a female prior to six months of age may lead
or breeding animals may fight. Cages with tops are not
to dystocia because the symphysis will be less able to
needed if the sides are eight to ten inches high because
separate. Physiological data are contained in Table
jumping seldom occurs.
15.1.
A wide variety of vocalization patterns have been
demonstrated, and cavies will vocalize in response to
hearing their food being prepared, lights being turned
BIOLOGIC AND REPRODUCTIVE DATA
on, and so forth.
They are neophobic animals, mistrusting any new
Guinea pigs reach breeding age at approximately three
foods or changes in their normal routine. Therefore, it
months of age. Females housed with other females will
is important to gently handle young animals on a
mount each other if in heat. It is possible to keep
regular basis and to expose them to a variety of certain
breeding pairs together long term; breeding may
foods. Trying to change feed types for a mature animal
take place during the postpartum estrus. Evidence of
is nearly impossible. When frightened, guinea pigs may
breeding is finding a copulatory plug in the bedding of
"stampede" in an effort to escape, bolting around the
the cage. This plug is an accumulation of secretions
cage. Another typical response is to suddenly freeze
that falls from the vagina shortly after breeding takes
and remain immobile for a brief period of time
place.
319
320
Chapter 15
Table 15.1. Physiological data for the guinea pig.
Lifespan
5-7 years
Average adult weight (M/F)
900-1,200 g/700-900 g
Puberty
4.5-70 days
Breeding age
 3-4 months
 Estrous cycle length
15-17 days
 Gestation period
63-68 days
Litter size
2-5 pups
Weaning age
21 days
 Respiratory rate per minute
70-130
Heart rate
230-300
 Rectal temperature °F
99-103.1
Harkness and Wagner 1989 (21), Hillyer and Quesenberry
Figure 15.1.An appropriate housing set-up for
1997 (248).
guinea pigs. (Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
Sows do not build nests like other rodents, and
 young are born precocious. Litters of two to five pups
longer fur of these animals. If needed, they can be
are typical, although larger litters are possible (Hillyer
bathed with a mild shampoo as long as they are dried
and Quesenberry 1997). Pups are born fully furred,
 carefully and not subjected to chilling.
with eyes open, all teeth erupted, and able to walk.
Within a few hours, pups can begin eating from a bowl.
NUTRITION
HUSBANDRY
A variety of food items, including commercial pellets
and some fresh vegetables, must be offered from an
Guinea pigs can be messy, often tipping over food
early age to prevent rigid food preferences from
crocks and scattering food throughout the cage. They
forming. Guinea pigs are herbivores. The daily recom-
defecate throughout the cage as well. Water should be
mended diet for guinea pigs is a good quality grass hay
provided in a bottle with a sipper tube. Fresh water
(offered at all times), a commercial guinea pig pellet,
may need to be provided more frequently than for
fresh vegetables, and a limited amount of fresh fruits.
other rodents due to the guinea spitting food particles
Vegetables and fruits should be washed thoroughly
into the bottle, and their tendency to play with the
prior to feeding to remove any pesticide residue. The
sipper tube. The bedding must be changed and the cage
fruit and vegetables should be removed from the cage
surfaces cleaned more frequently as well.
after a few hours to prevent spoilage. Pellets are a good
Cages do not need lids if the sides are tall, unless
source of crude protein and fiber and they also help
the owner has a dog or cat; a secure lid would then be
wear down the teeth through chewing activity.
a requirement. Solid flooring is preferable to wire mesh
 Like primates, guinea pigs cannot synthesize vitamin
to prevent trauma to the feet. Wire cages with deep
C and must be supplemented with this nutrient.
solid bottoms are nice because the tray contains scat-
Reputable brands of commercial guinea pig pellets are
tered bedding material, and the open sides allow the
fortifed with vitamin C or ascorbic acid; however,
 guinea pig to see out and observe what is going on
 most of the vitamin C is oxidized or lost by ninety days
 around it. Nonaromatic wood shavings or shredded
of manufacturing. Therefore, pellets should not be
 paper can be used as bedding material (Queensberry
relied on as the sole source of vitamin C. Fresh vege-
et al. 2004).
tables such as dark leafy greens, red and green peppers,
 Guinea pigs are comfortable at a normal room tem-
and broccoli, and small amounts of fresh fruits such
 perature of about 70°F Good ventilation is essential
as kiwi, oranges, and tomatoes are good sources of
to help prevent respiratory diseases. Owners should be
 daily supplements. Another route for supplementation
cautioned to keep cages away from drafty areas,
of vitamin C is in the water. One gram of vitamin C/l
windows, and home heating sources (Figure 15.1).
of
water
mixed fresh(
daily  is recommended.
Abyssinian and Peruvian guinea pigs benefit from
(Quesenberry and Carpenter 2004). However, vitamin
gentle grooming. Fecal pellets may become stuck in the
C in water begins to break down within twenty-four
Guinea Pigs
321
hours and must be changed daily to ensure adequate
 debridement, topical cleaning, and appropriate anal-
 intake. Pregnant animals have a higher (30 mg/kg/day)
 gesic therapy. This painful disease is best prevented
vitamin C requirement than nonbreeding adults (5 mg/
with clean flooring that is non-abrasive. If wire
kg/day) (Harkness and Wagner 1989).
flooring is used, provide some solid areas of flooring
or bedding so that the animals can move to softer
areas.
COMMON AND ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Antibiotic therapy in guinea pigs must be under-
taken with great care, because many of the antibiotics
Stress is a major factor in developing illness. Poor diet
effective against Gram-positive organisms, such as
or sudden dietary changes, overcrowding, and failure
 penicillin, can lead to enterotoxemia.
to maintain clean caging all result in stress.
The significant reproductive problems in guinea
 Failure to receive adequate vitamin C supplementa-
 pigs are dystocia, common if females are not bred prior
tion may result in the development of scurvy, a muscu-
to reaching six months of age, and pregnancy ketosis.
loskeletal disease. Guinea pigs with scurvy are lethargic,
Obesity also puts the female at risk for problems
anorexic, and may actually bite due to painful joints.
 during parturition. Straining, abnormal vaginal dis-
Diarrhea and weight loss may also be evident.
charge, depression, and/or failure to produce a pup
Supplementation with appropriate amounts of ascor-
within thirty minutes after onset of contractions are
bic acid, (50 to 100 mg/animal, PO, SC every 24 hours)
all indications of dystocia (Hillyer and Quesenberry
(Quesenberry and Carpenter 2004) coupled with good
1997). Cesarean sections are often necessary. Ketosis
supportive care usually result in a rapid recovery
is most commonly associated with obesity and stress.
Common respiratory diseases seen in guinea pigs
 Rapid onset of signs, including anorexia, dyspnea,
include those caused by Bordetella bronchiseptica and
convulsions, and death, may occur. The problem is
Streptococcus pneumoniae. Transmission is via aero-
easier to prevent through proper diet and husbandry
solization, fomites, direct contact with another sick
than to treat.
guinea pig, or in the case of Bordetella, any animal
Zoonotic diseases include salmonellosis, sarcoptic
capable of carrying the bacteria: dogs, cats, rabbits,
 mange, ringworm, and lymphocytic choriomeningitis.
and nonhuman primates. Signs of respiratory disease
include anorexia, ocular-nasal discharge, dyspnea,
and death. Treatment with antibiotics and increased
HISTORY AND
vitamin C, as well as supportive care, is needed. The
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
animal may also require force feeding.
Guinea pigs may contract salmonellosis and clos-
Questions to ask when interviewing a client are the
tridial infections through fecal contamination of food.
basic signalment questions asked with all species:
Signs include rough hair coat, weight loss, lethargy, and
diarrhea. Again, treatment involves antibiotics, based
The chief complaint
on culture and sensitivities, and good supportive care.
Where the owner obtained the pet and how long
Swellings on the neck are usually due to inflamed
she has owned it
or abscessed lymph nodes caused by Streptobacillus
 The owner's past experience, if any, in keeping
spp. or Streptococcus spp. infection. Cervical lymph-
guinea pigs
adenitis, or "lumps" as it is commonly called, may
result from a bite wound, abrasion from bedding
Ideally, the pet is brought into the clinic in the cage
 or caging equipment, or trauma from malocclusion.
it is normally housed in, allowing staff to see what type
Abscesses are usually drained and flushed, followed by
 of bedding and equipment the patient is exposed to.
systemic antibiotic therapy. Contact with the drainage
When scheduling appointments, advise the owner not
will infect any other guinea pigs housed with the
to clean the cage prior to the appointment.
affected animal so isolation is necessary until wound
 Information about appetite, type of diet, fecal pellet
healing has occurred.
production and quality, and overall attitude should be
 Pododermatitis is often associated with animals
obtained. Observe the animal in its cage; healthy
housed on wire flooring. The surfaces of the feet
 guinea pigs are active and vocal. The patient should
become irritated, thickened, and ulcerated. A second-
be weighed on a gram scale, and while gently restrain-
ary staphylococcal infection may ensue.
e. The animal
ing the guinea pig, a rectal temperature can be obtained
will vocalize and be unwilling to move due to pain.
with a standard rectal thermometer. The technician
Treatment consists of appropriate antibiotics, surgical
must restrain the guinea pig so the veterinarian can
322
 Chapter 15
exposure. Exposure times of 1/60 of a second or less
are necessary. Masking tape can be used to secure the
sedated animal in position. For ease in tabletop tech-
nique, taping the animal to a small sheet of Plexiglas
rather than directly to the cassette prevents having to
retape the patient each time cassettes are changed
(Imaging Resources 1995). The references listed at the
end of this chapter have excellent recommendations
for radiology techniques.
ANESTHESLA AND SURGERY
Guinea pigs should be fasted for one to two hours
Figure 15.2. Proper guinea pig restraint. (Photo
 prior to surgical procedures. Induction with isoflurane
courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
gas via face mask is recommended, and the animal can
be maintained on gas administered by face mask and
examine the mouth and teeth, and should be prepared
a nonrebreathing circuit (Hillyer and Quesenberry
for the patient to squirm and vocalize its objection to
1997).
the exam.
Depth of anesthesia in most rodents can be evalu-
ated partially by pinching the toes or gently pinching
the ear for reaction to pain; however, there has been
RESTRAINT
concern that pedal reflexes may not be reliable depth
 indicators in guinea pigs and may actually indicate the
Guinea pigs respond well to gentle restraint; inappro-
animal is too deeply anesthetized (Plunkett 1993).
priate handling stresses the animal and can cause
Doppler monitors and pulse oximeters are helpful
damage to the internal organs. Always use two hands
in monitoring the patient in addition to watching the
to restrain a guinea pig (Figure 15.2).
chest wall for movement related to respiration. Take
To properly restrain a guinea pig:
care to keep the animal warm perioperatively, and turn
the animal from side to side every fifteen to thirty
1. Gently place one hand under the thorax of the
minutes to prevent fluids from pooling on the depen-
 guinea pig, just caudal to the front limbs.
 dent side. Once fully recovered, ensure the client keeps
2. Support the hindquarters of the patient with the
the cage and bedding fresh and clean to prevent any
 Other hand.
surgical wound contamination.
3. The guinea pig may also have the dorsal thorax
supported in one hand in a cradling fashion while
supporting the hind limbs with the other hand. This
PARASITOLOGY
placement may be more comfortable for pregnant
animals because it avoids any pressure on the
Guinea pigs may be parasitized without showing any
abdomen.
clinical signs. Crypto sporidium wrairi, an intestinal
protozoan parasite, may result in diarrhea, weight loss,
Restraint for jugular venipuncture is similar to that
and death. Immunocompromised animals and wean-
used on cats in that the animal's forelegs are extended
lings are most susceptible. The protozoan can be seen
over the edge of a table while the head is gently
 on fecal examinations and there is no proven treat-
extended up. Stop the procedure immediately if the
ment. Animals generally recover on their own after
 animal becomes stressed (Hillyer and Quesenberry
a period of weeks and tend to be resistant to reinfec-
1997).
tion. (Quesenberry and Carpenter 2004). There is a
zoonotic risk from this parasite so owners should be
cautioned.
RADIOLOGY
Fleas, mites, and lice are ectoparasites that can
infest guinea pigs, causing intense itching, alopecia,
Whole body studies are common in guinea pigs, and
and excoriation of the skin. Humans may be affected
by the sarcoptic mange mite, Trixacaruscaviae. The
Guinea Pigs
323
dally and cranially to the genitals causes the penis of
the male animal to extrude.
TECHNIQUES
Techniques for administration of medication, veni-
puncture, catheter placement, bandaging, and wound
care are discussed in this section (Lawson 2000).
Administration of Medication
Subcutaneous,
intramuscular,  or   intraperitoneal
administration of drugs is often used due to the diffi-
culty of administering drugs intravenously. Many
Figure 15.3. A guinea pig with mange. (Photo
drugs given intramuscularly may lead to irritation of
courtesy of Dr. Chris King.)
the tissue surrounding the injection site (Hillyer and
Quesenberry 1997). Exercise caution when adminis-
tering IP injections to avoid damaging internal organs.
veterinarian may treat the guinea pig by prescribing
ivermectin or topical pyrethrin products safe for use
SQ
in cats (Figure 15.3).
Subcutaneous injection of medications allows for
slightly larger volumes (5 to 10 ml) to be administered
than with IM administration. Fluid therapy may
URINALYSIS
also be administered via the subcutaneous route.
Most guinea pigs will rest on the exam table and can
Because of the potential of urinary calculi and cystitis
be restrained by cupping your hands around them. A
in the guinea pig, the veterinarian may request that a
towel placed on the table gives the animal some
urine sample be obtained by cystocentesis to perform
traction.
a urinalysis. The technique is like that used in other
 For SQ injection:
small animals, except a 25-gauge needle should be
used and anesthesia may be required (Hillyer and
1. Use a 20-gauge or smaller needle.
Quesenberry 1997).
2. Tent the skin away from the underlying muscles
over the scruff of the neck.
3. Insert the needle into the tented area at a slight
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
angle, being careful not to pass all the way through
the other side of the skin.
Pregnancy toxemia may occur in later days of gesta-
4. Administer the medication.
tion and does not respond well to treatment. The con-
 5. A butterfly catheter may be easier to use if the
dition is usually fatal (Plunkett 1993)
animal is very active.
Dystocia is an emergency that usually requires an
6. Dispose of the needle into a puncture-proof biohaz-
immediate cesarean section. If the animal had several
ard container.
successful litters previously, demonstrating the pelvic
canal is capable of separating, the veterinarian may try
IM
oxytocin prior to surgery (Plunkett 1993).
 Intramuscular injections are usually given in the large
muscles of the hind limbs, such as the gluteal muscles.
To avoid tissue damage, use needles less than 21 gauge,
SEX DETERMINATION
and do not inject volumes of greater than 0.3 ml into
any one site.
 Anogenital distance is not a reliable method for sexing
For IM injection:
animals. To sex a guinea pig, gently restrain the animal
and examine the external genitalia. In the female, the
1. Place a towel on the table and gently restrain the
genital area has a "Y" shape. The male appears to have
animal or restrain it with your hands, being sure to
more of a straight slit. Applying gentle pressure cau-
support the hind end.
324
Chapter 15
2. It may be helpful to "pinch" the muscle tissue with
1. Use a needle size of 23 gauge or smaller.
one hand while administering the injection with the
2. Shave the area and clean with alcohol or other
other hand.
antiseptic solution.
 3. Aspirate the syringe prior to injection to avoid
3. Applying a low-watt light bulb (such as a penlight)
injecting into a blood vessel.
or a warm-water compress to the area prior to the
4. Administer the medication.
 procedure may help to distend the vein slightly.
5. Dispose of the needle in a puncture-proof biohazard
4. Apply pressure proximal to the injection site to
container.
distend the vein.
5. Aspirate prior to injection to ensure proper
IP
placement.
For IP injection:
6. Inject medications slowly after releasing proximally
 applied pressure.
1. Place the guinea pig gently on its back, supporting
7. Apply direct pressure to venipuncture site as the
the animal in one hand.
 needle is withdrawn to prevent formation of a
2. Tilt the animal's head down and insert the needle
hematoma.
at an approximate 45 degree angle into the lower
 8. Dispose of the needle in a puncture-proof biohazard
right quadrant of the abdomen.
container.
 3. Aspirate prior to injection to ensure you are not in
the bladder or digestive tract. If any blood or fluid
Venipuncture
enters the syringe, withdraw and discard the syringe
Small quantities of blood can be taken from the ear veins
before starting over.
or saphenous veins (Figure 15.4). Larger amounts of
4. Administer the medication.
blood can be obtained using jugular venipuncture,
5. Dispose of the needle in a puncture-proof biohazard
extending the guinea pig's forelegs over the edge of an
container.
exam table as you would a cat. Jugular venipuncture can
be stressful and should not be performed on very ill
IV
animals. The amount of blood that can safely be collected
 Intravenous injection is difficult; the saphenous vein is
from guinea pigs is approximately 0.5 to 0.7mL/100g
the easiest to use.
body weight (Hillyer and Quesenberry 1997).
For IV injection:
 For venipuncture:
Figure 15.4. Venipuncture sites on
a guinea pig. (Drawing by Scott
Stark.)
Guinea Pigs
325
1. Use a 23-gauge or smaller needle attached to a
To treat a wound:
tuberculin syringe, or a 3-mL syringe if performing
jugular venipuncture.
1. Keep the animal as comfortable as possible.
2. Shave the proposed venipuncture site and prep with
2. Gently clip hair from around the wound and clean
alcohol to make it easier to visualize the vein.
with an antiseptic solution.
 3. Applying a low-watt light bulb (such as a penlight)
3. The wound can be temporarily covered with a
 n ro 1 a  5 r- e 
sterile dressing until surgically closed.
 procedure may help to distend the vein slightly.
4. Apply pressure as described above for IV adminis-
More serious wounds and fractures can be quite
 tration of medications; however, maintain pressure
difficult to manage.
to keep the vessel distended.
5. After collecting the sample, withdraw the needle as
you apply pressure to the venipuncture site.
EUTHANASIA
6. Dispose of the needle in a puncture-proof biohazard
container.
Guinea pigs can be euthanized using an overdose of
barbiturate anesthesia administered intraperitoneally
as described above.
Catheter Placement
 Intravenous catheterization in guinea pigs is diffcult,
REFERENCES
and is more commonly performed in a research setting.
 Indwelling catheters meant for long-term use may need
Harkness JE, Wagner JE. 1989. The Biology and Medicine
to be surgically placed under anesthesia. Catheter
of Rabbits and Rodents. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.
supplies are available from Harvard Apparatus.
21.
Intraosseous administration of medications can be per-
Hillyer EV, Quesenberry KE. 1997. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
 Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
formed; the technique is the same as for a chinchilla
248-386.
(see Chapter 14).
Imaging Resources, Inc. 1995. An Overview of Small Animal
 Radiology. 3rd ed. Corvallis State: Imaging Resources.
Lawson PT, ed. 2000. American Association for Laboratory
Bandaging and Wound Care
Animal Science; LAT and LATG Training Manuals. Memphis:
Minor wounds are best cleaned as thoroughly as pos-
AALAS.
Plunkett SJ. 1993. Emergency Procedures for the Small Animal
sible during initial treatment to avoid repetitively
Veterinarian. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
stressing the animal. The risk of wound infection is
Queensberry KE, Carpenter J. 2004. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
decreased if the
patient's caging receives regular
 Clinical Medicine and Surgery. St Louis: Saunders.
Queensberry KE, Donnelly
yTM, Hillyer EV. 2004. Biology,
bedding changes. External sutures and bandages are
not usually well tolerated; subcuticular sutures and
Husbandry and Clinical Techniques of Guinea Pigs and
Chinchillas. In: Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine
surgical glue are better alternatives (Hillyer 
and
and Surgery, 2nd ed., edited by Quesenberry KE and Carpenter
Queensberry 1997).
JW. Missouri: Saunders, Elsevier.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Michael Duffy Jones
TAXOMONY, ANATOMY,
as much as 10% of body weight during the breeding
AND PHYSIOLOGY
season (Johnson 2004).
Pregnancy detection is often accomplished by moni-
Hedgehogs belong to the order of Insectivora, which
toring body weight. Typically if a female gains more
includes the most primitive of all living placental
than 50 grams within three weeks of being with a male,
mammals today (Storer 1994). There are many differ-
 then she is considered pregnant. During pregnancy and
ent species of hedgehogs, including the European,
lactation nutritional demands my increase up to three-
African, Pruner's, Algerian, long-eared or Egyptian,
fold. The female may cannibalize, kill, or abandon her
and Ethiopian or desert hedgehog. There are slight
newborn young if she is stressed or disturbed. Therefore,
differences between these species, including ear size
the male must be removed before parturition and the
 and times of hibernation. For the most part, the various
mother should be not be disturbed for five to ten days
species can be treated medically in a similar way. The
after parturition (Johnson 2004). Dystocia is rare and
Egyptian hedgehog is noted for its surly disposition
passive transfer of immunity occurs through colostrum
(Lightfoot 1997). African hedgehogs are slightly dif-
in the first twenty-four to seventy-two hours of life
ferent from their European cousins in that they do not
Orphaned young can be raised on puppy or kitten milk
hibernate (Storer 1994).
replacer (Johnson 2004).
 Hedgehogs' brains are small and primitive and are
 Dentition in these animals is unique because they
smooth, not fssured. The sensory parts of the brain,
are insectivores (Figure 16.2). The top row of teeth
including the olfactory and tactile areas, are very well
includes three incisors, one canine, three premolars,
developed. They have vibrissae, which are long, stiff
and three molars on each side, and the bottom consists
hairs around the mouth and nostrils that are used for
 of two incisors, one canine, two premolars, and three
their sense of touch (Storer 1994).
molars, for a total of thirty-six (Storer 1994, Johnson
Their digestive tract consists of a simple stomach
2004). The incisors are sharp, the canines are small,
and not cecum. The transit time averages twelve to
and the molars and premolars are broad and flat for
sixteen hours (Johnson 2004).
 grinding. The frst set of incisors has a large gap for
Most species of hedgehogs have five toes on each
appending and killing insects. Hedgehogs teeth are
foot, except for the four-toed hedgehog, which only
very small and sharp. The baby teeth erupt at about
has four toes on the back feet (Storer 1994). They have
twenty-three days and permanent teeth erupt at seven
very strong legs that are used for digging, and they
to nine weeks (Storer 1994). The skeletal anatomy is
have a nonexistent tail.
shown in Figure 16.3.
 The urogenital opening of females is not connected
Hedgehogs senses, including smell and hearing, are
to the anus but is directly anterior (toward the animal's
very developed. Their eyesight is of moderate ability
head). The male's penis is more anterior than the
with limited color vision. They are highly resistant to
female's genitalia (Storer 1994) (Figure 16.1). The
many toxins (Storer 1994).
 males have a prominent penis sheath. The testes are
Their face, underbody, and legs are covered with
intraabdominal and not readily visible. Pressure can be
cream- to brown-colored soft hairs. The rest of the
placed on the abdomen to push the testes into the
body is covered with quills (also called spines). Each
inguinal area. Internally, males also possess complex
quill is connected to a small muscle, which can help
accessory reproductive glands, which may account for
pull the quill erect. When the animal is frightened, the
327
Penis
V11v2
Anus
1
A
B
Figure 16.1. Sex determination in a hedgehog- (A) Female. (B) Male. (Drawing by Scott Stark.)
Figure 16.2. Dentition. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
Cheek.)
Pelvis
Axis
Humeml1s
Tibia
Rarlius
Maniclible
Filul
Ulna
Figure 16.3. Skeletal anatomy. (Drawing by Scott Stark.)
328
Hedgehogs
329
Table 16.1. Biologic and reproductive data.
animals can become quite tame over time (Storer
1994).
Sexual maturity
3-9 months (Storer 1994, 53)
Typical defense postures include rolling into a ball
Litter size
2-6 (Storer 1994 53)
with erect spines. Hedgehogs will hiss and spit to try
Gestation
32-48 days (Storer 1994, 53)
Weaning
and scare off potential predators. The spines will stay
5-6 weeks (Storer 1994, 53)
Breeding
1-2 times/year spontaneous
erect and will vibrate, in an effort to try and drive the
spine into anything that touches it. This posture makes
ovulates, but depends on
environmental conditions
it very difficult for hedgehogs to be picked up either
(Storer 1994, 54)
by a human or another animal (Storer 1994).
Lifespan
 3-4 years in the wild (Gregory
Hedgehogs are also good at wedging themselves
1992,63)
into very small places. This can make it diffcult to
WBC
5.8-21 × 103/ml (Ness 1999,
examine these pets. It is a good idea not to have
596)
 owners bring them in balls or other transport appara-
 Neutrophils %
49-70
tuses that will make it difficult to remove them if they
Lymphocytes
22-38
0
become frightened.
Monocytes
 Hedgehogs can become excited when encountering
Eosinophil
2-11
Basophils
0-5
 smells or substances. They will engage in a behavior
Hematocrit
28-38
that is called self-anointing. When they encounter a
Hemoglobin
9.9-13.1
small animal or substance they can become stiff, and
RBC (X106/ml)
4.4-6
they make licking motions with their tongues (which
MCV (fL)
60-67.4
are very long). They can start to bite or tug and start
MCHC (g/dl)
2.5.1-48.3
 producing large amounts of saliva. They can then get
Platelets (x103/ml)
200-412
into extremely contorted positions by stiffening their
MCH (pg)
21.2-23.4
 aamiaq yeq speaq an d pue sa o
ALT (IU/L)
39.7-68.9 (Ness 1999 2:3,
shoulder blades. This behavior can look much like a
600)
0-0.1
seizure, and can continue for a long period of time.
T. Bill (mg/dl)
There is much controversy about this behavior, and
T. Protein (g/dl)
5.3-6.3
Albumin (g/dl)
2.6-3.4
most people believe that it may be a sexual reaction
Glucose (mg/dl)
81.5-116.1
or a self-defense behavior (Storer 1994).
BUN (mg/dl)
21.3-32.9
Creatinine (mg/dl)
0.2-0.4
Calcium (mg/dl)
9.5-10.9
HUSBANDRY
The optimal temperature is between 65°F and 90°F,
quills are erect and crossed, making a very formidable
with the best temperature at 80°F If the temperature
barrier (Storer 1994).
is too low, these pets may start to hibernate, and if too
Hedgehogs are mostly terrestrial. They tend to walk
high, they can have significant health problems related
slowly, looking for food, but can scurry at about six
to heat stress. Hedgehogs can tolerate temperatures of
feet/second (four miles/hour). They can also use their
100°F for short periods of time (Storer 1994, Johnson
spinesas a cushion for rolling or dropping from high
2004)
places (Storer 1994, Johnson 2004).
It is best to keep adults in individual cages because
they can become aggressive if housed together. Plastic
or fberglass crates are good due to ease of cleaning.
BIOLOGIC AND REPRODUCTIVE DATA
Aquariums make great housing, but care must be
taken to monitor for overheating. Twenty-gallon
Table 16.1 includes biological and reproductive infor-
 aquariums are of adequate size and can be purchased
mation. Clinical pathology data are also included
with wire covers. Recycled/shredded paper or aspen
shavings are a very good substrate, and should be
changed twice a week (Storer 1994). Litter box train-
BEHAVIOR
ing is possible and hedgehogs tend to use the bathroom
in one area of the cage. Once that area is found, a
Hedgehogs are usually solitary animals and they can
small litter pan can be placed in the cage. Dust-free
be aggressive when housed together. However, captive
litter seems to work best because these pets roll and
330
Chapter 16
scratch the litter (Storer 1994). Self-clumping litter can
can move. The progression can occur over weeks to
aq a i aa saapu ap d e aso
months. There is no definitive treatment and no etio-
wet for any reason, the litter can stick in the spines
logical agent has been found (Johnson 2004).
and be very difficult to remove. They should be kept
on a twelve-hour light cycle (Johnson 2004).
Anorexia
Hedgehogs like security and they feel quite secure
 Because hedgehogs do not have continuously erupting
if they have a place to hide. A piece of PVC piping can
teeth, malocclusion is a problem that is seldom seen.
be used for sleeping quarters. One side of the tube can
However, gingival and periodontal disease does occur
be capped off, providing a small and secure place for
in older hedgehogs. Gingivitis may improve with
them to sleep. However, should more than one hedge-
ascorbic acid (50 to 200 mg/kg PO, SC every 24 hours)
hog be housed together, the tube should not be capped,
 (Johnson 2004). Husbandry problems, such as chang-
because they may pile on top of one another and
ing food, are often the cause of anorexia. If this does
become trapped inside (Storer 1994).
not seem to be the case, then blood work may be
 Regular rabbit or guinea pig water bottles work
 needed to determine whether there are any significant
well. Bowls or saucers are potentially hazardous,
liver problems such as hepatic lipidosis or neoplasia
because hedgehogs may climb inside and could drown.
(Lightfoot 1999).
 Solid surface exercise wheels designed for hedge-
hogs can be used (Johnson 2004).
Diarrbea
Diarrhea can be caused by many types of problems
from husbandry, parasites, bacterial infection, and
NUTRITION
even salmonellosis. After reviewing correct feeding
 techniques and food with the owner, other appropriate
Hedgehogs are insectivores, which means that they
diagnostics, such as fecal floats, should be taken. Other
have a high-protein diet (Storer 1994). For nonbreed-
systemic illnesses can present with diarrhea as well.
ing hedgehogs, feeding live food is acceptable. Crickets,
 Salmonella infections are well documented in hedge-
mealworms, grasshoppers, snails, slugs, pinkie mice,
hogs. Symptoms include anorexia, mucoid diarrhea,
and small nontoxic frogs are good sources. Small
 dehydration, and weight loss. Treatment is supportive
amounts of fruit may also be fed. Feeding live food
care (Johnson 2004).
can also add interest to their lives (Johnson 2004). The
dietary calcium : phosphorus ratio should be 1.2-1.5 : 1
Dermatologic Problems
(Carpenter 2002).
 Many forms of diseases can cause problems with skin
 Nonbreeding hedgehogs can become fat on regular
or quill loss (Figure 16.4). The problems can range
diets, so care must be taken with the quantity that is
from ectoparasites, hypersensitivity, dermatophytosis,
fed. Kitten food (wet or dry) may be used, as well as
high-quality dog food mixed with cottage cheese in a
and neoplasia. Fungal infection can be found with
 5: 1 ratio (Storer 1994). Chopped meat or hard-boiled
 normal fungal culture techniques and is most likely to
eggs can be given as an occasional treat.
COMMON DISEASES
Lameness
 Often hedgehogs are presented for reluctance to move
or weak gait. There are many causes of lameness,
including overgrown toenails, constriction of toes with
foreign material, fracture of long bones from trauma,
and even neoplasia. Systemic disease causing weakness
can be perceived as lameness (Lightfoot 1999).
Wobbling hedgehog syndrome is a demyelination
neurologic condition of African hedgehogs. It is char-
acterized by progressive ataxia and weight loss, even-
tually leading to paralysis and death. The age of onset
is typically eighteen to twenty-four months. It starts in
Figure 16.4. Mange. (Photo courtesy of Dr. Sam
the hind legs and gradually ascends until only the head
Rivera.)
Hedgehogs
331
Johnson 2004). Zoonotic transmission has been docu-
antibiotics, fluid therapy, bronchodilators, and nebu-
mented (Johnson 2004).
lization if needed (Johnson 2004).
Generalized infections are characterized by crusting
around the base of the spines. They can be treated with
Neoplasia
either griseofulvin (25 to 50 mg/kg by PO every 24
Neoplasia in hedgehogs is common. They can develop
hours for thirty days) or ketoconazole (10 mg/kg PO
a wide range of tumors. Specific neoplasms reported
 o (s s  s  s th 
in the hedgehog include squamous cell carcinomas,
If one hedgehog in a group is diagnosed, the entire
cutaneous mast cell tumors, mammary gland tumors,
group should receive treatment (Johnson 2004).
cutaneous hemangiosarcoma, alimentary lymphosar-
Ectoparasites are also common in the African
comas, and plasmacytoma (Carpenter 2002).
Hedgehog. Mite infestations with Caparinia or chori-
optes species are routine (Johnson 2004).
OBTAINING A HISTORY AND
Neurological Problems
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
 It is important to obtain as much information as pos-
hedgehogs (Ness 1999). Nutritional deficiencies can
sible about the pet before any actual handling takes
also cause many of the same signs. Rabies as well as
place. Because hedgehogs are frightened very easily, it
 Baylisascaris migration and polioencephalomyelitis are
is better to observe the pet while taking a thorough
among the causes of neurologic disease.
history, including what the pet eats and drinks, its cage
environment, or any other significant finding. Much of
Ophthalmologic Trauma
the physical examination must be performed under
nd aa sd q siad aa i i a o a
 anesthesia to prevent the pet from balling up.
are usually associated with trauma and are not noticed
 Hedgehogs can be difficult pets to pick up, but an
until later in the course of the disease. These pets are
object such as a spoon or litter box scooper can be used
also very difficult to treat. Enucleation is common and
to pick them up. Be very gentle and make sure that a
they do quite well with only one eye (Lightfoot 2000).
finger does not get caught if the pet is trying to ball up.
There are many techniques to get hedgehogs to
Liver Disease
 unroll. One method is to hold the hedgehog over a flat
 Liver disease also occurs. Fatty liver disease and hepatic
surface with the head pointing downward. With time,
adenocarcinoma are two of the most common.
 the hedgehog will unroll and reach for the table. Once
 Anorexia can be the only sign of liver disease (Johnson 
the pet has unrolled, gently grab the back legs and hold
2004).
the animal suspended by the back legs over the table
(Gregory 1992). If this fails, anesthesia is necessary.
Renal Disease
 Isoflurane is very well tolerated by these pets (Lightfoot
 Tublointerstitial nephritis is the most common type of
1999). A mask or tank is the most effective way to
kidney disease found. Lethargy, weight loss, and poly-
administer anesthesia. Salivation is often encountered
uria and polydipsia may occur (Johnson 2004).
with isoflurane.
Hedgehogs have a wide variety of squeals, snufling,
Internal Parasites
and sneezes that should not be confused with abnor-
Hedgehogs are susceptible to internal parasites such as
mal respiratory sounds (Johnson 2004).
nematodes, cestodes, and protozoa. Isopora and
 Eimeria species coccidia can cause diarrhea. Lungworm
infections can also occur and result in bronchopneu-
RADIOLOGY
monia or even death. Internal parasites are diagnosed
by fecal floatation and direct smear (Johnson 2004).
Anesthesia is needed  for accurate  radiographs.
Positioning is similar to that of other small animals.
Respiratory Disease
such as pasteurella, bordetella, and corynebacterium.
ANESTHESLA AND SURGERY
Nasal discharge and sneezing may result. Diagnostic
 procedures include radiographs and culture and sensi-
Anesthesia is an important part of the physical exam
tivity. Treatment should be supportive and include
(Figure 16.5). Isoflurane is well tolerated and is best
332
Chapter 16
Figure 16.5.Anesthesia is maintained after initial
Figure 16.6. Male hedgehog. (Photo courtesy of
induction by placing the patient in a face mask.
Ryan Cheek.)
(Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
usually presents as a moderate to severe skin infection
around the face and ears. Ivermectin is very effective
accomplished by using a large dog mask and removing
(Lightfoot 2000).
the diaphragm. Place the entire mask over the hedge-
Dermatophytes are also common causes of quill
hog and then wait for sedation to occur. Once the
loss. Trichophyton is the most common dermatophyte
hedgehog uncurls, it is preferable to switch to a smaller
found.
mask (Lightfoot 1999. Atropine (0.4mg/kg SC, IM)
A variety of nematode, cestode, and protozoan
can be given to help reduce hypersalivation. Injectable
parasites have been found in hedgehogs. Coccidia is
anesthetics are less reliable and seldom indicated.
present in as much as 10% of wild hedgehogs (Ness
Supplemental heat is essential (Johnson 2004).
1999). Crenosoama striatum is a common lungworm
The most common surgical procedure is toe ampu-
of the wild hedgehog.
tation, secondary to a foreign body that cuts off circu-
lation. However, routine procedures are also performed
including castration and ovariohysterectomy (Johnson
EMERGENCY AND CRITICAL CARE
2004).
Many of the same techniques used in small mammals
can be used in hedgehogs; however, with hedgehogs,
URINALYSIS
anesthesia is still needed to perform a good physical
examination. Intraosseous catheters are very useful in
 Extensive analysis of the urine of the African hedgehog
these small patients. Many must be monitored care-
fully because they will start to curl up and make further
has not been done but extrapolations can be made
from research on the European hedgehog. Research
diagnostics quite difficult.
showed that the urine was negative for glucose,
acetone, and acetoacetic acid. Albumin was present in 
SEX DETERMINATION
about half of the animals (Ness 1999).
Figure 16.6 shows the reproductive anatomy of the
hedgehog (also see Figure 16.1). Note that the distance
PARASITOLOGY
from the penis to the anus is much greater than the
distance from the vulva to the anus.
Mites are a common problem with hedgehogs. The
two major parasites commonly seen are the Caparinia
and Chorioptic species. Caparinia is usually distrib-
TECHNIQUES
uted over a significant portion of the body, and it may
suddenly appear that entire hedgehog's skin is moving.
Venipuncture
Ivermectin is commonly used, but must be used with
Venipuncture is next to impossible in the awake hedge-
proper shampoos as well. The Chorioptic species
hog. Supplies needed include a large face mask
Hedgehogs
333
(diaphragm removed), small face mask; anesthesia
5. Once the patient is asleep the face mask is changed
machine; 1-ml, 25-gauge needle syringe; 3-ml, 22-
to a smaller one
gauge needle syringe; and blood collection tubes (pref-
 6. The patient is placed in dorsal recumbency.
erably small tubes). The technique for a jugular
 7. Gentle pressure is applied to the thoracic inlet.
venipuncture is as follows:
8. A 3-cc, 22-gauge or 1-cc, 25-gauge needle is inserted
 into the jugular vein caudally and directed cranially
1. A large anesthetic face mask with diaphragm
to the point of the jaw. Alternately, the needle could
removed is obtained.
be inserted into the proximal vein with the needle
2. The patient is placed under the face mask with the
directed caudally (Figures 16.7, 16.8). Gentle nega-
 opening of the face mask tight against the table.
tive pressure is applied until blood is seen. Note:
3. Oxygen and anesthetic gas are turned on.
Many of these patients are obese so this technique
4. Wait for the patient to become anesthetized.
is performed blindly.
TPR
Much of this information can be obtained while
looking at the patient before it is handled; however,
many times anesthesia is required. A large face mask
with the diaphragm removed is placed over the patient
and held tight to the table. Once the patient is
anesthetized, a small face mask can be applied. The
TPR can then be obtained along with a physical
examination.
Urine Collection
The patient is anesthetized as described for the previ-
ous techniques. The patient is placed in dorsal recum-
 bency once it is anesthetized. The bladder is palpated
and stabilized while a 3-cc, 22-gauge needle is placed
through the skin and body wall and then into the
Figure 16.7. Jugular venipuncture. (Photo courtesy
bladder. Once the sample collection is complete the
of Ryan Cheek.)
 needle and syringe are withdrawn.
The Femoral Vein
Figure 16.8. Venipuncture sites.
(Drawing by Scott Stark.)
The CephalicVein
AnteriorVena Cava
334
Chapter 16
AdministrationofMedications
In general, many of the techniques used in small
Administration of fluids can be difficult. When hedge-
animal medicine can be used in hedgehogs; however,
hogs are older they do not take to oral fluids easily,
one must always consider the possible complications
and they must be eating well if moistening the food is
if the animal should curl up.
considered. Some oral medications can be injected
into food but it must be certain that the patient is
eating.
REFERENCES
Injectable medications are tolerated well by these
 pets. Medications can be injected into the quill area
Carpenter J. 2002. Diseases and Medicine of the African Hedgehog.
subcutaneously (Lightfoot 2000). This is a high fat
Tufts Animal Expo.
Gregory M. 1992. Hedgehogs. In: Manual of Exotic Pets, edited by
area of the hedgehog but absorption is suffcient.
Beynon P, Cooper J. Gloucestershire: British Small Animal
 Subcutaneous injections can be made in the rear legs
Veterinary Association. 63.
or back. This is performed by carefully picking the
Johnson D. 2004. Diagnosing and Treating African Pygmy
 patient up. A 25-gauge needle with a syringe is inserted
Hedgehogs. Atlantic Coast Veterinary Conference.
between the quills and then under the skin. The medi-
Lightfoot T. 1997. Clinical Techniques of Selected Exotic Species:
Chinchilla, Prairie Dogs, Hedgehogs, and Chelonians. Seinars 
 cation is injected and then the needle and syringe
in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine 6(2): 96-105.
removed.
Lightfoot T. 1999. Clinical Examination of the Chinchillas,
 Intravenous catheter placement can be done with
Hedgehogs, Prairie Dogs, and Sugar Gliders. Veterinary Clinics
the cephalic vein, but can be very difficult due to the
of North America Exotic Animal Practice 2(2): 447-69.
size of the patient. When the pet awakens from anes-
Lightfoot T. 2000. Therapeutics of African Pygmy Hedgehogs and
thesia, it may curl up and cause the catheter to func-
Prairie Dogs. Veterinary Clinics of North America Exotic Animat
Practice 3(1): 155-72.
tion improperly.
Ness R. 1999. Clinical Pathology and Sample Collection of Exotic
Small Marmmals. Veterinary Clinics of North America Exotic
Bandaging and Wound Care
Animat Practice 2(3):591-620.
This is very difficult in these pets and one must be
Storer P. 1994. Everything You Wanted to Know About Hedgehogs
aware of what will happen to the bandage as the pet
But You Didn't Know Who to Ask. Colurmbus, TX: Country
curls up. Anesthesia is required and normal bandaging
Store Enterprises. 14-96.
techniques are used.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Samuel Rivera
INTRODUCTION
Respiratory rate: 25-50 breaths per minute
Average body weight: 4.5 kg
Skunks are commonly kept as pets. They belong to the
Gestation: 63 days
family Mustelidae. Other members of this family are
Litter size: 4-10
ferrets, weasels, badgers, mink, and otters. The striped
Urine pH: 6.0
skunk (Mephitis mephitis) is the most common species
found in the pet market. It is native to North America,
HUSBANDRY AND NUTRITION
ranging from southern Canada into the United States
and northern Mexico. The most popular color pattern
 In the wild, adult males are solitary except during the
is brown fur with white stripes along the dorsum. The
skunks in the pet market are usually descented at two
winter months, when they may share a den with several
to four weeks of age. Contrary to popular belief,
females (Wallach and Boever 1983). Young skunks
can be housed together, but as they get older they
skunks are usually not neutered at an early age. They
should be kept in separate enclosures. The cage should
have extremely sharp teeth and their bite can cause
have a nest box and a litter box. Skunks have a natural
severe injuries.
instinct to dig and should be closely monitored when
Skunks adapt well to life in captivity and can be
outside the cage.
litter box trained and harness or leash trained. They
Wild skunks are omnivores. Their natural diet con-
are nocturnal animals but can adjust to a diurnal cycle.
sists of insects, rodents, small vertebrates, fruits, green
Even though they have poor sight, their hearing and
sense of smell are very good. In the wild, skunks do
vegetables, and grain. In captivity, skunks have been
fed a variety of diets. To date there is not a formulated
 not undergo true hibernation.
diet specifically designed for skunks. Light dog food
Skunks have unique health and dietary needs.
 Furthermore, there are limited resources describing
or a zoo omnivore diet supplemented with fruits and
vegetables has been recommended. A varied diet con-
their health and nutritional needs. In many states it is
sisting of fruits, vegetables, eggs, a small amount of
illegal to keep skunks as pets and it is essential for all
dog and cat food, yogurt, cottage cheese, mice, cereal,
the veterinary personnel to be familiar with the state
and insects should be provided. It is important to
and local regulations on keeping them as pets.
remember that skunks will eat anything in sight and
as a result become obese. Dairy products are a good
source of calcium but should be fed in limited amounts
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
because they can cause gastrointestinal upset. Skunks
tend to gain weight in the fall and are less active during
The anatomy and physiology of skunks are similar to
the fall and winter months. Feeding an adequate diet
that of other carnivores. One difference is the highly
will decrease the development of obesity and the asso-
 developed anal sacs, which can eject their contents for
ciated health problems.
a distance of three meters (Fowler 1986).
Biologic Data
COMMON HEALTH PROBLEMS
Average lifespan: 10-12 years
Obesity
Body temperature: 102°F (38.9'C)
This is the most common clinical presentation and the
Heart rate: 140-190 beats per minute
 leading cause of morbidity in skunks. Most pet skunks
33.5
336
 Chapter 17
are kept inside and fed an inadequate diet that leads
Dermatitis
to obesity. In some cases, correction of the diet and
Skin problems are common in skunks, particularly in
adequate husbandry practices can help to maintain a
those that are obese. Some of the most commonly seen
skunk at an ideal body weight.
lesions are dry, scaly skin; alopecia; papules; pustules;
and excoriations. Dermatitis can be caused by nutri-
Hepatic Lipidosis
tional deficiencies, ectoparasites, and fungal or bacte-
This disease is caused by an increased accumulation of
rial infections.
triglycerides in the liver, which is due to an increased
mobilization of fat from the body stores and the inabil-
Canine Distemper
ity of the liver to process it expeditiously. The end
Canine distemper has been reported in the ferret,
result is the buildup of fat within the hepatocytes
skunk, mink, badger, weasel, sable, and grison (Wallach
leading to compromised normal function. There is a
et al. 1983). The clinical signs are fever, hyperemia of
close relationship between obesity and the develop-
the face and ear, scleral inflammation, ocular discharge,
ment of hepatic lipidosis. Clinical signs include pro-
depression, anorexia, diarrhea, dyspnea, hyperkerato-
longed anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, weight loss, and
sis of the foot pads, and neurologic signs. The incuba-
jaundice. The presumptive diagnosis of hepatic lipido-
tion period is five to seven days for the acute phase. The
sis is based on the history, physical exam findings, and 
 diagnosis is based on clinical signs and serologic testing.
serum chemistry abnormalities. A definitive diagnosis
Treatment involves mostly supportive care. Fluid
is based on the cytological evaluation of a liver fine-
support and broad-spectrum antibiotics should be initi-
needle aspirate or biopsy. The treatment primarily
ated. Unvaccinated skunks that contract canine distem-
 involves supportive care.
 per have a poor prognosis.
Feline Panleukopenia
Feline panleukopenia has been reported in several
AMYLOIDOSIS
mustelid species (Wallach et al. 1983). This is an acute
viral disease that can lead to high mortality in skunks.
This disease is characterized by the buildup of insolu-
ble fibrillar proteins (amyloid) in multiple organ
The clinical signs are hemorrhagic enteritis, anorexia,
and depression. Death usually occurs within three to
systems, leading to compromised function. The clinical
five days after the onset of the clinical signs. A pre-
signs are nonspecific and vary depending on which
organ system is affected. The diagnosis is based on a
sumptive diagnosis is based on the characteristic clini-
cal signs accompanied by a low white blood cell count.
histopathological evaluation of the affected tissue.
 The best treatment is supportive care.
There is no treatment reported in skunks.
Cardiomyopatby
ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Cardiac disease is commonly seen in obese skunks. The
clinical signs are exercise intolerance, weight loss,
Baylisascaris columnaris is a roundworm found in
dyspnea, lethargy, anorexia, coughing, ascites and/or
skunks. This parasite can cause serious visceral larva
edema, pale mucous membranes, and cold extremities.
migrans in humans. The usual contamination is
The diagnosis is based on radiographs, electrocardio-
through the fecal-oral route. Strict hygiene to decrease
gram, and echocardiogram. Cardiomyopathy is treated
exposure to contaminated material is the best
the same as in ferrets.
prevention.
Rabies is a serious human health problem. The
Dental Disease
rabies virus can be transmited to humans through
The dental formula of skunks is 2(I3/3, C1/1, PM3/3.
bites from infected skunks. In North America, the wild
M1/1). Common dental conditions seen in skunks
striped skunk is the most important wildlife reservoir
are  advanced  periodontal disease and  fractured
 of rabies (Drenzek and Rupprecht 2000). The clinical
teeth. Common clinical signs are change in eating
signs of rabies in skunks are varied. Generally, any
habits, halitosis, pawing at the mouth, hypersalivation,
behavior considered abnormal  for the particular
or facial swelling. Periodontal disease is usually
animal should be considered suspicious. The incuba-
a result of a poor diet. Treatment involves dental
 tion period for rabies is from two weeks to six months.
cleaning, antibiotics, and diet correction where
In the furious form of the disease, the virus can be shed
appropriate.
in the saliva one to six days prior to death.
Skunks
337
The diagnosis of rabies is based on the identification
RADIOLOGY
of viral antigen and/or characteristic lesions in the
brain. Public health officials do not accept vaccination
The radiographic techniques and positioning are
against rabies in pet skunks and the animal may need
similar to those used in domestic animals. Many
to be euthanized and tested for rabies if it is involved
skunks require sedation to obtain good quality
in a biting incident. Even though rabies is a concern
radiographs.
 in the wild skunk population, the disease is relatively
rare in pet skunks. Pet skunks, as any other pet, can
become infected with rabies if exposed to a reservoir
ANESTHESLA
in the wild.
Gas anesthesia is most commonly used in skunks.
 Sevoflurane and isoflurane are among the safest anes-
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
thetic agents used. The skunk can be anesthetized by
placing it in an induction chamber. The animal can be
A healthy skunk should have a glossy, thick coat and
maintained on gas anesthesia via a face mask or endo-
bright, clear eyes. Yellow coloring of the white fur is
tracheal intubation. Fractious animals that are difficult
considered abnormal. The stools should be formed.
to handle can be anesthetized with parenteral drugs. If
Obesity or an underweight patient should raise a red
the animal cannot be safely contained, it can be trans-
flag as to the health status of the pet.
ferred to a squeeze cage for intramuscular injection.
Signs of illness in a skunk include change in stool
Ketamine and medetomidine are commonly used
consistency; dry, dull hair coat; yellowing of the white
together for induction of anesthesia.
fur; obesity; dry, cracked feet; ocular or nasal dis-
charge; coughing; sneezing; and bad breath.
PARASITOLOGY
VACCINATIONS
Skunks are susceptible to a variety of parasites
including roundworms, tapeworms, and coccidia.
Pet skunks should be vaccinated against canine distem-
 Roundworms and tapeworms are managed similar to
per, feline panleukopenia, and rabies (Miller 1995).
an infestation in domestic animals. Coccidiosis can
There are no vaccines licensed for use in skunks.
cause severe disease in skunks. The clinical signs com-
However, vaccines licensed for use in ferrets can be
monly seen are diarrhea, weight loss, anorexia, dehy-
used in skunks. It is important to remember that if a
dration, and depression. The diagnosis is based on
skunk bites a person, public health officials will not
the identification of oocysts in the feces. Treatment
accept rabies vaccination and the animal may need to
involves the administration of antiprotozoal agents
 be euthanized and tested for rabies.
similar to those used in domestic species.
Toxoplasmosis has been reported in skunks, ferrets,
and weasels. The clinical signs are fever, lymphade-
RESTRAINT
nopathy, splenomegaly, myocarditis, pneumonitis,
hepatitis, hydrocephalus, encephalitis, dermatitis, and
Skunks can be restrained in a manner similar to cats.
enlarged lymph nodes. The antemortem diagnosis is
 One difference is that many skunks lack a significant
based on serologic testing. Antiprotozoal drugs are
scruff, making scruffng behind the neck diffcult and
used to treat toxoplasmosis.
painful to the skunk. Most tame skunks can be picked
The lungworm Crenosoma mephitidis is a parasite
up by placing one hand on each side ofthe body caudal
that can affect the lungs of skunks. The clinical signs
to the axillary region. The animal can be restrained in
are coughing, dyspnea, depression, anorexia, and
this manner for taking the temperature or clipping the
depression. The diagnosis is based on the identification
nails. The skunk's primary defense is the expression of
of the infective larvae in the feces.
its anal sacs; therefore, they tend to be less likely to
bite as their primary means of defense. Leather gloves
can be used for handling fractious animals, but remem-
CLINICAL TECHNIQUES
ber that skunks have sharp teeth that can bite through
leather gloves, causing severe injuries. Many fractious
Blood Collection
skunks need（
 chemical  immobilization prior 
 Blood sampling is an important diagnostic tool, par-
tc
handling.
ticularly when assessing a sick skunk. The sites most
338
Chapter 17
commonly used are the jugular, cephalic, lateral saphe-
vein. The needle is inserted at a 20 to 25 degree angle.
nous, and femoral veins. Manual restraint for blood
 Once the vessel is entered, gentle suction is applied
collection is appropriate for tame skunks used to han-
 until the desired amount is obtained. Too much suction
dling or with extremely debilitated animals. Fractious
can cause collapse of the vein. Once the needle is
 animals need sedation for safe venipuncture. Remember
withdrawn, gentle pressure should be applied to the
that skunks have sharp teeth and can cause severe
venipuncture site.
damage when they bite. The supplies needed include
 Lateral saphenous vein: This vein is located in the
25- to 22-gauge needles, 1- to 3-ml syringes, 70%
lateral aspect of the hind limb. This is the third option
isopropyl alcohol, and blood collection tubes. The size
if the other two vessels are not accessible. This vein is
of the needle used depends on the size of the animal
small and often yields a small volume of blood. The
and the vein used.
assistant can hold the skunk in lateral recumbency by
Jugular vein: Skunks usually resist restraint for
holding the scruff of the neck with one hand and the
jugular venipuncture more than they do for cephalic
venipuncture leg with the other hand. The leg is held
or lateral saphenous collection. The restraint is similar
around the stifle with the leg extended. The leg is
to that used for cats. The animal should be restrained
 grasped around the tarsus and the skin gently pulled
in sternal recumbency, with the front legs held over
to stabilize the vein. The needle is inserted at a 20
the edge of the table (Figure 17.1). The assistant can
degree angle and the blood sample is collected. Digital 
hold the head with one hand extended by holding the
pressure is applied for thirty seconds afterward to
head from the dorsum; use the thumb and fingers and
prevent hematoma formation.
wrap the head in the palm, placing the thumb and
Femoral vein: The femoral vein is located in the
fingers on opposite sides of the head under the tem-
medial aspect of the thigh. Collection from this vein is
 poromandibular joint. Gentle pressure is applied at the
performed similar to the cat. In obese skunks the
thoracic inlet lateral to the trachea. The needle is
femoral vein can be very difficult to find.
inserted bevel up at a 25 degree angle into the vein.
After the sample is collected, pressure is released, the
Urine Colfection
needle is withdrawn, and digital pressure is applied at
Urinalysis is an important part of the health assess-
the venipuncture site for thirty seconds.
ment in skunks. The techniques to collect urine are
Cephalic vein: The animal is restrained in sternal
similar to those used in dogs and cats.
recumbency (Figure 17.2). An assistant should restrain 
Voided urine: Urine can be collected from the
the head by the scruff of the neck with one hand and
bottom of the cage using a syringe. The disadvantage
the fore limb extended by the elbow. Alternatively, the
 of this technique is that fecal and litter contamination 
head can be restrained as described for jugular veni-
affects the results.
puncture. Pressure is applied with the thumb around
 Manual expression: With the animal sedated, trans-
the elbow, rotating gently laterally. The limb is held
 abdominal pressure is applied to the urinary bladder
with a free hand and the thumb is used to stabilize the
 to overcome the sphincter pressure. The urine can be
Figure 17.1. Restraint for jugular venipuncture of
Figure 17.2.Cephalic venipuncture in a skunk.
the skunk. (Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
(Photo courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
Skunks
339
collected into a sterile container or from the
Intramuscular route: Parenteral medications can be
tabletop.
 given in the thigh musculature or the biceps.
Cystocentesis: With the animal sedated, the bladder
Subcutaneous route: This site is most commonly
is gently isolated. A 25- to 22-gauge needle on a 3- to
used for the administration of fluids to sick animals.
5-ml syringe is inserted into the bladder and the urine
The intrascapular and lateral flank regions are the best
collected. This is the preferred method when perform-
sites for the administration of subcutaneous fluids.
ing a culture and sensitivity on the urine.
Intravenous route: The cephalic, jugular, and saphe-
nous veins can be used for the administration of medi-
Fecal Analysis
cations. In most cases the skunk must be sedated to
The flotation and direct fecal smear techniques are the
facilitate intravenous medications, unless the animal is
same as for domestic species.
se verely debilitated.
ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS
REFERENCES
There are several routes for administration (
Drenzek CL, Rupprecht CE. 2000. The rabies pandemic. In: Kirk's
of
Current Veterinary Therapy XIll, edited by Bonagura JD.
medications.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
 Oral route: Liquids or powders mixed with food are
Fowler ME. 1986. Descenting carnivores. In: Zoo and Wild Animal
the most common forms of oral medications. In many
Medicine, 2nd ed., edited by Fowler ME. Philadelphia: W.B.
cases the skunk's sharp teeth preclude the use of
Saunders Co.
tablets. Liquid medications can be placed in the side
Miller E. 1995. Immunization of wild animal species against
of the mouth with a syringe. Powder medications can
common diseases. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII,
edited by Bonagura JD. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
be mixed with a favorite treat or a small amount of
Wallach JD, Boever WJ. 1983. Diseases of exotic animals: medical
soft food such as yogurt or cottage cheese.
and surgical management. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Sugar Gliders
Samuel Rivera
INTRODUCTION
Biologic Data
Sugar gliders (Petaurus breviceps) are small marsupials
Weight range: 95-160 grams
native to Australia and New Zealand (Figure 18.1).
 Body length: 16-21cm
 They are nocturnal arboreal animals. In the wild, sugar
 Heart rate: 200-300 beats per minute
gliders live in groups of up to twelve individuals ( Booth
Respiratory rate: 16-40 breaths per minute
2000). They are very social animals that are best kept
Rectal temperature: 96.5°F-97.9°F (35.8°C-36.6°C)
in pairs or small related groups, and they require a
Gestation 15-17 days, young leave the pouch at 70
large enclosure with branches, nest boxes, and hiding
days
areas. Proper husbandry and diet are essential for a
Weaning age: 110-120 days
healthy pet. During extreme weather conditions or
Lifespan: 9-12 years
food shortages, sugar gliders conserve energy by going
into torpor for up to sixteen hours per day (Booth
2000).
HUSBANDRY AND NUTRITION
 Sugar gliders need a lot of room. The larger the enclo-
ANATOMY
sure, the better for the animal. An enclosure measuring
2 × 2 × 2 meters is adequate for housing up to six
Sugar gliders have blue-gray fur with a dark line
animals (Dunn 1982). A nest box for sleeping and
extending from the nose to the lower back. Each foot
hiding must be provided. The nest box can be lined
has five digits. The second and third digits of the
with a piece of cloth, shredded bark, or dried leaves,
hind feet are partially fused. They do not have the
and should be changed weekly. Newspaper and pine
eupubic bones that support the pouch characteristic of
or cedar wood shavings are not recommended. Sugar
marsupials. Sugar gliders have a membrane (the pet-
gliders are arboreal animals; therefore, branches for
agium) that extends from the lateral aspect of the fore
limb to the tarsus. This membrane allows the sugar
glider to glide a fair distance. Males have frontal,
sternal, and urogenital scent glands. The females have
a pouch and urogenital glands. Scent glands are also
found on the paws, corners of the mouth, and external
ears. The scent glands are used for marking territory
and members of the same group (Smith 1984). The
males have a pendulous scrotum located cranial to the
 penis. The female have a ventral abdominal pouch that
opens cranially. Sugar gliders have a cloaca where the
gastrointestinal, urinary, and reproductive tracts
empty. They have a large cecum that may assist in
digestion of the sap eaten in the wild (Henry and
Suckling 1984).
Sugar gliders have a short gestation period with a
Figure 18.1. Sugar glider. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
longer development within the pouch.
Cheek.)
341
342
 Chapter 18
climbing are essential. A pair is the minimum number
obesity. Lack of exercise can also contribute to obesity.
to keep together.
 Obese animals are predisposed to cardiac and hepatic
The environmental temperature should be between
disease.
64°F and 75°F (18°C to 24°C). They can withstand
temperature in the mid to high 80s but higher tempera-
Stress-related Disease
tures can predispose them to hyperthermia.
 Animals under constant stress are prone to developing
 In the wild, sugar gliders eat sap and gum from
behavioral problems. Some of the clinical signs of
eucalyptus and acacia trees, nectar from eucalyptus
stress-related disorders include alopecia, self-mutila-
blossoms, and a variety of insects (Henry and Suckling
tion, coprophagia, hyperphagia, polyuria, pacing, and
1984). The diet in captivity consists of a variety of
cannibalism. The source of the stress must be identified
fruits, commercial sugar glider pellets, commercial
and eliminated to help correct the problem.
insectivore diets, insects supplemented with vitamin
and minerals, nectar, and small invertebrates. They are
Neoplasia
mainly insectivores but also eat sugar-containing sap
 Neoplastic disease is relatively common. Lymphoid
from several sources. Food and water should be pro-
 neoplasia is the most common type of tumor reported
vided in an elevated location. Nectar should be pro-
(Booth 2000). Other tumors reported include mam-
vided in covered feeders to keep the nectar from getting
 mary gland tumors, bronchogenic carcinoma, and
 on the fur. The ideal amount of food to offer is 15%
chondrosarcoma.
to 20% of their body weight (Booth 2000).
Malnutrition
Malnutrition is frequently seen in sugar gliders fed an
COMMON DISEASES
inadequate diet. As a result, malnutrition leads to
hypocalcemia, hypoproteinemia, and anemia. The
Nutritional Osteodystropby
clinical signs of malnutrition are nonspecific and
This is one of the most common diseases seen in
include lethargy, weakness, dehydration, pale mucous
captive sugar gliders (Pye and Carpenter 1999). The
membranes, cachexia, and in some cases seizures and
clinical signs include acute onset of hind limb paresis
pathologic fractures. The owner should be educated
or paralysis. This disease is believed to be caused by
about the appropriate diet. Treatment involves correc-
feeding an inadequate diet low in calcium and vitamin
 tion of the dietary inadequacies and supportive care.
D; and high in phosphorus. Too much fruit and muscle
 meat can predispose animals to this disease. The diag-
nosis is based on a thorough history and radiographs.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The treatment includes cage rest, parenteral calcium,
diet correction,
and calcium and vitamin
D
Sugar gliders can be challenging to examine without
supplementation.
sedation. A thorough history should be taken first. Ask
about the number of animals kept and the enclosure
Trauma
size. The diet should be recorded. The owner should
Trauma is most common in wild sugar gliders. In
be asked whether there are other pets in the household,
captivity the most common cases of trauma involve cat
and where the animal was obtained. While taking the
and dogs attacks. Some of the common injuries are
history, the animal's motor function and disposition
lacerations,
pneumothorax, hemothorax,
spinal
can be observed. If a weight is needed, many times the
trauma, and ocular trauma.
owners can place the animal on the scale and then
the weight can be recorded. If the animal is fractious,
Dental Disease
the weight can be obtained by placing the animal in a
Tartar buildup associated with periodontal disease is
cloth bag.
often seen. This has been associated with feeding car-
bohydrate-rich diets (Booth 2000). The teeth can be
cleaned as needed. Feeding insects with a hard exoskel-
RESTRAINT
 eton can help minimize tartar buildup.
The best way to restrain sugar gliders is by holding the
head between the thumb and middle finger and using
Obesity is seen in sugar gliders fed an inadequate diet.
the index finger to restrain the top of the head. The
 Diets high in fat and proteins predispose animals to
body is then placed in the palm of the restrainer's
Sugar Gliders
343
hand. Fractious animals can be restrained using a cloth
is applied as the needle is advanced. The syringe will
bag. To accomplish this the owner should place the
fill with blood as the jugular vein is entered.
animal in a small enclosure (scale basket or nest box).
Cranial vena cava: The animal is placed in dorsal
Then a cloth bag is placed over the hand that will grasp
recumbency. Both fore limbs are extended caudally.
the animal. The animal is then grasped and the bag
The needle is inserted at the angle formed by the manu-
slipped over the whole body. Once in the bag one can
brium and the first rib. The needle is aimed toward the
 gently expose the head and restrain it. It is important
contra-lateral hip joint at a very shallow angle. Suction
to keep the seam of the bag toward the outside to keep
is applied as the needle is advanced. It will fill with
the animal from injuring itself with the small threads.
 blood as soon as the vessel is entered. It is important
 not to reposition the needle in an attempt to find this
vessel. If the vessel is missed, the needle should be
RADIOLOGY
withdrawn and another attempt made. Other vessels
and nerves can be damaged inadvertently by excessive
The radiographic techniques are similar to those used
manipulation of the needle.
in other domestic animals. Because of their small size,
Medial tibial artery: The hind limb is held in the
high-definition radiograph flm ofers the best detail.
 extended position with the medial aspect exposed. The
fur is slightly moistened with alcohol. The artery runs
superficially from the stifle to the tarsus. The vessel
ANESTHESIA
should be visualized and the needle then inserted at a
30 degree angle. After the blood is collected, gentle
Gas anesthetics such as sevoflurane and isoflurane are
 pressure should be applied to the site to avoid hema-
most commonly used. Induction can be accomplished
by either face mask or chamber induction. A large face
toma formation.
 Other sites for blood collection include the cephalic,
mask can be used as an induction chamber. The animal
lateral saphenous, femoral, ventral coccygeal, and
can be maintained via a face mask.
lateral tail veins. The main disadvantage is that only
very small amounts of blood can be collected from
these sites due to their small size. In some cases, a
PARASITOLOGY
 small-gauge heparinized needle can be inserted into the
Coccidia and Giardia spp. have been identifed in
vein and the blood collected directly from the hub
captive sugar gliders (Ness 1999). The diagnosis is
using small collection containers or capillary tubes.
based on the identification of the oocysts or trophozo-
Urine Collection
ites in the fecal sample. There is limited information
 on the incidence of gastrointestinal parasites in sugar
Urinalysis is an important part of the health assess-
gliders.
ment in sugar gliders. The techniques to collect urine
are similar to those used in dogs and cats.
Voided urine: Urine can be collected from the
CLINICAL TECHNIQUES
bottom of the cage using a small syringe. The disad-
vantage of this technique is that fecal and litter con-
Blood Collection
tamination affects the results.
The blood volume that can be safely collected is up to
Manual expression: With the animal sedated, gentle
1% of the body weight. Because of their active nature,
transabdominal pressure is applied to the urinary
sugar gliders often require sedation for blood collec-
 bladder to overcome the sphincter pressure. The urine
tion, unless the animal is severely debilitated. They can
can be collected into a sterile container or from the
be sedated using isoflurane or sevoflurane via a mask
tabletop.
or chamber induction.
Cystocentesis: With the animal sedated, gently
Supplies needed include 27- to 30-gauge needles,
isolate the bladder. A 27- to 25-gauge needle on a
0.5- to 1-ml syringes, and 0.5-ml collection tubes.
0.5- to 1-ml syringe is inserted into the bladder and
Jugular vein: The animal is placed in dorsal recum-
the urine collected. This is the preferred method when
bency and the fore limbs are aimed caudally. Gentle
 performing a culture and sensitivity on the urine.
pressure is applied in the thoracic inlet. The fur is
moistened along the jugular groove to allow better
Fecal Analysis
visualization. The needle is then inserted at a 30 to 45
The flotation and direct fecal smear techniques are the
degree angle in the jugular groove. Negative pressure
same as for domestic species.
344
Chapter 18
REFERENCES
Ness RD. 1999. Clinical pathology and sample collection of exotic
small mammals. The Veterinary Clinics of North America Exotic
Booth RJ. 2000. General husbandry and medical care of sugar
Animat Practice, edited by Reavill DR, 2(3): 591-620.
gliders. In Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII, edited by
Pye GW. 2001. Marsupial, insectivore, and chiropteran anesthesia.
Bonagura JD. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
The Veterinary Clinics of Narth America Exotic Animat Practice,
Dunn RW. 1982. Gliders of the genus Petaurus: their management 
edited by Heard DL, 4(1):211-37.
in zoos. In: The management of Australian mammals in captiv-
Smith MJ. 1984. The reproductive systemm and paracloacal glands
ity, edited by Evans DD. North Melbourne, Australia: Ramsay
ofPetaurus breviceps and Gymnobelideus teadbeateri
Ware Stockland.
(Marsupatia: Petauridae), edited by Smith PA, Hume ID.
Henry SR, Suckling GC. 1984. A review of the ecology of the sugar
Australian Mammal Society. Sydney, Australia.
glider. Possurms and gliders, edited by Smith PA, Hurme ID.
Australian Mammal Society. Sydney, Australia.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Prairie
Samuel Rivera
INTRODUCTION
a thick layer of substrate to allow the animals to
burrow. Adequate bedding includes recycled paper,
The black-tailed prairie dog (Cyonomys ludovicianus)
 nonaromatic wood shavings, and hay. The larger the
is a rodent native to North America, more specifically
enclosure, the better The enclosure should include
to the western plains of the United States. Over
a suitable hiding box and it should also be well
recent years prairie dogs have become common in the
ventilated.
pet trade. Prairie dogs are diurnal, social animals
 Prairie dogs are not true hibernators. When exposed
that live in large groups in the wild. The ownership
 to low ambient temperature they may undergo torpor,
of wild-caught prairie dogs should be discouraged
a state in which the body's physiological activities are
due to serious zoonotic potential. It is important to be
 greatly reduced to conserve energy. The environmental
aware that owning prairie dogs is illegal in certain
temperature should be kept between 69°F and 72°F
states.
(20.5°C to 22*C) and the humidity at 30% to 70%
(Johnson-Delaney 1996).
 Prairie dogs are mostly herbivores. They should be
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
 fed high-quality grass hay ad lib, supplemented with a
commercially formulated diet. Fresh water must be
 The anatomy and physiology of prairie dogs are similar
provided on a daily basis.
to that of other rodents of comparable size. They are
hindgut fermenters. The male has a prominent scrotum
and the penis is relatively easy to exteriorize. The
COMMON AND ZOONOTIC DISEASES
female has a short distance between the anus and the
Barbering
vaginal groove. Prairie dogs have a characteristic set
of scent gland papillae that can be visualized on the
This condition often presents as areas of abnormal fur
anal margin when the animal is stressed.
appearance with underlying healthy skin. It can be
caused by the animal or a cage mate chewing the fur.
Biologic Data
It is often related to stress, and husbandry practices
 must be evaluated to help minimize fur barbering.
Average weight: 0.5-2.2kg
Average lifespan: 6-10 years
Obesity
Temperature: 95.7*F-102.3°F (35.4°C-39.1°C)
Obesity is commonly seen in prairie dogs. As with
Heart rate: 83-318/minute
other unusual pets, this condition is often due to inad-
 Respiration: 40-60/minute
equate diet and lack of proper exercise. Diets high in
Gestation: 30 days
fat, such as seeds and nuts, lead to obesity and should
be avoided. Obesity predisposes prairie dogs to other
conditions such as heart, respiratory, and liver disease.
HUSBANDRY AND NUTRITION
Nasal Dermatitis
Prairie dogs are very social animals that are best kept
This is a common condition in captive prairie dogs. It
in pairs or more. Prairie dogs require adequate room
is most often due to rubbing the face on the cage wire.
for digging. The enclosure should be made of heavy-
This results in abrasions and inflammation leading to
 gauge wire or stainless steel. It is important to provide
secondary bacterial infections.
34.5
346
Chapter 19
Dermatomycosis (Ringworm)
underlying husbandry problem is essential for resolu
Prairie dogs are susceptible to Microsporum canis and
 tion and/or prevention of bumblefoot.
Trichophyton mentagrophytes. The most common
clinical sign is alopecia. The diagnosis is based on a
Zoonotic Diseases
positive fungal culture. The treatment is similar to that
 Prairie dogs, particularly wild-caught animals, can be
of domestic animals and involves the administration
reservoirs of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, Yersinia
of systemic antifungal drugs in addition to topical
pestis, and Baylisascaris procyonidae. Yersinia pseudo-
antifungal treatment.
tuberculosis can cause severe illness in humans.
Affected humans can develop acute mesenteric lymph-
Respiratory Disease
adenitis, fever, anorexia, vomiting, enteritis with diar-
Respiratory disease is relatively common in prairie
rhea, and dehydration. This bacteria is transmitted to
dogs. Obesity and poor ventilation are two common
predisposing factors. Cedar bedding contains aromatic
rial. Yersinia pestis is the causative agent of Sylvatic
oils that can lead to irritation of the respiratory tract.
Plague in humans. This bacteria is transmitted to
Nasal foreign bodies (cage litter, hay, carpet fbers) are
humans through the bite of fleas from carrier prairie
common presentations. Overgrowth of the maxillary
dogs. Humans can also contract the infection from
incisor teeth roots can lead to increased pressure and
handling tissues from affected animals during nec-
irritation in the nasal sinus passages. Pneumonia is
ropsy. Flea control is essential to eliminate the human
often associated with bacterial and viral agents.
. The
risk of exposure.
clinical signs of respiratory disease are similar to those
Baylisascaris procyonidae can cause serious visceral
seen in dogs and cats. They include dyspnea, nasal or
larva migrans in humans. This parasite is transmitted
 ocular discharge, cyanosis, anorexia, and lethargy. The
to humans through the ingestion of contaminated
material or contact with open wounds on the skin.
supportive care. Appropriate husbandry is important
Monkeypox is a zoonotic viral disease found pri-
 in the prevention of respiratory disease.
marily in wild mammals and people in the central and
western African rainforests. The first report of this
Odontomas
illness was in monkeys in 1958, hence the name, but
This is a common cause of upper respiratory symp-
many other mammals are susceptible to the virus.
toms in captive prairie dogs (Phalen 2000). Odontomas
 Monkeypox virus belongs in the Orthopoxvirus group.
are caused by an inflammation of the periodontal bone
 The majority of the viruses in this group can cause
as a result of dental disease or trauma. This inflamma-
 systemic disease characterized by fever and rashes and
tion leads to narrowing of the nasal passages. The
may be fatal in some species. In June 2003, an out-
diagnosis is based on radiographic abnormalities of the
break of monkeypox in people and pet prairie dogs
incisor's root and surrounding soft tissue. Treatment
occurred in the United States, primarily in the states
involves removal of the affected teeth and debridement
of Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Ohio, Missouri, and
of the abnormal tissue.
Wisconsin. These people began contracting monkey-
ss s d d   e xo
Heart Disease
of the virus can occur through animal bites or direct
Obesity is a predisposing factor for the development
contact with the animal's blood, body fluids or lesions.
 of heart disease. Clinical signs are lethargy, syncope,
It can also spread from person to person. Traceback
cyanosis, dyspnea, and cold extremities. The diagnosis
investigations conducted by the Centers of Disease
is based on auscultation, radiography, echocardiogra-
Control and Prevention revealed that the sick prairie
phy, and ultrasonography.
dogs had been exposed to the virus through a pet
distributor prior to sale. The prairie dogs had been
Pododermatitis (Bumblefoot)
 kept in close proximity to imported African rodents.
This condition is usually the result of poor husbandry.
 Laboratory testing revealed that some of those African
Animals kept on wire-bottom cages can develop small
rodents (Gambian giant rats, dormice, and rope squir-
ulcers on the footpads that become infected. The infec-
rels) were also infected with the monkeypox virus.
tion results in severe swelling and abscess formation
 Monkeypox is not a typical zoonotic disease associ-
in the affected foot. In severe cases tendinitis and
ated with prairie dogs in the United States. However,
osteomyelitis can develop. Bumblefoot is treated by
this outbreak is a good example of how important it
debriding the affected lesions in conjunction with
 is for veterinary staff and pet owners to be aware of
topical and systemic antibiotics. Correction of the
 the risk of disease that can exist with pet ownership.
Prairie Dogs
347
The potential of acquiring a zoonotic disease depends
tained via a face mask. When the animal is anesthe.
on many factors. What is the origin of the animal
tized, its anterior end should be kept slightly elevated
(captive-born or wild, domestic, or imported)? How
so the extensive viscera do not put excessive pressure
much contact with other animals did it have during
 on the diaphragm.
shipping or in the pet store or with breeder? Is it
housed outdoors and exposed to wild animals? These
are only a few of the factors to consider when evaluat-
CLINICAL TECHNIQUES
ing the potential of a zoonotic disease in a sick pet.
Veterinarians and veterinary technicians should strive
Venipuncture
 to remain informed and proactive with their pet owners
Many animals require sedation for blood collection.
so that appropriate information can be shared and
The jugular vein is the preferred site for blood collec-
ad aun ron eau po u un un suo
tion. In obese prairie dogs this vein can be difficult to
and its owners (CDC monkeypox website; CDC 2003).
visualize and is often approached blindly. The sedated
 animal is restrained in dorsal recumbency. The animal
is kept with the anterior end elevated to facilitate
RESTRAINT
breathing. In prairie dogs the pressure from the
abdominal organs on the diaphragm can compromise
Prairie dogs are difficult to restrain. Animals that are
respiration. With the animal in dorsal recumbency, the
accustomed to frequent handling can be quite tame
fore limbs should be extended caudally. Gentle pres-
and examined awake. However, in many cases seda-
sure should be applied at the thoracic inlet. The fur
tion is needed to perform a thorough physical exam.
 along the jugular groove should be moistened. A 23- to
Prairie dogs do not have much loose skin around the
25-gauge needle in a 1- to 3-ml syringe should be used.
neck, making it difficult to scruff. Prairie dogs have
 The needle should be inserted at a 45 degree angle and
sharp claws and teeth that can cause severe wounds to
suction applied as the needle is advanced forward. In
the handler. Tame animals used to being handled can
some cases the needle may need to be redirected to
be restrained by placing one hand around the chest
either side to find the vein. Blood will immediately fill
and supporting the hind end with the other hand.
the syringe as the needle enters the vein.
Alternatively, the animal can be grabbed at the base
Venipuncture from the cephalic and lateral saphe-
 of the tail and lifted gently with the forelimbs resting
nous veins is done similar to the way blood is drawn
on a flat surface. The free hand is used to grab the
in other animals of comparable size. The cephalic vein
animal on the back of the neck. This technique can be
is located on the dorsal aspect of the front leg and the
used to move the animal or to perform minor proce-
lateral saphenous vein is located in the lateral aspect
dures such as nail clipping. Additionally, a thick towel
of the hind limb, just above the tarsus.
can be used to wrap the animal. This allows for closer
examination of the head and the administration of
Urine Collection
intramuscular injections in the hind limbs. The towel
Urinalysis is an important part of health assessment in
also protects the handler from been scratched.
sick prairie dogs. The techniques to collect urine are
similar to those used in dogs and cats.
Voided urine: Urine can be collected from the
RADIOLOGY
bottom of the cage using a small syringe. The disad-
vantage of this technique is that fecal and litter con-
The radiographic techniques and positioning are
tamination affects the results.
 similar to those used in domestic animals. Prairie dogs,
 Manual expression: With the animal sedated, gentle
unless severely debilitated, require sedation to obtain
transabdominal pressure is applied to the urinary
 good quality radiographs.
bladder to overcome the sphincter pressure. The urine
can be collected into a sterile container or from the
tabletop. Excessive pressure should not be applied
ANESTHESIA
because this can lead to rupture of the urinary bladder.
Cystocentesis: With the animal sedated, gently
 Sevoflurane and isoflurane gas are the most commonly
isolate the bladder. A 27- to 25-gauge needle on a
used anesthetic agents. Induction can be accomplished
 0.5- to 1-ml syringe is inserted into the bladder and
by chamber induction. Tracheal intubation is difficult
the urine collected. This is the preferred method when
in prairie dogs. As a result, the animal can be main-
 performing a culture and sensitivity on the urine.
348
Chapter 19
Fecal Analysis
Intravenous route: The cephalic, jugular, and saphe-
The flotation and direct fecal smear techniques are the
 nous veins can be used for the administration of medi-
same as for domestic species.
cations. In most cases, the prairie dog must be sedated
to facilitate intravenous medications, unless the animal
Administration of Medications
is severely debilitated.
There  are several  routes for  administration  of
medications.
Oral route: Liquids are the most common forms of
REFERENCES
 oral medications. The prairie dog's small mouth and
sharp teeth preclude the use of tablets. Liquid medica-
CDC Monkeypox website: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
tions can be placed in the side of the mouth with a
monkey pox/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2003. Multistate
syringe.
outbreak of monkeypox—Ilinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin, 2003.
Intramuscular route: Parenteral medications can be
MM WR Morb Mortat Wkly Rep. Jun 13:52(23): 537-40.
given in the thigh musculature or the biceps.
Johnson-Delaney CA. 1996. Exotic companion medicine handbook
for veterinarians. Lake Worth: Wingers Publishing.
Subcutaneous route: This site is most commonly
Phalen DN, Atinoff N, Fricke ME. 2000. Obstructive respiratory
used for the administration of fluids to sick animals.
disease in prairie dogs with odontomas. The Veterinary Clinics
The intrascapular and lateral flank regions are the best
of North America Exotic Animat Practice, edited by Phalen DN,
sites for the administration of subcutaneous fluids.
3(2): 513-17.
Section 6
Wildlife Rehabilitation
CHAPTER TWENTY
The Role of the Veterinary Technician in
Wildlife Rehabilitation
Melanie Haire
INTRODUCTION
care technician working in a small animal clinic. It
provides immediate information that can be used until
Wildlife rehabilitation is the process of rescuing.
more detailed information is obtained or the animal is
raising, and treating orphaned, diseased, displaced, or
transferred from the veterinary clinic to a licensed
injured wild animals with a goal of releasing them
rehabilitator for long-term care and release.
back to their natural habitats. For rehabilitation to be
deemed successful, these released animals must be able
to truly function as wild animals. This includes being
GETTING STARTED
able to recognize and obtain the appropriate foods,
select mates of their own species and reproduce, and
For a veterinary technician, the level of involvement in
show the appropriate fear of potential dangers (people,
wildlife rehabilitation can range from the care of an
cars, dogs, etc.) (Pokras 1995).
occasional orphan discovered by a hospital client to a
The veterinary technician is on the front line for
career on staff at a wildlife center. The technician can
receiving injured and/or orphaned wildlife. A back-
rehabilitate wild animals as a full-time occupation, as
 ground in veterinary medicine and animal husbandry
a volunteer at a wildlife center, on the job at a veteri-
makes veterinary technicians perfect candidates for
nary clinic, or at home in addition to a separate career.
this rewarding endeavor. In fact, the general public
Many zoological parks and aquariums also provide
often assumes that the veterinary technician is knowl-
care to injured and orphaned wildlife and have sepa-
edgeable about all species. This assumption could be
rate facilities and staff designated for such activity.
detrimental to the wild animal's welfare if the techni-
Although the numbers and types of animals received
cian does not have access to the proper instruction,
by different wildlife technicians varies, legal obliga-
facilities, and materials needed to care for these unique
tions are relatively consistent. To keep or possess in
individuals.
captivity any sick, orphaned, or injured wildlife, one
 This chapter is a compilation of pertinent informa-
must first obtain a wildlife rehabilitation permit from
tion to provide the veterinary technician with the
the state and/or federal government. Everyone, includ-
resources and guidelines needed to provide temporary
ing the veterinarian, must have his or her own permit
care for many of the wildlife species that are encoun-
or be listed on someone else's permit to rehabilitate
tered in veterinary hospitals today. It includes charts,
wildlife. Each state has its own laws and requirements
instructional articles, networking contacts, product
 but most require a permit to work with any indigenous
sources, suggested readings, and references taken from
species. A federal permit is required in addition to a
numerous literary sources on the topic of rehabilita-
state permit to work with migratory birds. A list of
tion of North American wildlife. Interested technicians
governmental departments that issue applications and
should note there are many books, seminars, web
S aad a 'i xdv  Pd si sd
 groups, and related organizational memberships avail-
responsible for knowing which species are covered on
able for anyone interested in quality wildlife care and
the permit and their individual regulations. The reha-
a list of a suggested few is provided in Appendix 11.
bilitator is responsible for keeping records on each
The information in this chapter is primarily to be
animal and knowing its current listed status {non-
used as a starting reference point for the wild animal
threatened versus endangered).
3.51
352
 Chapter 20
It is very important for anyone doing rehabilitation
educational facilities but quality of life should always
to build a reference library. The collection should
be the highest priority.
contain literature on three basic topics: natural history,
Another issue concerns zoonotic diseases and learn-
wildlife rehabilitation, and veterinary medicine as
ing to recognize them. Injured wildlife may expose
rehabilitation, which is a combination of all three. The
 hospital staff and animals to new risks. Proper per-
veterinary technician should always keep in mind,
sonal hygiene as well as facility disinfecting techniques
when reading articles and talking to other rehabilita-
 and protocols are critically important. Separate housing
tors, that there is more than one way to do things.
areas and separate clothing available for these areas
New information is always coming out and it is the
provide safeguards against infectious or zoonotic
veterinary technician's responsibility to keep current
cases. One method is to always treat the sick animals
as well as to learn to recognize which techniques might
last so as not to transmit diseases to any other patient.
work better in different situations. Common sense and
Hospital staff that has any contact with the wildlife
experience are the best ways to sort out contradictory
should consider having the appropriate prophylactic
suggestions and inaccurate information.
vaccinations, such as tetanus and rabies, to protect
Networking with other rehabilitators is one of the
them.(
Consultation  with  a personal physician is
most important sources for information. A list can be
recommended.
obtained from your state's special permits department
Despite these cautions, there are many reasons to
with the names and contact numbers of all the reha-
consider this volunteer work. It generates good clinic
bilitators in your state. These contacts can prove
PR, provides a valuable service to the community and
helpful for answering questions as they arise, helping
the clinic's clientele, is a kind act of giving something
to place animals that aren't covered by your permit,
 back to nature, and offers a personal reward for giving
 placing animals when the clinic has reached a full
a living creature a second chance that it otherwise may
capacity, and building a network team to help with
not have had. Veterinarians benefit by gaining skill at
long-term animal care and releases.
performing new procedures (i.e. IM pin in an owl) by
first learning on wildlife patients. Veterinary technicians
can gain valuable experience in exotic animal handling
from wildlife work such as restraint, anesthesia, blood
REHABILITATING WILDLIFE
collecting, bandaging, radiology, and necropsy.
IN A SMALL ANIMAI
VETERINARY HOSPITAL
CLINIC PROTOCOLS
 If the staff at a veterinary practice is interested in
wildlife rehabilitation, it needs to establish a set of
Selecting Types of Wildlife to Care For
protocols. To accomplish this, the staff needs to first
If the decision is made to rehabilitate, clinic procedures
understand all that is involved. Rehabilitation can be
 and protocols must be written and clear. Among the
both expensive and time-consuming. Profit making is
 decisions to make are the types and number of animals
not a valid or realistic reason to do rehabilitation.
the practice can reasonably take in. Taking in more
Currently there is no monetary assistance provided by
animals or more species than personnel are prepared
any governmental departments to cover or reimburse
to properly and safely handle can easily overwhelm a
rehabilitators for the costs of wildlife care.
clinic. One way to set limits is to specialize in a par-
Another crucial and difficult point that needs to be
ticular species or area (i.e. only birds of prey or injured
understood and accepted is that half of the animals
wildlife, no orphans, etc.) and refer the other calls to
that come in for rehabilitation will die or need to be
another qualified recipient.
 euthanized. This is often extremely taxing emotionally
Above all, the motto "Do no harm" should always
on veterinary personnel, people who chose their pro-
be remembered when working with animal patients,
fession to save lives. Deciding to euthanize an animal
and wildlife is no exception. Wildlife rehabilitation
that could otherwise be saved but not returned to the
should not be attempted at a clinic without sufficient
wild with a good quality of life (such as releasing a
staff to do the feedings, treatments, cage cleanings, and
one-legged hawk) may just be too hard for some indi-
so forth, because the animals will be the ones that
viduals. Euthanasia is never an easy choice but keeping
suffer. The ability to realize one's limits shows profes-
a wild animal alive because one
“cannot handle"
sionalism. Hospital managers and owners need to
putting it to sleep is selfish and inhumane. Occasionally,
make a clear decision about animal limits based on
nonreleasable wildlife can be placed in appropriate
costs and expenses. Staffing and other business costs
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
353
are very real factors that should be discussed ahead of
Whether a hospital chooses to be a drop-off site, a
time to help avoid staff "burn out" or resentment.
referral center, or both, a current list of participating
rehabilitators’ names, locations, phone numbers, and
Stabilization or Long-Term Rebabilitation-
 species covered under each permit is a prerequisite. A
An Important Decision
 prearranged plan for informing rehabilitators when a
Temporary stabilization verses long-term care should
pick-up or transport needs to be scheduled is a must
 be determined by examining the layout of the buildings
to prevent unnecessary and often detrimental delays
 and grounds, available facilities, and the number and
before an animal can receive adequate care.
experience of participating staff. Barking dogs, staring
On the other hand, if the practice can provide ade-
cats, ringing phones, and exposure to people are unac-
quate staff time and housing for the wildlife patients,
ceptable conditions for long-term rehabilitation.
A
then the hospital can consider becoming more involved
treatment room might be a marginally acceptable area
in longer-term care such as surgery, wound care, ema-
to keep an orphaned two-week-old squirrel (both eyes
ciation, and hand rearing.
and ears are closed at two weeks) but not a high-stress,
Choose your hospital's role wisely, putting the ani-
imprintable, or easily habituated animal such as a deer
mal's best interest foremost in the decision-making
fawn or raptor. Very few veterinary hospitals have
process.
flight cages of appropriate sizes and materials to ade-
quately recondition a red-tailed hawk for release.
Euthanasia
Wildlife must be respected as wild and provided with
 Before receiving animals, the hospital must have a
suitable housing to reduce additional stress and fear
clear euthanasia policy, including who will make the
and to promote natural behaviors that are necessary
 decision and do the actual procedure, what techniques
for successful release.
will be used, and what criteria are used. There is a
 If there is no dedicated space for the animals, the
section on nonreleasable criteria and euthanasia later
clinic should provide temporary care only until they
in this chapter to help with this difficult topic.
are stable and can be safely transferred to another
rehabilitator. Veterinary hospitals without adequate
Phone Protocols
facilities for rehabilitation can still perform a vital
 So often overlooked, one of the most important areas
function for wildlife by becoming a drop-off and/or
in which the wildlife veterinary clinic personnel must
referral site for the public. This arrangement can
be trained is the telephone procedure. Posting a clear
beneft both the animal, by providing it with proper
protocol for handling wildlife calls near every phone
temporary care away from the well-intentioned but
helps to ensure that the information received is accu-
often detrimental handling of the rescuer, and the
rate and consistent. The development of a wildlife
rehabilitator by providing a valuable time-saver of a
phone call protocol should be a combined effort
 one-stop pick-up location.
between the veterinary staff and the participating wild-
Often the single most crucial role for the technician
life rehabilitators. Many animals come into rehabilita-
d n a on s si ad  e u
tion that never should have been removed from the
accurate names and phone numbers of appropriate
spot in which they were found. Educating the public
rehabilitators. Putting the public in direct communica-
 is part of the responsibility of anyone participating in
tion with the rehabilitation facility that will provide
wildlife rehabilitation. Taking proper animal history
long-term care can eliminate the sometimes-fatal
information before the animal is even touched drasti-
animal stress and delay of using the hospital as a drop-
cally reduces the number of "orphans" that are kid-
off site. This system allows the rehabilitator to be the
 napped and end up needing to be hand raised, thus
clearing point and advise the fnder about how to
reducing wasted time, money, and energy.
return the animal if care is not truly needed or have the
 The caller should be asked if the animal appears to
caller transport the needy animal directly to the appro-
be orphaned or injured. What brought the finder to
 priate care provider. If the caller is willing to bring the
this conclusion? Many times it turns out that a little
animal to the clinic, chances are the caller will be
education in animal natural behavior can turn a
willing to transport the animal directly to the rehabili-
"needy” or “nuisance” animal call into a lesson in
tator. This method promotes the best use of time for
living with wildlife. If the animal does appear to need
both the veterinary staff and rehabilitators, thus allow-
assistance and the caller cannot handle it, advise the
ing the medical personnel to best use their valuable
 person to bring it in. One should never instruct or
expertise by caring mainly for the injured wild patients
allow the caller to take care of the foundling himself.
that must receive immediate medical attention.
If the caller cannot bring the animal to the clinic, he
354
Chapter 20
should be provided with phone numbers from the
parent birds in sight, the bird should be left and
contact list for a rehabilitator, rescue volunteer, or 
checked several hours later. It may take three to four
wildlife center in his area.
days for a “grounded" fledgling to learn to fly but a
healthy one should be active, very mobile, and left
Handling Phone Calls
where it was found.
In most instances, if an adult wild animal can be
caught and picked up by a person, then it has sustained
Baby Raptors
some type of injury, is in shock, or is sick and needs
If the nestling has closed eyes or has no feathers, return
some type of rehabilitation.
it to the nest if at all possible or make a surrogate nest.
Conditions that require immediate medical atten-
If the juvenile is hopping around or perching, has wing
tion include:
feathers and a short tail, it should be left alone.
"Branchers" are young raptors that have left the nest
● Unconsciousness
but cannot yet fly. Both parents are still providing care
·Bleeding
to these birds on the ground or in low trees and shrubs.
 Cold body temperature
The only time to bring in a nestling raptor is if the
?
 Open fracture
caller cannot return it to its nest or secure a surrogate
Weakness, inability to stand (emaciated)
nest to the nesting tree. Refer the caller to a raptor
·Head swelling
 rehabilitator for further instructions on how to replace
●Head/eye twitching
a baby in its nest or make a surrogate one.
● Eyes closed or matted shut
· Shock
Baby Squirrels
· Puncture wounds from cat/dog bite
Young squirrels are independent when they are about
· Broken bones
half the size of the adult and have bushy tails. If the
· Flies, fly larva, or eggs present
baby does not yet have a fluffy tail,is crying, or is cold,
it might be orphaned. Mother squirrels often move
If the animal found is an infant, have the caller
their babies from nest to nest so a baby found at the
describe the baby and its condition. It should be deter-
base of a tree is not automatically an orphan. Even if
mined if the animal is truly an orphan. If warm, strong,
 there is no adult squirrel visible but the caller can stay
and apparently healthy, the baby is probably not an
 nearby and watch for the mother, leave the baby
orphan and every attempt should be made to return it
 unmoved. If the caller cannot watch, advise the caller
to its mother or nest. If the baby is cold, weak, or
 to tie a small basket or box up off of the ground, with 
emaciated, or if there are dead siblings nearby, the 
 the baby inside, onto the possible nest tree out of reach
animal is probably orphaned. Mother animals do not
of ground predators. The caller or someone must
abandon their young because humans have touched
check the nest before dark and make sure that the
them.
infant has been reclaimed. If it is still in the box by
dark, have the caller bring it in. Infant squirrels make
Baby Songbirds
a very high-pitched squeal or “chirp" when they are
If the bird is naked or has a few body feathers but no
frightened, hungry, or cold, and the mother can hear
tail feathers, the baby should be put back in the nest 
it from quite a distance.
if at all possible. If the nest cannot be reached, instruct
the caller to hang a homemade nest made from a
Baby Rabbits
basket or container near the old nest. The “surrogate"
Baby cottontail rabbits should be left alone if unin-
nest should be placed up off of the ground and pro-
jured and found in the nest. Even if the nest has been
tected from direct sunlight and rain. If the mother does
disturbed, the mother will usually come back. The
not return by dark, advise the caller to bring the baby
 deciding factor seems to be the extent of the nest dis-
in to the clinic.
turbance. If the nest has sustained minimal disturbance
 If the bird has body feathers with one inch or longer
of the nesting material, the babies should be covered
tail feathers, is hopping around and chirping, it is
back up and left alone. If the nest site has been
probably a fledgling. These youngsters have left the
destroyed or dug up by a predator, the mother may
nest but the parents are still providing them with food.
not come back. An attempt can be made to put the
Instruct the caller to look around for a parent bird. If
 nest back together and a string placed on top of the
the baby is picked up and it vocalizes and attracts an
nest. If, by morning, the string has been disturbed and
adult bird's attention, leave it alone. If there are no
the babies are warm and plump, the mother has come
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
355
back to feed them. However, if the string is undis-
Callers Who Want to Care for Animals
turbed or the babies are cold or look thin, they should
If the caller wants to try to take care of the animal
be brought in. If the location of the nest is unknown
herself, explain why that is not in the animal's best
and the baby's eyes are closed, it should be brought
interest. Some points to argue this point include?
in. But if the young rabbit's eyes are open and its ears
are upright and capable of rotating, they should be left
1. The problems of imprinting—the rehabilitators
undisturbed. Mother rabbits will not pick up and carry
probably have more infants of the same species that
a baby back to the nest. Infants only feed at dusk and
they can put with the caller's animal and raise
dawn and the mother will leave the nest in between
 together as siblings.
feedings but stay nearby. Due to rabbits’ secretive
 2. The possibility of zoonotic or infectious diseases.
nature and infrequent visits to their nests, one should
 3. It is illegal for the caller to care for the animal
not automatically assume the babies are orphaned.
without a permit.
4. Using the wrong formula or feeding technique can
Baby Opossums
cause harm to the animal, or even death.
If an infant opossum is found that is less than six
5. Hand raising is very time-consuming. Give the
inches long and alone advise the caller to bring it in.
caller an idea of how often the animal needs to eat
 Baby opossums that are old enough to leave the moth-
and how long the care time may be.
er's pouch should cling to the mother's coat or follow
6. Acquiring and preparing the proper foods may be
along behind her If they fall off or cannot keep up,
difficult, expensive, and sometimes unpleasant
they are sometimes left behind.
(mealworms, grubs, mice that must be killed, etc.).
Baby Deer
If the caller has a raccoon, fox, bear, bobcat, owl,
 Fawns should be left alone unless injured. The doe
hawk, or any rabies vector species, or potentially dan-
often leaves the fawn alone for hours at a time while
 gerous animal, the name and phone number should be
she feeds.
taken immediately in case he decides to keep it and not
bring it in. This information should then be turned
Baby Raccoons
Baby raccoons are usually on their own by the time
tector, federal wildlife agent, etc.).
they are four to five months old and weigh eight to
twelve pounds. If a younger raccoon is discovered
alone, the caller should leave the youngster where it
INTAKE PROCEDURES
was found and check on it periodically. Although noc-
turnal, the mother raccoon will look for her missing
Under no circumstances should animals be handled or
infant during the daytime as well as during the night-
 looked at in between the necessary feedings and treat-
time. If twenty-four hours pass with no sign of the
ments intervals. This rule needs to begin in the recep-
mother, the licensed rabies vector rehabilitator should
tion room with the arrival of the animal. Without
be called for instructions. Be careful in advising the
lifting the lid or opening the transport cage, the recep-
public to handle any rabies vector species.
tionist should immediately transport the animal to the
examination area while the rescuer fills out an intake
Reuniting Mother and Baby
form. This form should include the rescuer's name,
Reuniting diurnal species’ (active during the day)
 address, phone number, animal type and numbers, and
babies during the daylight hours and nocturnal species'
finally the animal's circumstances for needing care. A
(active at night) babies during the night should be
detailed account of how, when, and where the animal
practiced. If the infant gets cold while waiting for the
was found can help determine the nature of the ani-
parent, a warm water bottle should be provided and
mal's problem. Also, information should be recorded
placed with the baby. It may take several hours for a
about how long the rescuer had the animal and if she
mother to reclaim its baby. If a diurnal species is found
attempted to medicate or feed the patient. This helps
at night, it may be worth a try in the morning to
the caretaker to investigate what happened to the
reunite it with its parent.
 animal and determine the correct form of treatment.
Orphans that are brought to the hospital probably
This form should be used as a pet's chart would be,
need to be taken home at night by a caretaker and
with the recording of physical exam findings, treat-
brought back in the morning to provide the young
ments, observations, and final disposition. The state
animals with enough nourishment.
and/or federal permit issuing departments also require
356
 Chapter 20
this information. A copy should be made and given to
(humans, domestic animals, wild predators; i.e. avoid
the rehabilitator who receives the animal to provide
housing hawks and cottontails in the same room) is of
the new caretaker with all the available information.
foremost importance. Second, providing something of
The original should be fled at the facility and used to
a natural setting is calming to many species of captive
help make the end-of-year report required by most
wildlife. Many bird species need to feel hidden or
states (Appendix 2).
 protected from view by vegetated plant cover. Cutting
Meanwhile, back in the treatment room, the animal
a few small leafed branches off of a nearby tree or
 should have a quick visual exam to check for emer-
shrub and placing them inside the animal's enclosure
gency conditions such as shock, hypothermia, or
(preferably before placing the animal inside) can
bleeding. If the animal appears stable and is not in a
provide naturalistic hiding places for the recovering
critical position, it should be allowed a little time to
patient. Animals such as rabbits, squirrels, opossums,
calm down from the previous handling and car ride
and chipmunks seek refuge by hiding under or inside
 before pulling it out of the box.
something that cannot be seen through. Providing
these types of patients with a nest box, hollow log,
plastic tube, or even layers of cloth that they can
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
burrow in increases their sense of security and well-
AND REDUCING STRESS IN
being as well as the chance of keeping them alive.
CAPTIVE WILDLIFE
Animals also equate having choices with comfort.
Offering a bird several perches provides them with the
"It is incumbent upon a person who takes the respon-
 opportunity to feel as if they have some control in their
sibility of manipulating an animal's life to be con-
strange, new, captive world.
cerned for its feelings, the infliction of pain, and the
 psychological upsets that may occur from such manip-
ulation" (Fowler 1986).
INITLAL EXAM
The wild nature of these animals should always be
respected and sensitivity shown for the unique needs
The visual exam is the first part and perhaps one of
of these unusual patients. Stress is the number one
the most important parts of the examination. Before
reason that wild animals under human care die. All
even touching the patient, observe its posture, color,
sick or injured animals need their strength to recover
behavior, and stool quality. Look for discharges, level
 and cannot afford to use it up in attempts to escape
 of alertness, body conditioning, head tilts, nystagmus,
from captive stress. Learning to recognize signs of
limping, or wing droops. Record all observations
early stress, with each species as well as between indi-
either on the intake sheet or the examination form
viduals, may possibly prevent or at least reduce such
(whichever one the hospital's wildlife protocol calls
fatalities. Many birds have a natural escape pattern of
for). An example of each form is provided in Appendix
moving up and away from danger and they feel threat-
2. Many of these signs are not as obvious once the
ened if they are housed down low and looked at from
 animal has been picked up and held in an unnatural
above. Typically, they are calmer if their cage is placed
position. Also, an animal will try its best to conceal
 at or above human eye level.
i smou i j roiepard e ot ,sauleam jo suis, asal
All prey animals fear direct eye contact or being
a aui noe kis aq o An os paum suaq s
stared at or even looked at. Consider the animal's
txam. Sometimes using binoculars and watching from
viewpoint: typically the first thing a predator does
across the room gets the best results.
while hunting is keep its eye on the prey and then move
When performing the hands-on part of the exami-
directly toward it. When humans do this, they mimic
nation, the examiner should be swift and thorough,
the predator's behavior and frighten the animal. It is
reducing the handling time and the animal's psycho-
a good idea to look in another direction when walking
logical stress. Restraint should be performed on the
 past wildlife cages.
animal quickly and with confidence, without a lot of
 Housing for different species is discussed further in 
repositioning. Prey animals view a predator's grip as
each of their sections but a note on stress-reducing
fatal, and frequent shifting of the animal's position
environmental factors should be mentioned here.
 only draws out the suffering.
Within each animal's enclosure, using something
 Use of a systematic approach when doing exams
natural and familiar to the patient will help decrease
ensures that no area gets overlooked. Even though it
stress. Housing away from sight or sound of predators
may be obvious that the patient has a wing injury, the
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
357
exam should be performed in a systematic manner and
a small or pinkie mouse that the bird can swallow
all the animal's systems evaluated in order. The ani-
whole at its normal eating time. Some pediatric sus-
mal's eyes, ears, mouth, nose, skin turgor, limbs, body
pensions have a more palatable taste and may be more
condition, and reflexes should be checked. Respiratory
 readily eaten either right out of the medicine dropper
sounds should be observed and noted as well as any
or when mixed in with a favorite food item (i.e.
signs of bleeding. All anticipated supplies and medica-
 Clavamox drops mixed in with fruit yogurt offered to
tions must be ready before handling the animal so the
an opossum). Another option is to have frequently
patient does not have to wait unnecessarily. It is not
used oral medications specially flavored or concen-
uncommon to find secondary problems days later
trated at a compounding pharmacy. Banana-flavored
because they were initially overlooked due to the
dewormers, meat-flavored antibiotics, alfalfa-flavored
examiner's mistake of starting right at the big problem
anti-inflammatories, just to name a few, have been
and then forgetting to follow through with the rest of
very useful in both zoological and wildlife medicine.
the exam.
Animals that do not swallow their food whole or
Restraining and examination techniques should be
eat food items in which medications are not easily
practiced as often as possible because this is the only
hidden (i.e., adult squirrels, rabbits) may need to be
way to become fast and efficient. Examine healthy live
hand injected. In these cases, effective medications
animals whenever possible to become familiar with
with the longest action time to reduce multiple daily
"normals" in order to recognize the
“abnormals."*
"catch ups" should be chosen. Ideally, medications
 Information obtained from examining dead animals
that need to be given only once daily should be sought.
should not be underestimated. Restraint positions, pal-
 In conclusion, it is not the role of veterinarians to
 pation, injection training, IO or IV catheter placement,
know the best way to rehabilitate every wild animal.
bandaging, tube feeding, necropsy, and even surgical
Veterinarians? expertise is in anatomy, surgery, diag-
techniques can be practiced on deceased patients.
nostics, and treatment, not necessarily the natural
history and behavior patterns of a southern flying
squirrel. To assist the veterinarian in making more
CHOOSING TREATMENT ROUTES
informed decisions, the technician should collect as
much information as possible pertaining to the types of
 rsn a ade so 
wildlife that the clinic decides to work with. Teamwork
into consideration the differences between the wild
is crucial and the combined efforts of many individuals
animal patient versus the domestic animals that are
make up the best rehabilitation team. Each wildlife
more routinely seen in the office. Domesticated animals
technician needs to form good working relationships
can withstand more extensive procedures done with
with several veterinarians. One veterinarian cannot be
manual restraint alone. On the other hand, the use of
expected to look at every baby squirrel, but can advise
anesthesia (i.e. isoflurane) should be considered when
on general treatment regimes and drug dosages.
obtaining quality radiographs or performing even
A technician should always realize his limitations
minor but painful procedures on wildlife.
 and should never feel as if networking makes him look
Routes and frequencies of medication need to be
incapable. Using the experience of others is the best
carefully compared as well. Oral medications should
way to learn and can also prevent animals from suf-
be chosen, when appropriate, that can be injected into
fering unnecessarily. No one should ever reinvent the
food items and fed to the patient. For example, enro-
wheel at the animal's expense. Always remember that
floxacin can be injected into a cricket and fed to a blue
the ultimate goal is to release the animal back into the
jay, or into a minnow and fed to a heron. Every effort
wild with the best possible chance of survival. A tech-
should be made to weigh the stress of handling and
nician can ofer this to each and every animal that he
administering treatments against the benefits they
works with if he learns to recognize when someone
 provide. Although the first treatment of choice may
else may be more qualified. This may even mean trans-
recommend BID-TID treatments, realize that with
ferring the animal to another person who may have a
wildlife this may not always be practical or possible.
better rehabilitation setup, more experience or time,
Wildlife medicine is a balance between what is effec-
animal conspecifics, or better release sites.
tive and what the patient can tolerate
While wildlife rehabilitation can be difficult, time-
This sometimes calls for some creative medicine
consuming, expensive, and many times downright
delivery ideas. Raptors can receive treatments of dexa-
frustrating, the benefits and personal rewards gained
methasone, LRS, vitamins, or antibiotics injected into
from this unselfish kind deed can be life changing.
358
Chapter 20
RELEASE CRITERIA VERSUS
Many hospitals or centers do not have the facilities to
EUTHANASLA
deal with an injured deer. At best, these animals, even
with adequate facilities, are difficult to maintain in
Some animals arrive at the clinic with injuries that
s a  n p a pn de
warrant euthanasia. Other injuries and illnesses may
trying to escape.
 not present themselves as life threatening but in fact
The potential for current handicaps to create new
are just as profound in terms of release and surviv-
 problems for an animal must be considered. For
ability in the wild. The veterinary technician should
example, is a one-footed bird likely to develop bumble-
learn to recognize these less-obvious conditions that
foot or frostbite on the remaining foot? The bottom
will ultimately lead to death of the animal if released
 line is that the animal must have enough of the equip-
back into the wild.
ment and capabilities necessary to survive by means
Merely saving a life for survival in captivity is not
natural to its species if it is to be released (Diehl and 
the goal. The animal must be capable of recognizing.
Stokhaug 1991).
obtaining, and processing food; 
pue Suzio
 Being a careful observer, understanding the ani-
mal's natural history, performing a thorough physical
shelter; acquiring and defending territories; perform-
exam, and knowing the release requirements could
ing normal seasonal movements and dispersal; and
spare an animal hours or days of suffering. Each
be capable of normal socialization with conspecifics
animal deserves a careful and unbiased evaluation. If
(Diehl and Stokhaug 1991). Each type of animal,
the releasability is in question, contact a rehabilitator
depending on its natural history and what it needs to
immediately so a speedy decision can be made and the
do to survive, has different criteria, so a handicap
 animal can begin to receive the treatment it deserves,
considered relatively minor for one species may be life
  q   n  s  
threatening to another.
euthanasia.
For instance, a bird of prey must be capable of
Situations that may require euthanasia include:
hunting and catching prey animals that may be as
quick and fast as they themselves are. If a Cooper's
 Compound or open fracture more than forty-eight
hawk was released with any degree of flight defect, it
hours old. These old injuries rarely can be properly
would not be able to obtain prey that is often caught
repaired and the animal would lose full function of
in midair. On the other hand, a mallard duck with a
the limb, making the animal nonreleasable.
slight wing defect but flight capability may be consid-
 Complete loss of sight or hearing in any animal.
ered for release because it acquires its food while
 Impaired vision in both eyes. Depending on the
swimming and dabbling in the water, breeds in the
species, some animals can be considered for release
water, and can also escape predators by diving as well
if only one eye is affected.
as flying. Furthermore, in some areas mallards do not 
 Nocturnal owls with hearing impairment.
have to migrate so the need to fly great distances is
 i s au, sa ro sm p
 also reduced
sustained injuries requiring amputation of a wing
 Another example would be an animal with impaired
at the elbow (humero-ulnar) or above, a leg or a
vision. An animal that does not depend on excellent
foot .. should be euthanized" (U.s. Fish and
sight to obtain food and avoid predation could also be
Wildlife—Rehabilitation regulation 50 CFR 21.27
considered releasable. For instance, a one-eyed, adult
#8). No animal should be put through the stress and
opossum might be considered releasable because in the
pain of surgery only to be euthanized later because
wild it has few predators and relies on its sense of smell
it can never be released.
to find food items (carrion, insects, vegetation) that do
 Raptors need unimpaired function of their feet to
not require a great deal of visual acuity to acquire.
 grasp, kill, and carry prey, therefore, any injury
However, a fox needs perfect vision to obtain its main-
involving the unilateral loss of both the hallux (digit
stay diet of live and very quick prey animals such as
1) and digit 2 on the same foot or the bilateral loss
mice, chipmunks, birds, and rabbits.
of both hallux.
The species of the animal involved should also be
 Fractures involving the wing or leg joints (or very
considered. An opossum with a fractured limb has a
o s   m f ae 
 good chance for recovery. Opossums tend to tolerate
for the animal to have normal use of the limb. The
bandages and splints well, plus they are relatively inac-
joint will heal by fusing in place and not allow for
tive, which provides for optimal recovery. A deer with
normal movement, thus preventing the animal from
a fractured limb, on the other hand, is a challenge.
flying or walking.
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
359
· Fractures with a significant piece of bone missing.
critical period. Once this has occurred, the animal then
· Some wing fractures can heal out of alignment and
identifies with the adult of its own species and learns
result in a wing droop. Although flight may be pos-
 by imitation and observation the methods for acquir-
sible, the wing cannot be allowed to drag on the
ing shelter, food, mates, and proper behaviors.
 perch or ground. The feather tips will become
The route in which a mammal, bird, or reptile
damaged and soiled and over time the bird may
imprints is different and still not completely under-
become nonflighted or develop an infection in the
 stood. In the area of wildlife rehabilitation, imprinting
damaged follicles.
is probably only relevant to birds. The critical periods
· Head trauma that results in abnormal posture in
for most species of birds have not yet been determined.
any animal.
With ducks and geese it occurs within the day of hatch-
 Back injuries that have resulted in loss of limb func-
ing and with smaller raptor species between days eight
tion in any animal.
 and twenty-one after hatching. Larger raptor species
· Animals imprinted on humans should never be
usually imprint between days twelve and twenty-eight.
released. These animals are not able to behaviorally
 The variations of days between species are largely due
fit into their own natural population and they could
to their different rates of development. The most
be dangerous to the public.
important period seems to be when the bird's visual
 Animals that have a highly incurable infectious
focus develops. Before their eyes open, neonates also
disease.
 imprint on their parents' calls and vocalizations.
· A rabies vector species from a rabies endemic area
What this all means for the wildlife caregiver is that
(follow current state guidelines) should never be
 the animal could be improperly imprinted on humans
released.
if a great deal of care is not taken. Imprinting is not
 Mammals with two or more nonfunctional legs.
believed to be reversible so if the process is transferred
· Rodents or rabbits with a fractured jaw or any
to a person the animal will have a poor chance to
facial injury leaving permanently unaligned inci-
survive. Birds that do not imprint on their own species
sors. (Opposing incisor teeth must be able to be
will lack the survival skills they need, will not repro-
normally worn down or they will overgrow and
duce in the wild, and are often killed outright by their
eventually kill the animal.)
 own species. A bird that has imprinted on a human
is not releasable and will probably need to be
Nonreleasable animals can sometimes be placed in
euthanized.
 an approved educational research program or breeding
 To reduce the chances of improper imprinting, the
facility. There are now several nonreleasable animal
 baby should be returned to its nest and/or parents if
placement programs designed to help place these
 at all possible. Sometimes orphans can be placed in
animals. Do not euthanize an endangered species
 foster nests and raised with like species of similar age.
without frst contacting your local and federal authori-
 Many rehabilitation centers have nonreleasable sur-
ties for authorization.
rogate parents (most commonly birds of prey) that
"We look to wildlife for the rules that we follow.
raise same species’ orphans that are not their own. If
Wildlife leads a life of quality, or it isn't alive—it's
that is not possible, care should be taken to be sure all
one or the other for wildlife" (Moore and Joosten
animals are raised with at least one other member of
1995a).
the same-aged species. Rehabilitators and nature
centers that have permanent nonreleasable raptors can
also house the young beside the adults to allow the
IMPRINTING AND TAMING
juveniles a chance to observe, listen, interact, and pos-
sibly imitate the same species adult. With some birds,
Imprinting
a mirror may be helpful if the baby has no nest mates.
The veterinary technician's code of ethics to "do no
 Birds (especially raptors) should be fed during their
harm" could not be more pertinent to this subject.
critical period from behind a curtain-type blind or
Understanding the definitions and what these two
while wearing a hooded poncho with a mask to hide
things mean to a wild animal under a technician's care
the human shape. By also using a hand puppet shaped
can make the difference between life and death.
like the head of the adult to feed raptor chicks, the
Imprinting is a socialization process by which
1an
young do not associate food with humans. Wildlife
individual animal learns to identify itself with a species.
should be handled as little as possible, with limited
This is a natural psychological process, which occurs
talking, and housed out of sight or sound of humans,
early in life, during a restricted period of time called a
 dogs, cats, and pet birds.
360
Chapter 20
Taming
whether the caller has the tools on hand to safely get
Taming is the process of an animal becoming social-
the animal into the transport container, such as gloves,
ized to humans by association with foods or other
a blanket, or a broom. The caller's confidence and
comforts over a prolonged period of time (Beaver
experience level should be ascertained before even sug-
1984). Baby animals in a wide range of species are
 gesting that he attempt to handle a potentially danger-
-dd a see a as  oi a i
ous animal. Human safety comes first. If in doubt,
erly imprinted and identify with their own species but
 referring the caller directly to the rehabilitator may be
 socialize with humans. Taming differs from imprinting
the safest thing to do.
in that the bond to humans is not as strong, takes
After capture an animal should be placed in a suit-
longer to establish, and is more readily lost once
 able container with holes and a lid and kept in a quiet
 human contact no longer occurs (Klinghammer 1991).
area before and during the transport. Unnecessary
The lack of fear tame animals show toward humans
talking or playing the radio in the vehicle during trans-
often leads to their deaths. These animals often get
 port should be avoided. Extreme temperatures should
Aua, e isnn aldoad may asneoq padden o ious
 also be avoided by providing ventilation, shade from
raccoon" and often misinterpret it to be diseased or
the sun, or extra heat if needed. Cardboard boxes
rabid. Tame game species are often easy targets for
make good temporary cages and can be quickly altered
 hunters and trappers. Tame animals are also unsuit-
 to suit many different types of animals. Ideally, the size 
able for release due to possible dangerous encounters
of the container should be just large enough for the
iq aan insn si ssnd s suq 
 animal to comfortably fit into but not large enough for
should be done by a person other than the one who
 a great deal of activity. Cardboard boxes and pet car-
caused it before the animal is released. Taming can be
riers make the best types of transport containers
avoided by minimizing human contact, é
especially
because they offer solid sides and tops, which reduce
human-associated positive stimuli such as food (Diehl
visual stress for the patient and are also disposable
and Stokhaug 1991). Wild animals no longer requiring
after use. Placing wildlife in a clear aquarium or plastic
hand-feeding should never be fed by hand. Food
tote should only be done if there is a towel or blanket
should be scattered around the enclosure when animals
available to cover the enclosure to block out light and
are sleeping and not likely to see the provider (i.e. feed
remove visual stimuli.
opossums and flying squirrels one to two hours before
 Proper nonslip material should be placed on the
dark when they are still asleep and out of view).
 enclosure bottom to ensure proper footing and reduce
It is critical that the distinction be made between a
stress as a result of slipping and sliding during the
true human imprint and a tamed animal with regard
transport. The cage should be secured so it does not
to the release potential. The animal's history must be
slide or flip over. No food or water should be provided
traceable from the day it came in. Again, good record
during the time of the transport because the animals
keeping is essential because it will help determine if 
are usually too stressed to eat and the bowls often end
improper imprinting is even a possibility. If the animal
up tipping over and spilling their contents, getting the
can be proven to be tame but not imprinted on humans,
animal wet or dirty.
it may still have a chance to be released.
Adult Birds
Open-wire bird/rodent cages are not advisable for
TRANSPORTINGWILDLIFE
transporting because they need to be covered with a
towel and the wire can be very damaging to the fight
A variety of containers can be used to transport wild-
feathers. Songbirds can be placed in a wide open paper
life. The two main considerations for choosing the
bag with the top rolled tightly shut and clipped with
appropriate transport container are the animal's safety
 a paper clip or clothespin. Several pencil-sized air holes
 and comfort. If a caller asks for advice on how to bring
should be provided in the bag for fresh air and ventila-
an animal in to the clinic, he should always be asked
tion. Plastic pet carriers work well for waterfowl,
for information about the animal such as what type of
raptors, and the larger songbird species (i.e. blue jays,
animal is it, whether it is conscious, and whether it is 
robins), but care should be taken with the smaller
a baby or adult. Each call should be taken on a case-
species (i.e. wrens, warblers) that can ft through the
by-case basis to determine the safest way to capture
holes on the cage door. Appropriate sized cardboard
and transport each animal. After determining that the
O dn u Sds ns rn lm Ana m sxo
animal needs assistance, it should also be determined
large herons.
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
361
Carpet pieces, paper towels, or cloth towels serve as
Injured medium to large mammals such as deer,
 good cage flooring. Newspaper is too slippery, as is the
coyotes, and bobcats may need chemical immobiliza-
 plain plastic bottom of a pet carrier. Alert and standing
tion and special capture equipment, such as punch
adult birds might use a perch to stand on if it is securely
poles, dart guns, and snare poles, to prevent injury to
fastened and proportionate to the bird's foot size.
the animal or the handler.
Tightly wedging a tree branch down low inside of a box
 Flying squirrels and chipmunks are escape artists
before placing the bird inside can give the animal an
and need to be contained in a box or solid sided
option to perch. Raptors need a branch about two to
container with the lid taped or snapped shut.
three inches in diameter to properly perch on.
Instruct the caller to make the air holes on the lid
 Provide soft material (i.e. rolled towel) to prop the
Aau no jouad e ueu punoe aiel ou pue Aquo
animal on if it is not capable of standing on its own.
could chew and enlarge the air holes to escape through
If the rescuer describes a heron-type bird, warn her
them.
of the dangers of the spearlike beaks and advise her
 The cage bottom should be lined with ravel-free
 not to go near the bird without eye protection such as
cloth and the entire cage draped for privacy. The cloth
safety glasses.
inside the cage provides better footing and a layer to
 If the caller describes a bird of prey, first warn her
hide under, which greatly reduces stress. The trans-
about the dangerous talons. It may be best to refer the
 porter can be advised to protect the vehicle's floor or
caller directly to a raptor rehabilitator for an on-site
seats by placing an old blanket down first before
rescue.
setting the cage inside. The rescuer should be warned
to use caution when handling these potentially danger-
Baby Birds
 ous animals and their cages.
Young featherless birds need supplemental heat and
can be transported using a warm water bottle or a
Baby Mammals
zip-lock bag (double bagged to prevent leaks) filled
Cardboard boxes and pet carriers work well to trans-
with warm water placed under or next to the baby's
port these animals. Soft, ravel-free cloth should be
enclosure. The nestling bird can be placed in a small
placed inside the cage and a heat source (warm water
box, berry basket, or any plastic margarine-sized con-
bottle) provided for hairless babies or those whose eyes
tainer lined with nonscented toilet or facial tissues as
are closed. The heat source should never go directly
nesting material. The artificial nest, not the infant
against the baby's skin but rather under the cage to
itself, should be placed on the heat source to prevent
warm up the cage bottom.
 the chance of skin burns. Keep in mind that these types
of portable warming devices stay warm for only thirty
Turtles
to sixty minutes. Covering the nest or carrier with a
Cardboard boxes or plastic buckets work for trans-
light cloth reduces drafts and helps hold the warmth
porting these animals. Do not transport water turtles
inside. These young animals need to be transferred as
in a container filled with water because the turtle will
quickly as possible to prevent chilling or further
bump against the sides of the container as it is moved
dehydration.
about.
 If the baby's nest also fell, advise the rescuer against
bringing it with the baby due to the strong possibility
Snakes
of unwanted parasites living in the nest.
 m asod e  sn saq ar sa
opening tied in a knot. The bag can then be placed
Adult Mammals
into a box, cooler, or bucket. The handler should carry
A wire cage or live trap is suitable to transport an adult 
the bag by the tip of the knot because the snake could
squirrel, raccoon, opossum, fox, or groundhog, to
bite through the cloth bag. Snakes can also be gently
name a few. Most of these animals can chew out of
swept with a broom into a lidded box or small trash
cardboard or plastic kennels in a surprisingly short
can. Unless the caller has experience in identifying
period of time. The transporter's safety is of foremost
venomous snake species from nonvenomous ones, care
importance so do not advise him to put himself at risk
should be taken in advising anyone to handle any
over the animal. Also be informed as to the status of
snake. This may be a job for animal control or a reptile
rabies in the caller's area and of the vector species that
rehabilitator.
carry the disease so the caller can be warned of any
See Appendix 3 for additional information on han-
 potential danger.
dling and restraint of wildlife species.
362
Chapter 20
RAPTOR CARE
Some birds also attempt to bite, so securing the
head or covering it with a towel may be necessary. The
Birds of prey include eagles, falcons, condors, vultures,
head must be secured when the eyes, mouth, nares,
harrier, hawks, kites, osprey, owls, and the caracara.
and ears are being examined. The handler needs to
Raptors are legally protected by a number of federal
 distract the bird with one hand and quickly grasp the
acts such as the migratory bird treaty act of 1918, bald
 head from behind with the other. Head restraint is
eagle protection act of 1940, and endangered species 
accomplished by firmly holding the head between the
act of 1973. Many federal bird rehab permits do not
 thumb and index finger at the articulation of the man-
automatically include birds of prey due to the special
dible. Covering the bird's eyes also tends to relax many
training and housing needed to work with these
raptor species and allows minor procedures to be more
animals.
tasily accomplished (giving injections, weighing, taking
radiographs, or collecting blood). The use of an ortho-
Raptor Handling
 pedic stockinet to cover the head and body is another
When handling any of these species of birds always
useful technique for raptor restraint when weighing. A
keep in mind that their frst line of defense is their
Velcro strip can be used as leg restraints by first attach-
talons. Be careful to safely secure the raptor's feet and
ing around one leg, just above the feet, then wrapping
'pq a ao o dn yid oi de aq sia
around both legs.
Heavy gauntlet-type welding gloves, such as the type
 If the bird is on the ground or in a large open-top
used for restraining aggressive cats, should be worn to
box, a towel, blanket, or net can be draped over the
catch a medium to large raptor. Small raptors such as
bird and then the bird picked up after first feeling for
screech owls and kestrels can be caught up using
and securing the legs through the draped material with
leather work gloves.
a gloved hand (Figure 20.1).
If a raptor feels trapped, it may either roll onto its
back with feet up and talons ready or make a bold
Raptor Initial Exam
dash at its restrainer. A gloved hand should be kept
 Birds of prey are most commonly brought into veteri-
ready at all times to deflect or grab such a bird in
nary hospitals with wing and/or leg fractures due
midair. If the bird flips onto its back, a rolled towel
to their frequency of colliding with motor vehicles.
si m qe oi 1i o papuey aq ueo aao aieds e 1o
These birds tend to survive many of these collisions,
feet and distract it long enough to allow a gloved hand
and due to their large size are more easily noticed
s Aq jeue aq qe pue aeq aq rapun dus o1
alongside the road and thus rescued by passing motor-
legs.
 ists. Two other common presentations are head or eye
 To remove a raptor from a cage, one gloved hand
injuries.
should be used to block the bird from darting out
Some of these animals, when presented to the hos-
around the other gloved hand while reaching in. It is
 pital, may be in shock and need to be treated accord-
often helpful to drape a towel over the door to prevent
ingly. Usually dexamethasone and lactated Ringer's
the bird from seeing a “get away”" space around the
solution is the treatment of choice but only after first
restrainer's body. With medium and large birds of
checking with the veterinarian. During the initial
prey, it is best to grab both legs, up high against the
examination of any wild animal, be quick but thor-
bird's body, with one hand keeping a finger between
ough. A systematic method of examination that covers
the birds legs. Once the legs are both contained, the
the patient from head to toe in the shortest time pos-
wings can be folded up against the body with the other
sible should be developed. Decreasing the handling
hand as the bird is pulled out. Every attempt should
time dramatically reduces the bird's stress and increases
 be made to avoid allowing the bird to beat its wings
its survival chances. Any cold bird should be placed
against the cage as it is extracted through the door
on or under heat to allow the body temperature to
When only one leg is grabbed, the natural reaction
reach a normal range (98°F-102°F) before continuing
of the raptor is to grab back at the handler with its
with the exam.
free foot. If the raptor manages to talon and hold onto
 Because raptors receive most of their water intake
a glove either the restrainer or someone else must first
from the prey they eat, they easily become dehydrated
paado aq oi sai au rp rapro u a au pxa Ai
when they are undernourished. Signs of dehydration
back up. Then one by one, each nail is removed with
include sunken eyes and thick, cloudy strands of
care taken to locate each of the other needle-sharp
mucous in the mouth. These birds should to be imme-
talons. It is very difficult to open up a foot on a raptor
diately treated with warmed lactated Ringer's solution
with a flexed leg.
by the oral, subcutaneous, intravenous, or intraosse-
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
363
B
Jpperbeak
choana
sophagy
Trachea
B
A
Tangue
Lowerbeak
C
Esophagus
C
D
Feeding tube
Figure 20.1. Picking a raptor up from the ground.
(A)Blanket technique used to cover and catch a
raptor. (B) The covered raptor is initially grasped
with both hands over back shoulders. (C) Both
hands secure the legs just above the feet. (D)
Restrain and carrying method with the raptor held
between the arms against the bandler's body.
(Permission for drawing use granted by the National
Wildlife Rehabilitators Association)
Figure 20.2.Anatomy of the avian oral cavity and
technique for assisted feeding in birds. (A).The beak
is held open by placing a finger in the corner of the
ous routes. One method is to tube feed small amounts
mouth. (B) Close-up view of oral anatomy showing
of lactated Ringer's solution with 5 % dextrose into the
the esopbagus at the back of the throat and trachea
bird’'s crop every fifteen minutes for the frst hour or
at the base of the tongue. (C) Proper placement of
two (Figure 20.2).
feeding tube in crop. (Permission for drawing use
Next, the bird should be examined for fractures by
granted by the Georgia Department of Natural
palpation and radiology. Many raptors will tolerate a
Resources and Branson Ritchie, DVM, MS.)
quick radiograph without sedation if properly held to
the table with a combination of manual and paper tape
restraint. Any potentially repairable broken limbs
injured raptor, a raptor rehabilitator should be called
 a  s   
first to help make the decision.
splints or bandages. A bandage should be chosen that
The bird's feather and muscle condition are two
immobilizes the joint above and below the fracture
clues that are useful in determining the reason why the
site. The figure-eight bandage is good for immobilizing
bird may have come in. Ragged and soiled feathers are
the wing and then can be wrapped to the body to
cpapunoi, uaaq Aiqeqoid sey puq au ieun aouaia
eliminate joint movement (Figure 20.12).
for a long period of time, so any injury is not likely to
 If there is a fracture found in or very near any limb
be fresh and wounds should be examined for fly eggs
joint or if any two or more limbs contain a break,
or larva. Any raptor that has been on the ground for
euthanasia should be strongly considered. These types
several days or more will be dehydrated and poten-
of injuries often result in a nonreleasable animal and
tially emaciated because these birds are unable to
immediate euthanasia is the most humane treatment.
acquire live prey without flight. Dark green mutes
 If the veterinarian is unsure of the releasability of any
(feces) are another sign of starvation. The bird's keel
364
Chapter 20
(sternum) can be palpated with the fingertips to help
axilla (wing web), lateral flank, or inguinal areas, with
assess the bird's level of health. A thin or emaciated
 the doses divided into several sites, to provide mainte-
bird’s keel feel “sharp" to the touch, meaning that the
 nance or mild dehydration fluids. Intraosseous (IO)
keel bone is prominent and the breast muscles are
fluids are most often delivered via sterile catheter
atrophied (Figure 20.3). Use a combination of physical
placed into the hollow cavity of the distal ulna or tibia
condition, body weight, and degree of muscling on the
for severe dehydration. This technique is described in
keel to evaluate the bird.
Chapter 2 in this text. IV injections are given in the
Another all too common reason birds of prey end
medial metatarsal or the right jugular vein. Once the
up in rehabilitation is gun shot injuries. Poisoning.
patient is self feeding, many medications can be injected
whether intentional or unintentional, is also worth
 or pilled into a food item that the bird can swallow
mentioning here because the veterinarian can some-
whole, such as a pinkie or small mouse, and offered
times determine toxicities with specific blood tests.
as part of the daily meal.
Due to the nature of a raptor's eating habits, these
birds may end up consuming a rodent or bird that ate
Raptor Caging
poisoned bait and thus become secondarily poisoned.
 Most veterinary clinics can do short-term convalescent
Emaciated juvenile birds often end up in hospitals and
care with birds of prey but do not have the proper
wildlife care centers during their frst winter due to
facilities for any long-term care or housing. All housing
their inexperienced hunting skills and the difficulties
for raptors, as well as all wildlife, should be separate
of surviving without an established hunting territory
from the domestic patients and in a quiet area away
in the months when prey is most scarce.
from people and animal traffic.
Once the bird has been examined, it should be
 Feathered healthy birds can be comfortably main-
weighed (ideally in grams) so the medication, fluids,
tained at 60°F-85*F. Cages should have solid sides
and food dosing will be accurate. The animal's weight
such as the stainless sterile hospital rack cages or a
is often the best indicator of how it is doing overall
large plastic pet kennel. A towel should be draped over
after being admitted for medical care. Good medical
 the inside of the door opening to provide a complete
records that include all procedures, treatments, food
visual barrier for the patients and to prevent them
intake, and weights should be maintained daily. A
from catching their wings on the vertical door bars.
copy of these records can be made to give to the reha-
 The cage size should be large enough to allow the bird
bilitator when the bird is transferred.
of prey to stand, turn around, and step up on a perch
All treatments should be done as quickly as possible
without touching its head or tail feathers, yet not so
and with minimal talking. If any food, fluids, or medi-
large that the bird can fly within it and potentially
cations need to be given orally, this should be done
further injure itself. Newspapers are adequate for
last after everything else has been done (injections,
lining the bottom of the cage.
radiographs, venipuncture, etc.) to lessen the chances
 Proper perching should always be provided for
 of regurgitation.
rehabilitating birds. Perches need to be of appropriate
 IM injections can be given in the leg or breast
size and well secured to the floor or cage sides. Large
muscle. SQ fluids can be administered in either the
wooden tree branches or small logs can be used if the
bird is only staying for several days. A cage perch can
be made by combining PVC pipes into a "T" shape
and then mounting it to a block of wood. These plastic
Keel
perches should be wrapped with outdoor carpet or
-Breast
Astroturf and can be cleaned and reused. Raptors that
 require longer-term hospital stays should have padded
 perches to stand on to reduce foot injuries caused by
Figure 20.3. Subjective evaluation of a bird's
the pressure of standing for long periods of time. The
condition based on pectoral muscle mass. (A) Severe
technician can wrap the perches with Vetrap to add
muscle atrophy indicating a substantial amount of
cushioning and provide an easy gripping surface. The
weight loss. (B) Moderate weight loss. (C) Severe
perches should be secured at a height to prevent the
weight loss, mild muscle atrophy. (D) Excellent
bird's tail from dragging on the cage bottom but low
condition with no detectable muscle atrophy.
enough to be easily stepped up on to.
(Permission for drawing use granted by the Georgia
The nature of the bird's injury should determine
Department of Natural Resources and Branson
perch placement. No high perches should be available
Ritchie, DVM, MS.)
to a bird with a limb injury. To avoid any additional
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
365
trauma, the perch should be six to twelve inches off
 be a problem and the bird will start to eat when it gets
the ground to begin with and gradually raised as the
 really hungry. The food presentation may also confuse
bird learns to step up and hop down from the perch.
the bird and it may not recognize a dead white lab
 Ramped perches can cause problems if the injured bird
mouse as a food item. Offering brown or black mice
pue deoipuey sh <siaaio, inq dot aui ot dn squ
sometimes helps, as well as cutting open the mouse
jumps off. Most raptors never learn to descend from
cavity to reveal the organ tissue, which often stimu-
these learning perches the same gentle way they
lates the bird's appetite.
climbed up them.
 Occasionally a raptor needs a little help with one
 A towel should be provided for padding to protect
or two hand-feedings to get started. A mouse may need
the bird's sternum if it is unable to stand. A rolled-up
to be cut into small bite-size pieces depending on the
towel can be used to prop a weak bird up on its
size of the bird. The pieces can be offered from a
stomach at a 45 degree angle. The head should be level
hemostat while leaving the bird inside the cage. Be
to prevent any fluids from the bird's nose or mouth
quiet and do not stare at the bird or make sudden
from draining down into the lungs. Another caging
movements. The food should be slowly held up to and
method used for birds too weak to stand or with frac-
allowed to touch the bird's beak. Sometimes the bird
tured legs is to place them in a box half full of shredded
will bite at the food defensively and accidentally take
newspapers. This material not only supports the bird's
the offering. Stay still until the bird swallows it, which
body but also allows the feces to fall away from the
could take a minute or two for the first bite. This can
bird.
be repeated several times, and then the remaining part
 The importance of keeping the feathers in good
 of the meal can be left inside the cage with the bird. If
condition cannot be stressed enough. Wing and tail
the bird will not swallow the food or is too aggressive
feathers, especially, are easily damaged if the birds are
and tries to foot and bite the feeder, then it may need
 improperly housed. Even if the clinic is only holding
to be force fed.
the bird for a day or two, housing the bird in any cage
With the bird wrapped securely in a towel and
in which the feathers or feather tips can stick out will
properly restrained, the beak should be opened and
do some degree of damage. It only takes two or three
 pieces carefully placed one by one into the back of its
broken flight feathers to deem an otherwise ft bird
mouth (past the glottis) with fingers or blunted hemo-
temporarily nonreleasable. If the damage in any way
stats. The bird needs to be allowed to swallow each
interferes with normal mobility, the bird must remain
bite one at a time. Care should be taken to open the
in captivity until it undergoes a molt and replaces the
beak at the base and not the biting curved tip. Once
broken feathers with new ones. This is a normal
the beak is open, it can be kept open long enough to
ooo Aeu oi ra e oi dn axen e iq ssaoond
 place the food by wedging a finger inside at the extreme
 In addition to proper housing, a tail guard can be
base of the mouth. Always remember that these birds
easily applied. Some rehabilitation centers and veteri-
can be dangerous and will foot or bite at any given
nary clinics wrap tails as a common intake procedure.
chance. Once a stubborn raptor swallows several
See Appendix 4 for a tail-wrapping method that is
pieces of delicious rodent, even if it is a white one, it 
reprinted with permission from the North Carolina
usually gives the bird incentive to start self feeding.
Raptor Center in Charlotte, North Carolina.
If the bird is emaciated, dehydrated, or too weak to
eat solid whole items, then tube feeding may be needed.
Raptor Feeding
Start first with SQ LRS fluids and then switch to the
As with any animal, the bird should be warm and
 oral route once the bird has stabilized. Continue with
hydrated before solid food is offered. If the bird
liquid formula feeding (such as Emeraid II or Isocal)
 appears in good condition and is not emaciated, it can
until the bird has gained strength. Next, bites of skin-
be offered a natural prey item for its diet. Healthy
less and boneless pieces of muscle or organ meat such
diurnal birds of prey (hawks, falcons) need to be fed
as raw beef liver or muscle meat from a cut-up mouse
once a day during the daylight hours. Nocturnal birds
or rat can be offered. Only after the bird has recovered
(owls) should be fed once a day but only in the evening.
its strength, which can take up to three to four days,
These birds eat a variety of rodents, birds, rabbits,
should it be offered solid whole foods. Table 20.1
fish, insects, and snakes in the wild but in short-term
provides feeding guidelines for birds of prey.
hospitalization, fresh-killed or thawed adult mice will
do. In some cases it may take the new patient several
Raptor Orpban Initial Care
days to accept the new surroundings and food. As long
The intake of many raptor “"orphans" into the veteri-
as the bird came in at a good weight this should not
nary hospital can often be prevented by good phone
366
Chapter 20
Table 20.1. Recommended feeding guidelines for birds of prey.
Species
Average male/female weight (g)
Food type
Amount
American kestrel
M-111g/F-120g
1 mouse
25g
Bald eagle
M-4,123 g/F-5,244g
2 rats
200-300 g
 Barn owl
M-442g/F-490g
2-3mice
50-75 g
Barred owl
M-632g/F-801g
2-3 mice
50-75g
 Broad winged hawk
M-420 g/F-490 g
2 mice
50g
 Cooper's hawk
M-349g/F-529g
2-3 mice
50-75g
Great horned owl
M-1,318 g/F-1,769g
3-5 mice or 1/2 rat
75-125g
 Peregrine falcon
M-611g/F-952g
4 mice
100g
Red-tailed hawk
M-1,028 g/F-1,224g
 3-5 mice or 1/2 rat
75-125g
 Rough-legged hawk
M-1,027 g/F-1,278g
4 mice
100g
Saw-whet owl
M-74.9g/F-90.8g
1 mouse
25g
Screech owl
M-167 g/F-194g
1 mouse
25g
Sharp-shinned hawk
M-103 g/F-174g
1-2 mice
25-50g
 Red-shouldered hawk
M-475 g/F-643 g
2-3mice
50-75g
Turkey vulture
1,467g
6-8 mice or 1 rat
150-200g
(Information in part from Engelman 1993)
protocols and animal history taking. Raptors have a
and hydrated). The chick should first be provided with
stage of development between the nestling and fledg-
heat if it is not old enough to regulate its own body
ling stages referred to as “branching." At this age,
temperature. One accepted rule for raptor brooding
 young birds are feathered, still being fed by the parents,
temperature is:
and have left the nest, but are not flighted. Well-
meaning people often discover these birds and believe
· Unfeathered birds should be kept at an ambient
them to be orphaned or injured because they will not
temperature of 85°F to 90°F
fly away and there is no nest in sight. Because these
 Downey chicks with quills present can be kept at
birds are so easily captured, they are usually first
80°F to 8.5°F.
picked up before the rehabilitator is notified. By asking
 Birds with feather quills and small feathers should
the right questions, many of these "kidnapped" birds
be kept at 75°F to 80°F.
can be returned to the founding sight before any harm
is done. If the clinic receives these calls, the best thing
 Estimating actual raptor-chick age is beyond the
to do is to instruct the caller to leave the bird where
scope of this chapter due to the sheer number of species
it is and have the person call one of the raptor reha-
and classifications of birds of prey. The raptor reha-
bilitators (on the referral phone list) to determine if the
bilitator can be called with the bird's description and
bird is truly orphaned or not.
weight for age estimate and feeding instructions. After
 Raptors are hatched with down but unable to leave
the chick is warm and active, provide hydration fluids
the nest (semi-altricial). While hawks are born with
orally by carefully placing two to four drops of solu-
their eyes open, owls are born with eyes closed.
tion into the throat beyond the glottis every fifteen to
Hatchling- and nestling stage babies found on the
twenty minutes until the bird becomes active.
 ground should be replaced into the nest if at all pos-
sible. Some rehabilitators, nature centers, or wildlife
Raptor Orphan Feeding
agencies may have individuals to help with this process.
If the chick's transportation cannot be arranged before
If returning to the original site is not possible, the
it needs to eat, the technician can offer it small pieces
orphan should be temporarily cared for until a foster
of rodent from tweezers or hemostats. Caution should
nest or captive foster parent can be found. Many of
be taken to avoid improper imprinting from the chick
the larger wildlife rehabilitation centers have perma-
watching hand feeding (refer to imprinting section).
nent foster parent birds that willingly feed many
 Imprinting within raptors occurs anywhere between
orphans each year.
five and fifteen days of age. Raptor chicks do not gape
for food like songbird babies do, but they readily take
to that of all animal species (make sure they are warm
food with the tips of their beaks and sometimes even
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
367
nibble on the feeding tool as they would their parent's
turbed only for care-taking until they can be trans-
beak.
ferred to the rehabilitator.
If the chicks eyes are closed, it is safe to hand-feed
A juvenile raptor that shows fear or aggression is
by touching the bird's beak with the feeding instru-
beyond the critical imprinting stage and, one hopes,
ment containing small bites of food and trying to
mou Aq sads umo sii uo pu Aadd s
imitate the parents feeding calls by whistling or chirp-
These birds may also be capable of self-feeding, so try
ing quietly. Because the chicks cannot see the person
placing small pieces of food in with the bird. If it
feeding it, the only concern is the chicks’ not hearing
refuses to pick up the food on its own after several
the person talking.
feedings, refer to the above section on feeding adult
 If the bird's eyes are open and it demonstrates no
raptors for hand-feeding ideas.
fear or aggression, it is within the dangerous critical
 imprinting period and much care should be taken to
Raptor Orphan Food
 prevent the youngster from seeing or hearing a human
or any animal in the hospital. Some centers feed these
often three to four times the amount of an adult.
birds with gloves and ski masks to partially hide the
Weigh the chick in the morning before feeding and
human shape or better yet feed with a hand puppet of
then feed 8% to 10% of body weight. The first few
a raptor-type bird (rubber bird hand puppets can
meals should be less to allow the digestive tract time
sometimes be found at gift shops of nature stores and
to adjust to the changes. The crop should be allowed
zoos) (Figure 20.4). Another option is to hang a towel,
 e ix ai  aq aa  o
sheet, or curtain, to serve as a kind of blind, in front
hawks, owls do not have crops but tend to turn away
 of the infant and feed by reaching around and peeking
from food when full (Crawford 1988).
through a hole in the blind. These animals must never
Very young chicks, zero to seven days old,
be available for “show and tell," and should be dis-
should eat just the soft muscle organ meat of
 a rm u o pdd s 
parents would remove all skin, fur, and bones
from the meals. These young raptor chicks should eat,
 until they are satisfied, every three to four hours. Feed
them until the crop is half to three-quarters full but
not so full that it feels hard or extended. Meals should
Hand puppet
not be skipped, and birds should be fed for a twelve-
hour day.
Once the birds are seven to ten days old, small
 amounts of moistened hair, skin, and small bones can
be introduced into the diet, which will serve as rough-
Food
age and later be casted up.
Around days ten to twenty, the chicks can be fed
larger moistened pieces of meat with bones, skin, and
fur for three feedings a day. Starting at three weeks of
age, the young should be able to eat the entire mouse
cut into three to four pieces and will start to pick these
up on their own.
Feed the three-week-olds to fledge twice a day
Blinc
and offer whole-prey items for them to tear on their
own. Continue to hand-feed them until it is certain
that they are picking up enough food on their own to
sustain themselves. Once fledged, these birds can be
Figure 20.4. A hand-feeding puppet used for feeding
fed once daily (owls in the evening, hawks in the
neonates.During critical imprinting periods,hand-
morning).
feeding puppets should be used in conjunction with
Whether the baby is staying at the veterinary
blinds to prevent a young animal from associating
hospital for one meal or many, it is the clinic's respon-
food with humans.(Permission for drawing use
sibility to NOT allow this animal (or any wild animal)
granted by the Georgia Department of Natural
the opportunity to improperly imprint on human
Resources and Branson Ritchie, DVM, MS.)
beings. If this is allowed to occur, the raptor will be
368
Chapter 20
deemed unreleasable and usually will need to be
ALTRICLAL ORPHAN SONGBIRDS
euthanized.
Basic Care
Raptor Orphan Housing
 This section is to be used for general information only.
A small cardboard box lined with cloth works well for
Remember that every bird is slightly different in devel-
a very young raptor (Figure 20.5). A twisted towel
opment and behavior. These guidelines are to be used
made into a circle with the baby placed inside the
by the veterinary technician until the bird can be trans-
"doughnut" serves well for support. Walls may need
ferred to a licensed rehabilitator.
to be covered or cleaned daily because hawks and
Altricial birds are those that are hatched blind,
eagles tend to shoot when they excrete feces. Use of
naked, unable to control body temperature, and com-
an incubator, heat lamp, or heating pad to provide
pletely helpless (blue jays, robins, mockingbirds).
external heat for the very young {two weeks old or
younger) is necessary. Healthy raptors do not need as
Development
much heat as other birds, but if they seem lethargic or
The development of the altricial bird is generally five
shiver, they may be cold. A panting chick is too warm.
 stages. All species follow these stages but at different
Housing temperatures are outlined below in the initial
rates, depending on their natural history.
care section.
 As the young become more active, pieces of branches
1. Hatchling: Zero to four days old, newly hatched,
can be placed on the nest bottom to provide the birds
 no voice, eyes closed, naked, or sparsely downy
with foot-gripping exercise, which is necessary to
2. Nestling: Five to ten days old, eyes open, partially
develop coordination and strength.
feathered, feeding call
When raptors fledge, they need a larger enclosure
3. Fledgling: Eleven to fourteen days old, almost
with stable perches that are larger around than the
fully feathered, can perch, hop, first attempts to fly,
bird's grip. The enclosure should have solid sides to
ready to leave the nest, able to thermoregulate,
prevent the flight feathers from sticking out and
frequently preening, wing stretching, short tail
becoming damaged. The growing chick now needs
feathers
room to hop and flap its wings.
4. Juvenile:
Fully grown,(
 defensive, independence
Misting these newly feathered birds daily with
begins, lasts until sexual maturity
water helps stimulate them to preen and activate their
5. Adult: Sexually mature
uropygial gland for waterproofing. Once they are
eating on their own, acclimated to the outside, and
Initial Care
waterproofed, juvenile raptors are ready for outdoor
An animal should never be fed until it is warm. Use
flight caging. By now the bird should be transferred to
 an incubator, brooder, heat light, or heating pad to
a raptor rehabilitator to be trained to catch live food
warm up a chilled infant and keep the baby on heat
and prepared for release.
until it is feathered. Altricial baby birds’ temperature
guidelines are:
Hatchlings: Should be kept at 80*F-90°F
Nestlings: Should be kept at 80°F-85°F
Fledglings: Should be kept at 70°F-80°F
Once the bird is warm, it should be hydrated
by offering drops of Pedialyte or lactated Ringer's
solution orally every five to ten minutes until the
baby passes a normal fecal sac. For most birds
this should consist of a dark solid part (stool) and a
milky white softer part (urates) contained within a
clear sac.
The baby bird should be examined for injuries,
 bruises, puncture wounds, bites, mites, and so on. The
species must be identified to determine the proper diet
Figure 20.5.Baby hawk.(Photo courtesy of Melanie
 and feeding schedule. Begin offering the infant hand-
Haire.)
rearing formula.
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
369
Identification
 If the baby bird is very young, it may be necessary
A bird rehabilitator should be called for help in iden-
to use an incubator with a wet sponge or other source
tifying the bird. Also refer to Appendix 5.
of moisture for humidity. A homemade incubator can
Information should be obtained about where and
be made out of a small plastic tote with air holes in
how the bird was found from the person who found
the lid. Care should be taken to provide enough
 aa  a du a nu s as 
ventilation that the humidity does not build up
bird it is, but also may help determine if the bird needs
and allow moisture to collect on the inside of the con-
further help or if it can be returned to its parents.
tainer, which in turn allows rapid growth of patho-
The following items help to identify altricial nest-
gens. Instructions for how to make a homemade
ling species:
incubator are available on the International Wildlife
Rehabilitation Council (IWRC) web page: www.iwrc-
1. Mouth color: The inside membranes of the mouth
online.org.
are usually brightly colored to attract attention
 If an incubator is not used, the nest should be placed
from the feeding parent bird.
inside a safe container such as a lidded box or basket
2. Gape flanges color: The fleshy "lips" that edge the
to prevent any unfortunate mishaps from babies falling
mouth may be a different color than the inside of
out or pets getting into the nest. This especially applies
the mouth.
to the technician who has the babies at work in a busy
3. Beak: The length and shape of the beak helps iden-
veterinary practice.
tify a species by what it eats. Insect eaters tend to
The nest should be kept on a heating pad or under
have long, slender beaks and seed eaters tend to
a heat lamp at all times to keep the baby from chilling.
have thick, short, and conical shaped beaks.
A thermometer should always be used to monitor the
4. Skin color or color of down: Presence or absence of
ambient air. The warmth should circulate around the
down, natal down, and skin color are also species
infant (Figure 20.6). A tissue or soft wash cloth should
specific.
be draped over the top of the baby to hold in the
 5. Vocalizations: Many songbird species have unique
warmth and simulate the security of a brooding parent.
feeding calls.
Baby birds can usually come off the heat when they
6. Location baby was found: Was the baby found in
feather out, as long as they are active and healthy.
a tree cavity (woodpeckers, nuthatches), a fireplace
(chimney swifts), hanging planters (wrens, finches)?
Housing Fledglings
7. Body size: When the tail feathers emerge from their
 The babies will require a larger cage once they are
sheaths, a baby bird has reached its full body size.
ready to leave the nest. The nest can be placed inside
a small flight cage so the youngsters can hop in and
out of their nests until they no longer return to it. The
Housing Nestlings
cage should be large enough to allow the birds to take
The baby bird should be placed in a homemade nest
constructed of a berry basket, small plastic bowl, or
margarine tub lined with unscented toilet or facial
tissues.
A cuplike cavity with the nesting material can be
constructed so the baby can nestle down but still
receive support from all sides. The baby could develop
leg problems if not properly supported during the
nesting stage. For extra support, a paper towel can be
rolled (snakelike) and coiled around the inside of the
 nest, and then the tissue placed over the top.
 If the tissue is piled high enough (within one-half
inch of the nest container top), the baby can defecate
over the side of the nest and help keep the inside clean.
 Replace the tissue as it gets soiled.
Do not use the old natural nest because it may
contain parasites and is too difficult to clean. Do not
Figure 20.6. Baby bird incubator with a bygrometer,
line the artificial nest with fresh grass because it is too
wet sponge, nest with facial tissues, and heating pad.
 cold and damp.
(Photo courtesy of Melanie Haire.)
370
 Chapter 20
short flights and hop from perch to perch, but small
All hand-raised wild bird releases should be done
 enough to be easily carried inside and out.
by a licensed bird rehabilitator. Many of the rehabilita-
The sides should be constructed out of or lined with
tion manuals listed on the source pages have instruc-
soft netting or nylon mesh to prevent injury to the bird
tions for building pre-release and release caging.
or its feathers. Reptariums—affordable, commercially
available soft-sided mesh cages—can be successfully
Feeding Metbods
used to house fedgling and injured adult songbirds.
There are many feeding methods in practice for feeding
These cages are available in different sizes and are easy
wild baby birds (Figure 20.7). Blunt forceps, tweezers,
to clean because the mesh zips off the plastic frame
pipettes, syringes, eyedroppers, small artists’ paint
and can be machine washed.
brushes, Popsicle sticks, blunted toothpicks, and
Wire bird or mammal cages should never be used.
fingers are just some of the tools that can be used for
If the feathers stick out from between the cage bars
administering food. A discussion of feeding techniques
they will fray, break off, and possibly become too
with a local avian rehabilitator will aid in choosing the
damaged to support flight. At best these birds with
 best method. Many of these feeding implements only
  rao i aq oi au lm ad P
work with certain types of formulas, and sometimes a
molt out a new set of flight feathers, which may take
combination works well. Often the thickness of the
up to a year for many songbird species. Occasionally
formula depends on the age of the bird, so feeding
 these birds develop permanent feather follicle damage
several birds of different ages may require the use of
and need to be euthanized.
more than one tool.
The cage bottom can be lined with paper towels and
 Many healthy nestlings and fledglings gape readily
should be changed daily. Several secured low branches
and hungrily, making feeding time for the caregiver
should be included to allow for landing and perching
much easier. These willing participants will continue
practice.
to gape, for the most part, until their crops are full.
If the weather is mild, the cage should be moved
 Care should be taken to avoid over filling the crop. If
outside during the day but brought inside at night to
the bird is slow to swallow or flings food, it might be
start acclimating the birds to outdoor temperatures,
full or too dehydrated.
sights, and sounds
If the baby is hesitant to gape, it may be dehydrated
In addition to introducing the young bird to natural
 or otherwise ill, not hungry, too frightened, or nervous,
temperatures, the sunlight will provide vital and accu-
 or it may not recognize the gesture as a feeding attempt.
rate doses of vitamin D,. Birds require a proper balance
 Tap on the side of the nest and whistle sofly in an
of calcium and phosphorus in their diet for the devel-
 attempt to imitate the parent bird's arrival to the nest.
opment of normal, healthy bones. Vitamin D; is neces-
 This may require patience and several tries with
sary to ensure that the body can absorb the dietary
different chirping sounds. Gaping nest mates often
calcium; otherwise the bones and the bill can become
help stimulate gaping in all individuals, including
rubbery and soft. This deficiency, called metabolic
newcomers.
bone disease, results in bone deformities or even stress
fractures that are difficult at best to treat. Prevention
is the best medicine, and a combination of thirty
minutes a day of direct daylight or thirty to sixty
minutes a day with artificial full-spectrum light plus a
balanced diet meets the requirements.
 Plastic and glass filter out the necessary ultraviolet
light so sunlight coming through a window or aquar-
ium does not provide adequate light. The entire cage
should never be placed in direct sunlight. The babies
can quickly overheat if a shaded area is not easily
accessible. Ultraviolet rays from the sun are still avail-
able on cloudy days and in the shade.
The enclosure should never be left unprotected from
possible predators. A screened porch or a fenced yard
is no protection from a stray cat or hungry raccoon.
Predator-proof caging can be affordably built but is
Figure 20.7. Hand-feeding a baby cardinal. (Photo
not be discussed in this chapter.
courtesy of Melanie Haire.)
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
371
If the baby is hydrated and healthy but still will not
gape, gently prying the beak open with fingers and
placing a small amount of food toward the back of its
mouth may be necessary. Some birds get the picture
quickly and only need one or two force feedings to
understand that they are being offered food and will
not be harmed.
Once birds imprint on their parents and are old
enough to have developed fear of humans in the wild,
they become more difficult to hand feed and may need
to be force fed until they become self feeding.
Introducing a bowl of food into their cage for this
older fledgling group may be the answer.
Several altricial species of baby birds (i.e. some
swifts, swallows, nighthawks, pigeons, and all doves)
Figure 20.8. Pigeon feeder. (Photo courtesy of
never gape, and knowing the identification of these
Melanie Haire.)
species will save a lot of time and frustration. These
 individuals must be fed in a different manner. Fledgling
or juvenile swifts, swallows, and nighthawks are
offered the feeder several times a day to facilitate the
examples of birds that will probably need to be force
self feeding and weaning process.
 or tube fed until release. Hatchlings and nestlings may
A size 10 or 12 red rubber catheter cut to about
adjust to hand feedings but need to be fed by holding
three inches in length can be used to crop tube feed
the food up to the bird's beak.
pigeons and doves. Exact, Pretty Bird, and Emeraid are
 Pigeon and dove babies do not gape but they do
examples of quality hand-rearing powdered diets com-
beg. They naturally feed by sticking their beaks inside
mercially available at pet stores or veterinary clinics.
their parent's mouth, which is the opposite position
of many songbirds, and thus the concept of willingly
Food Prep
opening their mouths to the sight of an eyedropper
The bird formulas ideally should be made fresh daily
full of food has no meaning to them. These birds
and refrigerated until use. Each feeding should be
must be tube fed until they self feed. Once the birds
 allowed to warm to room temperature before feding
are seven days old or older, a feeder can be made
it to the bird.
that resembles the feeding technique naturally used by
The consistency varies depending on the diet and
this group.
the age of the bird. Most diets are thick like oatmeal
when hand mixed but can be blended to a slurry that
Pigeon and Dove Feeder
can be pushed through a syringe or dropper. Some
 A 12- or 20-cc syringe casing can be flled with a bal-
formulas tend to thicken over the day during refrigera-
anced parakeet seed mix (small seeds without a lot of
tion, and a little water may need to be added to keep
 hulls or shelled sunflower seeds) and tightly wrapped
it at the proper consistency. Remember that baby birds
with Vetrap over the opened bottom of the case to
 need as many calories as possible so do not thin for-
keep the seeds in. A quarter- to half-inch slit is then
mulas down more than absolutely necessary. Runny
cut in the center of the Vetrap (long enough for the
or drippy formulas should never be fed because the
bird's beak to fit through but not too big to allow seeds
food could drip down into the trachea and cause aspi-
to spill out around beak). Next, the bird's beak can be
ration pneumonia.
inserted into the slit in the Vetrap, and while holding
Many diets can be made in batches and stored in
the back of the bird's head to keep it from pulling out
the freezer for short periods of time. Making a week's
 of the dispenser, the syringe can be tapped to simulate
worth of food at once and freezing it in ice cube trays
the movement of the parent bird (Figure 20.8). It will
can save a lot of time. Then as many cubes are needed
take several attempts to get the bird to quit struggling
for the day can be thawed, and a back-up supply is
and pulling away from the feeder. Once the baby swal-
available if more babies are received. It is important
lows some seeds (probably by accident the frst time),.
 to know about nutrition because some ingredients lose
it will quickly start self feeding right out of the dis-
dietary value when frozen or stored for long periods
penser. Then, in addition to tube feeding into their
of time. Always start with fresh, good quality
crop with a hand-rearing formula, the baby can be
ingredients.
372
Chapter 20
Feeding Frequency
1 cup soaked puppy chow
Feeding frequency should follow this guideline:
1 T baby food beef
1 T hard-boiled egg yolk
Hatchling: Feed every ten to twenty minutes (6 a.m.
3 to 4 drops balanced avian vitamins (Avitron)
to 10 p.m.)
1/2 tsp. ground egg shell (Johnson 1991)
Nestling: Feed every twenty to thirty minutes (6 a.m.
to 10 p.m.)
1 cup soaked Hill's Science Diet Feline Growth (origi-
 Fledgling: Feed every forty-five to sixty minutes (7 a.m.
nal recipe only)
to 10 p.m.)
1/2 cup chick starter added to 1/2 cup boiling water
Juveniles: Feed every two hours (7 a.m. to 9 p.m.)
3 to 4 drops balanced avian vitamins (Avitron)
1/2 tsp.
 Rep-cal
(calcium
with
vitamin
D3,
In the wild, baby birds are fed from sunup to
 phosphorus-free)
sundown. A technician should not make the mistake
 1 tsp. powdered Benebac
of thinking that baby birds can be fed enough calories
Mix cat food and hot chick starter together in blender.
in a 9:00-5:00 work day. Hand-raising a baby bird is
Add other ingredients after mix cools (Ivie 1999).
not a part-time responsibility. If the bird cannot be
Note: Science Diet Feline Growth original recipe
transferred over to a rehabilitator the same day, feeding
only is advised due to avian digestive problems
arrangements must be made for the baby for a full
associated with the other flavors.
twelve- to fourteen-hour day. The biggest single
mistake made by well-meaning people who hand
These sample diets can be fed to a wide variety of
rearing baby wild birds is underfeeding them. The
species with the exception of doves and pigeons. These
caretaker cannot make up for several missed feedings
diets are a balanced base. Depending on the bird
by feeding larger volumes at the next couple
of
species, food items can be added to more closely match
feedings.
their natural diet.
The only flexibility a caretaker has is to pick when
the twelve to fourteen hours begin and end. By
 Insectivorous birds such as woodpeckers, swifts,
covering the cage and making it dark or leaving
and wrens should have insects added to the base.
the lights on in the nursery past sundown, the
Mealworms, wax worms, crickets, and freeze-dried
"daytime" can be slightly altered if need be. This is
insects are examples of supplements that should
not recommended for the long term or with older
make up to 50% of the diet.
juvenile birds because they need to develop a sense of
 Frugivores such as waxwings and orioles should
natural time.
have chopped fruit added.
 Birds with a tendency to develop a calcium def-
Diets
ciency, such as mockingbirds, thrashers, and king-
It is ideal to feed the same diet that the rehabilitator
birds, should have food items rich in calcium or a
will use to prevent the stress of change to the baby's
calcium supplement added to the diet.
gastrointestinal tract. The recipes and ingredients
 Doves and pigeons, which are strictly seed and grain
should be on hand prior to the start of baby season in
feeders, can be tube fed with a commercial brand
order to be prepared. All too often the babies seem to
of baby bird food formulated for psittacines. These
come in at 10 p.m. on a Sunday night, just as the pet
powdered diets, which are ready to use after adding
stores close.
water, are available in most pet stores.
 Proper bird species identification is necessary to
Hummingbirds need a commercial nectar such as
choose the best diet recipe. Read as much natural
Nekton or Roudybush. Pet store or homemade
history information as is available to learn about food
sugar-water diets (although good for providing
preferences, feeding methods, food presentation, and
energy) only provide calories and will not keep a
 normal behavior
hummingbird alive long term.
The following are some examples of passerine
hand-rearing formulas used at rehabilitation centers:
AdditionalInformation
Avoid allowing formula to dry on the baby's beak,
1 part soaked Hills Science Diet Feline Growth
nares, or feathers. Remove any spilled food while it is
1 part Gerber's High Protein Cereal
still moist and easier to remove. Food that is allowed
1 tsp. bone meal
to dry on feathers may cause feather loss or a skin
Water to proper consistency (Evans 1986)
infection. Use a damp cotton swab to clean food off
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
373
of the baby; wiping should be in the direction of the
as ruffled feathers, squinted or closed eyes, sneezing,
feather growth.
clicking, mouth breathing, dull feathers, lethargy, diar-
Always try to house single baby birds with conspe-
rhea, squatting instead of standing, and wing droops.
cifics. The rehabilitator should be contacted to help
Next, a physical examination should be performed,
place the baby with other same-species orphans or,
looking for obvious wounds and fractures along with
even better, into a foster parent situation. Arrangements
 more subtle signs of shock and dehydration. (See the
should be made to get them together as soon as pos-
section on performing the physical exam under *Initial
sible. The benefts of orphaned animals being raised
Exam," above). Body and feather condition should be
with natural or foster siblings are immeasurable. They
   aa    
learn critical behavioral and social skills from interact-
to determine if the bird is thin or emaciated. When
ing with the correct species.
checking for lacerations or bruising, feathers can be
Never forget that the goal of wildlife rehabilitation
blown out of the way to better visualize the skin
 is to provide temporary care with the goal of releasing
underneath.
the animal with its best chances to survive. Technicians
Restraint for adult songbirds is relatively easy.
must above all do no harm and never release an animal
Pressure should not be placed on a bird's sternum
that cannot properly care for itself. To achieve this
because it breathes by expanding its chest and abdomi-
goal:
nal cavities. Using the "bander's" hold enables the
examiner to check the bird thoroughly while keeping
·Limit talking around wildlife.
a secure yet gentle hold on the patient (Figure 20.9).
 Avoid improper imprinting.
 This hold should be used for any handling, medicating
·]
 Keep adequate notes that can be used as reference
 or force feeding procedures.
material later. Good record keeping may also
An accurate weight in grams should be obtained
prevent mishaps due to shift changes in caregivers.
and monitored every twenty-four to forty-eight hours.
 Limit handling and activity to feeding and cleaning
The bird should be kept warm and hydrated before
time only.
attempting to feed it. If the bird feels thin; has bright
·
 Never house wild birds near domestic pets, espe-
green stools, sunken eyes, wrinkled skin; or is weak
cially pet birds.
and lethargic, it should be offered two to four drops
· Clean all food containers and tools with hot
of rehydrating solution orally by placing the drops
soapy water after each use and allow them to
behind the glottis into the throat every ffteen minutes
air dry or towel dry them before the next use.
for the first one to two hours.
Dip feeding instruments in 5% diluted bleach or
 Dehydrated birds can receive SQ fluids injected into
soak in 10% diluted Nolvasan for thirty minutes
their wing web or into the loose medial skin folds
once daily.
where the legs join to the body. Injecting fluids,
although more painful than delivering oral fluids due
CARING FOR ADULT PASSERINE
(SONG) BIRDS
Initial Care
The bird's history should be obtained on the intake
form to help diagnose why the bird came in to the
clinic. The rescuer might know for certain that it was
hit by a car few into a window, or was caught by a
cat. If no cause is known, good “investigative” ques-
tions should help find the answer. If the bird was found
in the driveway, ask if there is a nearby garage with
windows it might have collided with. If the bird was
found under a bird feeder and has had its tail feathers
pulled out, the rescuer should be questioned about the
possibilities of outdoor cats in the area.
Ater the history taking, a visual exam should be
performed frst before touching the bird. The bird
Figure 20.9. Bird bander's hold. (Photo courtesy of
should be observed for signs of disease or illness such
Melanie Haire.)
374
Chapter 20
to the needle prick, ultimately may be less stressful due
 depressors, halved syringe case, etc.) covered in Vetrap,
to the larger volume that can be given at one time,
 depending on the size of the bird, are needed. The joint
which decreases the number of times the bird must be
above and below the fracture site must be covered. If
restrained.
this is not possible, it is best not to bandage at all and
arrange to have the bird transported to an experienced
Immobilizing Fractures
avian veterinarian or rehabilitator immediately.
Immobilization of any fractures should be performed
d m an on pe aq  a
 as soon as possible so the bird does not further injure
blood flow from leaving the foot, and the foot and toes
itself. The wildlife veterinary technician should know
may swell. The toes must be evaluated daily for swell-
how to apply all of the following bandages. The vet-
 ing, loss of function, or discoloration.
erinarians may not be able to look at every bird that
Foot injuries can be bandaged several different ways.
 comes in with a fracture, but if the proper stabilizing
In small songbirds, toes can be taped down individually
wrap is applied, the fracture may have all it needs to
papped e 'spiq rasreiui ,'aoysmous, preoqpres e otuo
heal properly. Do not allow a bird with a fractured
ball bandage can be made to keep the toes aligned and
bone to sit in the hospital without a proper bandage.
the talons from puncturing the footpads (Figure 20.11).
Waiting one or two days to apply the wrap could be
A circular piece of cardboard is cut to fit in the bottom
too late.
of the bird's foot and is padded with cotton. The pad is
 If the bone needs more than a bandage to properly
taped in place by wrapping the cotton padding with
mend (long bones on larger birds such as ducks, owls,
Vetrap between the bird's toes. The toe tips should be
 and hawks), the wrap should still be applied until
the veterinarian(
can schedule the bone surgery
procedure.
 If the lower leg (tibiotarsus or tarsometatarsus) is
fractured on a small bird, a tape splint usually works
well (Figure 20.10). The leg is held in a natural *perch"
position and tape is placed on each side of the leg. Seal
the tape firmly to the leg by pinching it with a pair of
hemostats. The more tape applied, the more stable the
splint, but remember the weight of the apparatus
Footpa
versus the small size of the patient. The bird should be
able to stand and perch with this type of bandage if it
is properly trimmed.
A fractured femur needs more than tape. Cast
 padding and a splint (made of toothpicks, tongue
Cottonwrap
Vetrap
Figure 20.11. A padded bandage used in avian foot
and leg injuries. (A) A cardboard plate is cut to fit
the foot and padded with cotton wrap and covered
with tape. (B) The foot pad is placed against the
Figure 20.10. Tape splint used for fracture
bottom of the foot with the toes properly positioned
immobilization in thelower leg bones of small birds.
and in extension. (C and D) The foot pad is
Tape is placed on each side of the leg with the sticky
wrapped in place with cotton padding. (E) Cotton
sides facing each other. The tape is pressed together
padding is covered with Vetrap. (F) Completed
with hemostats. (Permission for drawing use granted
bandage. (Permission for drawing use granted by the
by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources
Georgia Department of Natural Resources and
and Branson Ritchie, DVM, MS.)
Branson Ritchie,DVM, MS.)
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
375
1
for two to three weeks, as long as the bird is confined
to strict cage rest for several days after the bandage is
removed. After this cage-rest period, the bird should
have manual limb massage and gradual limb exten-
Cottor
sions. After a good callus is formed, the bird can be
padding
 placed in a fight cage.
Housing Adult Birds
C
Make sure the housing is as stress free as possible.
 Cover the fronts of all bird caging and if possible give 
the bird natural materials to hide in. Reptariums (See 
mesh cages in Appendix 10) and the collapsible framed,
mesh laundry hampers (available at discount stores)
make excellent injured adult bird caging due to their
Figure 20.12. Figure-eight bandage used for the
soft-sided, feather protecting material and light weight.
immobilization of the avianwing.(A) Cotton
 Reptariums are machine washable. Perching of various
padding is wrapped from the carpus to the humerus
heights should be provided if the bird is capable of
and back to the carpus. (B) The same pattern is
 standing.
repeated with the Vetrap. (C) The Vetrap is passed
As soon as its hospital stay is over, the patient
around the midbody and taped in place. (D) A
should be transferred to the rehabilitator to be housed
properly bandaged wing should be held at the same
 in an appropriate aviary.
level as the normal wing. (D) If the wing drops
below the level of the normal wing,the bandage
Feeding Adult Birds
should be removed and reapplied.(Permission for
Adult birds should be encouraged to eat on their own
drawing use granted by the Georgia Department of
by providing natural food items that they may recog-
Natural Resources and Branson Ritchie, DVM, MS.)
nize. Use whole berries, millet sprays, seed mixes, and
live insects along with grains, cracked corn, bran, and
chopped fruits. A stressed bird usually will not eat, so
slightly visible so they can be checked for bandage tight-
noise, bright lights, visual disturbances, and extreme
ness. The bandages should be kept as clean and dry as
temperatures should be reduced to allow the avian
 possible because replacing the wrap before the bone is
patient to settle down and eat.
healed will delay or prevent healing.
 If after one day the bird has not eaten, it must be
For wing fractures, as with all fractures, the joint
force fed at least four times a day. This can be per-
above and below the fracture site should be immobi-
formed by gently placing a thumb and forefinger at the
lized. The figure-eight bandage holds the wing closed
corners of the mouth and pressing it to open or by
in a natural position and is adequate to immobilize a
using the other hand to open the mouth and placing
fracture on any portion of the wing as well as reduce
food carefully down the throat behind the glottis.
the weight of the wing on the shoulder. If the fracture
Most birds will swallow when food is placed far
involves the humerus, continue the wing bandage
enough back. Use one of the homemade diets in the
around the body to immobilize the shoulder joint
 nestling care section for hand feeding or Lafeber's
(joint above the fracture).
Emeraid Psittacine (powdered diet for debilitated
If using the body wrap, be sure to pass the tape
birds) for tube feeding. For prey eating birds, pow-
under the good wing on the opposite side and across
dered diets such as Emeraid Carnivore or Oxbow
the body on the upper keel (Figure 20.12). The fit
Critical Care for Carnivores are good products for
should be snug but not tight enough to interfere with
tube feeding.
respiration or circulation. When this bandage is prop-
Sometimes force feeding a bird several times is all
erly applied, the bird should be able to stand and perch
it takes to get it to start self feeding. Make sure it is
while holding the wing in a normal anatomic position.
tating enough and maintaining a healthy weight.
All wing feathers should be in alignment as well. If the 
 Live insects (wax worms, mealworms, and crickets)
bandage pulls the wing in an abnormal position, the
should be “gut-loaded" with healthy, nutritionally rich
bandage should be removed and reapplied.
 ingredients and not fed off the shelf from a bait store.
Bird bones heal much more quickly then mammal
When insects are purchased, they usually have eaten
bones do, so bandages usually only have to remain on
much of the food that was in the container they have
376
Chapter 20
been living in, so they need to be provided with nutri-
determine its proper diet and feeding schedule. Begin
tion for at least twenty-four hours before feeding them
 offering the infant hand rearing formula.
to wildlife patients. Mealworms can be put into a
plastic tub with a ventilated lid at room temperature
Identification
with coarsely ground whole grains such as corn meal,
A bird rehabilitator should be contacted to help iden-
rolled oats, wheat bran, or game bird starter. For
tify the species. Field guides may also be helpful. Ducks
moisture, a cut-up potato can be added to the top of
and some dabbling water birds have webbed feet or
the mixture. Crickets and wax worms can also eat this
toes.
Hatchling wood ducks have a visible 
egg
mixture. Fresh-dug earthworms are also good to offer
tooth on the tip of the bill. Most shore birds have very
to insectivorous or omnivorous birds, especially robins,
long legs and can run quite fast. Be sure to look at the
thrashers, ducks, thrushes, jays, and mockingbirds.
beak shape. Ducks and geese have wide, flat bills,
See Appendix 6 for the average weight of selected
whereas the killdeer have thinner, tapered beaks
North American songbirds (Dunning 1984).
(Figure 20.13). Quails and pheasant have short, sturdy,
conical beaks.
PRECOCIAL BIRD BASIC CARE
Housing
A box or plastic tote lined with newspaper covered
At hatching, precocial birds are covered in feather
with paper or ravel-free cloth towels will do. The
down, self feeding, ready to leave the nest, and can see,
container should be covered with a screen top because
hear, run, and swim. These baby birds have no flanges
some ducks (wood ducks) can jump very high. These
on the sides of the mouth and have small, developed
birds are messy and cardboard will become soiled and
wings. The eggs of the precocial bird contain more
need to be replaced often.
nutrients and require more time to hatch, but the chick
A wild bird should never be housed in a wire pet
hatches out fully developed.
 bird or mammal cage. A ceramic brooder-heating
These birds (ducks, geese, killdeer, pheasant, quail,
element or a brooder heat light can be hung in one half
woodcock, and other shorebirds) have different dietary
of the cage, making sure the enclosure is large to allow
and housing needs than altricial birds.
the birds to move in and out of the heated area.
It is very important to provide these birds with
Initial Orphan Care
hiding places, such as a small box on its side. A feather
Never feed any animal until it is warm. An incubator,
duster can be hung down inside the cage so babies can
brooder, or heat light should be used to warm a chilled
snuggle up under it for security, shelter, and comfort.
infant. Despite their downy covering, precocial chicks
All these cage items will get soiled and need to be
need to be kept at slightly warmer ambient air tem-
cleaned and kept as dry as possible.
perature than altricial chicks. Temperature guidelines
Waterfowl splash in the water bowl and then seek
are:
the heat lamp to dry off underneath. As the birds grow
Newborn chicks (zero to seven days): 90°F to 95°F
Chicks developing quills: 85°F to 90°F
Birds with quills and developing feathers: 60°F to 85°F
These chicks, if healthy, usually eat readily and
drink on their own. They are social and eat better in
 groups of similar species and ages. If the chick is not
eating, its dehydration and temperature should be
checked. Some chicks can be quite nervous, and cover-
ing the box or cage with a towel may help them to eat.
If the bird is dehydrated, it can be offered drops of
Pedialyte every fifteen minutes for the first several
hours or until it passes a normal stool. The fluid may
have to be placed into the throat beyond the glottis if
the baby is weak and dehydrated.
The bird should be examined for injuries, cuts,
Figure 20.13. One-week-old killdeer. (Photo
mites, or wounds. The species should be identified to
courtesy of Melanie Haire.)
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
377
feathers and spend less time under the lamp, it can be
ADULT PRECOCLAL BIRDS
gradually raised up until the birds are weaned off of
(INCLUDING WATERFOWL
the supplemental heat.
AND WADING BIRDS)
Do not provide waterfowl with a pool unless
directed to do so by an avian rehabilitator. Baby ducks
Identification of the species and familiarity with its
and geese should never be left unattended during
natural history, food preferences, and habitat is
swimming time. If instructed to provide “swim time,
required. An examination for injuries should be
a painter's roller tray can be used to provide a ramp
performed.
and shallow swimming area.
Care must be taken with the water birds with long,
 These young chicks need appropriate shelter and a
pointed beaks. Herons, cranes, kingfishers, loons, and
quiet room to prevent stress that can oftentimes be
egrets will stab at faces and eyes when they feel threat-
fatal.
ened. Smaller birds such as grebes, coots, gulls, and
As they grow, so should their housing. Older juve-
rails can strike very quickly with short sturdy beaks
niles and adults need to have a large outside predator-
and give quite a pinch as well. Coots kick and use the
proof pen with a pool. This type of setup cannot
spurs on their legs to defend themselves. Ducks, geese,
usually be provided at a veterinary clinic or at most
and swans can be diffcult to restrain due to their
people's homes, so transferring the birds to the reha-
strength and size. These birds will bite and twist with
bilitator or wildlife center is recommended.
their powerful bills and will beat at their restrainer
with their very powerful wings. Take precautions,
wear goggles, secure their heads, and work in pairs
Feeding
when restraining these animals. Even the small species
Food and water bowls should be placed on the side
are surprisingly strong and difficult to restrain.
away from the heat. Caution must be used with the
Examination, body temperatures, hydration, and
selection of the water bowl to prevent babies getting
 treatments are similar to other adult birds. See Chapter
soaked and chilled. Using a Mason jar filled with water
2, "Psittacines and Passerines. "
and inverted over a shallow lid or a commercial
These species are particularly susceptible to lead
chicken waterer (available at most feed and farm
 poisoning (from ingesting fishing sinkers and lead bird-
S  s      r
shot used for duck hunting), fish hook ingestion,
fourths full with rocks or marbles also provides a
monoflament entanglement, and botulism due to their
readily available drinking source and keeps the babies
aquatic nature.
from jumping into the water.
Diving birds (grebes, some sea ducks, loons, etc.)
 Food varies slightly between species but most do
are built for floating, swimming, and diving, but not
well on crumbled, unmedicated chicken starter. Some
walking, so many times these birds are presented with
food can be sprinkled on the cage floor, as well as in
"broken legs" because they will not or cannot stand.
a food bowl.
The legs on these birds are positioned far back on the
A very young, single chick may be unsure how and
body, for propelling through the water, instead of
        
underneath the body, for walking. Many times these
and imitating its mother. Contact other bird rehabilita -
birds get tired during migrational movements and
 tors so another chick can be placed with it. Sometimes
come down for a rest. If a loon lands on a wet pave-
these birds need to be force fed until placement can
ment or parking lot thinking it looks like water, it has
be found. In the meantime, try to teach the youngster
no way to take off again. Many times these birds just
 o  e  o   , q
need a few meals and to be placed on a large body of
motion also seems to help stimulate feeding behavior,
water to allow for takeoff. This is a good example of
so the grain can be gently rolled around and tiny live
why learning about a patient's natural history is so
mealworms, earthworms, or crickets offered to inspire
mportant.
the infant to begin to peck. In addition, floating
chopped greens and small amounts of chick starter on
Housing
water tends to stimulate unsure waterfowl.
 A plastic pet kennel works well if a water bird needs
The food should be changed twice a day, and small,
 to be housed. Keeping the pen clean can be challenging
live mealworms, chopped greens and berries, cracked
due to the large volume of liquid stool these birds
corn, and crickets can be offered as the babies grow.
produce. If the bird is too weak to hold itself upright
Fresh food should always be available, because the
or has a fractured leg, placing it in a box half flled
birds eat free choice.
with shredded ne wspapers makes a good body support
378
 Chapter 20
setup and also allows the feces to drop away from the
Feeding should always be the last procedure done on
bird, which keeps the feathers and vent clean.
 any animal and should be immediately followed by
Water birds must keep their feathers in perfect con-
low stress, quiet, and privacy to aid the animal in the
dition and naturally do so by constant preening and
digestion process. Sudden loud noises or big move-
bathing. If the birds are strong enough and do not have
 ments may cause the animal to regurgitate the food
a bandage on, they can be provided with a bath water
and possibly even aspirate it.
source either in the enclosure or in a sink or tub to
 Some fish eaters can learn to fish live minnows or
allow them to bathe and keep their feathers water-
goldfsh out of a pan or bucket. Ducks, geese, coots,
proof. Caution should be used with pools because even
shorebirds, and similar species may eat live insects and
ducks can drown, especially if they are weak or not
chopped greens if provided in addition to the grain
waterproof. It may be best to transfer these birds out
 diet. Another hint is to float grain, insects, and greens
as soon as possible and allow the rehabilitator to do
on top of a dish of water. Sometimes this more natural
this process.
 presentation stimulates the birds to stab or dabble at
Many water-type birds do not have feet designed
the groceries.
for long-term perching. A kennel, box, or mesh cage
can have a flat "shelf-type" perch or a split log avail-
 able to those that feel comfortable standing up off the
GENERAL ORPHAN MAMMAL CARE
ground.
These adult birds, especially the herons, rails, and
What to Do First
egrets, are quite nervous and will pace and wear them-
Never feed any animal until it is warm and hydrated.
selves out trying to escape if they do not fel secure
 Use a heat lamp, heating pad on low and always under
and hidden. These birds should be provided with the
the cage (not inside), or a warm water bath to warm
quietest place possible with covering on all sides of the
up a cold baby. Once the baby is at normal body
caging.
temperature, it can start to be rehydrated. Oral fluids
such as lactated Ringer's solution (LRS) or Pedialyte
Feeding
are the preferred method of rehydration for infants.
Although the commercial game bird grain mixes are
Subcutaneous fluids (LRS) can be used if the animal is
sufficient in nutrition for short-term care of many of
moderately dehydrated. Consider all animals that
these species, getting them to eat it is the biggest chal-
come into rehabilitation to be dehydrated to some
lenge. These birds, with the possible exception of some
extent. Fluids should always be warmed frst before
ducks and geese, tend to be very difficult captive
 administering, regardless of route.
feeders. One problem is that many are normally used
The infant should be weighed and fluids provided
to feeding in or while on the water. Sitting on a towel 
 at the rate of 40 to 50 ml/kg over a twelve- to twenty-
in a box is too unnatural, and they don't understand
four-hour period or until hydration is complete. See
the concept of eating with a bowl of food in front of
 the fluid chart in the glossary in Appendix 9 under
them. Due to their nervous nature, they might not ever
"Dehydration."
feel secure enough to eat.
 Often these species need to be tube fed or force fed
Introducing Formula
while they remain in captivity. Kingfishers, herons, and
 Once the baby animal is warm and properly hydrated,
gulls must be fed fish, insects, and/or mice. To force
formula can begin to be fed gradually. It should be
feed a fish, be sure to insert the fish headfirst into the
 introduced slowly to prevent digestive problems. Never
bird’s mouth and gently push it down the throat until
start an animal on full-strength formula. It should take
the bird swallows. Holding the head in an upright
twenty-four to seventy-two hours to introduce a milk
position for several moments after feeding each fish
formula, depending on the degree of initial dehydra-
may help prevent the bird from regurgitating the meal.
tion. A severely dehydrated animal's digestive tract
Several tube feeding formulas that can be used
cannot handle full-strength or solid foods. Feeding
depending on the diet requirements of the species
these food items prematurely could prove to be fatal.
include Emeraid II, infant bird hand rearing powdered
The following dilution procedure should be followed:
diets, Clinicare (liquid diets made for debilitated dogs
or cats), ground game bird pellets mixed with water,
Day 1: 25% full-strength formula/75% water or
or blended fish.
Pedialyte
All of the medical procedures, cleaning, moving.
Day 2: 50%
6full-strength formula/50%water or
 and so on should be done before feeding is attempted
Pedialyte
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
379
Day 3: 75% full-strength formula/25% water or
one feeding (100*F to 102*F; warm but not hot on a
Pedialyte, OR 100% full-strength formula if no
wrist). One way to warm formula is to drop formula-
diarrhea develops and the infant remains hydrated
filled syringes into a mug of warm water. Using an
electric coffee mug warmer may be helpful to keep
 If diarrhea or bloating develops, at any stage, the
multiple syringes warm. Also, remember to cap syringes
concentration of formula should be reduced or replaced
or milk will leak out and mug water will refill the
entirely with Pedialyte until the situation clears up.
syringes, resulting in diluted formula.
Veterinary advice should be sought if problems persist
Do not use the microwave to heat formula. This
for more than twenty-four hours.
method tends to cook the milk and leaves the contents
If bloating occurs, gently message the infant's
une venly heated.
abdomen while submerging the bottom half of its body
The infant should be weighed and the species care
in a warm water bath. Also consider giving oral
pages in Appendix 7 used to determine the quantity of 
simethicone drops for gas relief if the massaging is not
food intake.
completely effective. Using a probiotic (Lactobacillus)
Some infants prefer to be stimulated to urinate and
product, such as Benebac, can be helpful to reduce
defecate prior to feeding. Use of a cotton ball or soft
stress to the babies' intestinal tract and help prevent
facial tissue dipped in warm water to lightly wipe the
or treat diarrhea.
babies abdomen and genitals will suffce. This process
 If the neonate regurgitates formula, feeding should
also seems to stimulate the nursing reflex in some
be discontinued and that feeding skipped altogether.
species.
At the next feeding, the formula can be thinned with
water by half and the volume reduced. Seek veterinary
Selecting Milk Formulas
advice if the vomiting continues.
Many brands of milk replacers are available, and there
are as many variations of how to use them. Again, this
Preparing Formulas
is when it becomes critical to contact a local rehabilita-
Milk formulas should be mixed according to the label's
tor. The importance of using the correct diet
instructions using warm water to help dissolve the
cannot be stressed enough. Do not try to switch for-
powdered milk. Ready-to-use liquid formulas are also
mulas unless the baby is having trouble digesting
available, but they tend to be more expensive. Once
the milk replacer that has been chosen. The animal
the can is opened, unused milk must be discarded after
 transfer process will be much easier on the infant if the
seventy-two hours, making this sometimes wasteful
same formula that the rehabilitator will be using is
(Figure 20.14). Enough milk formula should be made
chosen.
up to last for twenty-four hours and kept refrigerated.
 Of the many commercial formulas available, no one
When ready to feed, only enough should be heated for
milk substitute meets the needs of all species. Substitute
 domestic animal milk formulas for puppies, kittens,
lambs, and foals have been used successfully. Recently
a commercial line of milk replacers, formulated for
wildlife, has become available. Due to space limita-
tions, this chapter does not cover detailed wildlife
nutritional requirements and comparisons. Refer to
the species care sheets in Appendix 7 for general diet
guidelines. Good reference articles and books are
 available through the National Wildlife Rehabilitators
Association(
(NWRA)  and  International  Wildlife
Rehabilitation Council (IWRC) on wildlife nutritional
requirements. The company Pet-Ag has been manufac-
turing milk replacer products since 1930 and most of
the wildlife nutritional studies have been done on their
products (e.g. Esbilac, KMR, Multi-Milk, Zoological
Milk Matrix). Homemade formulas are sometimes
used but these rarely meet the complete nutritional
Figure 20.14. Three-month-old river otter enjoying a
requirements for wildlife. Cow's milk is not compati-
boul of Esbilac milk formula. (Photo courtesy of
ble with the natural milk of most wild animals and
Melanie Haire.)
tends to cause gastrointestinal problems.
380
Chapter 20
Syringe Feeding
Use the smallest syringe that will hold the needed
volume of formula. This provides the most accurate
 measurement of the animal's formula intake and the
best flow control.
B
Many animals resist the first few feeding attempts
due to the newness of the plastic feeder and the taste
of the formula. However, after several feedings, they
begin to accept their foster care.
 Use of a soft rubber nipple (Catac) or silicone nipple
(Mothering Kit) on the end of the syringe often helps
facilitate the feedings. To help keep the nipple from
C
slipping off the syringe tip, remember to wipe the
syringe's slip tip dry and roughen the surface slightly
with a hemostat before slipping the nipple on. Make
Figure 20.15. “Preemie" feeding nipple. (A) A
sure that an overeager youngster does not pull the
multiple sample collection needle. (B) A 16-gauge IV
nipple all the way off and choke on it. It may be neces-
indwelling catheter. (C) Assembled. (Photo courtesy
sary to discontinue the nipple use once rodents' inci-
of Melanie Haire.)
 sors appear, due to their ability to chew the tip off and
 possibly ingest it.
 In the case of tiny neonates (i.e. newborn chip-
munks, flying squirrels, mice), a handmade “preemie
 Enlarge the opening of the syringe tip or nipple.
nipple” can be made from two common veterinary
Thin the formula.
supplies. A size 16 gauge intravenous indwelling cath-
 Use a smaller size syringe.
eter cut off about one-half inch from the end can be
used as the base for the nipple apparatus because it fits
To decrease flow rate:
onto any slip-tipped syringe. The nipple is made from
the rubber sleeve that covers the needle of a multiple-
Hold back on the syringe plunger.
sample blood collection needle used to draw blood.
+
 Remove air from syringe.
First, the rubber sleeve should be pulled down and
 Use another nipple with a smaller hole.
punctured with the collection needle to make the
 Add rice baby cereal to thicken the formula.
nipple hole. Then the sleeve is pulled off of the blood
● Use a larger size syringe.
collection device and slipped over the cut catheter. A
size 16 gauge catheter provides a snug fit for the nipple,
Each animal is different and several different
 and the apparatus is ready to attach to the feeding
syringes and nipple combinations may need to be tried,
syringe (Figure 20.15).
even when feeding litter mates (Figure 20.16).
Other feeding syringe attachment examples
 Individual infants may drink too quickly regardless of
are
tomcat catheters, feeding tubes, or teat infusion can-
what is done and the syringe will have to be moved
nulas. Any slip-tip syringe will work but the O-ring
away every few seconds to reduce the chance of the
type syringe is much smoother, and the rubber plunger
baby choking or aspirating formula.
doesn't stick and wear out as quickly as the regular
plungers do. (See the suppliers list in Appendix 10.)
Otber Feeding Implements
 Slow and steady pressure on the base of the syringe
Bottle feeding can be used for some species of animals.
should be used to allow infants to drink small amounts
 Pet nursers and puppy and kitten bottles are sometimes
at a time. Some species will nurse (i.e. squirrels, chip-
used with small wildlife such as squirrels and rabbits.
munks, raccoons, and beavers), while others may lap
Human baby bottles and nipples work for such species
(i.e. cottontails, opossums, and mink) at the tip of the
as large felids, canids, older raccoons, and otters.
nipple or syringe. Use the following methods to help
 Neonatal carnivores should be started out on a human
control the formula flow rate.
premature-infant-sized  nipple.  Hoofstock  prefer  a
To increase flow rate:
goat/foal-type nipple and bottle due to the size and
shape of their mouths. This method offers a faster
· Apply more pressure on the syringe.
formula delivery system but less control over milk flow
·Allow air into the syringe.
speed and quantity.
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
381
Mothering
Figure 20.16. (A) Mothering Kit silicone feeding
Figure 20.17. Three-week-old flying squirrel being
nipples. (B) Catac rubber feeding nipples. (C) Pet
fed with a silicone nipple and syringe. (Photo
nurser nipple tip tied to a catheter tip syringe.
courtesy of Melanie Haire.)
(Photo courtesy of Melanie Haire.)
and be wrapped in a cloth. They should never be fed
 Remember to make the size of the nipple hole
 on their backs because this could result in aspiration
appropriate for the animal. Holes can be made in the
of the formula (Figure 20.17).
nipple by several methods. By cutting the tip off with
Mammals should be fed their calculated amounts
scissors or cutting an "X" into the tip, different flow
until their stomachs are rounded but not tight. Never
 patterns are created. To create a very small round hole,
overfeed a baby because it can lead to diarrhea, bloat-
an appropriate-sized gauge needle is heated with the
ing, and perhaps death. Even with every effect made,
beveled tip in the flame. When the needle tip is hot,
occasionally babies will aspirate formula and get milk
allow it to melt through the center of the end of the
in their nose or lungs. If this happens, feeding should
nipple. With the needle still in place, the entire appa-
immediately be discontinued, and the baby should be
ratus should be placed in cold water until cool. Once
turned nose down and lightly tapped on its back. Any
the needle is removed, the hole remains approximately
bubbles or drops should immediately be wiped off as
the same size as the needle gauge.
they come out of the infant's nose or mouth to prevent 
Eyedroppers can be used for hand-feeding but tend
reinhalation.
to produce air bubbles and make the milk flow difficult
Once fed, all formula must be wiped off of the
to control.
mammal. Allowing the milk to dry on the skin or hair
Gavage feeding, or stomach tubing, is another
of an infant can result in hair loss or skin infections.
option for diffcult feeders, such as armadillos, opos-
 If the baby was not stimulated to eliminate before the
sums, and nervous cottontails, who do not suck or
feeding, this should be done afterward. Gently stroke
drink consistently from other implements.
the belly and anal area with a warm, moist cloth until
Stomach tubing can also be a lifesaving technique
the flow stops. After about a minute, stimulation
used with older juveniles and adult mammals but can
should be discontinued whether the baby has defecated
also be the most difficult to do correctly and safely.
or not. Stimulation can be discontinued when the
When using the stomach tube method, never feed more
infant's eyes are open and there is evidence that it is
then the calculated stomach
capacity
 volume.
eliminating on its own. Any uneaten formula should
 Remember that an emaciated animal's stomach capac-
 be thrown away; reheated milk should never be saved.
ity may be reduced by as much as 50%. Due to space
All feeding implements should be cleaned with hot,
limitation of this chapter, the gavage technique is not
soapy water after each feeding and a bottlebrush used
covered here. This method is covered in Chapter 9
to remove milk residue from hard-to-reach places
under "Techniques."
inside the syringes/bottles. Syringes, bottles, and
nipples should be disinfected once daily by soaking in
Feeding Procedure
an appropriate cleaning solution such as diluted 10%
Infant mammals should be fed in an upright position
Nolvasan or 5% bleach for ten to fifteen minutes, fol-
on a soft, warm surface. Some babies like to feel secure
lowed by a thorough rinse.
382
Chapter 20
All items should be allowed to completely dry
that the adventurous youngster cannot escape out of
before each use to reduce the chance of bacterial over-
 kennel door holes that are too large or unsecured cage
growth. Once they are cleaned and rinsed, feeding
lids. The supplemental heat and humidity can be
materials should be stored on an absorbent material
removed when the baby is furred and able to thermo-
such as a clean hand or paper towel or in a drying rack
regulate, and spends most of its time away from the
 until the next feeding.
heat. This time varies from species to species and even
from individual to individual.
Orphan Mammal Housing
Once the heat is no longer needed, begin to accli-
Most eyes-closed mammal infants can be housed in an
 mate the babies by placing their cage outside for short
incubator generally kept at 85°F to 95°F. A set of plans
 periods of time at first and then gradually lengthening
to make an incubator is available at the IWRC web
the time. Caution and common sense should be used
site: www.iwrc-online.org. A homemade incubator
with the placement of the cage, shade should be pro-
can be made from a plastic tote with a lid and ventila-
vided, and monitoring should be done for predators
tion holes. Some rehabilitators use glass or plastic
and sudden inclement weather. Acclimating usually
aquariums, cardboard boxes, plastic pet carriers, or
can wait until the animal has been transferred to the
laundry baskets, of appropriate height and size, for
rehabilitator's facility. Features such as nest boxes,
this stage. A heating pad set on low, placed a quarter
hammocks, shelves, and natural items can be added to
of the way to halfway under the tote, can provide the
the cage at this stage.
heat, and a water-soaked sponge placed in a plastic
The next phase usually begins once the mammals are
container with holes for evaporation can provide the
weaned, eating natural foods, acclimated to the outside
humidity. Make sure that moisture does not collect on
temperatures, and grown out of their cage. Preparing
the inside of the incubator by providing enough ven-
them for release by placing them in the large prerelease
tilation. A heat lamp can be used in place of a heating
cages should be done at the rehabilitator's facility.
pad but both should never be used at the same time
 Recommended housing materials, sizes, and stan-
(Figure 20.18). A soft, ravel-free cloth such as cotton
dards are also available at www.iwrc-online.org.
T-shirt, sweatshirt, or flannel or fleece material can be
used because fingers, toes, and nails are too easily
SPECIES CARE SHEETS
caught and twisted in the loops.
Once their eyes are open, baby mammals tend to
The species summary sheets provided in Appendix 7 are
become more active and they begin to explore their
 meant for quick reference only. Entire books have been
surroundings. When the mammals become
more
written on the care of each of these species and, when-
active, they can be placed in a larger enclosure to allow
ever possible, more than one source should be consulted
for more room to exercise, dig, or climb. Be careful
for more complete and detailed care. The charts are
included to serve as a summary of age determinators
and growth characteristics to provide the technician
with enough general information to accurately confrm
age and thus temporarily care for the most common
species.1
Due to regional variations, standardized
weights and infant developmental patterns are difficult
to predict. Factors such as geographic location, subspe-
cies, weather, season, and quantity and quality of food
are just a few things that determine how fast or large an
animal can grow. The species care sheets in Appendix 7
should only be referred to after reading the general
orphan ma mmal care section. See Appendix 10 for a list
of products mentioned in this chapter.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Figure 20.18. Two four-week-old gray squirrels on
supplemental heat. (Photo courtesy of Melanie
Avian illustrations (Figures 20.2, 20.3, and 20.4):
Haire.)
Illustrated by Linda A. Orebaugh, MS, AMI, from
Role of the Veterinary Technician in Wildlife Rehabilitation
383
the Care and Rehabilitation of Injured Native
Special thanks: To Michael Haire, Veola Herron,
Wildlife training manual. Permission for use granted
Michael Ellis, Mike Fost, and Sue Barnard for all
by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources
their help.
and Branson W. Richie, DVM, MS.
Raptor tail wrap procedure (Appendix 4): From
Raptor Rehabilitation, A Manual of Guidelines
REFERENCES
Offered by the Carolina Raptor Center. Permission
to use granted by Mathias Engelmann and Pat
Beaver P. 1984. Imprinting and Wildlife Rehabilitation. Suisun, CA:
Marcum.
International Wildlife Rehabilitation Council.
State and federal wildlife permit offices lists (Appendix
Crawford WC. 1988. Hand Rearing Birds of Prey. In: IWRC
Proceedings, Suisan, CA: International Wildlife Rehabilitation
1): International Wildlife Rehabilitation Council
Council. 1-6.
Membership Directory 2001. Names and numbers
Diehl S, Stokhaug C. 1991. Release Criteria for Rehabilitated Wild
are likely to change.
Animals.Symmpositm Praceedings.
St.
Cloud National
Raptor restraint illustration (Figure 20.1): Illustrated
Rehabilitators Association. 159-81.
by George Carpenter. Raptor Restraint, Handling.
Dunning JB. 1984. Body Weights of 686 Species of North American
 z   q s  P
Birds. Suisun, CA: IWRC.
Engelman M, Marcurm P. 1993. Raptor Rehabilitation, A Manual
the NWRA Volume 8 Symposium Proceedings.
of Guidelines Offered by the Carolina Raptor Center. Charlotte:
 Permission for use granted by the National Wildlife
Carolina Raptor Center.
Rehabilitators Association.
Evans RH. 1986. Care and feeding of orphan mammals and birds.
Photos: By Melanie Haire.
In: Current Veterinary Therapy IX, edited by Kirk RB.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
 Admission, examination, and animal care record forms
Fowler ME. 1986. Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. 2nd ed.
(Appendix 2): By Janet Howard.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
Handling and Restraint of Wildlife Species paper: By
Ivie D. 1999. Individual bird rehabilitator. Personal communication.
Florina S.
Tseng, DVM,
from
IWRC
1991
Johnson V. 1991. Wild Animal and Rehabilitation Manual,
ConferenceI
 Proceedings. Permission  granted for 
Kalarmazoo Nature Center Kalarmazoo: Beech Leaf Press.
Klingharmmer E. 1991. Imprint and Early Experience: How to Avoid
use by the International Wildlife Rehabilitation
Problerms with Tame Animals. Symposiurm Proceedings. St.
Council.
Cloud: National Wildlife Rehabilitators Association.
Guide to Identification of Hatchling and Nestling
Moore AT, Joosten S. 1995a. Euthanasia—The three stages of
Songbirds (Appendix 5): By Marty Johnson from
euthanasia. In NWRA—Principles of Wildlife Rehabilitation,
NWRA Principles of Wildlife Rehabilitation, The
The Essential Guide for Novice and Experienced Rehabilitators.
Essential Guide for Novice and  Experienced
St. Cloud National Wildlife Rehabilitators Association.
Pokras M. 1995. NWRA—Principles of Wildlife Rehabilitation,
Rehabilitators. Permission granted for use by the
Introduction. St. Cloud: National Wildlife Rehabilitators
National Wildlife Rehabilitators Association.
Association.
Section 7
Hematology
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Avian and Reptile Hematology
Denise I. Bounous
INTRODUCTION
from a healthy bird or reptile with no ill effects (Mader
2000, Campbell 1995). Therefore, approximately
Birds and reptiles are not so different as one may
3.5 mL can be withdrawn from an Amazon parrot
suppose. Phylogenetically, these species emerge closer
weighing 3.50 grams, but only 0.35 mL from a budgeri-
to each other than to mammals (Gauthier et al. 1988).
 gar weighing 35 grams. Thus, it is necessary to priori-
Hematology of both is similar, in that they have nucle-
tize which assays are to be performed when only small
ated erythrocytes that develop and mature in the bone
volumes are available.
marrow sinusoids, unlike mammalian erythrocytes,
 Blood for hematologic procedures must be collected
which migrate into the sinusoids and into vessels after
in  anticoagulant. Potential anticoagulants  include
developing into mature anucleate
erythrocytes
EDTA (ethylenediaminetetracetic acid), heparin, or
(Campbell 1967). However, these nucleated erythro-
sodium citrate. Heparin can interfere with staining of
cytes present problems for complete blood analysis.
blood cells, and using sodium citrate causes dilution
Automated hematology instruments do not accurately
of the blood, resulting in incorrect cell counts.
count nucleated erythrocytes. The morphology of
Comparison studies with the three anticoagulants
blood cells may vary, not only between animal groups
show that citrate causes significant changes in PCV as
of birds and reptiles, but also between species within
well as increased cell lysis.
a group (e.g. iguanas and chameleons or boas and rat
Samples for hematology that are collected into any
snakes). Additionally, there are variations in the white
of these anticoagulants should be evaluated within
blood cell differential among the different genera of
twelve hours of collection for best results, because
birds and reptiles. In some snakes, such as the boidae
greater than 50% lysis can occur at twenty-four hours.
family (e.g. boa constrictors, pythons), the predomi-
nant leukocyte is the azurophil, whereas other snakes,
such as rat snakes, have predominantly heterophils.
 Morphology of peripheral blood constituents can
also vary. Thrombocytes of some birds and boid
snakes are elongate and easily differentiated from
small lymphocytes (Color Plate 21.1), but thrombo-
cytes of the rat snake are small and round, very similar
to lymphocytes (Bounous et al. 1996) (Color Plate
21.2). When performing a differential leukocyte count
on birds or reptiles, it is advisable to scan the smear,
examining each cell type and identifying the character-
istics that can be used to classify the cell types before
actually starting the count.
BLOOD COLLECTION
Avian and reptilian blood volume is approximately
Plate 21.1. Blood smear from an owl: cluster of
10% and 5% to 8% of body weight, respectively, and
elongate thrombocytes. (Wright stain,EDTA,
approximately 10% of blood volume can be taken
original magnification x 100.) (See also color plates)
387
388
Chapter 21
or rapid stains such as Diff-Quick or Accustain). A
 properly made smear can be used to assess the number
of leukocytes and platelets, as well as evaluate eryth-
rocyte morphology.
LEUKOCYTES
Total Leukocyte Count
Leukocytes from birds are classified as heterophils,
eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes
(Campbell 2000). Reptiles have an additional leuko-
cyte, the azurophil (Hawkey and Dennett 1989, Frye
1991). In general, electronic counters cannot be used
for avian and reptilian leukocyte counts. Avian and
reptilian leukocytes are best enumerated using a hemo-
cytometer. Various stains have been reported for use in
Plate 21.2. Blood smear from a rat snake: cluster of
differentiating and counting types of leukocytes from
small round thrombocytes,one lymphocyte.(Wright
thrombocytes and erythrocytes. Using the Natt and
stain, EDTA, original magnifcation × 100.) (See also
Herricks staining method, all leukocytes and thrombo-
color plates)
cytes stain varying degrees of a blue-violet color. One
must be able to identify thrombocytes from leukocytes
Heparin is frequently used as the anticoagulant for
 in the hemocytometer to calculate the leukocyte count.
 avian and reptile blood samples only because it allows
Use of the Unopette #5877 eosinophil system con-
-ad aq on siseue Ansaoq pue oi yo
taining phloxine B, which stains avian granulocytes
formed on the same sample tube. Blood for biochemi-
(heterophils, eosinophils, basophils), is an indirect
cal analysis can be collected into lithium heparin or
 method for leukocyte counting. This procedure requires
into “serum” tubes without anticoagulant. However,
an accurate differential to calculate the number of
glucose, potassium, and chloride concentrations were
 leukocytes. After counting the number of cells staining
shown to change significantly at twenty-four hours in
an orange-red color on both sides of the hemocytom-
 python samples collected in lithium heparin (Davidson
eter chamber, the count is corrected for all leukocytes
et al. 2002). When possible, EDTA is the optimal anti-
(to include monocytes, lymphocytes, and azurophils)
coagulant for hematology analysis and serum for bio-
based on the differential as follows:
chemistry; however, the volume of blood that can be
removed from birds and reptiles frequently limits this
Total WBC =
optimization. Blood collected for biochemistry into
heparin or into tubes without anticoagulant should be
# of cells stained in the chamber x 1.1 x16
separated immediately to prevent artifactual changes.
% granulocytes/100
BLOOD SMEAR AND ASSESSMENT
300 x1.1x16
Example:
= 8,800 cells/μl
0.60
Smears should be made as soon as possible after blood
collection to avoid any deterioration of the cells.
Estimating the leukocyte count is highly variable
Methods for making smears include (1) using a
and not very accurate. A “guestimate” of the number
spreader slide across the slide containing the drop of
of leukocytes/μl blood can be made from a well-made
blood, and (2) placing a cover slip on top of another
a rad saonl yo raqu a hu aq rea
cover slip containing a blood drop, then pulling the
field (40 × objective) in ten fields, taking the average
two cover slips apart. The cover slip method requires
of the ten and multiplying by 1,500.
extra care in staining and must be fixed to a regular
glass slide to evaluate microscopically. Blood smears
Heterophils
are stained with classical Romanowsky-type stains,
Heterophils are functionally similar to the mammalian
containing the dyes azure A, azure B, methylene violet,
neutrophil. Heterophils are usually the most numerous
and methylene blue (e.g. Wright's stain, Giemsa stain,
leukocytes in pet bird blood (Color Plate 21.3). They
Avian and Reptile Hematology
389
Plate 21.3. Blood smear from a hawk: heterophil,
Plate 21.4. Blood smear from a tortoise: heterophil
erythrocytes containing hemoparasite,
withband-shaped nucleus and area ofbasophilic
Leucocytozoon. (Wright stain, EDTA, original
cytoplasm. (Wright stain, EDTA, original
magnification x 100.) (See also color plates)
magnification × 100.) (See also color plates)
are round cells with clear cytoplasm and prominent
eosinophilic, rod-shaped to oval granules, which may
partially obscure the nucleus. The nucleus of a mature
heterophil usually has two to three lobes containing
coarse, purple-staining chromatin. Immature hetero-
phils are rarely present in peripheral blood of birds or
reptiles, and usually are associated with inflammation
(Bounous et al. 1989). The nuclei of these immature
cells (toxic heterophils) have fewer lobes and may
appear mononuclear with more basophilic cytoplasm
and less mature granules (Color Plate 21.4). Very early
 granulocytes may be so poorly differentiated that gran-
Plate 21.5. Blood smear from an owl: toxic
ules are round and exhibit staining characteristics of
mononuclear heterophil with eccentric nucleus and
both eosinophilia and basophilia (Color Plate 21.5).
both basophilic andeosinophilic granules.(Wright
Heterophils of reptiles are similar to those of birds,
stain, EDTA, original magnification × 100.) (See also
with some subtle differences. This cell can account for
color plates)
approximately 30% to 45% of leukocytes in reptiles.
Mature heterophils of reptiles contain an oval-to-len-
 inflammation. Heteropenia may also occur with severe
ticular nucleus that can be eccentrically located in the
inflammation that exceeds or affects bone marrow
cell with a chromatin pattern similar to that of birds.
production.
The nuclear color may range from more light blue in
lizards to purple in other reptiles. The reddish-orange
Eosinophils
granules can be pleomorphic across the species, ranging
Eosinophils are uncommon to few in the peripheral
from needlelike to oval and from large to small (Color
blood of birds and reptiles. They are round, peroxi-
Plate 21.6). Heterophil cytoplasm of reptiles can fre-
dase-positive cells, with pale basophilic cytoplasm and
quently have a foamy appearance. As in birds, imma-
many spherical reddish-orange cytoplasmic granules
ture heterophils in the peripheral blood of reptiles
(Color Plate 21.7). Eosinophil granules from birds may
indicates an increased demand for heterophils, such as
 appear brighter than heterophil granules. The nucleus
in conditions of inflammation (Mateo et al. 1984).
 is eccentrically located, and nuclear lobulation is less
Heterophilia, an increase in the number of circulat-
than in heterophils. Reptilian eosinophil size varies
ing heterophils, is usually a response to stres or
 with species; snakes have the largest cells, turtles and
390
Chapter 21
Plate 21.6. Blood smear from a tortoise: basophil
Plate 21.8. Blood smear from a lizard: basophil,
with granules obscuring the nucleus,ruptured
band heterophil, monocyte. (Wright stain, EDTA,
heterophil with loose granules. (Wright stain, EDTA,
original magnifcation × 100.) (See also color plates)
original magnifcation × 100.) (See also color plates)
species, they may compose from 0% to 40% of the
leukocytes in reptiles, with turtles having the highest
 percentage. Basophils are easily identifed because of
their large, round, deeply basophilic granules. The
round to oval nucleus is centrally or eccentrically
located and frequently obscured by the granules (Color
Plates 21.6 and 21.8). Reptilian basophils, as mam-
malian basophils, appear to be involved in processing 
immunoglobulin and histamine release (Sypek and
Borysenko 1988).
Lympbocytes
Lymphocytes occur in different sizes and somewhat
-ou lao ro P ane Aa ood sna
nuclear cells with variation in the appearance of the
nucleus and cytoplasm. Most are small to medium
Plate 21.7. Blood smear from a tortoise: heterophil
sized (5 to 10 μm) round cells with a centrally located
with ill-definedrod-shaped granules,eosinophil with
nucleus containing densely aggregated chromatin. The
round distinct granules, heterophil. (Wright stain,
nuclear shape is usually round to indented, and cyto-
EDTA, original magnification x 100.) (See also color
 plasm is pale blue. The nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio of
small lymphocytes is high. Larger lymphocytes (15 μm)
plates)
can have larger nuclei with more dispersed or reticu-
crocodilians have intermediate-sized cells, and lizards
lated chromatin and more cytoplasm, so that the N:C
have the smallest eosinophils. Eosinophils can make
ratio is less. Lymphocytes may have cytoplasmic blebs
up from 7% to 20% of the leukocytes in healthy rep-
and sometimes deeper blue staining cytoplasm at the
tiles. Increased eosinophil numbers in pet birds have
 periphery of the cytoplasm. Occasionally a few azuro-
been associated with parasitism (Campbell 1994).
philic granules may be present. Lymphocytes may
occasionally appear to be indented by surrounding
Basophils
cells on the smear. In some parrots (e.g. Amazons,
Basophils are uncommonly seen in the peripheral
Eclectus), lymphocytes are reported to be the most
blood of birds and most reptiles. Depending on the
common leukocytes in peripheral blood. Reptilian
Avian and Reptile Hematology
391
Plate 21.9. Blood smear from a lizard: monocyte
Plate 21.10. Blood smear from a rat snake:
with gray-blue cytoplasm and oval nucleus. (Wright
azurophil with granules at cytoplasmic periphery
stain, EDTA, original magnifcation × 100.) (See also
instilling a pinkish-purple bue. (Wright stain, EDTA,
color plates)
original magnification × 100.) (See also color plates)
lymphocytes are similar, and can compose as much as
granular  and  may sometimes contain  vacuoles.
80% of the circulating leukocytes (Color Plate 21.2).
Granules may impart a purplish hue to the cytoplasm,
Reactive lymphocytes are larger cells with large
particularly to the outer region (Color Plate 21.10).
nuclei containing dispersed chromatin and deeply
Occasionally azurophils are observed with vacuolated
basophilic cytoplasm. Reactive lymphocytes may result
cytoplasm (Dotson et al. 1995).
from antigenic stimulation of the immune system due
to infection or inflammation. Lymphocytosis in rep-
tiles can occur with viral diseases, inflammation,
ERYTHROCYTES
wound healing, and certain parasitic infections
(Campbell 1996).
Early erythrocytes are round with round nuclei. The
cells and nuclei become more oval, and the nuclear
Monocytes
chromatin becomes increasingly condensed as the cell
Monocytes are large mononuclear cells found less
 matures. Mature avian and reptile erythrocytes appear
commonly in the peripheral blood of birds and reptiles
 oval to elliptical on the blood smear with a centrally
than lymphocytes. These cells are more variable than
located nucleus that is also oval. It is not unusual for
most other types of leukocytes. They can be round to
the erythrocyte nucleus to be irregularly shaped in
oval to rhomboid shape. The nucleus may be small or
some reptiles (Color Plate 21.11). The cytoplasm of
large and round, indented, bilobed, or U-shaped.
the early erythrocyte is basophilic, becoming polychro-
matic, and then pale orange to pink when the hemo-
but with finely granular cytoplasm that is blue-gray,
globin and cell is mature.
and may also occasionally contain vacuoles. Monocyte
 The change in color from basophilic to eosinophilic
 nuclear chromatin is usually less clumped when com-
as the erythrocyte matures parallels the maturation of
 pared to lymphocytes (Color Plate 21.9). Monocytosis
hemoglobin in the cell. The mature erythrocyte varies
in birds can occur with chronic illness, such as tuber-
in size, and to some degree, in shape, depending on the
culosis, chlamydia, and aspergillosis.
species of bird or reptile. A slight variation in the size
of erythrocytes is normal. Polychromatophilic erythro-
Azurophils
cytes make up less than 5% of erythrocytes in the
Azurophils are unique cells identified only in reptiles.
peripheral blood (Color Plate 21.11). These cells can
(These cells eventually may be determined to be a type
be identified and enumerated as reticulocytes by stain-
of monocyte.) They are similar in size to heterophils
ing with a supravital stain, such as new methylene
with abundant cytoplasm that is finely to coarsely
blue.
392
Chapter 21
Plate 21.11. Blood smear from a lizard: basophilic
Plate 21.12. Blood smear from a rat snake: cluster
erythrocyte in the center, two thrombocytes.Note
of thrombocytes. (Wright stain, EDTA, original
the irregularly shapederythrocyte nuclei,tiny
magnification x 100.) (See also color plates)
cytoplasmic vacuoles in erythrocytes. (Wright stain,
EDTA, original magnifcation × 100.) (See also color
plates)
REFERENCES
The variation in size of erythrocytes and number of
Bounous DI, Dotson TK, Brooks RL Jr, Ramsay EC. 1996.
reticulocytes can be used to classify anemia. A greater
Cytochemical staining and ultrastructural characteristics of
degree of anisocytosis in the presence of increased
peripheral blood leukocytes from the yellow rat snake (Etaphe
polychromasia is indicative of responsive anemia. A
obsoteta quadrivitatta). Comp Haematol Int 6:86-91.
large number of hypochromatic erythrocytes is associ-
Bounous DI, Schaeffer DO, Roy A. 1989. Diagnosis of a coagulase
ated with an erythrocyte disorder such as iron defi-
Med Assoc 195:1120-22.
ciency anemia. Marked poikilocytosis may indicate a
Campbell F. 1967. Fine structure of the bone marrow of the chicken
maturation dysfunction. Occasionally erythrocytes of
and pigeon. J Morphot 123:405-40.
reptiles may contain small, clear cytoplasmic vacuoles 
Campbell TW. 1994. Hematology. In: Avian Medicine: Principles
that are not associated with any pathology (Color
and Application, edited by Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison
Plate 21.11).
LP, Lake Worth: Wingers Publishing Inc. 176-98.
Campbell TW. 1995. Avian Hematology and Cytology, 2nd ed.
Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Campbell TW. 1996. Clinical pathology. In: Reptile Medicine and
THROMBOCYTES
Surgery, edited by Mader DR, Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.
248-57.
Campbell TW. 2000. Hematology of Psittacines. In: Schalm's
Mature thrombocytes in birds and reptiles are round
to oval with a round to oval nucleus containing
Veterinary Hematology, edited by Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain
NC, Sth ed., Baltimore: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
clumped chromatin. Their shape can vary from one
1155-60.
species to another, but the cytoplasm is colorless to
Davidson D, Harr K, Raskin R. Hematologic and biochemical
pale gray. Thrombocytes frequently contain a few
changes caused by commonly used anticoagulants on Burmese
python (Python molurus bivitatus) blood over time. Vet Pathol,
small azurophilic granules. In some animals, thrombo-
in press.
cytes are difficult to discern from small lymphocytes.
Dotson TK, Ramsay EC, Bounous DI. 1995. A color atlas of blood
Thrombocytes occasionally occur in closely associated
cells of the yellow rat snake. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
groups in the smear, and this characteristic can be
17:1013-17.
helpful in identifying thrombocytes from small lym-
Frye FL. 1991. Hematology as applied to clinical reptile medicine.
phocytes (Color Plate 21.12). Thrombocytes have been 
In: Biomedical and Surgical Aspects of Captive Reptile
Husbandry, edited by Frye FL. 2nd ed. Malabar: Krieger
reported to have potential phagocytotic capabilities,
Publishing Company.
but in general function as do mammalian platelets
Gauthier J, Kluge AG, Rowe T. 1988. The early evolution of
(Bounous et al. 1989).
Amniota In: The Phylogeny and Classification of the Tetrapods,
Avian and Reptile Hematology
393
edited by Benton MJ, Volurme 1: Amphibians, Reptiles, Birds.
Mateo MR, Roberts ED, Enright FM. 1984. Morphological, cyto-
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
chemmical, and functional studies of peripheral blood cells of
Hawkey CM, Dennett TB. 1989. Color Atlas of Comparative
young healthy American alligators (Alligator mississippiensis).
Veterinary Hermatology. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Am J Vet Res 45: 1046-1053.
Mader DR. 2000. Normal hematology of reptiles. In: Schalm's
Sypek J, Borysenko M. 1988. Reptiles. In: Vetebrate Blood Cells,
Veterinary Hermatology, edited by Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain
edited by Rowley AF, Ratcliff NA. Cambridge: Cambridge
NC, Sth ed., Baltimore: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
University Press.
1126-32.
APPENDIX ONE
State/Federal Wildlife Permit Offices
STATE AND U.S. TERRITORY
Wildlife Permit Officer, Georgia DNR, Wildlife
WILDLIFE PERMIT OFFICES
Resources Division, 2065 US Hwy 278 SE, Social
Circle, GA 30025; 770-761-3044, 706-557-3060
Listings are alphabetical by state or territory.
fax; todd_nims.dnr.state.ga.us
Chief of Law Enforcement, Division of Wildlife/
Administrator of Forestry and Wildlife, 1151
 Freshwater Fisheries, PO Box 301456, Montgomery,
Punchbowl St., Honolulu, HI 96813; 808-587-
AL 36130-1456; 334-242-3467; Craig.hill@dcnr.
0166
alabama.gov
Chuck Harris, Department of Fish and Game, PO Box
Director of Wildlife Conservation, Department of Fish
25, Boise, ID 83707-0025; 208-334-2920
and Game, PO Box 115526, Juneau, AK 99811-
5526; 907-465-4148
Permit Offcer, Department of Natural Resources, 1
Natural Resources Way, Springfeld, IL 62702-
Wildlife Building Coordinator, Arizona Game and
1271; 217-782-6431; bclark1@dnrmail.state.il.us
Fish Department, 2221 W. Greenway Rd., Phoenix,
AZ 85023-4312; 623-582-9806
Linnea Petercheff, Wildlife Permit Officer, IN DNR,
402 W. Washington St. #W273, Indianapolis, IN
Karen Rowe, Wildlife Permit Officer, Arkansas Game
46204-2212; 317-233-6527,317-232-81.50 fax
 and Fish Commission, 31 Hallowel Lane, Humphrey,
AR 72073; 870-873-4302; krowe@agfc.state.ar.us
Daryl Howell, Iowa DNR, Wallace State Office Bldg..
502 E 9th St., Des Moines, IA 50319-0034; 51.5-
Nicole Carion, California Department of Fish and
281-8524, 515-281-6794 fax; daryl.howell@dnr.
Game, 601 Locust St., Redding, CA 96001; 530-
state.ia.us
357-8690; ncarion@dfg.ca.gov
Wildlife Permit Officer, CDOW/Special Licensing.
Wildlife Permit Officer, Kansas Department of Wildlife
6060 Broadway, Denver, CO 80216; 303-291-
and Parks, 512 SE 25th Ave., Pratt, KS 67124-
7143; kathy.konishi@state.co.us
8174; 620-672-5911, 620-672-2972 fax; kenb@
wp.state.ks.us
Wildlife Permit Officer, Department of Environmental
Protection, Wildlife Division, 79 Elm St., Hartford,
Permit Officer, Department of Fish and Wildlife
CT 06106-5127; 860-424-3011, 860-424-4078
Resources, #1 Game Farm Rd., Frankfort, KY
fax; laurie.fortin@po.state.ct.us
40601; 502-564-7109
Kenneth Reynolds, Program Manager, Division of Fish
Nongame Biologist, Louisiana Department of Wildlife
and Wildlife, 4876 Hay Point Landing Rd., Smyrna,
and Fisheries, Natural Heritage Program, PO Box
DE 19997; 302-653-2883, 302-653-3431 fax;
98000, Baton Rouge, LA 70898-9000; 225-763-
Kenneth.reynolds@state.de.us
3557
Wildlife Permit Officer, Florida Fish and Wildlife
Susan Zayac, Department of Inland Fish and Wildlife,
Conservation Commission, 620 S. Meridian St.,
284 State St, Station #41, Augusta, ME 04333-
Tallahassee, FL 32399-1600; 850-488-6253
0041; 207-287-5240
39.5
396
Appendix 1
Mary Goldie, DNR 580 Taylor Ave., Tawes State
Daron Barnes, 1722 Mail Service Center, Raleigh, NC
Office Bldg., Annapolis, MD 21401; 410-260-8540;
27699-1722; 919-707-0060
mgoldie@dnr.state.md.us
Sandra Hagen, North Dakota Game and Fish
Tom French, Asst. Dir Division of Fisheries and
Department,_.
100N]
Bismarck
Expressway,
Wildlife, Rte. 135, Westboro, MA 01581; 508-792-
Bismarck, ND 58501; 701-328-5382
7270 ext.163
Carolyn Caldwell, Asst.
 Administrator
Wildlife
 Dennis Knapp, DNR, Box 30031, Lansing, MI 48933;
Management and Research, Division of Wildlife, 2045
517-241-0330
Morse Rd. Building, Columbus, OH 43229-6693;
614-254-6300; carolyn.caldwell@dnr.state.oh.us
Nancy Huonder WL Rehab. Program Coordinator,
DNR Sect. of Wildlife, 500 Lafayette Rd., Box 25,
Law Enforcement Division, Department of Wildlife
St. Paul, MN 55155-4025; 651-259-5108; nancy.
Conservation, PO Box 53465, Oklahoma City, OK
huonde@dnr.state.mn.us
731.52-3465; 405-521-3719
Richard G. Rummel, Department of Wildlife, Fish and
 Carol Turner, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife,
Parks, Mississippi Museum of Natural Science,
3406 Cherry Ave. NE, Salem, OR 97303-4924;
2148 Riverside Dr., Jackson, MS 39202-1353; 601-
503-947-6318; carol.d.turner@state.or.us
354-7303, 601-354-7227 fax; richardr@mmns.
state.ms.us
Jason DeCoskey, Pennsylvania Game Commission,
2001 Elmerton Ave., Harrisburg, PA 17110-9797;
Lynn Totten, Department of Conservation, PO Box
717-783-8164
180, Jefferson City, MO 65102-0180; 573-522-
4115 x3322
Wildlife Permit Officer, Division of Fish and Wildlife,
277 Great Neck Rd, West Kingston, RI 02892; 401-
Stella Capoccia, Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks, 23
789-0281; lori.gibson@dem.ri.gov
S Rodney, Helena, MT 59601
Wildlife Permit Coordinator, Sandhills Research and
Nebraska Game and Parks Commission, 2200 N 33rd
Education Center PO Box 23205, Columbia, SC
St, Lincoln, NE 68503-1417
29224-3205; 803-419-964.5
Law Enforcement, Nevada Division of Wildlife, 4600
Wildlife Permit Officer, Game, Fish and Parks
Kietzke Lane D-135, Reno, NV 89502; 775-
Department, Division of Wildlife, 412 West Missouri,
688-1500
Suite 4, Pierre, SD 57501; 605-773-4191
Attn: Lt. Bruce Bonenfant, New Hampshire Fish and
Captive
Wildlife
Coordinator, 
TWRA/Law
Game Department, 11 Hazen Dr., Concord, NH
Enforcement Division, PO Box 40747, Ellington Ag
03301; 603-271-3127
Center, Nashville, TN 37204; 615-781-6647
Amy Wells, NJ Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife,
Jennifer Blecha, Nongame Permits Specialist, 4200
PO Box 400, Trenton,NJ 08625-0400; 609-292-
Smith School Rd., Austin, TX 78744-3291;
2965; amy. wells@dep.state.nj.us
512-389-4481
New Mexico Department of Game and Fish, Special
DNR Division of Wildlife Resources, 1594 W. North
 Use Permits Program, Law Enforcement Division,
Temple, Suite 2110, PO Box 146301, Salt Lake
PO Box 25112, Santa Fe, NM 87507; 505-476-
City, UT 84114-6301; 801-538-4701
8064
Law Enforcement Assistant, Agency of Natural
Patrick P. Martin, NYS Department Env. Con., 625
Resources, Fish and Wildlife Department, 103 S.
Broadway, Albany, NY 12233-4752; 518-402-
Main St., 10 South, Waterbury, VT 05671-0501;
898.5; pxmartin@qw.dec.state.ny.us
802-241-3727
Appendix 1
397
Diane Waller, VA Department of Game and Inland
Region 2: AZ, NM, OK, TX
Fisheries, PO Box 11104, Richmond, VA 23230-
1104; 804-367-9588
Kamile McKeever, US Fish and Wildlife Service,
Migratory Bird Permit Office, PO Box 709,
Judy Pierce, Division of Fish and Wildlife, 6291 Estate
Albuquerque, NM 87103-0709; 505-248-7882,
Nazareth 101, St. Thomas, VI 00802-1104;
505-248-7885 fax; kamile_mckeever@fws.gov
340-775-6762
Region 3: IL, IN, IA, MI, MN, MO, OH, WI
Peggy Crain, Department of Fish and Wildlife, 600
Capitol Way N., Olympia, WA 98501-1091; 360-
Andrea Kirk, US Fish and Wildlife Service, Migratory
902-2513, crainpsc@dfw.wa.gov
Bird Permit Office, Region 3, 1 Federal Dr., Fort
Snelling, MN 55111; 612-713-5449 (direct office),
Wildlife Permit Officer, Division of Natural Resources,
612-713-5436 (general line), 612-713-5393 fax;
Wildlife Resources, 1900 Kanawha Blvd., Bldg. 3,
andrea_kirk@fws.gov
Rm. 816, Charleston, WV 25305; 304-558-
2771
Region 4: AL, AR, FL, GA, KY, LA, MS, NC, SC, TN
Wildlife Veterinarian Liaison DNR, Box 7921, WM/6,
Carmen Simonton, US Fish and Wildlife Service,
Madison, WI 53707-7921; 608-267-6751, Jennifer.
Migratory Bird Permit Office, PO Box 49208,
haverty@dnr.state.wi.us
Atlanta, GA 30359; 404-679-7049
WL Law Enforcement Coordinator, Game and Fish
Region 5: CT, DE, ME, MD, MA, NH, NJ, NY, PA,
Department, 3030 Energy Lane, Casper, WY
RI, VT, VA, WV
82604; 307-233-6413
 David Dobias, Migratory Bird Permit Offce, PO Box
779, Hadley, MA 01035-0779; 413-253-8643
UNITED STATES MIGRATORY BIRD
Region 6: CO, KS, MT, NE, ND, SD, UT, WY
PERMIT OFFICES
 Janell Suazo, US Fish and Wildlife Service, Migratory
The following list includes only the US Fish and
Bird Permit Office, PO Box 25486 DFC 60154,
Wildlife Service Migratory Bird Permit Offices.
Denver, CO 80225-0486; 303-236-8171 x630
Region 1: CA, HI, ID, NV, OR, WA
Region 7: AK
Tami Tate-Hall, US Fish and Wildlife Service,
Migratory Bird Permit Office, 911 N.E. 11th Ave.,
Meg Laws, US Fish and Wildlife Service, Migratory
Portland, OR 97232-4181; 503-872-2715; tami
Bird Permit Office, 1011 E. Tudor Rd., Anchorage,
tatehall@fws.gov
AK 99503; 907-786-3693
APPENDIX TWO
Wildlife Admission/Exam/Care Forms
399
Admission Form
Clinic Name·Address · Phone Number
Date Admitted:
1
Case No.
Time Admitted:
AM / PM
 Rescuer Information
Name:
Address:
City:
State:
Zip
Phone:
Do you wish to be contacted via email about the animal's status?
Yes No
Email Address:
Animal Information
Species:
Young Adult
Date and time found:
AM /PM
Have you fed or medicated the animal? No
Yes, I gave it,
Location Found:
Describe circumstances found:
Was anyone bitten or scratched by the animal ? YesNo
Did you come in contact with blood/urine/feces/saliva?  Yes No
Other treatment/ comments:
Condition (Mark all that apply):
Cause of Admission:
Observations:
(circle one)
Easy to catch
L
Cat / Dog Attack
Limping
Hit by car
Can't stand
 Found on ground
Can't walk
In road
Panting
Abused
Bleeding
Exposed to Chemicals
Wet
Disease suspected
Oiled
 Nest disturbed
L
L
Cold
Hit window
 No apparent injury
L
Shot
Other:
L
 Other:
Describe condition:
Disposition:
Date:
Circle One: R
TR
TD
TE
PDOA
DIC
EOA
E
Location:
J US F&WS Notification (llegal activity, E/TH species, B/G eagle) Date:
400
Examination Form
Clinic Name·Address · Phone Number
Case No.:
Date:
Time:
AM / PM
Basic Information:
Species:
Age:
Sex: Male Female
Weight:
Visual Observation:
Weight Distribution:  Even  Abnormal
Notes:
Movement/Attitude:  Walks in circles  Head tilt Notes:
Alertness:  Comatose  Lethargic  Normal  Excitable
Notes:
Body Condition:  Emaciated
 Underweight
 Normal
 Overweight
Temp:  Hypothermic  Cool
 Normal  Warm 
Hyperthermic
Hydration:  Severely dehydrated  Moderate dehydration  Normal
Mouth:  Normal Plaque/lesions
 Cap refill
seconds
Notes:
response
Notes:
Ears:  Normal  Parasites  Discharge/bleeding
Notes:
Nose:  Normal  Discharge/bleeding  Cuts/abrasions 
Notes:
Fur/Skin:  Cuts/wounds  Abrasions  Bald spots
 Parasites Notes:
Gastrointestinal:  Normal  Mouth odor  Vomiting  Blood
Urogenital:  Normal  Discharge  No urine/stool
Notes,
Anal Area: Normal  Clogged  Loose  Parasites Notes:
Abdomen:  Normal  Bloated  Painful  Cuts/abrasions Notes:
Cardio/Pulmonary:  HR
/min.
RR
/min.
 Cough
 Chest sounds
Notes:
Muscular/Skeletal:  Swelling
 Lameness  Fractures/dislocation  Pain
response
401
Animal Care Record
Clinic Name·Address ·Phone Number
Case No.:
Species:
Description:
Weight Record
Date
Weight
Date
Weight
Date
Weight
Date
Weight
Feeding Chart
Date
Food
Amount
#Feedings
Feeding
Comments
Description
per feeding
Daily
Frequency
Treatment
Date
Medication/ Treatment
Comments/ Observations
Veterinary Care
 Date
Description
402
APPENDIX THREE
Handling and Restraint of Wildlife Species
Florina S. Tseng, DVM
HOWL Wildlife Center, P.O. Box 1037, Lynnwood, WA 98046
INTRODUCTION
allows you to act in a timely manner if problems
arise, e.g. breathing diffculties, hyperthermia etc.
Wildlife rehabilitation involves the care of sick, injured,
and orphaned wildlife. These animals, while in captiv-
 In addition to the basic considerations above, there
ity, require special husbandry practices—they must
are also environmental, behavioral, and humane
be transported, housed, and fed. When they are ill,
factors in handling and restraint. A major environmen-
they must be examined and treated. In addition, it is
tal consideration should be the possibility of hyper-
sometimes necessary to relocate “nuisance” wildlife to
thermia generated during the capture procedure. An
more appropriate locations. All of these situations
animal usually must be chased and caught before it
necessitate the handling and restraint of wildlife
can be restrained, which means increased muscle activ-
species.
ity for the animal. This, in turn, translates into heat
 generation, especially if the air temperature and humid-
ity are high. Smaller species tend to overheat faster
CONSIDERATIONS
than larger species because they have a higher meta-
bolic rate. Therefore, keep these factors in mind when
Restraint can be as direct as holding the animal in your
 planning restraint, e.g. try to plan activities for cooler
hands or as indirect as restricting an animal's move-
times of the day, if possible, and try to work quickly
ment by fencing. The responsibility for the animal's
 and efficiently if it is necessary to work during the
welfare is in the hands of the rehabilitator. The amount
hotter times of the day.
of restraint on the animal should be as minimal as
Animals dissipate heat by a variety of methods,
 possible, yet enough to accomplish the purpose of the 
including excretion of moisture  via evaporation,
restraint and afford the handler maximum safety.
urine, feces, etc. Moisture can be evaporated from
There are four basic considerations in the selection
the skin (as long as the relative humidity is not too
 of a restraint technique:
high) and the skin can become wet from sweat glands,
from the animals' licking themselves, etc. Evaporation
A. Human safety: Human safety always comes first
also takes place from the lungs of all breathing
 in the execution of any capture or restraint plan.
animals, so panting serves to increase cooling from the
 If a person is injured during an attempt to handle
respiratory tract. Be aware of restraint techniques that
the animal, all attention is focused on the care of
inhibit heat dissipation-e.g. a stockinette placed
that person and the capture will be unsuccessful.
around a bird's body prevents it from spreading its
B.
Animal safety: If the animal is hurt or dies during
wings to allow convection cooling, wrapping a
the capture/handling, you will not have achieved
mammal  in a heavy towel decreases evaporative
your goal.
cooling, and taping a beak shut inhibits the ability of
C.
Technique: Choose the proper technique
the bird to pant.
accomplish the desired result. Have you chosen a
 Clinical signs of hyperthermia include increased
technique that is likely to work given the environ-
heart and respiratory rates, open-mouth breathing,
ment and the expected behavior of the species?
and increased salivation/sweating in those species that
D.
 Observation: Can the animal be observed during
are capable of sweating. These signs may, in turn, lead
and after the procedure? Observation of the animal
to dehydration and subsequent loss of cooling ability,
during and after capture/handling and transport
weakness, depression, and incoordination. If the
403
404
Appendix 3
temperature rises above 108*F, eventually convul-
Never underestimate the power of confidence on
sions, collapse, and death will occur.
The converse side is hypothermia, or low body tem-
can all be used to psychologically restrain an animal
perature. This occurs while working outdoors in cold
or, conversely, will let the animal know that you are
temperatures, or when animals are housed in outside
afraid. Be sure of yourself, but never let yourself
areas on cold concrete or other surfaces. It may also
 become overly confident.
occur when in a weak or sedated animal that has lost
"Every restraint procedure should be preceded by
the ability to shiver and generate heat. Be wary of
 an evaluation as to whether or not the procedure will
placing these animals on a cold exam table because
result in the greatest good for that animal" (Fowler
their body temperature will quickly drop.
1985). Finally, consider the most humane method of
 Be aware of the immediate surroundings in which
capture. Try to reduce stress to the animal as much as
 you are working. You may be able to use the physical
 possible during the capture. These stressors include
environment to your advantage in capturing an animal.
visual, auditory, olfactory, tactile, or psychological
For instance, herding an animal by using portable bar-
factors. Be sensitive but do your job. This means being
riers (plywood) into a large pen or shed or against a
prepared ahead of time so you can work as quickly as
fence or cliff wall will make the final capture much
 possible. In addition, try to minimize exacerbating any
easier. Also be aware of physical hazards in the envi-
 preexisting injury or condition during the capture and
ronment that the animal may encounter during a
handling episode.
capture episode.
The physical environment can be used to decrease
the animal's sense perceptions. If, for instance, the
PREPARATION
oep sup ii adeo o An ‘ieuou st leuue
hours. Conversely, if it is diurnal, try to work at night
Try to work in pairs whenever possiblehaving a
 or dim the lights during the capture attempt.
back-up person ensures the safety and effcacy of the
There are also behavioral considerations in the deci-
plan. Next, decide on the technique you'll use before-
sion regarding capture technique. You must know the
hand. Talk it through to make sure that everyone
natural history of the species: nocturnal or diurnal,
understands their role. Be prepared for all eventuali-
breeding season, when its young are raised, food
ties, especially the worst case scenario. Then, make
habits, habitat, etc. These factors will aid in your deci-
Suom u pue Apea si suaudinba Aessau le ains
sions; for instance, if you capture an adult of the
 order before you attempt the capture. Protective cloth-
 species, will you potentially leave young behind?
ing, such as long pants, long-sleeved shirt, boots,
Animals have a natural fear of predators; this fear
gloves, and goggles, is helpful in most situations.
is what drives the flight or fight response. As you
 approach an animal, its first response will be to flee,
if possible. If this is not possible and/or you come
TOOLS OF RESTRAINT
within a critical distance of the animal, the fight
response will then be initiated. You may be able to
The frst tool of restraint is psychological restraint-
use long-handled nets, poles, or projectiles
to
have confidence in your abilities. Everyone is aware
extend the effective range of capture by staying outside
that animals can sense when a person is afraid of them
of this critical distance until the animal is effectively
and react accordingly. Next, consider diminishing
restrained.
sensory perceptions. The more you can decrease or
Know what the animal's fight response will be. Wild
eliminate visual, auditory, or other sensory stimuli
felid kits respond to being grabbed by the nape of the
 during the restraint episode, the easier it will be on
neck much as domestic kittens do. However, this is not
both humans and animals.
true of adults. Raccoons will turn and bite if they are
 Physical barriers, such as shields made of plywood,
held in this manner. Knowing the behavior of the
Plexiglas, blankets, etc., can be used to herd animals
species helps determine what an animal will do next.
from one area to another and provide a protective
Buteo hawks use their feet more than their beaks,
barrier betweenthe handler andthe animal. Confinement
whereas falcons use both feet and beaks. Eagles are
techniques include the use of squeeze cages, restraint
perfectly willing to bite, too, whereas vultures regur-
bags, plastic tubes for holding snakes, etc.
gitate. Pigeons and waterfowl beat their wings when
It is also possible to use equipment to act as exten-
alarmed, etc. An understanding of behavior allows you
sions of your arms, for example, nets, snares and
to give more complete and better care to your patients.
tongs.
Appendix 3
405
Nets: These come in all sizes and shapes. Many
to grasp, how much pressure to use, and how this
manipulative procedures, such as injections, examina-
 varies from species to species. Your greatest protection
tions, or obtaining samples for blood work, can be
is detailed knowledge of the animal. Gloves vary from
carried out by placing a net on the animal. Hoop nets
thin cotton gloves to heavy, double layered, coarse
with long handles are commonly used. Be aware that
leather gloves. Leather welder's gloves are good for
the hoop edge can injure the animal. It is better to
 general use. The thicker and heavier the glove, the less
allow the animal to enter the net than to swing the net
ability you have to determine how tightly you are
at the animal. The net should be sufficiently deep to
 grasping the animal or to feel the animal's response.
allow the hoop to be twisted, trapping the animal in
Try to keep the glove loose on your hand so you can
the bottom of the net. If it is too shallow, the animal
slip your fingers up or out of the way if teeth penetrate
will be able to climb out. Placing the net on the ground
the leather. Gloves do not protect from crushing inju-
or against the wall will help to restrict escape. Birds
ries! Chain mail gloves alone or within leather gloves
with talons or animals with claws are diffcult to
 offer more protection against the tearing effects of
handle in large mesh nets. They may poke their limbs
large canine teeth.
through the netting, possibly causing feather damage
Finally, chemical restraint can be administered via
and fractured bones.
injection, pole syringe, blow-dart, or pistol. These
They may also cling to the netting with their talons,
techniques and restraint drugs are further detailed in
making it difficult to extract them. Try to use smooth
Restraint and Handling of Wild and Domestic Animals
netting for birds. If the mesh is too large, the animal
by Murray E. Fowler.
may force its head through the mesh and strangle.
Know the characteristics of the net's construction
materials. Nylon, cotton, and manila all withstand
SPECIFIC TECHNIQUES BY SPECIES
different degrees of stretch and wear. Inspect nets for
flaws before using them.
Opossums
 Rectangular nets can be placed in the path of various
Danger potential: Sharp claws and 50 small, sharp
types of animals. As the animal runs towards it, the
teeth. Technique: Fortunately, opossums usually move
net is extended, then dropped over the animal. Mist
slowly during the daytime and often “play possum"
nets are used to capture small birds and bats. Cannon
when stressed. Be careful if there are fetuses in the
nets are shot over the top of the animal or herd. Nets
pouch; you may cause the fetuses to pull away from
can also be suspended over feeding areas and dropped
the nipples and they will need to be replaced right
over the animal to entangle it.
away. Opossums can be netted, snared, tonged, or
 Snares: Used carelessly, snares can cause unneces-
 manually handled by covering the head with a towel,
sary pain or strangle an animal. Commercial snares are
grasping at the base of the tail, and supporting under
designed with swivels for humane and effective manip-
the chest or grasping at the scruff of the neck.
ulation. Quick-release snares (Ketch-allrM) permit the
animal to twist without being suffocated. Always try
Rabbits
to include one front leg through the snare as well as
Danger potential: Scratch with sharp claws and have
encircling the neck to decrease any problems with
 powerful back legs. Technique: Be aware that rabbits
twisting. Don't catch the animal around the chest
can kick so strongly with their rear legs that they can
 or abdomen because you may cause crushing injuries
fracture their spines. Grasp the loose skin over the
to this part of the body. This also allows too much
back of the neck, lift the hind quarters with the other
mobility of the head. Animals with good fore limb
hand for added support, and cradle the animal against
dexterity, such as raccoons, are sometimes diffcult to
your body. Rabbits can be induced into a torpid state
catch with snares. Once you have the animal snared,
by placing and holding them on their backs for a few
grasp the tail and bring the animal taut to the pole,
seconds or blindfolding them.
control the head, and remove the snare as quickly as
possible.
Rodents
Tongs: Vise tongs grasp an animal at the neck. They
Danger potential: The sharp incisor teeth especially
act like snares but do not completely encircle the neck;
adapted for chewing and gnawing, and sharp claws for
they clamp behind the back of the head. These are used
burrowing. Technique: Be aware that rodents possess
for initial control.
no specialized thermoregulatory mechanisms. They
The use of physical force involves using your hands
achieve homeostasis by a high level of behavioral activ-
to grasp the animal. You must know where and how
ity. Therefore, rodents are predisposed to hyperther-
406
 Appendix 3
mia when handled and hypothermia when sedated or
bears can be handled only with squeeze cages and
anesthetized.
chemical restraint.
Squirrels and Chipmunks
Raccoons
A fine mesh net can be used, though claws sometimes
 Use nets, squeeze cages, tongs, and snares. Raccoons
become entangled. You can use a towel and gloves
have great forelimb dexterity.
(they can bite through gloves), and try to grasp behind
the neck and one fore leg.
Skunks
To restrain a skunk, use a shield of plate glass or
plastic and wear goggles or protective clothing. Use a
Beavers
Do not lift beavers by their tail. Doing so can cause
 net to capture the animal, then sedate or anesthetize
 spinal injuries because they are so heavy. Restrain a
to handle it further.
beaver with a snare or tongs around the neck, then lift 
up and hold it at the base of the tail. Some people feel
Minks and Weasels
Minks and weasels can be restrained by using snares
that beavers don't have much in the way of a neck and
 or manually grasping at the base of the tail, pulling up
prefer to wrap the animals in a blanket and just pick
them up manually; they do not tend to be very
and out of the cage, then grasping behind the neck.
You must move quickly. Sometimes it is best to simply
aggressive.
try to pin them behind the neck, then sort out where
Porcupines
the rest of the body is.
Separate porcupines that are in a group before attempt-
Otters
ing to capture one; otherwise they may bump into
River otters can be netted or snared. Sea otters require
one another, causing quill discharge and injury to
 specialized techniques. They are trapped in the wild
one another. Approach from the rear when the porcu-
 using basket nets from beneath while the otters float
pine is facing into a corner, reach under the tail and
on the surface of the sea. The net is closed with a
grab the underhairs, pull backward, and don't let the
 drawstring, then lifted out of the water. They are
tail flip up or it will discharge quills into you. Then,
extremely susceptible to stress and have no insulating
slide your other hand beneath the tail and up under
blubber layer. They are protected from hypothermia
the body. You can also use a snare around the base of
by their dense fur coats. You must prevent soiling of
the tail and other snares on each foot to stretch the
 animal if you need to get a blood sample for any
the coat.
reason.
Cats
 pddm no r p aa ae s
Carnivores
towels or canvas restraint bags. If the cat is under 30
 Danger potential: Teth designed for grasping and
Ibs., it can be netted with a fine mesh net, snare, or
tearing prey with well-developed jaw muscles. Claws
tongs, then the tail grasped with a gloved hand. Squeeze
can rip and tear. Technique: In general, control the
cages can be used for the larger species. One of our
head first then the body. Wear gloves to guard against
secret techniques for luring them into cages is to use
scratches; most can bite through gloves.
catnip.
Fox, Coyote, and Wolf
Hoofed Stock
Smaller canids can be netted or grasped by the base of
 Danger potential: Antlers, sharp hooves. Technique:
the tail, and then manipulated until the scruff of the
 Small cervids without antlers can be handled manu-
neck can be grasped. Tongs can be used around the
 ally. With one arm, hold the animal under the abdomen
neck for initial control, and the animals can be muzzled
 in front of the rear legs and with the other arm, hold
for further control of the mouth (though muzzling
it under the neck. Lift the animal up and away from
decreases their ability to pant).
the ground and point the legs away from the handler's
body. Larger cervids usually need to be chemically
Bear
immobilized to work on individual animals. For
These animals have extremely powerful paws and
herding or transporting, be aware that deer do not
limbs. Immature bears less than five months old may
recognize chain link or wire net fences as barriers;
be hand-held or controlled with nets or snares. Mature
 therefore, these should be draped with opaque plastic
Appendix 3
407
sheeting. You can also use plastic sheeting to herd deer
 grab them by the feathers, especially the tail feathers,
toward a certain area. Most injuries occur during
because the bird will release them into your hand.
herding and transport. Try to arrange it so that you
 Hold the wings close to the body and try to control
can funnel them via chutes into their new enclosure or
the legs. Pigeons and doves do not scratch, don't peck,
a transportation crate. Select the correct sized crate—if
 and have mild dispositions. They will attempt to beat
it is too large, they may try to turn around and injure
their wings when alarmed. Grasp them from above
themselves. Capture myopathy is a big problem in
oq r on aso sm an ssard pe pq p
cervids.
Small Passeriformes
Birds
Capture small passeriformes with a net in the aviary,
and hold them cupped in one hand with the fingers
Waterfowl
around the base of the head. Do not completely sur-
Waterfowl can be captured manually or with nets or
round the sternum and interfere with respiration.
hooks. Drape a towel over the wings to hold the bird
 Sometimes it helps to darken the room and approach
against the body, then grasp behind the head. To carry,
from behind.
support the body, restrain the head, and let the legs
dangle.
Reptiles and Ampbibians
Shorebirds
Chelonians
Shorebirds sill try to bite and stab with long, sharp
Small species can be handled manually. Hold them on
bills. Protect your face with goggles if necessary.
either side of the carapace. It may be necessary to
Shorebirds can be netted like gulls, or can have a towel
 insert a finger between the carapace and plastron to
placed over them. Control the wings first, then the
prevent the shell from completely closing. Do not
head. Herons, cranes, etc. have long, thin legs that are
rapidly turn the animal upside down and then right
o e lm a   q uq A
side up again because it is possible to cause a torsion
your eyes with their beaks and are fully capable of
of the bowel with this sudden movement. Snapping
spearing an extremity. Exercise extreme caution and
turtles can inflict serious bite wounds. Grasp them at
always control the head first.
the base of the tail, them lift off the ground, and then
grab the carapace just behind the head. You can turn
Raptors
them over onto the carapace; they usually relax in this
 Beaks and talons are adapted for grasping and tearing
position.
flesh. Vultures will employ their beaks but have very
weak feet. Wear heavy leather gloves, and use a hood
Snakes
or towel on their heads to decrease visual stimuli. If a
Danger potential: Can bite, produce venom, or con-
bird is on the floor of an enclosure, throw a towel or
strict. Technique: Grasp behind the head (if nonpoi-
heavy cloth over the bird, wrap it in the fabric, and
sonous), then support the body. If unsupported, the
then grasp the feet, then the head. Try to remove the
snake can thrash so much that it dislocates or fractures
gloves after the initial capture to facilitate handling.
its vertebrae. Snake hooks can be used to pin the head
The feet should be grasped with one hand above the
to the ground. Snakes can be cooled for procedures
talons (but not too far above the foot or you will lose
that require only mild restraint but respiratory ail-
control of the talons) and with your finger between the
ments are a possibility after prolonged chilling.
two feet, the head should be grasped from behind
 Handling poisonous snakes is beyond the scope of this
without obstructing the trachea. If the bird is perched,
section. Suffice it to say that you must be extremely
it can be approached from the front or back. If
careful, always have antivenin on hand, and know
approaching from the front, grasp the legs first, one in
what you are doing!
each hand, and then transfer the legs to one hand and
grasp behind the head. If approaching from the back,
Amphibians
grasp the wings, body, and legs together, then separate
Danger potential: Toothless but can bite with hard-
the legs in one hand and the head with the other hand.
keratinized plates in the mouth. None are venomous.
 Technique: Amphibians can be netted. Then, surround
Galliform Birds
the body with your hand (two fingers surround the
These birds are usually docile but have claws, and
neck and the rest of the hand encircles the body and
some males have well-developed tarsal spurs. Do NOT
back legs).
408
Appendix 3
CONCLUSION
vidual animal in each individual situation. In this way,
we will best serve the interests of our unique patients.
Just as there are a myriad of different animal species
that the wildlife rehabilitator may be called upon to
handle, there are similarly a wide variety of handling
REFERENCE
and restraint techniques that are available for use. Our 
job as knowledgeable rehabilitators should include
Fowler ME. 1985. Restraint and Handling of Wild and Domestic
familiarity with the proper techniques for each indi-
Animals. Ames, Iowa State University Press. p. 5.
APPENDIX FOUR
Tail Wrapping
A. Standard wrap (to be used with tail feathers not in
shape of the wrap to the natural curvature
molt)
of the tail feathers.
1. Materials
h. Finally, fold one long strip lengthwise around
a. 1 to 2 tongue depressors 
the tip of the tail wrap and press all strips
b. Spray bottle with water (set on mist)
firmly together, making sure they all stick
c. Gummed paper packaging tape (sticky when 
well (Appendix Figure 4.2).
wet)
3. Notes
d. Used X-ray film or other plastic
a. For long-tailed birds (Cooper's hawk, etc.),
e. Scissors
you may have to tape two tongue depressors
f. Stapler
together.
g. Adhesive tape
b. For American kestrals, you may have to cut
2. Procedure
 one off a little.
 a. Tear or cut off several strips of paper tape
c. Make the wraps as lightweight as possible.
(2 to 3 inches long for American kestrel, 6
d. Press the edges together firmly and dry the
to 8 inches long for red-tailed hawk).
tail wrap. A wet or loose wrap will slide off
b. Cut a strip of X-ray flm about 1/3 the length
 as soon as the bird is returned to its cage.
of the tail and about the same width as the
folded tail. Fold it in half and staple it at the
fold.
c. Gather all tail feathers fairly close together
without bending them. The narrower the tail
Tape
wrap, the stronger and less cumbersome it
will be.
 d. Place the tongue depressor along the center
of the tail so that one end is flush with the
X-ray Film
feather tips and the other end almost reaches
the bird's body. You may have to trim the
tongue depressor.
Tongue Depressor
e. Fit the X-ray "sleeve" over the tips of the tail
 and tongue depressor.
f. Wet the first strip of paper and fold it around
the end section of the tail, making sure no
feathers are bent (Appendix Figure 4.1).
g. Repeat with as many strips as necessary to
cover the tail to the bare shafts, making sure
that each strip overlaps the previous one; do
not include tail coverts (downy feathers on
Figure A4.1. Wrapping the paper tape around the
the underside of the tail). Try to conform the
tail feathers.
of Guidetines, Dp. 30-31.
409
410
Appendix 4
b. Masking tape
c. Stapler
2. Procedure
a. Cut a piece of plastic as long as the tail and
twice as wide as the folded tail (not fanned
out).
b. Fold this piece in half lengthwise so it now
matches the shape of the folded-up tail fairly
well.
Figure A4.2. The completed tail wrap
c. Place a few staples along the long edge
(where the two edges meet) and along one
short edge. You should now have an “enve-
lope" with one short side still open.
d. Carefully slide this sleeve over the folded-up
e. Tail wraps will have to be repaired or
tail.
replaced periodically.
e. Attach the sleeve to some of the downy
 4. Tail wrap removal
coverts on the underside and backside with
a. Soak the whole tail in a pitcher or bucket
some strips of masking tape. Be sure not to
flled with warm water. Gently begin sepa-
 cover up the oil gland or the feathers cover-
rating the tape from the feathers with your
 ing the vent area.
fingers. After thirty to forty-five seconds, the
3. Notes
whole wrap will often slide off in one piece.
 a. Depending on the material used, this wrap
11AIP o deIm aY1 1a1 10 1n 01 A1 1ou o
may be stiff enough without the addition of
 will permanently damage feathers.
tongue depressors.
B. Modified wrap (To be used with tail feathers in
b. If the bird is active or when the masking tape
molt)
wears out, this wrap will have to be repaired/
1. Materials
replaced.
a. Piece of used X-ray flm or similar light-
 c. Standard-size sleeves can be prepared and
weight plastic
kept on hand for quick applications.
APPENDIX FIVE
Guide to Identification of Hatchling and
Nestling Songbirds
411
gray, irides.
crescent
marking
 of mouth
skin often 
yellowish
insect eater
insect eater
insect eater,
AA
1521
brown-tipped
 on back by
wings and
feathers
abdomen,
Feathers
buff and
1 4
Otherwise
gray-black
gray and
striped
rust-tippec
speckly
white
striped
 nestlings-
white
chest
black
wings
tail,
adult
tail
buff
 Feeding call
note; then
when older
barking type
hatchling—
squeaky
hatchling—
hatchling-
crowlike
squawk,
throaty
single,
clear,
piping
peep-peep
insistent-
single
2101
bark
trill
　43
80
LL
18
11
22
Approximate weight in
Hatchling  Nestling
40-60
20-32
40-60
7-15
13-15
grams
8-
5.5-30
5-18
5-35
2-13
2-5
2-6
Legs/feet
long legs
long, thin
long, thin,
delicate,
toenails
 short legs,
long legs
long legs
chubby
legs
dark
blue-
feet
back, and
 cream on
back, legs
long and
plentiful
 onhea d,
back and
a "star"
Down
grayish-
head,
gray and
sparse
cluster
sparse,
back
Beak contour 
tapering to a
"arrowhead"
very wide, flat,
 pointy tip,
pointy beak
very wide
wide, flat,
flat, wide,
 point
look
Table A5.1. Yellow to Orange Mouth Birds."
wide
wide
Gape flanges
larger than
bright yellow
prominent,
 pale yellow
lower
upper
bright
very
yellow
flesh
yellow to
Mouth
yellow-
orange
 yellow
yellow-
orange
Cliff swallow  orange-
10[0]
yellow
bright 
bright
Mockingbird
Black phoebe
Pacific slope
flycatcher
Species
Starling
Robin
412
insect eater,
insect eater
 have blue
eyes,
cavity
nesters
females
irides.
 yellow
eyebrows
medium gray
abdomen,
 black head,
crown of
 gray-brown
buff-
white
Jo apis
head
head
white
buff
"locator"
cheep
call,
look
10
14
84
10
S
14
40-60
3.5-4
8-10
8-9
8-9
7-11
1.5-8
1.5-6
6-35
1-4
1-4
1-3
 short legs
long legs
purple
shoulders,
 and back
head and
dark gray
 plentiful
cream on
head,
thighs,
back,
back
only
auou
curves down as
pointy beak 
very wide,
nestling
flat, wide
flat, wide,
grows
pointy
pointy
short
 prominent
cream
yellow
yellow
yellow
cream
yellow
yellow
orange-
yellow
 orange
orange-
yellow
orange-
orange
deep
deep
Violet-green
chickadee
swallow
 California
thrasher
Chestnut-
backed
Bewick's
wren
Wrentit
Bushtit
413
often found
in nests of
Special
features
para sitic,
bald face,
towhees
insect eater
smooth, gray
white chest
white spots
yellow brea st.
 gray back,
white wing
Feathers
dark back,
on wings
 yellowish
coming in
and tail
red dot at
brown
breast
 melodic, single
repeated, like 
 Feeding call
high-pitched
notes, similar
back, yellow
high-pitched
changes to
single peep
1snu 0i 1aai
continuous,
 repeated
abdomen
punos
chirp
Approximate weight in grams
2
3
33
10
()
2
3
 Nestling
14-20
25-39
25-30
20-25
7-8
Hatchling
2.5-18
2-13
3-18
4-20
2-20
1-6
Legs/feet
chunky
feet
tipped
stubby
319
nails
pink,
short,
snow-white
 long, brown-
and wings
light gray
Down
on back,
dark gray
UO SMo1
head
grayish
auou
long,
short, cone-
conical and
 conical and
 pointed
hea vy, to a
contolr
sha ped
narrowe
than a
towee's
pointed,
narrow
 similar to
Beak
iod
finch
Table A5.2. Pink to Red Mouth Birds.*
Gape flanges
med. yellow,
 pale yellow,
prominent
 
prominen
 pale yellow
 pale yellow
white to
101
Mouth
color
pink
 pink
daap
daap
pink
pink
pa
 goldfinch
sparrow
towhee
California
towhee
cowbird
 Species
 headed
Northern
oriole
House
414
white chest
ruddy skin
similar to
cowbirds
ke13 kuny
head, blue
p s
stripey, gray
ruddy skin
bald face,
black
tail
black
sounds like a
hatchling-short
peeping, later
hatched, then
high-pitched
rusty hinge
repeated
a single
squawk
none when
peeping
raucous,
newly
42
28
438
70-328
20-30
20-30
35-70
10-15
1.5-8
18-70
3-15
3-15
6-30
long legs
toenails
toenails
stocky
short,
blackish-gray,
wings, and
 plentiful. 4
underparts
 scant, white
 on back,
 plentiful
UO SMO
on head,
lower
thighs
fairly
head
sparse,
none
pointed
pointed
long and
 conical
very long,
wide
large,
heavy
long,
short,
prominent
prominent
yellow, not
 prominent
white, not
yellowish
white, not
white to
white
red
red
red
red
pa
 blackbird
House finch
Brewer's
Scrub jay
41.5
APPENDIX SIX
Average
Weights of Selected North
American Songbirds
 Bird species
Weight range (grams)
Average weight (grams)
American robin
77
Bluebird, eastern
31
Cardinal
33.6-64
4.5
 Carolina wren
21
Chickadee, black-capped
8.2-13.6
10.8
Crow, American
448
Dove, mourning
126
 Duck, mallard
720-1,580
1,082
Finch, house
19-25.5
21
 Flicker, yellow-shafted
130
106-164
Goldfinch, American
8.6-20.7
12.6
Grackle, common
11.5
Hummingbird, ruby-throated
2.4-4.1
3
Jay, blue
64.1-109
8.5
Mockingbird
36.2-55.7
49
 Oriole, orchard
16-25.1
19.6
Pigeon
270
 Purple martin
49.4
Sparrow, house
20.1-34.5
27.4
Swallow, barn
13.4-23.4
19
Thrasher, brown
57.6-89
69
Titmouse, tufted
17.5-26.1
21.6
Warbler, pine
9.4-15.1
11.9
Woodpecker, pileated
290
Woodpecker, red headed
56.1-90.5
72
(Information in part from Dunning 1984)
417
APPENDIX SEVEN
Species Care Sheets
RACCOONS
· Gradually decrease the bottle feeding until weaned
(seven to twelve weeks).
Raccoon Diet and Feeding
● Begin to offer drinking water when raccoons begin
Formula: 1 part powdered KMR:2 parts water.
to eat solid foods, but plan to refill the water bowl
several times a day because they love to climb in
 Stomach capacity is 50 to 66 ml/kg (5% to 7%). Use
and also dunk their food items in bowl.
50 ml/kg to reduce chances of diarrhea (.05 x BW
 Some rehabilitators prefer to teach the babies how
ing=
ml.). There are 30 ml/fluid ounce.
to lap formula out of a bowl. This method takes
· Do not allow free choice formula feeding because
 patience and a lot of wash cloths to clean up
some raccoons overeat and develop diarrhea or
afterward.
bloat.
Raccoons may resist weaning and lose weight at
+
· Very young raccoons can be fed with a dropper, pet
first.
nurser bottle, or nipple attached to a syringe. The
 Dry puppy food (Science Diet Canine Growth)
 pet nurser has the least amount of flow control, so
should constitute 90% of the post-weaning diet.
use it with caution.
 The remaining 10% of the diet should be apples,
 Older juveniles are often fed with preemie baby
grapes, berries, eggs, vegetables, sweet potatoes,
bottles and nipples. After bottle feeding always
fish, worms, clams, small rodents, chicks, and
remember to burp the baby by patting firmly between
crayfish.
the shoulder blades and down the infant's back.
 By the age of twelve weeks raccoons should be able
· New incoming infants may take several days to
to kill crayfish.
become accustomed to the new diet and feeding
By fourteen weeks raccoons should be able to kill 
instrument.
young rats
· Scratching the back of a raccoon's neck, while
+
 Some individuals need to be fasted for twenty-four
holding the nurser in its mouth, usually stimulates
hours before they will try new foods.
a suckling reflex.
Use
caution
and
protective
clothing
when
· Once baby raccoons get the idea of bottle nursing.
 handling raccoons because they are a rabies vector 
 the rest of the feeding times are spent trying to slow
species.
them down. They tend to drink very fast and you
must pull the bottle away after they have received
Raccoon Housing
the measured formula amount or they will swallow
 From zero to five weeks of age, a cardboard box or
air.
 pet carrier works best because it can be thrown out
 Stimulate before feeding until eyes open and self
 after it becomes soiled. Due to the zoonotic concern
elimination is evident (four to five weeks).
with the internal parasite Baylisascaris procyonis,
Add baby rice cereal to formula as a thickener to
any fecal-contaminated materials should be burned
slow down overzealous nursers.
or thrown away. Never reuse any cages or caging
 Gradually begin introducing solid foods (apple-
 materials used with raccoons with any other species
sauce, yogurt, baby foods, softened puppy food),
because disinfectants are ineffective in killing the
either mixed in the formula or separate, once rac-
raccoon roundworm. Fresh feces are not infective,
coons have their eyes open and begin to get teeth
but become so in three to four weeks. The intake
(four weeks).
procedure for raccoons should include weekly
ui u! pooy Addnd aui roy ase e aaey Aaui aouo ·
dewormings  of  pyrantel  pamoate  suspension
formula, start offering it dry.
(4.5 mg/ml at 0.5 to 1 cc/lb).
419
420
Appendix 7
· Use soft, ravel-free cloth as bedding. Do not use
and a hammock made from canvas or tight-weave
terry cloth because their fingernails get caught in the
netting, which should be hung near the top of the
loops too easily.
enclosure. The hammocks are a good substitute for
?
 Provide supplemental heat until they are four weeks
wooden nest boxes because they can be changed
old.
and washed.
● At six weeks provide the animal with a wire cage
 By eight weeks, raccoons are very active and need
with logs, natural substrate, tree limbs for climbing,
 a large cage with lots of natural items to help keep
them from getting bored (i.e. hollow logs, rocks,
live plants, dirt for digging, water bowls for dunking
food, pine cones, small pooll.
 Outdoor acclimation usually starts at six weeks and
finishes by twelve weeks.
Raccoon Release
· The release age is four to five months, when
 o  e aa s ae a
outdoors.
 This section does not cover raccoon release due to
the regulations on possessing rabies vector species
 in many states and the numerous difficulties one can
face with this procedure. Turning all raccoons over
to a licensed rehabilitator, vaccinated against rabies,
Figure A7.1. Raccoon babies.
is recommended.
Table A7.1. Raccoon Care Sheet.
Age
Weights
(weeks)
(g)
Age determinates
Diet
Amount
Frequency
0-1
50-100
 Faint tail rings and mask, very
KMR
Volume
q 3 hr, 1 PM
lightly furred, ears pressed
by
feeding
against head
B.W.
1-2
100-150
Face mask furred, eye slit visible,
KMR
q 3.5 hr 1 PM
crawling on belly
feeding
2-3
100-200
Ear canals open, 18-24 d eyes open
KMR
q 3.5 hr no PM
feeding
3-4
200-300
 Fully furred tail rings, responds to
KMR, add cereal
q 4hr
sight and sound
4-5
175-300
Able to walk, eyes open but cloudy
KMR, add soaked
q 4hr
 blue, deciduous teeth erupting
kibble
5-6
300-400
Able to run and climb, eyes darken
QID
6-7
400-600
Adult pelage begins (ends 12-14
TID
weeks)
7-8
600-650
 2nd & 3rd premolars erupt, full
Start weaning
TID
sight & hearing
8-9
650-675
 1st permanent incisors erupt
Start dish feeding
BID
9-10
675-700
1st premolars erupt
 No bottle feedings
SID
10-11
700-775
Wean 10-12 weeks
Weaned
11-12
775-82.5
12-13
82.5-875
 3rd permanent incisors erupt
13-14
875-900
14-15
900-1,100
Appendix 7
421
FLYING SQUIRRELS
blocks, primate chow, seed mix, vegetables, sweet
 potatoes, carrots, broccoli, wheat germ, etc.
Flying Squirrel Diet and Feeding
+
Natural food items to offer include mushrooms,
Formula: 1 part powdered Esbilac:2 parts water.
lichens, bark, buds, insects, acorns, hickory nuts,
·Feed with a 1- or 3-cc O-ring syringe with silicone
pine cones, beech nuts, berries, green buds, etc.
nipple.
The diet ratio of food groups should be: 80% rodent
 Flying squirrels have a good suckling reflex and the
mix (dog, primate, rodent chow); 20% fruit and
?
formula may need to be thickened to prevent
vegetable matter; one nut/squirrel/day; two to three
aspiration.
insects/squirrel/day.
Gradually thicken formula with rice baby cereal
 Offering the squirrel “nutri-bites"” (recipe under
 starting at three weeks.
grey squirrel diet, below) until release will help
 Stimulate after each meal until the eyes are open
assure proper nutrition.
 and there is evidence of self elimination in cage.
· Provide drinking water in a bowl or water bottle
 Once the eyes are open begin to introduce solid
when babies are weaned down to twice a day
food items.
formula.
 Start decreasing the number of formula feedings
+
Once weaned, feed the squirrels at night (they are
as solid food is being consumed (four to five weeks).
 nocturnal) and scatter food around the cage.
?
Wait at least
four
days
between
feeding
reductions.
Flying Squirrel Housing
· A useful weaning tool is to add powdered rodent
+
 Supplemental heat is needed until they are five to
or primate chow to the formula starting at five
 six weeks old. Using a heating pad under half of the
weeks.
enclosure is recommended.
 Examples of weaning foods include dog chow, raw
+
 Masters of escape, flying squirrels need to be housed
 nuts, fresh corn on the cob, apple, grapes, rodent
in a secure enclosure with a tight lid.
Table A7.2. Flying Squirrel Care Sheet.
Age (weeks)
Weights (g)
Age determinates
Diet
Amount
Frequency
0-1
3-6
Pink, no fur, eyes
Esbilac
0.2-0.3 ml
q 2 hr, 2 PM feeding
closed, few whiskers
1-2
6-10
 Short hairs appear, toes
Esbilac
0.3-0.6 ml
q 2 hr, 1 PM feeding
separate
2-3
10-15
Downy hair darkens,
Esbilac
0.6-1.0 ml
q 3 hr, no PM feeding
 able to right
themselves, ear canals
 open, lower incisors
erupt
3-4
17-23
Lateral tail hairs
 Esbilac, add
1.0-1.5 ml
q3 hr
develop, responds to
cereal
loud noises
4-5
25-30
 Fur covers body, upper
Esbilac, cereal,
1.5-2.0 ml
q 4 hr
incisors erupt, days
add solid
28-32 eyes open
food
5-6
30-38
 Miniature version of
Weaning begins
2.0-2.5 ml
TID
adult
6-7
38-43
Add rodent
2.5-3.0 ml
BID
pellets
7-8
40-47
Add natural
3.0-5.0 ml
SID-BID
spoof
8-10
47-53
Wk 8-9 weaned
12-14
60
Ready for release
422
Appendix 7
· One to four weeks in an aquarium or small box.
 Opossums have a poorly developed suckling reflex,
● Four to six weeks in a larger wire portable cage
which makes gavage feeding the most effective
(begin to acclimate to the outdoors).
method to feed young animals under 45 grams.
+
 Provide a nesting box because these squirrels live in
Gavage tube size ranges from size 3-1/2 to 5 French
tree cavities in the wild.
feeding tube.
+
 Six to fourteen weeks in an outdoor pre-release pen
 Pinkies should be started on very dilute formula
(once acclimated). This pen needs to be large enough
(1:5 with water) and gradually built up to full
for the young flying squirrels to practice jumping
strength formula over three to five days. Until infant
and gliding. Minimum size of 6 feet H × 6 feet
is on full strength, feed more often.
Wx 8 feet L
+
Zero to seventy-five days: tube feed q 2 hours at
 The pen needs both horizontal and vertical branches
5% BW. Belly should be rounded but not tight after
to assimilate the trees.
a feeding and a milk line in the stomach should be
?
 Flying squirrels move from tree to tree and rarely
visible through the skin.
go to the ground.
?
 By the time they weigh 50g, they do not tolerate
 t e ado saaa ue aaq ag 'saay aq
Flying Squirrel Release
of warm formula can be placed with baby opos-
 Release age is fourteen to sixteen weeks.
sums. By dipping their noses in the milk and allow-
● Release criteria: Fully acclimated to outdoors, noc-
ing them to walk through the formula they will
turnal behaviors, running from humans, opening
clean the milk off of themselves (and their litter
shelled nuts, and eating natural food items.
mates) and learn to self-feed faster.
· Whenever possible, raise and release flyers with a
+
When able to lap up formula out of bowl, start
group because these animals live in colonies. Also
thickening with rice baby cereal.
release in a well-wooded area where other flyers
 Foods to help facilitate the weaning process: fruit
have been seen or heard.
yogurt, meat baby foods, bananas, grapes, cooked
 Release by closing animals inside their nest box one
sweet potatoes, and applesauce. These items can be
hour before dark outside (tape hole shut). Tie box
mixed with milk formula in the bowl to encourage
to tree trunk (6 feet or higher up) and remove tape
self feeding.
from nest box entrance at dusk. Flyers will exit the
 By ten to twelve weeks gradually start adding puppy
box and explore the tree tops, then sometimes
or cat chow to formula.
 return to the nest box until they find another cavity
 By sixteen weeks opossums should be weaned and
to sleep in.
eating solid food items such as fresh carrion, live
●Supply
back-up
food
having a  nearby
crickets, mealworms and earthworms, fruit and
feding station or putting a bowl on top of the nest
vegetables native to the area, raw eggs, dead
box.
minnows, and crayfish. Lightly sprinkle the diet
with a calcium supplement. Offer food in the
Flying Squirrel Miscellaneous Information
evenings.
·When startled, flying squirrels flip on their backs
Make sure there is always fresh drinking water
and box at the invader with all four feet. Wake the
available during and after weaning. Opossums have
sleeping baby up slowly and gently to prevent this
a habit of defecating in their food and water bowls,
aggressive display.
so offer a water bottle to guarantee a clean water
 Do not worry if the infant does not eliminate each
source.
time it is stimulated. Discontinue stimulation after
about a minute. As long as the squirrel has at least
Opossum Housing
one bowel movement a day bloating should not
· Housing: Small box or pet carrier with soft, ravel-
occur.
free cloth, heating pad set on low, and a source of
humidity until eight weeks old. Be careful to use
cage lids and small (less than1/2 inch) ventilation
OPOSSUMS
holes due to the opossum's ability to easily escape.
 Maintain nest humidity at 70%.
Opossum Diet and Feeding
Move to1/4 inch to 1/2 inch mesh hardware cloth
Formula: 1 part powdered Esbilac:2 parts water
2 feet x 2 feet x 4 feet cage at eight to ten weeks.
● Stomach capacity is 50 to 66 ml/kg or 5% to 7% of
· Use a heating pad until ten weeks or 80 to 90g at
BW. (.05 × BW in g =
ml).
external temperatures of 95°F.
Appendix 7
423
Table A7.3. Opossum Care Sheet.
Weights
Age (weeks)
(g)
Age determinates
Diet
Amount
Frequency
2
Whiskers start, blond nose
Tube-Esbilac
.50 ml
q 2 hrs, 24hr
 hairs, pink skin
4
20
 Blond belly hairs, pink skin
Same
1ml
q 2-3 hr, 1
PM feeding
5-6
25-35
Slight bluish coloration, ears
Same
1-2ml
q 2-3 hr, 1
open
 PM feeding
6-8
35-50
 Furred, eye slits developed,
Same
2-3 ml
q 3-4 hr 1
 mouth fully open
 PM feeding
9
4.5-52
 Eyes open, running around,
Bowl—Esbilac, add
2.5-3 ml
QID
lapping formula, teeth
cereal
 present, white-tipped guard
hairs, ears erect
10-11
50-75
 Self-defecating/urinating; 3-6"
Bowl—Esbilac,
2.5-4ml
QID
excluding tail
cereal, add cat or
 puppy chow
12
75-100
Thermoregulating; 4.5-6.5"
Start weaning
4ml
TID
13-15
100-500
Actively climbing; 6-10"
Weaned, dry chow
5ml
BID-TID
1.5-20
500-1,000
20 weeks-
-ready for release
Natural foods
BID
· At twelve weeks begin outdoor acclimation.
to come and go. Provide back-up food until the
Opossums need exercise and a daily dose of vitamin
animal moves on.
Ds, naturally provided by sunlight, to help prevent
 Some opossums will leave the cage and explore at
 metabolic bone disease (MBD). Opossums are very
 night but come back to the nest box by morning
prone to MBD and must receive daily dietary
and sleep until the next dusk.
calcium in addition to thirty to sixty minutes of
If the cage is not on a suitable site, be certain the
unfiltered U/V light.
animal is ready and release it near cover and trees
 Use caution when putting animals in sunlight.
right before dark.
Opossums are prone to overheating and can die
quickly if not provided with some shade and proper
Opossum Miscellaneous Information
ventilation. They do not need to be in direct sun-
Opossums are sensitive to corticosteroids and
light to benefit from natural U/V, just placed outside
 Levamisole the is dewormer of choice.
during daylight hours. Beneficial U/V rays are
+
 Opossums tolerate sutures, bandages, and splints
blocked out by glass windows.
well.
 Move to a release cage at four months.
 Orphans have immature immune systems so wash
 Opossums are becoming nocturnal and sleeping
 hands before and after feeding.
during the day by four months.
 Small groups of same age preweanlings can be
housed together Cannibalism can result when
GREY SQUIRRELS
housing older juveniles together.
Grey Squirrel Diet and Feeding
Opossum Release
 Formula: 1 part powdered Esbilac:2 parts water
Consider release when the opossum is five months
old and 8 to 10 inches in body length, 1.5 1bs., self-
Stomach capacity is 50ml/kg (.05ml x BW in
+
feeding, acclimated to weather and outside tem-
g=
ml).
 peratures, and baring its teeth at the caretaker.
Use O-ring syringe with a silicone or Catac nipple
 If the cage is on a suitable release site, open the cage
to feed orphan squirrels.
door one hour before dark and allow the opossum
+
 Stimulate after each feeding until five weeks.
424
Appendix 7
· A healthy squirrel should gain 4 to 7g/day once
· Make sure the squirrel is off milk and eating solid
established on Esbilac formula.
 and natural food items for at least two weeks prior
+
 Squirrels should be fed lying on their stomachs with
to release.
heads slightly raised.
· Post-weaning foods: rodent blocks, high quality dog
 Add rice baby cereal to thicken formula at about
chow (i.e. Purina One, Proplan, Eukanuba),
three weeks.
uncracked acorns, hickory nuts, pecans, buds, bark,
· Add powdered rodent blocks to further thicken
pine cones, fungi, sunflower seeds, insects, fresh
formula at about five weeks.
vegetables, and rodent seed mixes.
· When eyes open and the squirrel is eating rodent
 Squirrel nutri-bites are a healthy weaning tool. The
blocks or monkey chow, start offering self feeding
recipe is as follows:
diet items such as cracked nuts, small pieces of fresh
1-1/2 cups powdered rodent or primate chow
corn on the cob, apple, grapes, broccoli stems, cau-
1/3 cup powdered Esbilac
 liflower, and rodent seed mixes.
2/3 cup warm water
O un Aq ysuy Pue saam 1uaia ie ueam on 1eis ·
 1/3 cup chopped pecans
eleven weeks.
1/3 cup crushed cuttlebone, if needed.
· The ratio of the diet offered should be 80% rodent/
Mix together and roll into small meatball-size balls.
primate chow:20% other items. Do not allow the
 Keep refrigerated up to three days or freeze for
animal to “choose” a balanced diet for itself; stick
up to six months.
with the ratio.
 These "squirrel nutri-bites" can be offered in place
● Limit nuts to one nut/squirrel/day or they will not
of a milk feeding and once the squirrels start eating
eat enough of the more nutritious foods.
them they can be offered free choice. Due to the
Table A7.4. Grey Squirrel Care Sheet.
Age
Weights
(weeks)
(g)
Age determinates
Diet
Amount
Frequency
0-1
15-2.5
 Pink, no fur, eyes closed tight—bulgy
Esbilac
0.5-1.0 ml
q 2hr, 1 PM
feeding
1-2
2.5-3.5
 Scant gray color to head, shoulder,
Esbilac
1-2 ml
q 2 hr, 1 PM
and back Day 10—lose umbilical
feeding
cord
2-3
35-60
 Scant grayish fur, ears unglued, eyes 
Esbilac
2-4 ml
q 2-3 hr, no PM
less bulgy; Day 21—lower incisors
feeding
emerge
3-4
60-90
 Slick, shiny fur except under tail;
Esbilac, add
3-6 ml
q 3-4 hr
ears open, eye slits relaxed and
cereal
ready to open
4-5
90-115
 Downy white hair on belly, slight 
Esbilac, cereal,
5-9 ml
QID
bush to tail, eyes open, may begin 
add rodent
to walk
block
5-6
115-175
 Thicker hair, tail curling over back,
 Same; keep
5-12ml
TID-QID
upper incisors emerge, sitting up
thickening
6-7
175-250
 Furry all over, sleeping less, can sit
Add small
9-15 ml
TID-QID
up fruit
pieces
7-8
Bushy tail, back molars come in
Rodent blocks
15-20ml
BID-TID
8-9
 Looks like miniature squirrel
 Begin to wean
20-25 ml
SID-BID
9-10
 Furred on underside except for 1" at
Wean
20-30ml
SID
base tail, tail bushy
10-11
300-425
Wean
11-12
Tail completely furred
Weaned
12-14
Ready for release
Appendix 7
425
milk content, do not leave them in cages long
· Stomach capacity = 100 to 125ml/kg (10% to
enough to spoil.
12.5%) of BW. Safer to use 100 ml/kg or .1 x BW
ing=
ml.
Grey Squirrel Housing
· Cottontails benefit by receiving daily Benebac to aid
● From zero to four weeks: lidded box, cardboard pet
with digestion and diarrhea prevention.
carrier, plastic or glass aquarium with heating pad
+
 Rabbits can be fed with a syringe but they seldom
 on low under one-half of the cage.
suckle. Some will lick formula from the tip of the
?
 Use soft, ravel-free cloth for bedding, such as cotton
syringe drop by drop or swallow milk as it is dripped
T-shirts, flannel, sweat shirts, fleece.
 onto their lips.
·At five to six weeks discontinue heating pad use.
· If your new cottontail refuses to eat, try a drop of
?
 Around six to eight weeks move to a small wire
Karo syrup on the end of the nipple or add a bit of
flush bottom cage (1/2 inch x 1 inch mesh or smaller)
baby food (no sugar added) applesauce to the
with tree limbs for climbing, and provide a nest box
formula. Another trick is to add orange flavored
inside cage.
Pedialyte to the formula to enhance the flavor.
 Start acclimating to outdoor temperatures by
+
Allow cottontails to drink as much formula as they
placing cage outside during warm days and bringing
want per feeding. It is better to feed these babies in
it back in at night. Gradually leave out for longer
 as few feedings as possible. Twice a day is the goal
periods of time until the squirrel can comfortably
 as long as they get enough calories and are gaining
be left out overnight. Baby squirrels do not have to
weight.
be brought inside if a heat lamp can be provided
+
 Gavage feeding is a faster method and ideal if there
near one of the nest boxes.
are many babies to feed or if the babies are fright-
· At eight to twelve weeks move squirrel to large
ened of handling and refuse to nurse. Be sure to
outdoor wire release cage (minimum size 4 feet X 4
watch a veterinarian or an experienced rehabilitator
feet X 6 feet); the larger the better. I should have a
do this method before first trying it yourself.
covered, waterproof roof, back, and one side. Hang
Although faster tube feeding can be potentially
a water bottle on the cage. Attach nest box to the
lethal if done incorrectly. The rabbit's pallet skin is
top of the cage. Use natural substrate on the cage
very fragile and can be punctured by the soft end
bottom and inside the nest box.
of the feeding tube, resulting in SQ delivery of
· House animals with similarly aged conspecifics.
formula followed by death.
Stimulate baby rabbits before feeding until their
Grey Squirrel Release
eyes open.
Release Criteria:
 Keep a secure hold on baby rabbits when handling.
· At least twelve to fourteen weeks of age and accli-
Rabbits have a habit of suddenly jumping out of
mated to the outdoors for at least two weeks.
your hands or off the table.
Squirrels should hide at the sight or sound of
When the eyes are open, start offering diced teasily
approaching people and should not allow any han-
done with scissors), fresh natural greens (clover
dling, even from the hand raiser.
greens and flowers, grass, dandelion leaves, alfalfa,
· Squirrels should be weaned for a minimum of two
privet) twice daily. No stems of plants should be
weeks, be building nests, eating natural food items,
given until rabbits are approximately three weeks
and able to crack open whole shelled raw nuts.
old. Offer only a small amount at first and be sure
· If these criteria are met, open the cage door and
the greens are clean and chemical free.
allow the animal to come and go. Continue to
Once they have adjusted to the new food items
 supply food until squirrels move on or at least for
(three to four days after they begin to sample them),
three to four weeks.
offer larger amounts. There should always be some
left over. After a week of eating solid foods, discon-
tinue dicing the greens and ofer them whole.
COTTONTAIL RABBITS
 Remove uneaten greens as new greens are added.
Greens and grasses wilt quickly, becoming undesir-
Cottontail Rabbit Diet and Feeding
 able to the rabbits, and they can mold in just a day
Formula: 1 part powdered KMR:2 parts water
or two.
● Provide drinking water in a shallow lid or a water
· Feed with O-ring syringe and nipple or tube feed
bottle when young rabbits start to nibble on solid
rabbits.
foods.
426
Appendix 7
· Other solid food items include rabbit chow, rolled
enteritis caused by stress-induced coccidiosis flare
oats, wheat germ, corn, apple and carrot slivers, dry
ups.
hay, or alfalfa fed free choice until released.
 Be sure there are no holes in the cage or cage door
+
 Introduce new food items slowly and one at a time
larger than 1/2 inch square because infant rabbits
to allow the gut to adjust to the changes.
can squeeze out of a 1-inch by 1-inch hole. Securely
·Wean rabbits by three to four weeks.
 cover any questionable holes with burlap, netting,
or screen.
Cottontail Rabbit Housing
· Acclimate to outside temperatures once rabbits are
· From zero to two weeks use a small cardboard box
weaned.
 or aquarium with secure lid.
·]
 Provide hiding spots such as hay to burrow into, or
 Use a heating pad on low under one half of the cage
a cardboard or wooden nest box.
 Or a heat light on one half of the cage.
+
 Supply soft, ravel-free cloth for bedding. Rabbits
Cottontail Rabbit Release
like layers to burrow into and they prefer to be
 Ready for release by the end of four weeks.
covered up.
· Many rabbits do not do well in captivity past five
 Once weaned, remove the heating pad and cloth
to six weeks of age and should not be kept this long
bedding. Instead, bed with natural substrates such
 unless there is a medical reason.
as hay, grasses, leaves, or pine straw.
 Rabbits ready for release should run and hide from
· At three weeks move to a large plastic pet carrier
 all humans, pets, and noise.
 or enclosed rabbit hutch. Rabbits need solid sided
 The Release weight is between 100-200 g, ideally
cages and a quiet area to reduce stress.
about 150 g.
 Do not overcrowd the cages.
Find a site with open fields or pasture with n
● Litter mates can be housed together but be careful
earby cover for a release site. Open the cage
when mixing unrelated animals and do not mix
door and allow rabbits to hop out by themselves
different ages because they tend to fight and become
 or place them under cover and quietly leave the
stressed.
area.
● Fatal enteritis can develop from environmental
+
Cottontails do not need back-up food if released in
stress.
a proper habitat, and they rarely return to the
Albon at 25 to 50 mg/kg PO SID × five to fourteen
release site.
days given to all rabbits initially may help prevent
 Release at dusk or dawn in mild weather.
Table A7.5. Cottontail Care Sheet.
Age (weeks)
Weights (g)
Age determinates
Diet
Amount (ml)
Frequency
0-1
30-40
Pink, thin fur all over, eyes closed,
KMR
0.5-1.5 ml
3-4 × /day
ears flat and closed
1-2
3.5-5.5
Fully furred, 7-10 days eyes open,
KMR,
2-6 ml
2-3×/day
greens ears erect
offer
2-3
06-0S
Ear length growth, 3 weeks
Same
3-9 ml
1-2 × /day
self-defecating
3-4
60-120
Hopping, running, ears fully erect
Natural
0-1 x /day
pooj
weaned
4-5
150-190
Release
APPENDIX EIGHT
Biological Data of Selected North
American Wild Mammals
427
Release age
(weeks)
9-12
2
6 mo.
01-8
8-10
2
9-12
8-9
3-4
8-9
忆配
8
9
2
2
2
一
Hrs after
(sAep)
28-36
birth
35-42
30-33
21-30
16
58-72
21-35
18-24
28-32
14-28
29-40
55-87
56-87
birth
birth
9
1-15
birth
10-1
birth
10-1
birth
14-1
3
2
1
 Feeding formula
Mother's Helper
lamb, doe, goat
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
 milk
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
Esbilac
K-9
KMR
Weaning
(weeks)
8-10
22-26
8-12
8-10
16
8-12
8-9
8-9
2-3
L
3-4
3
12-1
3-5
10-1
8-9
8-9
6-8
6-8
2
6-8
Adult weight
65-127g
0.038-0.069
38-69 g
"6l) zems pue (986l) saxos (66l) iamo 'i86l suea woy ed u uoeuou a.mos
1-16g
871-0
0-214
M 34-180
F 22-112
13-27
8.1-18
1.8-3.6
0.5-1.4
5-16
.340-1.2
0.5-1.4
1.8-6.3
(8)
9-S
6-11
0.9-2
9-5
5-7
3-6
23.5
2.5-4.0kg
51-150.3
birth (g)
400-500
283-340
200-275
400-500
28.4-42.5
Weight a
3.3-4.0
170-227
35-45
60-180
6-10
S4-09
8
8
1.0-1.5
2.5-5.
9-5
14-1
14-1
56
6
132
283
2.
454
Respiration.
rate/min
15-30
32-60
16-20
18-20
20-60
15-30
6
45
100
Pulse rate/
110-140
660-702
148-306*
120-140
172-192
180-264*
23
7
250-300
2
128-180
min
06-09
08-0
130-3
100-17
130-17
280-32
100
390
°F body
95-102.2
97-98.6
 temp
84-92
99-102
100-102
98-101
99-102
100-103
100-103
101-102
100-103
120
99-102
99-103
98-101
99-102
99-100
100-103
101-102
98-102
98-102
98-102
66-06
100-103
100-102
99-100
Table A8.1. Biological Data.
1-001
99-1
Opossum (Virginia)
Bat (big brown)
Deer (white tail)
 jack rabbit)
Squirrel (fox)
Squirrel (grey)
Bear (black)
Woodchuck
Armadillo
Cottontail
(gray)
Porcupine
Bat (red)
(ar))
Muskrat
Raccoon
Animal
Badger
Bobcat
Coyote
Mink
Fox (
Wolf
428
APPENDIX NINE
Glossary of Medical Conditions
and Treatments
Bloat: Causes of bloat include a change in diet, internal
m soo siss do o do o, in dor
parasites, improper diet, feeding a cold infant, over-
the contents of the crop fail to empty. This sometimes
feeding, or constipation. If an infant bloats, hold its 
 occurs when the food was fed too cold, the crop was
belly down on a heating pad and gently but firmly
overflled, foreign bodies are present, or food was sour
massage its side from top to bottom of the abdomen.
when fed. Crop infections such as trichomoniasis and
Also use gas relief medications such as Di-gel, simethi-
systemic illness are other causes. Because the contents
cone, activated charcoal, or powdered calcium carbon-
 must be removed, administer a small amount of sterile
 ate dissolved in water orally in addition to warmth and
water and gently massaging the crop. If the crop does
 massage. Long-term treatment is to eliminate the cause
not empty on its own within a few hours, the contents
of the bloat.
must be removed by drawing the material out with the
tube and syringe used to feed the bird. Flush the crop
Broken Blood Feathers: Feathers that are actively
with warm, sterile water Possible treatments consist
growing (pin feathers) contain a blood supply and
of antimicrobial therapy and correction of dehydration
when damaged may bleed. These feathers need to be
and nutrition.
removed by grasping the quill at the skin surface with
hemostats, supporting the bone with the other hand,
Dehydration: Dehydration is the excessive loss of fluid
and pulling straight out. The entire feather must be
from the body. It is life threatening and prevents every
cleanly removed from the follicle for the bleeding to
system in the body from functioning properly. The
stop.
body cannot digest food, maintain body temperature,
 deliver proper oxygen or blood flow, or excrete toxins
Bumblefoot: A generalized inflammation of the foot
in a dehydrated state. The condition must be quickly
that is most commonly seen in raptors but could occur
assessed by determining the level of dehydration and
 in any bird. The condition usually starts out as a cut,
the fluid treatment should be started immediately.
puncture, swelling, bruising, crack, or abrasion on the
 Neonates need two to three times the fluid requirement 
bottom of the foot. Bacteria then enter the break in
of adults.
the skin and cause a generalized infection. The problem
is often caused by improper or unclean perches and
Maintenance: 50ml/kg/day (OR) BW in g x .05
cages. Therapy must include topical cleaning and
daily mls fluids
flushing of the wounds, proper bandaging, and often
 Replacement: decimal value of % dehydration x BW
systemic antibiotics.
in g = daily mls needed; 0.10 = 10% (replaces fluid
loss
 volume
for
volume, e.g.
diarrhea,
Constipation: In infant mammals, constipation may be
hemorrhage)
due to over feeding, change in diet, internal parasites,
Dehydration: 100ml/kg/day (OR) BW in g × .10
dehydration, intestinal obstruction, or too long since
= daily mls fluids (give 1/2 volume over two to six
stimulation. If increasing the fluid intake and stimulat-
hours; then 1/2 volume plus maintenance over next
ing for a longer than normal time does not work,
twenty-four hours (OR) S0ml/kg BID until
remove impacted feces in the colon by a warm water
rehydrated)
or mineral oil enema. A couple of drops of mineral oil
The daily volume must be divided by the number of
or Laxatone orally may help alleviate constipation.
times you wish to administer fluids. Use the least
evasive method to resolve the dehydration. Oral is
429
430
Appendix 9
A9.1. Method
to
determine
degree
of
Table A9.2. Method to(
determine
degree
debydration.
emaciation.
%
Skin turgor
Category I
Category Ⅱ
Category Ⅲ
Deyhdration
(in seconds)
Clinical signs
90-100% BW
75-90% BW
50-70% BW
6%
1-2
Tented skin; slight
Not eaten in
Not eaten in
 Not eaten in
loss of skin
1 day
several days
1 week
elasticity
Hypoglycemic
Seizures
Near comatose
8%
2-3
Eyes slightly
Mild muscle
Moderate muscle
Severe atrophy
depressed; slow
atrophy
atrophy
CRT; dry, tacky
Generally
Difficult to save
Few recoveries
mucous
salvageable
membranes
10%
3-5
Sunken eyes and
cere; dry,
Fleas, Ticks: Use VIP flea powder, 5% pyrethrin dust
tented, scaly
or powder safe for kittens and puppies. Manually
skin; very slow
remove ticks.
CRT; wrinkling
12%
>5
 Early signs of
Glue Traps: Use a light sprinkle of cornstarch to neu-
hypovolemic
tralize the glue and prevent the animal from becoming
shock; easily
more entangled. Cut away as much of the trap as pos-
collapsible
sible. Warm canola oil to 102*F to 104*F and apply oil
peripheral veins
to stuck feathers or fur by gently working it in with your
fingers. The warmed oil will soften the adhesive bond
and after several minutes allow you to remove the
preferred for birds, provided the animal is conscious
animal from the trap. Work the soft, gummy substance
and its bowels are functional. IV therapy is manda-
that forms up and off of the animal without pulling on
tory in cases of dehydration and shock, comatose
the feathers or fur directly. After several more minutes
animals, and starvation.
most of the glue should be soft enough to be removed
 or washed out. If the canola oil leaves a residue you may
Emaciation: Body weights and degree of muscle
 need to do a bath with Dawn dishwashing detergent
wasting are diagnostic. These animals should slowly
and rinse as described under "soiled feathers."
be weaned onto solid food depending on category
stage. First, offer a rehydrating solution such as LRS
Hyperthermia: Factors which predispose animals to
or LRS with 2.5% Dextrose orally. Then start with a
 hyperthermia, abnormally high body temperature, are
diet such as Ultracal, Ensure, or Isocal. These liquid
fever, infection, excessive muscular exertion, or expo-
diets are high calorie, low volume, isotonic (requiring
piny yiy ro sanadan suque yi on ans
minimum energy for digestion) food sources that can
 These patients need to be cooled quickly. Submerge
be fed to birds or mammals. Probiotics should be
animals in a cold water bath and perform cold water
offered to help reestablish normal healthy gut flora.
enemas. A circulating air fan helps provide evapora-
When the animal is hydrated and passing normal
tion cooling. The danger here is taking the body tem-
looking stools, begin to offer diets for debilitated
perature down below normal levels, so be sure to
animals such as Clinicare, Hill's A/D, or Emeraid II.
discontinue cooling methods once the temperature
nears normal.
The progression time period from fluids to solid foods
varies from category to category as well as from patient
Hypothermia: Animals suffering from hypothermia,
to patient. Always slowly mix new foods in with the
abnormally low body temperature, must be warmed
old diet to make the changes gradual (over several
slowly. With temperatures 10° to 15° below normal,
days) and easier on the animal. Meals should be small
 the animal is likely to become comatose and unable to
and as often as possible (weighed against frequent
respond or even shiver At this point it is critical to
handling stress). These animals should be on vitamin
understand why a heating pad will NOT be effective.
supplementation to promote appetite. Supportive care
Circulation is decreased to the peripheral parts of the
should include heat and a stress-free environment.
body due to the its attempt to conserve blood for the
Appendix 9
¥431
vital organs, so contact heat from a heating pad is
 Ruptured Air Sac: A ruptured air sac, which appears
wasted. The body is not capable of carrying heat from
like an air bubble under the bird's skin, is often caused
the skin touching the warm pad into the rest of the
by impact trauma such as falling from a nest. Small
body. The best sources of heat are from heat lamps,
 SQ pockets that do not interfere with the bird's mobil-
incubators, or a warm water bath that supplies radiant
ity or breathing can be left to heal on their own.
heat evenly over the entire body at one time. Warm
Otherwise, clean the skin over the bubble and make a
water enemas are helpful as well. Gradually increase the
small incision about 1/8 inch to 1/4 inch long with a
 temperature and make sure the animal does not burn or
sterile scissors to let the air out. Be sure to avoid the
get heated up too fast, which is equally damaging.
cutaneous blood vessels that can usually be seen
through the skin.
Maggots: Maggots in small numbers are best removed
manually. Heavy infestations may require flushing
Shock: The definition of shock is an acute failure of
with peroxide to kill them. Applying cornstarch to the
the heart to provide adequate blood flow to the tissues.
 maggots dries them out and they often fall off. A dose
Signs of shock include glassy eyes, fixed stare, unre-
of Ivermectin kills any remaining maggots and any
sponsive pupils, rigidity of the limbs, paleness of the
eggs that may hatch. If the infestation is advanced and
 gums, listlessness, decrease in blood pressure, increase
they have entered the body cavities, euthanasia is
in pulse, lower body temperature, or unresponsiveness
recommended.
to stimuli. Treatment is a combination of heat, fuids,
 Malocclusion: Improper tooth alignment is most criti-
nary care for animals that come into the clinic in this
cal with rodents and lagomorphs. These animals have
condition.
two upper and two lower incisors that continue to
grow throughout the animal's life. They normally wear
Soiled Feathers (oil, tar, dirt): Feathers need to remain
down from chewing on hard objects and grinding
 clean and waterproof to provide insulation and flight.
teeth. Maligned incisors may continue to grow and
If a bird comes in with soiled feathers or becomes
overgrow, resulting in starvation (from not being able
soiled during rehabilitation, a warm water bath (103°F
to chew food) or self-induced puncture wounds (from
to 104°F) using Dawn dishwashing detergent followed
the lower teeth puncturing the roof of the mouth). The
by a clean warm water rinse will remove caked-on
prognosis is poor with this condition, but manually
food, feces, oil, and glue. It is very important to keep
trimming the teeth biweekly or so may allow the teeth
the bird warm at all times until completely dry. Wash
time to grow back normally after the animal has healed
and dry under a heat lamp if possible. Fill a container
from the fractured jaw or other facial injury that
with warm soapy water and dip the bird into the solu-
caused the trauma.
tion, carefully wiping with the grain of the feathers.
Agitate the bird's body around in the solution, being
Mites: Dust baby and adult birds with an avian mite
careful to keep the animal's head dry. Then dip bird
powder. Ivermectin applied to the back of the neck
into warm, clean rinse water until all soap and residue
treats birds for mites, but be sure to accurately measure
 are gone. Repeat if necessary until water beads on the
idde Aq isn iou ‘iam poq q aso a
“a
feathers. This procedure is very stressful and should
drop." Ivermectin is effective against mites in mammals
only be done on stable animals.
by injecting one dose SQ.
APPENDIX TEN
Wildlife Product Sources
Products
Manufacturer/Supplier
Products
Manufacturer/Supplier
Aviary netting
Cutler's Pheasant Supply
www.cutlersupply.com
Live insects: rmealworms,
Grubo, Inc.
crickets
Phone: 513-874-5881
Memphis Net and Twine Co., Inc.
www.grubco.com
PO. Box 80331
Memphis, TN 38108-0331
Rainbow Mealworms Inc.
Phone: 888-674-7638
Phone: 800-777-9676
E-mail: www.memphisnet.net
www.rainbowmeal worms.net 
Sterling Net Co., Inc.
Nature's Way
18 Label St.
Phone: 800-318-2611
Montclair, NJ 07042
www.thenaturesway.com
Phone: 800-342-0316
discount to rehabilitators
www.sterlingnets.com
Powdered egg whites
www.eggstore.com
Nipples "Catac" {Latex
Chris's Squirrels and More, LLC
rubber nursing mipples, 3
Phone: 860-749-1129
Avimin@
Lambert Kay
sizes,) fits on slip tip or
www.squirrelsandmore.com
{avian minerals)
www.lambertkay.com
catheter tip syringes
Avitron
Pet stores
{avian vitamins)
Nipples "Mothering Kit"
Upco
(Silicone small tapered
Phone: 800-254-8726
Esbilac, KMR, Multi-
Chris's Squirrels and More, LLC
nipples fit on slip tip
www.upco.com
Milk, Benebac, Snuggle
Phone: 860-749-1129
syringes) Catac mipples,
 Discounts to licensed rehabilitators
Safe {microwavable disks
www.squirrelsandmore.com
Esbilac, KMR, Multi-
that stay warm for 12
Milk, Bene-Bac, plastic
Chris's Squirrels and More, LLC
hours), Nekton nectars,
feeding cannula
Phone: 860-749-1129
 Zupreem Primate Diet,
www.squirrelsandmore.com
scales, homeopathy
Feed stores, pet stores
remedies, reference
books
Feeding tubes, feeding
Chris's Squirrels and More, LLC
catheters, flexible white
Phone: 860-749-1129
Syringes (O-Ring) for
Chris's Squirrels and More, LLC
www.squirrelsandmore.com
feeding
syringe tips, pipettes
Phone: 860-749-1129
www.squirrelsandmore.com
Dried insects
Oregon Feeder Insects, Inc.
Medcare
Phone: 866-641-8938
246E. 131st Street
www.oregonfeederinsects.com
Cleveland, OH 44108
Biconet
Phone: 800-433-4550
www.biconet.com
www.medcareproducts.com
Hagen
www.hagen.com
Any good fish, reptile, or pet store
papmody esn eos
www.ladygouldianfinch.com
dried flies)
433
434
Appendix 10
Products
Manufactur er/Supplier
Products
 Manufacturer/Supplier
Animals for food: Rats
The Gourrmet Rodent
Monkey Biscuits/Chow
Jeffers, Inc.
and mice
Bill and Marcia Brant
Phone: 334-793-6257
Coturnix quail, eggs,
Phone: 352-495-9024
www.JeffersPet.com
chicks; Frozen: rats,
www.gourmetrodent.com
Zupreem-primate chow
mice, chicks, and live
crickets
Northwest Gamebirds
Chris's Squirrels and More, LLC
228812 E. Game Farm Rd.
Phone: 860-749-1129
Kennewick, WA 99337
www.squirrelsandmore.corm
Phone: 509-586-0150
Hummingbird nectars
Guenter Enderle Enterprises, Inc.
www.niwgamebird.com
Nekton
Perfect Pets, Inc.
Clearwater, Florida
Phone: 727-669-1030
23180 Sherwood
Belleville, MI 48111
www.nekton.de
Phone: 800-366-8794
Roudybush Nectar
www.perfectpet.net
Hummingbird nectars
Zoologic Milk Matrix
Pet-Ag, Inc.
Phone: 800-326-1726
products, Esbilac, KMR,
Phone: 800-323-0877
www.roudybush.com
Multi-Milk
www.petag.com
CliniCare Canine/feline
Abbott Laboratories
Mesh cages (reptariums)
Chris's Squirrels and More, LLC
Liquid diet
Animal Health
Phone: 860-749-1129
Phone: 888-299-7416
www.squirrelsandmore.com
Isocal Human liquid
Mead Johnson and Company
Wildlife-related book
Zoo Book Sales
diet formula
Evansville, Indiana 47721
Sources: mail-order
403 Parkway Ave. N
 Order from local pharmacy
Catalogues, veterinary
Mail To: PO. Box 405
topics, specializing in:
Lanesboro, MN 55949-0405
Emeraid Diets:
Lafeber Company
natural history books,
Phone: 507-467-8733
(Psittacine) (Carnivore)
Cornell, IL
field guides,
www.zoobooksales.com
Phone: 800-842-6445 ext. 888
rehabilitation manuals
Wild Ones Animal Health Library
www.lafeber.com
PO.Box 947
Carnivore Care?
Oxbow Pet Products
Springville, CA 93265
Phone: 800-539-0210
{raptors, carnivores),
800-249-0366
Critical Care diets
www.oxbowhay.com
www.for-wild.org
(herbivores)
write or call for catalog
National Wildlife Rehabilitators
Rodent blocks
Kaytee Products, Inc.
Association (NWRA)
Chilton, WI
www.fiwra.com
phone: 800-KAYTEE-1
www.Kaytee.com
 International Wildlife Rehabilitation
Council {IWRC)
Pet stores that sell Kaytee
ww w.iwrc.com
Animal-related
Aces Animal Care Equipment
Wildlife Publications
catalogues: Animal
Phone: 800-338-ACES
PMB 293
handing and restraint
www.animal-care.com
897 Oak Park Blvd.
nets, traps, and Services,
Tomahawk Live Trap
Pismo Beach, CA 93449
 Inc. punch poles, animal
PO.Box 323
Phone: 805-489-0411
handling gloves,
Tomahawk, WI 54487
www. wildcare.com
blowpipes, darting
Phone: 800-272-8727
Krieger Publishing Co.
equipment, Ketch-A11
www.livetrap.com
Natural Science and Veterinary
 poles, snake hooks
One Of A Kind
Topics Catalog
Phone: 920-4854369
Phone: 800-724-0025
www. krieger-publishing.com
Ketch All Company
Phone: 877-538-2425
Chris's Squirrels and More, LLC
www.ketch-all.com
Phone: 860-749-1129
www.squirrelsandmore.com
Wildlife Rehabilitation Information
Directory
www.tc.urmn.edu/-devo0028/pub.htm
Appendix 10
435
Products
Manufacturer/Supplier
Products
Manufacturer/Supplier
Intensive care units,
Therrmocare Inc.
incubators
Animal caging Products:
Valentine Inc.
PO. Box 6069
cages, wire, netting.
Phone: 800-GET-STUFF
Incline Village, NV 89450
latches, watering
www. valentineinc.corm
Phone: 800-262-4020
systems, cage building
www.therrmocare.com
supplies, incubators,
Strormberg's
 Lyon Electric Company, Inc.
brooders, heat lights, etc.
PO. Box 400
Pine River, MN 56474
Phone: 888-LYONUSA
Phone: 800-720-1134
Lyonelectric.com
www.strombergschicken.com
Chicken/duck starter
Feed stores and some larger pet
Banding and tagging
NationalBand and TagCompany
721 York Street
Crumbled balanced diet
stores
supplies
for growing ducks,
PO. Box 72430
chicken, geese
Newport, KY 41072-0430
Phone: 859-261-2035
Falconry equipment,
 Northwoods Limited
www.nationalband.com
raptor books, raptor
PO. Box 874
handling gloves
Rainier, WA 98576
Pet Store Products:
Upco
Phone: 800-446-5080
bowls, vitamins, foods,
Phone 800-254-UPCO
www.northwoodsfalconry.com
milk formulas, cages,
www.upco.com
water bottles, vaccines,
That Pet Place
Reptile equipment:
Mid-West Products
Nutri-cal, books, nest
Phone: 888-THAT-PET
Tongs, hooks, transport
14505 S. Harris Rd.
boxes, etc.
www.thatpetplace.com
bags, heat lamps,U/V
Greenwood, MO 64034
light bulbs, light stands.
Pet Warehouse
Phone: 816-537-4444
PO. Box 310
etc.
www.tongs.com
Xenia, OH 45385-0310
Phone: 800-991-3299
www.petswarehouse.com
R.C. Steee
1989 Transit Way
PO. Box 910
Brock port, NY 14420-0910
Phone: 800-872-3773
www.rcsteele.com
For a listing of additional books, resources, supplies, links, and information for the rehabilitation professional: Wildlife Rehabilitation
Information Directory, ww w.tc. urmn.edu/~devo0028/index.htm.
APPENDIX ELEVEN
Additional Resources
NATURAL HISTORY: GENERAL
Stokes D, Stokes L. 1979. Stokes Nature Guides, A
Guide to Bird Behavior Volumes 1-3. Boston:
Peterson RT. 1980. Peterson Field Guides. Boston:
Little Brown and Co.
Houghton Mifflin Company.
Terres JK. 1980. The Audubon Encyclopedia of
Rue LL, IIl. 1981. Furbearing Animals of North
North America Birds. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
America. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc.
Inc.
Stokes D, Stokes L. 1986. Stokes Nature Guides, A
Tyrrell EQ. 1985. Hummingbirds, Their Life and
Guide to Animal Tracking and Behavior Boston:
 Behavior. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc.
Little Brown and Co.
Chapman JA. 1982. Wild Mammals of North America.
Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University
RODENTS
Press.
Allen EG. 1938. The Habits and Life History of the
Eastern Chipmunk (Tamias striatus lysteri). NY
BIRDS
State Museum Bulletin.
Barkalow F, Shorten M. 1973. The World of the Gray
Campbell TW. 1995. Raptor Rehabilitation in the
Squirrel. New York: J.B. Lippincott Co.
Private Veterinary Hospital. In: Exotic Animals: A
Booth ES. 1946. Notes on the Life History of the
Veterinary
Handbook,
Trenton:
Veterinary
Flying Squirrel. Journal of Mammalogy 27 (1):
Learning Systems Co., Inc. 121-25.
28-30.
Eastman J. 1997. Birds of Forest, Yard and Thicket.
Costello DF. 1966. The World of the Porcupine. New
Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
York: Lippincott Co.
Eastman J. 1999. Birds of Lake, Pond and Marsh.
Hanes PC. 1988. Hand-Rearing Infant Tree Squirrels.
Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
IWRC 1988 Proceedings, Suisun, CA: International
Eastman J.
2000. Birds of Field
 and
Shore.
Rehabilitation Council. 77-93.
Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
Nichols JT. 1958. Food Habits and Behavior of the
Ehrlich PR, Dobkin DS, Wheye D. 1988. The Birder's
Grey Squirrel. Journal of Mammalogy 39 (3):
 Handbook, A Field Guide to the Natural History
376-80.
of North American Birds. Fireside, Simon and
Rue LL, MI. 1964. The World of the Beaver.
Schuster.
Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott.
Fox N. 1995. Understanding the Birds of Prey. Blaine,
Long K. Squirrels: A Wildlife Handbook. Boulder,
WA: Hancock House Publishers.
Colorado:
Johnson
Nature
Series,
 Johnson
 Johnsgard P. 1988. North American Owls, Biology
Publishing Co.
 and Natural History. Smithsonian Institution.
Long K. 2000. Beavers: A Wildlife Handbook. Boulder,
Morzenti A. 1998. Captive Raptor Management.
Colorado:
 Johnson
Nature
Series,
Johnson
Madison: Omnipress.
 Publishing Co.
Sibley DA. 2001. The Sibley Guide to Bird Life and
Wasserman
J.
1988.
Raising Orphaned
Flying
Behavior. National Audubon Society. New York:
Squirrels.
. IWRC 1988 Proceedings. Suisun, CA:
Chanticleer Press, Inc.
International Wildlife Rehabilitation Council.
437
438
Appendix 11
LAGOMORPHS
Rue LL, IIl. 1994. The World of the Raccoon.
 Springville, CA: Wild Ones Animal Books.
Lockley RM. 1964. The Private Life of the Rabbit.
Stuewer FW. 1943. Raccoons: Their Habits and
New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc.
Management
äin
 Michigan.
Michigan
Ecol
Monograph, 13: 203-57.
OPOSSUMS
WILDLIFE REHABILITATION
Keefe JF, Wooldridge D. 1967. The World of the
ORGANIZATIONS
Opossum. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott.
McManus J. 1974. Didelphis virginian. Mammalian
Basically Bats Wildlife Conservation Society, Inc.
Species, No. 40: 1-6.
106 Spooner Rd., Hawthorne, FL 32640
Nave P, Lacy J. 1983. Rehabilitation notes: Opossum
Nonprofit organization devoted to bat rehabilitation,
(Didelphis marsupialis). WRC J, Winter, 7-10.
research, education, and conservation; includes
resources  and  contacts and  promotes public
awareness
CANIDS
www.basicallybats.org
Fox MW. 1971. Behavior of Wolves, Dogs and Related
BCI: Bat Conservation International
Canids. New York: Harper and Row.
PO. Box 162603, Austin, TX 78716
Henry D. 1986. Red Fox, The Cat Like Canine.
Phone: (512) 327-9721
Smithsonian Institution Press.
www.batcon.org
Rue LL, Ill. 1969. The World of the Red Fox.
 Bat information, their conservation, and how to get
Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott.
involved.
Van Wormer J. 1964. The World of the Coyote.
Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott.
IWRC:
International
Wildlife
Rehabilitation
Council
PO. Box 8187, San Jose, CA 95155
MUSTELIDS
Phone: (408) 271-2685
www.office@iwrc-online.org
Caine-Stage M. 1990. American River Otter, Lutra
Membership, training, education, and support for
canadensis. Wildlife Journal 13(1): 7-10.
wildlife rehabilitators, literature catalogues, non-
Hall RR. 1951. American
Weasels. Lawrence:
releasable animal placement, job line, symposium
University of Kansas Press.
information, online training, standards, rehabilita-
Kruuk H. 2006. Otters Ecology,.
Behaviour and
tion links.
Conservation. New York: Oxford University Press
Inc.
NOS: National Opossum Society, Inc.
Park E. 1971. The World of the Otter. New York: J.B.
PO. Box 21197, Catonsville, MD 21228
Lippincott.
www.opossum.org
Verts BJ. 1967. Biology of the Striped Skunk. Urbana,
Annual subscription
IL: University of Illinois Press.
NWRA: National Wildlife Rehabilitation Association
2625 Clearwater Rd. Suite 110, St. Cloud, MN
PROCYONS
56301
Phone: (320) 230-9920
Evans AT, Evans RH. 1995. Rearing Raccoons for
nwra@nwrawildlife.org
Release: Part I: Rehabilitation and Diet. Veterinary
Membership, training, education, and support for
Technician 6(6):296-306.
wildlife rehabilitators, NWRA/IWRC Minimum
Goldman EA. 1950. Raccoons of North and Middle
 Standards, state and federal permit agency listings,
America. U.S. Department of Interior, U.S. Fish and
career page, baby animal care, publications,
Wildlife Services, North American Fauna 60.
literature order reprints, upcoming events, and
Washington, DC.
symposium.
Appendix 11
439
REHABILITATION BOOKS, MANUALS,
for Animals National Headquarters; Urban Wildlife
AND CDs
Program; phone 203-393-1050.
Wildlife Neighbors: The Humane Approach to Living
These books can be purchased from the IWRC or
with Wildlife. 1997. Edited by John Hadidian, Guy
NWRA web sites or the other book companies listed
R. Hodge, and John W. Grandy. The Humane
on the product source pages.
Society of the United States.
General Rebabilitation Topics
Mammal Rebabilitation
Adams P, Johnson V, Goodrich P, Haas R. 1991. Wild
Bats in Captivity. 1995. By Susan M. Barnard. Now
 Animal Care and Rehabilitation Manual. Kalamazoo
available free of charge online at www.basically-
Nature Center. Kalamazoo: Beech Leaf Press.
bats.org/onlinebook.htm.
Fowler ME. 1983. Restraint and Handling of Wild and
Complete Rehabilitation Guide for North American
Domestic Animals. Ames: Iowa State University
Bats. By Amanda Lollar, Barbara French, and
Press.
 Patricia Winters.
IWRC—Basic Wildlife  Rehabilitation 1AB Skills
Merritt  JF.
1987.
Guide
to the Mammals of
Seminar, Sth ed. rev. By Jan White, DVM. An inter-
Pennsylvania. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
pretation of existing biological  and  veterinary
Press.
literature
for the wildlife rehabilitator. Includes
North  American 
River Otter, Lontra canadensis,
anatomy,
physiology,
calculating
Bnp
Husbandry Notebook, 2nd ed. 2001. By Janice
dosages, nutrition, housing, release, euthanasia, and
 Reed-Smith. John Ball Zoological Gardens, Grand
more.
Rapids, MI.
Moore AT, Joosten S. 1995b. NWRA—Principles of
Opossum Orphan Care Training Manual. 1995. By
Wildlife Rehabilitation, The Essential Guide for
Paula Taylor of the Opossum Society of the U.S.,
Novice and Experienced Rehabilitators. St. Cloud:
14 pp; guides new opossum rehabilitators through
National Wildlife Rehabilitators Association.
the rearing process: Wildlife Publications.
NWRA Quick Reference, 3rd ed. 2006. By E.A. Miller,
Stinky Business: How to Rehabilitate Skunks, 3rd
DVM. Includes a glossary, abbreviations, tables,
ed. By Share Bond, 117p, Contact: skunks10@aol.
calculations, drug dosing, fluid charts, infant devel-
com.
 oping, and anatomy pertaining to wildlife.
 Squirrel Rehabilitation Handbook. 2003. By Shirley J
NWRA—Principles of Wildlife Rehabilitation, The
 and Allan M. Casey, 265pp. Sold only to permitted
Essential Guide for Novice and  Experienced
wildlife rehabilitators and subpermittees; order
 Rehabilitators. By Adele T. Moore and Sally Joosten.
 form available at www.ewildagain.org.
 Printed by Burgess International Group Inc., Edina,
MN.
Avian Rebabilitation
NWRA/IWRC Minimum
 Standards
for  Wildlife
Care and Rehabilitation of Injured Owls, 4th ed.,
Rehabilitation. Includes basic housing requirements
1987.
By
Katherine
Mckeever.
The Owl
for mammals and birds, euthanasia standards, and
Rehabilitation Research Foundation, Vineland,
disease transmission (available free on IWRC/
Ontario, Canada.
NWRA web site).
Raptors in(
Captivity:
Guidelines for Care and
Raley P.1991. Primer
r of Wildlife
：Care
and
Management. 2007. By Lori R. Arent. The Raptor
 Rehabilitation. Troy: Brukner Nature Center.
Center atthe University of Minnesota; NWRA website.
White J. 2000. IWRC—Basic Wildlife Rehabilitation
Raptor Rehabilitation: A Manual of Guidelines. 1993.
1AB Skills Manual. Suisun, CA:
 International
By Mathias Engelmann and Pat Marcum. The
Wildlife Rehabilitation Council.
Carolina Raptor Center.
Wild Animal Care and Rehabilitation Manual, 4th ed.
Hand-rearing Birds. 2007. By Laurie Gage, DVM, and
1991. Kalamazoo Nature Center,
，7000 North
 Rebecca Duerr, DVM. 488pp. Wildlife Publications.
Westedge Ave., Kalamazoo, MI 49007; phone (616)
Rehabilitation and Conservation of Chimney Swifts.
381-1574; fax (616) 381-2557.
4th ed. 2004. By Paul and Georgean Kyle; available
Wild Mammal Babies, The First 48 hours and Beyond.
(at no charge) online at www.chimneyswifts.org.
2007. pp 448. By Irene Ruth and Deborah Gody;
to order call 603-239-7338
Reptile Rebabilitation
Wildlife Care Basics for Veterinary Hospitals—Before
Turtle Husbandry for Wildlife Rehabilitators CD.
the Rehabilitator Arrives. By Irene Ruth: The Fund
2006. By Harriet Forrester. NWRA website.
440
Appendix 11
Wildlife Veterinary Topics
· Tri-State Bird Rescue and Research Center: Wild
       s
bird care, tips on living with wildlife, oil spill
 Porter, VMD. 15 power point programs: micros-
response, www.tristatebird.org
copy, parasitology, mycology, necropsy, effusions,
+
USFandW home page: www.fws.gov
etc. Available on NWRA website.
Wildlife Rehabilitation  Information
Directory:
Willowbrook
Wildlife
Center's
 Pharmaceutical
Books, resources, supplies, rehabilitation law,
Index, 3rd ed. 2000. By Catherine M. Brown.
information on nuisance wildlife, locating a reha-
DVM, MSC. 187 pp. Medical wildlife formulary
 bilitator, helping wildlife, links, and information
published by the Willowbrook Wildlife Foundation,
for the rehabilitation professional, www.tc.umn.
NWRA website.
edu/-devo0028/index.htm
Topics in Wildlife Medicine, Vol 1, Clinical Pathology,
Songbird Diet Website: Excellent site with detailed
2005,
and
Vol2,
 Emergency
 and
 Critical
information on songbird natural and captive diets,
Care, 2007. By Florina S.
.Tseng, DVM, and
www.snowcrest.net/kellyj/wildbirdcare/group2.
Mark A. Mitchell, 
DVM, MS, PhD. NWRA
htm
website.
 The Smithsonian National Museum of Natural
Medical
Management
of
Birds
Prey:
History-North American mammal species database:
A
Collection of Notes on Selected
Topics.
1993.
www.mnh.si.edu/mna
By Patrick Redig, DVM, PhD.
University
of
+
 Animal Diversity Web: University of Michigan
Minnesota.
Museum of Zoology, http://animaldiversity.ummz.
Field Manual of Wildlife Diseases: National Wildlife
umich.edu/site/index.html
Health Center. www.nwhc.usgs.gov; available for
+
Squirrel Tales: S
 Squirrel rehabilitation,
, care, and
free download (43MB).
information site: www.squirreltales.org
+
The International Otter Survival Fund (IOSF): River
otter rehabilitation, care, conservation, and infor-
WEBSITES USEFUL TO
mation, www.otter.org
REHABILITATORS
· WildAgain Wildlife Rehab, Inc.: Resources and
tools for wildlife rehabilitators, teleclass training.
 CDC: Diseases and zoonotics, www.cdc.gov/nczved
seminars on wildlife homeopathy and squirrel reha-
· National Wildlife Health Center: Invaluable site
bilitation, publications, squirrel care, articles for
for
wildlife
disease
 information,
emerging
free, download on wildlife rehabilitation and home-
diseases, wildlife health news updates, www.nwhc.
opathy, www.ewildagain.org
usgs.gov
 The National Opossum Society: Opossum care and
 NetVet: Links to hundreds of veterinary medical and
information, www.opossum.org
animal resources related sites, www.netvet.wustl.edu
?
 Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study
(SCWDS): Current news on wildife diseases, diag-
INTERNET LISTSERVE FOR
 nostic services, education, zoonotics, www.vet.uga.
PROFESSIONAL WILDLIFE
edu/scwds
REHABILITATORS
● Merck Veterinary Manual: Free electronic manual
online version, www.merck.com
Wildlife Rehabilitation (WLREHAB): To Subscribe,
 Internet Center for Wildlife Damage Management:
send an e-mail to: listserve@listserv.nodak.edu with
Tips on dealing with urban wildlife, www.icwdm.
a blank subject line and text that reads: subscribe
org/default.asp
WLREHAB.
APPENDIX TWELVE
Supplies Necessary for an Exotic Practice
3.5 to 5 red French rubber catheters
 Isoflurane or sevoflurane precision vaporizer
 Drinking water bottles
 Microdrip IV sets and pumps
Electrocautery unit
Microtainer blood collection tubes
Avian feeding formulas
Mouth speculum (stainless steel and rubber)
2 to 3.5 mm endotracheal tubes
Nasolacrimal cannulas
Feeding tubes
Nolvasan solution and scrub
Gavage needles of various sizes
 Perches of different sizes
 Gram scale
 Rigid endoscope
Gram stain kit
 Small anesthesia masks (cones)
Heat lamps
Small hand towels
Heated cages
 Small nonrebreathing circuit
 Heating pads
 Small rebreathing bag for an anesthesia machine
Incubators
 Sterile cotton tip applicators
 Induction chamber/oxygen cage
Uncuffed endotracheal tubes
Instrument  pack  with small
1 hemostats, scissors,
Wing trimming scissors
forceps, and needle holders 
441
Page references in italics refer to figures.
parasites of, 331
 Page references in bold refer to tables.
wobbling hedgehog syndrome,
330
Abdominal palpation
Aggression
amphibians, 231
in amphibians, 215
ferrets, 246
dominance, 93
rabbits, 265
fear, 93
Abdominal vein
in lizards, 93-94
amphibians, 213
in mice, 297, 298
chinchillas, 317
in rabbits, 255, 271
frogs, 233,234,235
 in reptiles, 200
lizards, 75, 112
in rodents, 300
Abortion, in rabbits, 269
in snakes, 119-120, 200
Abscesses
Air sacs
chelonians, 173, 174
birds, 15
 guinea pigs, 321
intubating, 36, 37
iguana,93
ruptured, 431
reptiles, 93,141, 143
snakes, 123
rodents, 302
Albendazole, in rabbits, 269
snakes, 93, 141, 143
Alcohol, disinfection with, 185
Abyssinian guinea pigs, 319, 320
Aldabra tortoise, 167
Acariasis. See Mites
Aldehydes, disinfection with, 186
Acepromazine
Allergies, rodent, 300
in chinchillas, 316
Allethrin, lizards, 104
in rabbits, 276
Alopecia
Adrenal glands
prairie dogs, 346
ferrets,243,245-246,245
rabbits, 271
rodents, 293
rodents, 297
snakes, 126
Amazon parrots, 11, 48, 49
Aeromonas spp.
behavior, 48
amphibians, 224
bile duct carcinoma, 27
reptiles, 95, 174
blood collection, 387
Afatoxins, in peanuts, 17, 18
chronic malnutrition, 17
Aflatoxin toxicity, rabbits, 289
heart/respiratory rates, 14
African fat-tailed gecko, 75
papillomatosis, 27
African Grey parrot
poxviruses, 26
aspergillosis, 28, 46
tube feeding, 42
behavior, 46-47
American newt, 210
hypocalcemia, 29
Aminoglycoside toxicity, lizards, 92, 94
sinusitis, 46
Amitraz, in rodents, 296
African hedgehog, 332
Ammonia, disinfection with, 186
443
444
Index
Amoebiasis
fluid therapy, 213, 236
amphibians, 226-227
food items, 222-224, 229
lizards, 105
gape in, 231
snakes, 154
history, 229-230
turtles, 176
housing, 214-220
Amphibians
aquatic species, 215, 219
aggression in, 215
multiple species, 219-220
 anatomy and physiology, 209-214
quarantine, 220
cardiovascular system, 213
terrestrial species, 215, 218-219
cloaca, 211, 213
humidity requirements, 217
coelomic cavity, 233
husbandry, 214-218
digestive system, 211
 injection sites, 236
glands,210
 interspecies toxicity, 220
integument, 209-210, 231
intubation, 233
lymph sacs, 213
IPPV, 233
reproductive system, 212, 227
keratophagy, 210
respiratory system, 210, 211-212
larval, 228-229
sense organs, 214
life cycle, 209
skeleton, 210, 211, 212
light requirements, 216-217, 225
urinary system, 212-213
locomotion, 210
viscera, 212
medication administration, 236
vomeronasal organ, 214
milkweed toxicity, 219
anesthesia, 232-233
mydriasis, 231
anorexia, 226
natural history, 214
antibiotics, 224, 227,236
nervous system, 213-214
assist feeding, 235
nictitating membrane, 214
bite wounds, 224
nutrition, 221-222,223-224, 229
blood collection, 213, 233, 234, 235
 nutritional supplements, 222
celiocentesis, 233-234
oviparous, 213
cloacal wash, 235
parasites of, 220-221,226,227, 234
common species, 205, 206-208, 209
physical examination, 230-232
deworming, 220-221
poison glands, 210
disorders
POTZ,206-208,217,219
bloat, 225
 prey prehension, 211
chytridiomycosis, 220, 223, 225
quarantine, 220-221
cloacal prolapse, 225
radiography, 232
digestive, 226-227
regurgitation, 226
egg-binding, 227
reproduction, 206-208, 212, 227
integumentary, 224-225
respiration, 210, 211-212, 231
metabolic bone disease, 222, 225
restraint, 230, 407
nutritional, 222, 225
sight feeding, 221
ophthalmic, 227
skin scrapings, 235
reproductive, 227
stress, 226
respiratory, 226
substrate ingestion, 219
rostral abrasions, 224
surgery, 233
spindly leg disease, 225-226
toxicities of, 227
Vitamin A deficiency, 227
transtracheal wash, 235
Vitamin B, deficiency, 222
traumatic injuries, 220, 224
ecdysis, 209-212
viviparous, 212
emaciation in, 231
vocalization, 212
epidermal glands, 210
wild-collected, 220
euthanasia,236-237
zoonotic diseases, 227-228
feeding methods, 221
Amphigonia retardata, 193
Index
445
Amphiumas, 205, 221; See also Amphibians
reptiles, 101
 Amphotericin-B, for aspergillosis in birds, 28
snakes, 151
Amylase, serum, rabbits, 256, 260
Anticoagulants, blood collection, 387
Amyloidosis, skunks, 336
Antifungals, in birds, 28, 59
Analgesia
Antivenin, 163-164, 188
birds, 31-32
 Ants, for amphibians, 223
ferrets, 248
Apomorphine, in rabbits, 289
rabbits, 279-280
Aposematic coloring, amphibians, 210
snakes, 152
Appointments, length of, 5
Anal sacs
Aquariums, snakes, 130
chinchillas, 313
Ascaridosis, See also Baylisascaris spp.:
skunks,335
Roundworms
Anemia
birds, 33
defined, 392
lizards, 107
snakes, 155
Aspergillosis, in birds, 28, 46
Anesthesia
Aspergillus flavus, 28
amphibians, 232-233
Aspergillus fumigatus, 28
birds, 30-33
Assist feeding, See also Force-feeding; Tube feeding
chelonians, 175-176
amphibians, 235
chinchillas, 316
lizards, 114-115
ferrets, 248
rabbits, 286-287
guinea pigs, 322
raptors, 363,363
hedgehogs, 331-332
reptiles, 200
lizards, 101-102
Atipamezole, 280
 prairie dogs, 347
Atropinesterase, rabbits, 256, 271, 276
rabbits, 275-280
Atropine sulfate
rodents, 302-303
lizards, 101
skunks, 337
snakes, 151
snakes, 150-153
Auricular artery, rabbits, 282, 283
sugar gliders, 343
Auscultation
Anisocytosis, 392
amphibians, 232
Anorexia
birds, 24
amphibians, 226
lizards, 98
birds, 25, 41, 53
rabbits, 272
buprenorphine-induced, 280
snakes, 149
chelonians, 171
Australian gastric brooding frogs, 211
chinchillas, 314
Australian king parrot, sex determination,
ferrets, 245, 249
61
guinea pigs, 321
Aviary
hedgehogs, 330, 331
cage design, 56
lizards, 86, 90, 91, 109, 110, 144
closed, 55-56
neonate reptiles, 200
disease prevention, 57
prairie dogs, 346
disinfection, 57
rabbits, 265, 270, 280, 282
pediatrics, 58-59
skunks, 336
watering system, 56
snakes, 146
Aviculture, 55
Antibiotics
Azurophils, reptiles, 391, 391
in amphibians, 224, 227, 236
in birds, 26, 38-40, 59
Badgers, 335, 336
in lizards, 115
 Bait, poisoned, 364
in rabbits, 264, 266
Balantidium spp.
Anticholinergics
in chelonians, 176
rabbits, 275
in chinchillas, 316
446
Index
 Bandaging
guinea pigs, 320
birds, 42, 374-375, 409-410
hedgehogs, 329
ferrets, 253
 prairie dogs, 345
guinea pigs, 325
rabbits, 261
hedgehogs, 334
rodents, 295
lizards, 88-89, 113
skunks, 335
rabbits, 285
sugar gliders, 341
raptors, 363
wild mammals, 428
rodents, 303
Birds
Bander's hold, 373
altricial, 368-376
Barbering
analgesia, 31-32
in mice, 297, 297
 anatomy and physiology
 in prairie dogs, 345
air sacs, 15, 36, 37, 431
Barbiturates, in snakes, 151
cardiovascular, 13-14, 13
Barium sulfate contrast imaging. See Contrast
cecum, 15
radiography
choanal slit, 22
Basilic vein, birds, 24, 38, 39, 40
cloaca, 16
Basilisks, bipedal locomotion, 74
coelomic cavity, 15, 23
 Basking area
digestive system, 15-16
chelonians, 170, 171
ear, 22,22, 58
lizards, 82
eye, 14, 31, 52, 58
snakes, 135
glands, 12
 Basophils
integument, 12, 13
birds, 390, 390
nares, 22, 22, 58
hedgehogs, 329
operculum, 22, 22
rabbits, 256,260
 oral cavity, 22
reptiles, 390, 390
renal, 14
 Baths, medicated, amphibians, 236
reproductive system, 16, 62-63
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis,225
respiratory system, 14-15
Baylisascaris spp.
skeletal system, 12-13, 13
B. columnaris, in skunks, 336
viscera, 16
B. procyonis
anesthesia, 30-33
in chinchillas, 315
anorexia, 25, 41, 53
 in prairie dogs, 346
antibiotics, 26, 38-40, 59
in raccoons, 419
bandaging, 42, 374-375, 409-410
 in hedgehogs, 331
bathing, 51
in rabbits, 267
beak trimming, 34
 Beak trimming
blood collection, 14, 24, 37-38, 39, 42, 387-388
birds, 34
blood loss, 36
chelonians, 172, 172, 173
body condition scoring, 23
Bearded dragons, 70, 98-99
cardiac arrest in, 36
Bears
carriers, 18
biological data, 428
catheterization
restraint, 406
intraosseous, 13, 37,40
Beavers, 406
intravenous, 40
Bedding. See Substrate
common species, 11
Beetles, for amphibians, 222-223
dehydration, 22, 24, 36-37
Betadine, 185
in chicks, 58
Biguanides, 185
disorders
 Bile duct carcinoma, Amazon parrots, 27
crop burn, 30
Biliverdinuria, birds, 25
dystocia, 63-65, 64
Biologic data
egg-binding, 29-30
ferrets, 244
heavy metal toxicosis, 28
Index
447
hemochromatosis, 18
melena, 19
non-stick cookware toxicosis, 29
molting, 51, 54
pododermatitis, 23, 24, 42
nail trimming, 34
Vitamin A deficiency, 22, 23, 24,29
nasal flushing, 40-41, 41
dyspnea in, 20
nebulization, 40
egg laying, 63-65
neonates, 56-57
emergency/critical care, 35-38
nutrition, 17-18,17,38
enrichment items, 50-51
pain assessment, 31-32
escape patterns, 356
parasites of, 33
euthanasia, 43
pediatrics, 58-59
feathers. See Feathers
perches, 49-50, 53
feces
physical examination, 21-24, 58-59
bacterial content, 15-16
playing, 51
normal, 19
polyuria, 20
flock mentality, 32, 35
precocial, 376-378
fluid therapy, 32-33, 36-37, 40
 preening, 12, 51
foods toxic to, 18
quarantine, 55-56
fracture immobilization, 374-375
radiography, 30, 30, 31
gape in, 370
regurgitation, 52, 53
gavage feeding, 18
reproduction
glucose levels, 16
anatomy, 16
grooming, 34-35, 51
female, 16, 62
heart rates, 14
male, 16, 63
hematology
resources, 437
basophils, 390, 390
respiration, 14-15
eosinophils, 389-390
IPPV, 32, 35-36
erythrocytes,16-17, 389,391-392, 392
 open-mouthed breathing, 53
granulocytes, 388
rates, 14
heterophils, 16, 388-389, 389
restraint of, 20-21, 22, 23
leukocytes, 388-391
sex determination, 16, 33-34, 61-62
lymphocytes, 390-391
shivering, 52-53
monocytes, 391, 391
sinus flushing, 40-41
thrombocytes, 16, 16, 392, 392
sleep requirements, 51-52
hematuria, 19
stress in, 21
history, 18-20
surgery, 32-33
housing, 18, 49-51, 360-361
tail bobbing, 20, 53
husbandry, 49-51
tail wrapping, 409-410
hypocalcemia, 29, 372
toys, 50-51
infectious diseases, 24-28
traumatic injury, bruising, 12
aspergillosis, 28, 46
tube feeding, 41-42
canary pox, 26
uropygial (preen) gland, 24, 38
candidiasis, 28
vitamin Dg deficiency, 370
chlamydiosis, 24-25
vocalizations, 52
papillomatosis, 27-28
vomiting, 53
PBFD (psittacine beak and feather disease),
water requirements, 18
26-27
weighing, 24
polyomaviruses, 26
wild, See also Raptors; Songbirds; Waterfowl
 proventricular dilation disease, 26
feeding, 359
West Nile virus, 28
housing, 360-361
 injection sites, 38, 40, 40
imprinting, 359, 366
IPPV, 32, 35-36
medication administration, 357
light requirements, 51, 370
nutrition, 18
medication administration, 38-41
orphaned, 354
448
Index
Birds (continued)
Blood loss, birds, 36
physical examination, 356-357
Blood sexing tests, 62
rehabilitation resources, 439
Blood smears, 388
releasability, 358
Blood transfusions
restraint, 407
ferrets, 253
stress in, 356
rabbits, 289
transporting, 360-361
Blue jays, 368
wing trimming, 34-35
Boas
wound care, 42
husbandry, 133
Birds of prey. See Raptors
inclusion body disease, 144
Bite wounds
reproduction, 128
amphibians, 224
sexual characteristics, 158
chinchillas, 314
Body fluke, 229
guinea pigs, 321
Body temperature
lizards, 88, 95
chinchillas, 316
rodents, 303
ferrets, 244
snakes, 138-139, 139,156
 guinea pigs, 320
Black-footed ferret, 241
 prairie dogs, 345
Black-legged poison frog, 230
rabbits, 272, 280
Black-tailed prairie dog, 345
rodents, 295
Bladder infections, ferrets, 246
skunks, 33.5
Bleach, 57, 185
sugar gliders, 341
 Bleeding times, rabbits, 260
 Bollinger bodies, 26
Blister disease, snakes, 141
Bones, pneumatic, 13, 37
Bloat, 429
Bordetella spp.
amphibians, 225
B.bronchiseptica
chinchillas, 314
 in guinea pigs, 321
orphaned mammals, 379, 381
in rabbits, 263
Blood chemistry
 in hedgehogs, 331
blood collection for, 388
 Bottle feeding, orphaned mammals, 380-381
ferrets, 249
Box turtle, 167
hedgehogs, 329
 anatomy and physiology, 168-169
rabbits, 256-257, 259,260
sex determination, 188
Blood coagulation, rabbits, 260
Brachial vein, chelonians, 177, 178
Blood collection
Branchers, 354, 366
amphibians, 213, 233, 234,235
 Branchial (gill) respiration, 211-212
birds, 14,24,37-38,39,42,387-388
Breakfast cereals, for rabbits, 261
for blood chemistries, 388
Brown fat, rodents, 295
chelonians, 177-179
Bruising, birds, 12
chinchillas, 317
Brumation, 187
guinea pigs, 324-325
Bruxism, ferrets, 245
hedgehogs, 332-333
Bubbling, in amphibians, 231
for hematology, 387
Bubonic plague, 300
lizards, 75, 111-112
 Buccopharyngeal respiration, 212
prairie dogs, 347
Bucks, 255
rabbits, 282-285
Buck teeth, 268
reptiles, 387-388
Budgerigars, 17, 42
rodents, 307-308, 308
Bufo toads, 207, 210, 230
skunks, 337-338
 Bulla osteotomy, rabbits, 281
snakes, 160, 161
Bumblefoot. See Pododermatitis
 sugar gliders, 343
Bumps, snakes, 143-144
Blood feathers, 429
Buprenorphine
Blood gases, rabbits, 257
in birds, 32
Index
449
in rabbits, 280
Carprofen, in birds, 32
in rodents, 303
Caryospora spp., lizards, 105
Buphthalmia, rabbits, 267, 271
Casque-headed tree frog, 223
Butorphanol
Castration
in birds, 31-32
chinchillas, 316
in chinchillas, 316
ferrets, 248
in ferrets, 248
hedgehogs, 332
in lizards, 101
rabbits, 262, 281, 289
in rabbits, 276, 280
rodents, 302
Cataracts, rabbits, 268
Caecilians, 205, 206
Catheterization
larval, 228
intracardiac, snakes, 161
reproduction, 213
intraosseous
Caesarean sections, guinea pigs, 321
birds, 13, 37,40
Caffeine, 18
chinchillas, 318
Cages. See Housing
ferrets, 249, 252,253
Calcitonin, 85
guinea pigs, 325
Calcium
hedgehogs, 332
deficiency. See Hypocalcemia
lizards, 111, 111
regulation, 84-8.5
rabbits, 284-285
serum, rabbits, 256-257
raptors, 364
Caliciviruses, rabbits, 267
intravenous
Campylobacter spp., from reptiles, 145, 174
birds, 40
Canaries, nutrition, 17-18
chelonians, 180, 180
Canary pox, 26
chinchillas, 317
Candida albicans, in birds, 28
ferrets, 249, 250, 252
Canding, reptile eggs, 198-199
 guinea pigs, 325
Canine distemper
hedgehogs, 334
in badgers, 336
lizards, 110-111, 111
in ferrets, 245
rabbits, 283-284
in skunks, 336
snakes, 161
Canine distemper vaccine, ferrets, 247
urinary, ferrets, 249, 250
Canker, pigeons, 33
Cats, large exotic, 6, 406
Cannibalism
Caudal artery, ferrets, 251
hedgehogs, 327
Cavies. See Guinea pigs
rodents, 300
Cecal fermentation, rabbits, 257-258
sugar gliders, 342
Cecotrophy, rabbits, 256, 258-259
Caparinia, 331, 332
Cecum
Capillaria spp., lizards, 106, 108
birds, 15
Carapace, 168, 168
chinchillas, 311
Carbamate toxicity, snakes, 142
guinea pigs, 319
Carbohydrate fermentation, rabbits, 257
rabbits, 257-258
Cardiac arrest, in birds, 36
sugar gliders, 341
Cardiocentesis
Celiocentesis, amphibians, 233-234
chelonians, 178
Celiotomy
snakes, 160, 161
amphibians, 233
Cardiomyopathy, skunks, 336
lizards, 102-103
Cardiovascular system
snakes, 153
amphibians, 213
Cellophane tape test, 297
birds, 13-14, 13
Central nervous system
chelonians, 169
disease in rabbits, 267
lizards, 75, 89-90
lizards, 78
snakes, 122-123,142
snakes, 123-124
450
Index
Cephalic vein
hematology
chinchillas, 317, 317
eosinophils, 389-390
ferrets, 249,250,251,252
heterophils, 389
hedgehogs, 333, 334
history, 174-175
lizards, 111,112,112
housing, 169-171
prairie dogs, 347
 injection sites, 179
skunks, 338, 338, 339
intubation, 176
sugar gliders, 343
IPPV, 176
Cephalosporins, in birds, 26
light requirements, 170, 171
Cere, birds, 14, 15
medication administration, 179-180
Cerebral larval migrans, rabbits, 267
 microchip placement, 187
 Cervical lymphadenitis, guinea pigs, 321
nebulization, 179-180
Cestodes, See also Tapeworms
neonates, 199-200
of amphibians, 226, 227, 316
nutrition, 169-171
of chelonians, 176
parasites of, 176
of hedgehogs, 331, 332
physical examination, 175
of lizards, 106
POTZ, 170, 171, 175
of snakes, 155
radiography, 175
Chameleons, 70
reproduction, 169, 169, 170, 173
cages for, 79-80
environmental factors, 191-192
color changes, 69, 74
sexual maturity, 191
cryptosporidiosis, 105
respiration, 168, 172-173
diet, 86
restraint, 175, 175, 407
eyes of, 78
salivary glands, 168
physical examination, 98-99
sex determination, 188, 189, 190
sex characteristics, 77
temperature-dependent, 197-198, 197
sex determination, 189
shell
traumatic tail amputation, 89
anatomy, 168,168
water availability, 82
disorders of, 172
Cheek pouches, hamsters, 294
repair of, 172
Chelation therapy, heavy metal toxicosis, 28
traumatic injury, 172, 172, 176-177
Chelonians, 167
viscera, 169
anatomy and physiology, 168-169
zoonotic diseases, 174
anesthesia, 175-176
Cheyletiella, rabbits, 272
anorexia, 171
Chiggers, lizards, 104
beak trimming, 172, 172, 173
Chinchillas
blood collection, 177-179
anal sacs, 313
catheterization, 180, 180
 anatomy and physiology, 311-313
disorders
anesthesia, 316
abscesses, 173, 174
anorexia, 314
cloacal prolapse, 173, 174
behavior, 315
dystocia, 173
bite wounds, 314
gastrointestinal, 173
blood collection, 317
gout,173
body temperature, 316
metabolic bone disease, 171
catheterization
overgrown beak,172,172, 173
intraosseous, 318
respiratory, 172-173
intravenous, 317
shell rot, 172
dentition, 311
Vitamin A deficiency/toxicity, 172
disorders
eggshell, 198
gastrointestinal, 314
emergency/critical care, 176-177
malocclusion, 313-314
euthanasia, 180
respiratory, 314-315
Index
451
dust bath, 313
Cloacal palpation, snakes, 149
dyspnea, 314-315
Cloacal probing
emergency/critical care, 317
lizards, 77
euthanasia, 318
snakes, 158, 159
handling, 315-316
 Cloacal prolapse
history, 315
amphibians, 225
housing, 313
chelonians, 173, 174
 injection sites, 318
lizards, 91-92, 103, 110
locomotion, 311
snakes, 140
medication administration, 318
Cloacal wash
nutrition, 313, 314
amphibians, 235
parasites of, 315, 316
lizards, 113
physical examination, 315
Clostridium spp.
radiography, 316
C. piliforme, 264
reproduction, 312-313
rodents, 300
restraint, 315-316, 316
 in bird feces, 16
sex determination, 317
C. spiroforme, 264
surgery, 316
guinea pigs, 321
teeth trimming, 314
 Clotting time, rabbits, 260
 traumatic injuries, 314
Clover, 261
urinalysis, 316-317
Coccidiosis
viscera, 312
amphibians, 227
zoonotic diseases, 315
chelonians, 176
Chipmunks
chinchillas, 316
biological data, 428
ferrets, 246, 248
restraint, 406
hedgehogs, 331, 332
transporting, 361
lizards, 105, 107, 108
Chlamydia trachomatis, 24
rabbits, 263-264
Chlamydophila pneumoniae,24
skunks, 337
Chlamydophila psittaci
snakes, 154
in birds, 24-25
sugar gliders, 343
in lizards, 95
Coccygeal vein, sugar gliders, 343
Chlorhexidine, disinfection with, 57, 185
Cockatiels
Chlorine, disinfection with, 57, 185
behavior, 46
Choana, lizard, 99
heart/respiratory rates, 14
 Choanal slit
nutrition, 17
birds, 22
tube feeding, 42
snakes,125
Cockatoos
Choke, chinchillas, 314
behavior, 45, 46
Cholecalciferol. See Vitamin D
chicks, 58
Chorioptic mange, hedgehogs, 331, 332
common species, 11
Chromatophores, chameleon skin, 69, 74
intubation, 31
Chromodacryorrhea, 299
reproduction, 63
Chytridiomycosis, in amphibians, 220, 223, 225
sex determination, 61
Cleft palate, rabbits, 268
tube feeding, 42
Climbing toad, 223
Coelomic cavity
Cloaca
amphibians, 233
amphibians, 211, 213
birds, 15, 23
birds, 16
lizards, 75
chelonians, 168, 169,179
Colonic wash
lizards, 76, 76, 77,99
lizards, 113
 sugar gliders, 341
snakes, 154, 162,163
452
Index
Colorado river toad, 230
commercial sources, 433
Coloration
hedgehogs, 330
aposematic, 210
lizards, 86, 87
mimicry, 210
for medicating wild birds, 357, 375-376
 Conazoles, for aspergillosis in birds, 28
Critical care. See Emergency/critical care
Concertina locomotion, 121
Crocodilians
Congo African grey, 59
eggshell, 198
Constipation, 429
hematology, 390
chinchillas, 314
microchip placement, 187
snakes, 140
 nest guarding, 199
Contact dermatitis, snakes, 141
sex determination, 190, 197
Continuing education, and exotic medicine, 6-7
Crop
Contrast radiography
birds, 15,23
amphibians, 232
psittacine chicks, 58
ferrets, 248
Crop burn, 30
lizards, 100
Crop stasis, 23, 429
Conures, 48
Crown vetch toxicity, 261
Cooling fans, lizard cages, 82
Crustaceans, feeder, 229
Coprophagy
Cryptosporidiosis
rodents, 294
chinchillas, 316
sugar gliders, 342
disinfection solutions, 83
Copulatory plug, guinea pigs, 319
ferrets, 245, 248
Coracoid bone, 13
lizards, 105-106
Corneal lipidosis, amphibians, 227
snakes, 105-106, 154-155
Corneal reflex, rabbits, 279
Cryptosporidium wrairi, 322
Corn snakes, 128, 133
Cuban treefrog, 210
Coronaviruses
Cuniculosis, 266
of rabbits, 264
Cutaneous respiration, 210, 212
of rodents, 299
Cuterebra larvae
Corticosterone, 191
in rabbits, 267,272
Corynebacterium, in hedgehogs, 331
in turtles, 176
Cottontail rabbits, 255
Cystitis, guinea pigs, 323
biological data, 428
Cystocentesis
housing, 426
ferrets, 249, 250
orphaned, 354-355
 guinea pigs, 323
release, 426
hedgehogs, 333
species care sheet, 425-426
prairie dogs, 347
Courtship behavior, reptiles, 127-128, 192-193
rabbits, 285
COX-2 inhibitors, for proventricular dilation disease,
skunks, 339
26, 32
sugar gliders, 343
Coxiella burnetii, from reptiles, 145
Cystotomy, rabbits, 281
Coyote
biological data, 428
Dacryocystitis, rabbits, 271
resources, 438
Dandelion, 261
restraint, 406
 Daphnia, for larval amphibians, 229
CPR, rabbits, 287
Day geckos, 74
Cranes, 377,407
cages for, 79-80
Cranial nerves, snakes, 149
skin of, 96
Crayfish, as food item, 223
 Decompensation, rabbits, 287
Crenosoma mephitidis,337
Deer
Crenosoma striatum,332
baby, 35.5
Crickets, feeder
biological data, 428
amphibians, 222, 223
releasability, 358
Index
453
Defecation, stimulating, 379, 381
amphibians, 211
Defense postures, hedgehogs, 329
birds, 15-16
Dehydration, 429-430; See also Fluid therapy
chelonians, 168, 173
assessing, 430
chinchillas, 311
birds, 22, 24, 36-37
ferrets, 241-242
chicks, 58
hedgehogs, 327
lizards, 111
lizards, 75-76, 90-92, 109-110
orphaned mammals, 378
rabbits,257-259,259,263-265
rabbits, 265,272, 288
rodents, 294-295
raptors, 362, 363, 364
snakes, 125-126, 143
snakes, 156
Digit amputation, lizards, 103
songbirds, 373-374
Disinfectants, 185-186
Demodex nanus, 297
Disinfection
 Dental radiographs, rabbits, 274
aviary, 57
Dentition
lizard cages, 83
chinchillas, 311
reptile cages, 184
ferrets, 241-242
Distemper. See Canine distemper
 guinea pigs, 319
Distress calls, frogs, 212
hedgehogs, 327, 328
Diving birds, 377
lizards, 74
DNA sexing tests, 62
rabbits, 257,258
Does, 255, 256
rodents, 293, 298-299
Doves, 371, 372
skunks, 336
Ducks
Dermatitis
identification of, 376
amphibians, 224-225
restraint of, 377
prairie dogs, 345
Dust bath, chinchillas, 313
rabbits, 266-267
Dutch rabbits, 262, 271
rodents, 296,297, 299
Dwarf rabbits, 272
skunks, 336
Dysecdysis
snakes, 141, 143
lizards, 69, 88
Dermatomycosis, prairie dogs, 346
snakes, 141-142
Dermatophagy, amphibians, 210
Dyspnea
 Dermatophycosis. See Ringworm
birds,20
Dermatoses, snakes, 141-142
chinchillas, 314-315
Descenting, ferrets, 241
guinea pigs, 321
Dewlap, rabbits, 271, 287
lizards, 90, 98
Deworming
prairie dogs, 346
lizards, 83
snakes, 155, 157
reptiles, 103
Dystocia
Diarrhea
birds, 63-65, 64
guinea pigs, 321, 322
chelonians, 173
hedgehogs, 330, 331
guinea pigs, 319, 321, 323
orphaned mammals, 379, 381
lizards, 92, 110, 187
rabbits, 264, 288
nonobstructive, 141
rodents, 299
obstructive, 141
Diarrhea scald, 266-267
reptiles, 141
Diastema, 293
snakes, 141, 153
Diazepam
in chinchillas, 316
Eagles, feeding guidelines, 366
in rabbits, 277
Ear
Diet, See also Nutrition
birds, 22, 22
low-iron, 18
neonates/juveniles, 58
Digestive system
lizards, 78
454
Index
Ear (continued)
rabbits, 279, 289
rabbits, 256, 270, 271, 282
rodents, 303
snakes, 124
Emaciation, 430
Ear canker, rabbits, 265
 in amphibians, 231
Ear mites
assessing, 430
ferrets, 246, 248
in raptors, 363-364
rabbits, 265-266, 265,282
 Emergency/critical care
Earthworms
birds, 3.5-38
for amphibians, 223
chelonians, 176-177
for chelonians, 170, 171
chinchillas, 317
Ear veins
ferrets, 249-2.50
 guinea pigs, 324
guinea pigs, 323
rabbits, 282,283, 284
hedgehogs, 332
Ecdysis
lizards, 106, 109-110
amphibians, 209-212
rabbits, 287-289
lizards, 69
rodents, 303
snakes, 120, 153
snakes, 155-157
 Eclectus parrots
Emetics, in rabbits, 289
behavior, 46
Encephalitozoon cuniculi, 269
sex determination, 61
Encephalopathy, hedgehogs, 331
 Edema syndrome, amphibians, 225
Enclosures. See Housing
EDTA tubes, 387
Endotracheal intubation. See Intubation,
Egg-binding
endotracheal
amphibians, 227
Enema
birds, 29-30
ferrets, 252-2.53
lizards, 92, 110
lizards, 113
Egg incubation methods, reptiles, 194-198
snakes, 162, 163
Egg laying, birds, 63-65
Enrichment devices
Eggs
birds, 50-51
feeder, 229
rabbits, 255-256
hard-shelled, 198
Enrofloxacin
snakes
in amphibians, 224, 236
anatomy, 128
 in birds, 26
management, 128-130
in lizards, 115
soft-shelled, 198
Entamoeba spp.
 Eggshell
in amphibians, 226-227
lizards, 77
Entamoeba invadens
reptiles, 198
lizards, 105
Egrets, 378, 3777
snakes, 154
Egyptian hedgehog, 327
turtles, 176
Eimeria spp., See also Coccidiosis
Enteritis, chinchillas, 314
E. chinchillae, 316
Enterobacter spp.
E. stiedae,263-264
birds, 25
in hedgehogs, 331
reptiles, 145
in lizards, 105, 108
Enteropathy, rabbits, 264
in rabbits, 263-264
Enterotoxemia
 Electrocardiography (ECG)
guinea pigs, 321
chelonians, 176
rabbits, 264, 288
lizards, 102
Entomelas, 106
snakes, 157, 158
Envenomation protocol, 163-164
 Electrocautery, Harrison tip, 32
Eosinophils
 Elizabethan collars
birds, 389-390
birds, 42, 43
chelonians, 389-390
Index
455
hedgehogs, 329
Eyelid
rabbits, 260
amphibians, 231
reptiles, 389-390, 390
lizards, 78
Epidermal glands, amphibians, 210
third. See Nictitating membrane
Epilepsy, rabbits, 268
Epizootic catarrhal enteritis (ECE), ferrets, 245, 249
 Falcon pox, 26
Ergocalciferol. See Vitamin D2
 Falcons, feeding guidelines, 366
Erythrocytes
 Fasting, preoperative
birds, 389,391-392, 392
guinea pigs, 322
hedgehogs, 329
rabbits, 275
parrots, 16
 Fat bodies
rabbits, 256, 260
amphibians, 212
reptiles, 391-392, 392
lizards, 76, 99
reticulated, 256
Fat cycle, snakes, 127
Escherichia coli
Feathers
in birds, 25
broken, 429
 enteropathogenic, rabbits, 264
cleaning, 431
Esophagus, birds, 15
destructive behaviors, 46, 47, 52
Estrogen, 193
fluffed, 52-53
European ferret, 241
grooming, 51, 54
European hamster, 293
molting, 51, 54
 European hedgehog, 332
 psittacine beak and feather disease, 26-
European salamander, 210
27
Euthanasia
raptors, 363, 365
amphibians, 236-237
structure, 12, 13
birds, 43
wing trimming, 34-35
chelonians, 180
 Feather sexing, 62
chinchillas, 318
 Fecal testing
ferrets, 253
amphibians, 220-221, 231, 234
 guinea pigs, 325
birds, 33
lizards, 116
chinchillas, 316
rabbits, 289
ferrets, 248
rodents, 308-309
hedgehogs, 331
snakes, 164
prairie dogs, 348
wildlife, 352,353,358-359
rabbits, 273
Exercise wheels
reptiles, 103, 149, 154, 184
hedgehogs, 330
skunks, 339
rodents, 296
snakes, 149, 154
Exophthalmia, rabbits, 271
sugar gliders, 343
Exotic pets
Feces
captive-raised vs. wild-caught, 6
birds, 15-16, 19,363
housing, 5-6
parrots, 15, 16
 Extremity amputation, lizards, 103
rabbits, 2.59
Extremity necrosis, lizards, 88
Feeding stations, lizards, 82-83
Eye
 Feline panleukopenia, in skunks,
amphibians, 214, 231
336
birds, 52
Femoral pores, 189, 189
lubrication of, 31
Femoral vein
neonates/juveniles, 58
chelonians, 178, 178
hedgehogs, 331
frogs, 233, 234
lizards, 78,93
hedgehogs, 333
rabbits, 271
skunks, 338
snakes,124,143
sugar gliders, 343
456
Index
Fenbendazole
reproduction, 242-243, 244
 in amphibians, 226
restraint, 247,247,248,249
in birds, 33
salivary glands, 242
in lizards, 115
sex determination, 242-243,243, 250
in rabbits, 265, 269
surgery, 248
 Fenbendazole toxicity, in amphibians, 220-221
TPR, 250
 Fentanyl patches, rabbits, 280
ultrasonography, 248
Ferrets
urine collection, 249, 250
adrenal glands, 243, 245, 245
vaccination protocols, 247
analgesia, 248
vaccine reactions, 247, 249
anatomy and physiology, 241-243
viscera, 242
anesthesia, 248
vocalization, 243
anorexia, 245, 249
wound care, 253
bandaging, 253
zoonotic diseases, 245
behavior, 243-244
Finches, 17-18
blood chemistry, 249
Fipronil, lizards, 104
blood transfusions, 253
 Fipronil toxicity, in rabbits, 289
body temperature, 244
Fire-bellied frogs, 210
bruxism, 245
Fish, feeder
canine distemper in, 336
amphibians, 223
catheterization
chelonians, 170
intraosseous, 249, 252, 253
water birds, 378
intravenous, 249, 250, 252
Fish-scale gecko, 74, 96
urinary, 249, 250
Fitch, 241
dentition, 241-242
Flagellates, See also Giardiasis; Protozoa
 descenting, 241
lizards, 107
disorders, 245-246, 247, 249
snakes, 155
emergency/critical care, 249-250
Flank glands, hamster, 294
enema,252-253
Fleas, 430
euthanasia, 253
chinchillas, 316
fleas, 248
ferrets, 246, 248
fuid therapy, 249, 250
 guinea pigs, 322
force-feeding, 249
Flea sprays, lizards, 104
heart rate, 244
Flight feathers, broken, 365
history, 246-247
 Flight or fight response, 404
housing, 244
Flock mentality, birds, 32, 35
hyperthermia, 241
Flour beetle, 223
hypoglycemia, 246, 249
 Fluid therapy, 429-430; See also Dehydration 
injection sites, 250
amphibians, 213, 236
intubation, 248
birds, 32-33, 36-37, 40
medication administration, 250-251
ferrets, 249, 250
nutrition, 244-245
hedgehogs, 334
obstructions, 245
lizards, 111
odor, 241
orphaned mammals, 378
oil glands, 241
rabbits, 283-285, 288
pain assessment, 245
raptors, 364
parasites of, 245, 246, 248
reptiles, 151, 156
physical examination, 246-247
snakes, 151, 156
physiologic values, 244
songbirds, 373-374
 preventive medicine, 247
 Flying squirrels
prostate disease, 246
biological data, 428
 pseudopregnancy, 243
housing, 421-422
radiography, 247-248
nutrition, 421
Index
457
release, 422
Gall bladder
species care sheet, 421-422
amphibians, 211
transporting, 361
bird, 15
Fly strike, rabbits, 267
lizards, 76, 76
Food, adding medication to, 38
Galliform birds, 407
 Food hiding, ferrets, 244
Gammarus, 229
 Force-feeding, See also Assist feeding; Tube
Gang gang cockatoos, 61
feeding
Gape
ferrets, 249
in amphibians, 231
raptors, 365
in baby birds, 370
snakes, 161,161,162
 in lizards, 98
songbirds, 375
in snakes, 121, 155
 Foreign body obstruction
Gape worm, 33
amphibians, 226
Garter snakes, 128, 133
lizards, 91, 109-110
Gastric dilation, rabbits, 288
rabbits, 281
Gastric stasis syndrome, rabbits, 265
Formula
Gastrointestinal system. See Digestive system
commercial sources, 433, 434
Gavage feeding
orphaned mammals, 378
birds, 18
Fowl pox, 26
orphaned mammals, 381
Foxes
Gavaging, rodents, 306-307
biological data, 428
Geckos
restraint, 406
cryptosporidiosis, 105
transporting, 361
eggshell, 198
Francisella tularensis, 269
physical examination, 98-99
Frilled dragons, bipedal locomotion, 74
sex determination, 77, 197
 Frogs, See also Amphibians
skin regeneration, 74
adaptations of, 207
spectacles, 93, 99
blood collection, 213, 233
Geese
common species, 205, 206-208, 209
identification of, 376
diet,222,223
restraint of, 377
distress calls, 212
Gender determination. See Sex determination
 Frogs, feeder
Genotypic sex determination (GSD), 196-198, 197
for hedgehogs, 330
Gerbils, 293; See also Rodents
for other frogs, 223
adrenal glands, 293
Frogs
behavior, 300
feeding methods, 221
 ovarian granulosa cell tumors, 298
nocturnal, 221
physiologic data, 295
 poison glands, 210
restraint, 301, 302
red-leg disease, 224
scent glands, 303, 304
release calls, 212
seizures,293,299
spindly leg disease, 225-226
sore nose, 299
viscera, 212
squamous cell carcinoma, 298
vocalization, 212
Tyzzer's disease, 300
Frostbite, snakes, 156
ventral gland, 294
Frounce, raptors, 33
Giardiasis
Fruit flies, for amphibians, 223
birds, 33
Fryers, 255
ferrets, 246, 248
Fur, chinchilla, 311
snakes, 155
Fur mites, rabbits, 269
sugar gliders, 343
Fur-slip, chinchillas, 315
Gila monster, 75, 189
Fusus coli, 258
Gill respiration, 211-212
Fuzzies, 138
Glaucoma, 267
458
Index
Glottis
intravenous, 325
birds, 14, 15,22
dentition, 319
chelonians, 168
diarrhea, 321, 322
lizards, 75, 90, 99, 112
diseases of, 321
snakes, 125,149,162
 dyspnea, 321
Gloves, wildlife restraint, 405
dystocia, 319, 321, 323
Glucose, blood
emergency/critical care, 323
hedgehogs, 329
euthanasia, 325
rabbits, 260
heart rate, 320
Glue traps, 430
history, 321-322
Glutaraldehydes, disinfection with, 57, 186
housing, 320
Glycopyrrolate
injection sites, 323-325
in lizards, 101
ketosis, 321
in rabbits, 276
medication administration, 323-325
in snakes, 151
nutrition, 320-321
Golden dart frogs, 210
obesity, 321
Golden hamster 293
parasites of, 322-323
Golden mantella, 210
physical examination, 321-322
Golden poison frog, 230
 physiological data, 320
Gout
 pododermatitis, 321
chelonians, 173
 pregnancy toxemia, 323
lizards, 94
radiography, 322
snakes, 142
reflex assessment, 322
Granulocytes, birds, 388
reproduction, 319-320, 320
Grasshoppers, feeder, for hedgehogs, 330
respiratory rate, 320
Green iguana, 69
restraint,322,322
bite wounds from, 95
sex determination, 323
diet, 8.5
stress in, 321
dystocia, 187
surgery, 322
husbandry, 79
urinalysis, 323
 physical examination, 98
vitamin C supplementation, 320
Green slime disease, 245, 249
vocalization, 319, 322
Grey squirrels
wound care, 325
biological data, 428
zoonotic diseases, 321
housing, 425
Gut-loading
nutrition, 423-424
crickets, 357
release, 42.5
feeder insects, 375-376
species care sheet, 423-425
prey items, 222
Griseofulvin, in lizards, 115
Gyrodactylus spp., 229
Grison, 336
Groundhogs, transporting, 361
Haemonchus contortus, 316
Guinea pigs
Hairballs, chinchillas, 314
abscesses, 321
Halothane
anatomy and physiology, 319
 in lizards, 101
anesthesia, 322
in snakes, 151
anorexia, 321
Hamster polyoma virus (HaPV), 297
bandaging, 325
Hamsters, 293; See also Rodents
behavior, 319
adrenal glands, 293
bite wounds, 321
behavior, 300
blood collection, 324-325
blood collection, 307
body temperature, 320
cheek pouches, 294
catheterization
flank glands, 294
intraosseous, 325
ileitis, 303
Index
459
lymphoma, 298
anatomy and physiology, 327-329
physiological data, 295
anesthesia, 331-332
restraint, 301, 302
anorexia, 330, 331
sex determination, 303, 304
bandaging, 334
Tyzzer's disease, 300
behavior, 329
wet-tail, 299, 303
blood chemistry, 329
Hand-feeding
blood collection, 332-333
baby songbirds, 370
cannibalism, 327
puppets, 367
catheterization
raptors, 365, 367
intraosseous, 332
Harderian glands, rodents, 293, 294
intravenous, 334
Harlequin frogs, 210
defense postures, 329
Harrison tip, 32
dentition, 327,328
Hatching, bird eggs, 63
diarrhea, 330, 331
Hawks, feeding guidelines, 366
diseases of, 330-331
Hay
emergency/critical care, 332
chinchillas, 314
fluid therapy, 334
 guinea pigs, 320
hematology, 329
rabbits, 261
history, 331
Head pinning, 119
housing, 329
Heart
 injection sites, 334
amphibians, 213
lameness in, 330
birds, 13-14, 13
litter box training, 329-330
chelonians, 169
medication administration, 334
ferrets, 242,242
neoplasms of, 331
lizards, 75,76
nutrition, 330
snakes, 122-123
parasites of, 330-331, 332
Heart rate
physical examination, 331
birds, 14
pregnancy detection, 327
ferrets, 244
quills, 327, 329, 330-331, 332
 guinea pigs, 320
radiography, 331
 prairie dogs, 345
reproduction, 327, 329
rabbits, 261, 272
self-anointing, 329
rodents, 295
sex determination, 328, 332, 332
skunks, 33.5
species of, 327
snakes, 149
surgery, 331-332
 sugar gliders, 341
temperature requirements, 329
Heartworms, ferrets, 247, 248
TPR, 333
 Heat dissipation, and restraint technique,
traumatic injuries, 331
403
urinalysis, 332
Heating devices
urine collection, 333
 amphibian enclosures, 217
wound care, 334
baby songbirds, 369
Hellbenders, 206, 223
burns from. See Thermal burns
Hematology, See also specifc cells
lizards, 81-82
birds, 16-17, 388-392
orphaned mammals, 378, 382
chelonians, 388-392, 389
raptor chicks, 368
hedgehogs, 329
reptile egg incubators, 196
rabbits, 256, 257,260
snakes, 134, 136, 157
reptiles, 388-392, 388, 390, 391,
Heat stress, rabbits, 260
392
Heat stroke, in chinchillas, 315
Hematuria
Heavy metal toxicosis, birds, 28
birds, 19
Hedgehogs
rabbits, 282
460
Index
Hemipenes
rabbits, 269-270, 270
amputation of, lizard, 103
rodents, 301
hydrostatic eversion of
snakes, 145-146
lizards, 77
wildlife calls, 353
snakes, 158-159
Hobs, 243
lizards, 77, 103, 189
Hoofed animals, restraint, 406-407
manual eversion of
Hookworms, lizards, 106
lizards, 77
Hoppers, 138
snakes, 77,158
Horned frogs, 223, 228
prolapse of. See Paraphimosis
Hot air blankets, 279
snakes, 77, 126-127, 158-159
Housing
Hemochromatosis, birds, 18
amphibians, 214-220
Hemocytometer 388
birds, 18, 49-51
Hemolytic anemia, snakes, 155
wild, 360-361
Hemorrhage, rabbits, 289
chelonians, 169-171
Heparin tubes, 387
chinchillas, 313
Hepatic lipidosis
commercial sources, 435
ferrets, 249
cottontail rabbits, 426
skunks, 336
exotic pets, 5-6
Hepatic worms, lizards, 106
ferrets, 244
Herons, 377, 378, 407
flying squirrels, 421-422
Herpesvirus, 27
grey squirrels, 425
Heteropenia, 389
guinea pigs, 320
Heterophilia, 389
hedgehogs, 329
Heterophils
lizards, 79-83
birds, 388-389, 389
opossums, 422-423
parrots, 16, 16
orphaned mammals, 382
chelonians, 389
 prairie dogs, 345
rabbits, 256, 257, 260
rabbits, 260-261
reptiles, 389, 390
raccoons, 419
toxic, 389, 389
raptors, 364-365, 368
Hexamita, 176
reptiles, 130-137, 184
Hibernaculum, 187
rodents, 295-296
Hibernation, reptiles, 187
skunks, 335
Hide boxes
snakes, 130-137
chelonians, 171
songbirds, 369-370, 375
hedgehogs, 330
sugar gliders, 341
 prairie dogs, 345
waterfowl, 376-378
snakes, 137
wildlife, 356, 360-361
waterfowl, 376
Human-animal bond, 6
wildlife, 356
Humidity requirements
Hindgut, rabbits, 257
amphibians, 217
Hindgut fermentation, rabbits, 261
lizards, 80, 81, 82, 88
History
rabbits, 260
amphibians, 229-230
reptiles
birds, 18-20
egg incubators, 198
chelonians, 174-175
neonates, 200
chinchillas, 315
and reproduction, 191
ferrets, 246-247
snakes, 129,133, 135,137
guinea pigs, 321-322
Hummingbirds, nectar, 372, 434
hedgehogs, 331
Hutch burn, 266-267
lizards, 96
Hutches, rabbits, 260
questions to include, 6
Hydrocephalus, rabbits, 268
Index
461
Hydrogen peroxide, 186
malocclusion, 431
Hygrometers, 135, 137, 369
chinchillas, 313-314
Hymenolepsis, in chinchillas, 316
rabbits,268,272-273,273
Hypercalcemia
rodents, 293, 298-299, 298
amphibians, 222
overgrowth of, rabbits, 268
rabbits, 257
 Inclusion body disease, snakes, 144
snakes, 142
Incubators
Hyperparathyroidism, lizards, 85
baby songbirds, 369
Hyperphosphatemia, 84
commercial sources, 435
Hypertension, rabbits, 268
orphaned mammals, 382
Hyperthermia, 430
orphan raptors, 368
clinical signs of, 403-404
reptile eggs, 128-130, 194-198
ferrets, 241
snake eggs, 128-130
rabbits, 288
 Influenza, ferrets, 245
rodents, 405-406
Injection sites
snakes, 157
cloacal, chelonians, 179
Hyperthyroidism, snakes, 141
intracoelomic
Hypocalcemia
amphibians, 236
African Grey parrots, 29
chelonians, 179
birds, 29, 372
lizards, 116
chelonians, 171
snakes, 160
lizards, 84-85, 89, 92-93, 109
intramuscular
snakes,142
amphibians, 236
sugar gliders, 342
birds, 38, 40
Hypoglycemia
chelonians, 179
ferrets, 246, 249
chinchillas, 318
rabbits, 288
ferrets, 250
rodents, 302
guinea pigs, 323-324
Hypothermia, 430-431
lizards, 116
clinical signs of, 404
prairie dogs, 348
rabbits, 265,288
rabbits, 286
rodents, 302, 406
raptors, 364
snakes, 156
rodents, 305
Hypovitaminosis A. See Vitamin A deficiency
skunks, 339
Hypoxemia, rabbits, 288
snakes, 160
intraosseous, chelonians, 179, 180
Iguanas
 intraperitoneal
aggression in, 93-94
guinea pigs, 324
cryptosporidiosis, 105
rabbits, 285-286
diet, 8.5
rodents, 305-306, 305
reproduction, 198
intravenous
restraint of, 96-97
amphibians, 236
retrobulbar abscess, 93
birds, 40
sex determination, 189, 197
chelonians, 179
Ileitis, hamsters, 303
chinchillas, 318
Ileus, rabbits, 288
 guinea pigs, 325
 Impaction, lizards, 91, 109-110
 prairie dogs, 348
Impression smears, amphibians, 235
rabbits, 285
Imprinting, 359, 366
rodents, 303-304
Incisors
skunks, 339
chinchillas, 311
snakes, 159-160
 guinea pigs, 319
subcutaneous
hedgehogs, 327, 328
amphibians, 236
462
Index
Injection sites (continued)
in rabbits, 274, 278
birds, 40
in skunks, 337
chelonians, 179
in snakes, 151
chinchillas, 318
 in sugar gliders, 343
ferrets, 250
 Isospora spp, See also Coccidiosis
 guinea pigs, 323
ferrets, 248
hedgehogs, 334
lizards, 105
lizards, 116
Itraconazole, in birds, 28
 prairie dogs, 348
Ivermectin
rabbits, 285
in amphibians, 226, 236
raptors, 364
 in birds, 33
rodents, 306
in ferrets, 247
skunks, 339
 in guinea pigs, 323
snakes, 160
 in hedgehogs, 332
Insects, feeder
for maggots, 431
amphibians, 222, 223
in rabbits, 264, 265, 266
chelonians, 170
 in reptiles, 104
commercial sources, 433
 in rodents, 296
gut-loaded, 375-376
Ivermectin toxicity
snakes, 138
amphibians, 221, 225
songbirds, 375-376
lizards, 94, 104
sugar gliders, 3342
 Insulinoma, ferrets, 246
Jackson chameleon, 70
 Intermittent partial pressure ventilation. See IPPV
 Jacobson's organ. See Vomeronasal organ
 Intracardiac shunting, snakes, 122
Jills, 243
Intraosseous catheterization. See Catheterization,
 Jugular vein
intraosseous
birds, 37-38, 39,40, 42
Intubation
chelonians, 177, 178, 180, 180
air sac, 36,37
chinchillas, 317
endotracheal
ferrets, 249, 250, 251, 251
amphibians, 233
guinea pigs, 324, 324
birds, 14-15, 30-31
hedgehogs, 333, 333
chelonians, 176
prairie dogs, 347
ferrets, 248
rabbits, 282, 283
lizards, 102
rat, 308
rabbits, 256, 277-278
skunks, 338, 339
snakes, 152, 152
sugar gliders, 343
Iodophors, 185
IPPV (intermittent partial pressure ventilation)
Karyotyping, 190
amphibians, 233
Keel
birds, 32,35-36
pet birds, 12
chelonians, 176
raptors, 363-364, 364
lizards, 75, 102
Keratophagy, amphibians, 210
snakes, 150
Kestrels, feeding guidelines, 366
 Iron deficiency anemia, 392
Ketamine
Isoflurane
 in amphibians, 236
in amphibians, 233
in chinchillas, 316
in birds, 30
in lizards, 101, 102
in chinchillas, 316
in rabbits, 276-277
in ferrets, 248
in skunks, 337
in hedgehogs, 331-332
in snakes, 151
 in lizards, 101, 102
Ketoconazole, in birds, 28
 in prairie dogs, 347
Ketosis, guinea pigs, 321
Index
463
Kidneys
chelonians, 170, 171
amphibians, 212-213
lizards, 80-81
birds, 14
 reptile reproduction, 192
chelonians, 168-169
snakes, 135,136, 137
chinchillas, 313
Limb amputation, amphibians, 233
ferrets, 242
Limb fractures, rabbits, 288
lizards, 76, 76
Limit feeding, rabbits, 262
snakes, 126, 142
Lingual plexus, ventral, frogs, 213
Killdeer, 376, 376
Listeria monocytogenes
Kindling, 256
amphibians, 228
Kingbirds, 372
chinchillas, 315
Kingfishers, 377
rabbits, 269
King snakes, 128, 133
Litter box training
Kits
hedgehogs, 329-330
ferret, 243
rabbits, 255
rabbit, 255,256
skunks, 335
Kiwi, reproduction, 62
Liver
Klebsiella spp.
chelonians, 168
birds, 2.5
chinchillas, 312
reptiles, 145
lizards, 76
rodents, 299
snakes, 125
Knemidokoptes pilae,33
Liver disease, hedgehogs, 331
Korean hemorrhagic fever, 300
Lizards, 69; See also individual species
aggression, 93-94
Lactate, in reptiles, 151
aminoglycoside toxicity, 92, 94
Laparoscopy, sex determination in reptiles, 190-191,
anatomy and physiology, 79
191
cardiovascular system, 75, 89-90
Laparotomy, rabbits, 281
cloaca, 77,99
Laryngeal mask airway (LMA), 278
coelomic cavity, 75
Lateral undulation, 121
digestive, 75-76, 90-92, 109-110
Lawsonia intracellularis, 264
integument, 69, 74
Lead toxicosis
 nervous system, 78
birds, 28
renal system, 76, 76
rabbits, 289
reproductive system, 76-77
Leafhoppers, for amphibians, 223
respiratory system, 75
Leaf-tailed geckos, 75
salivary glands, 75
Leash training, skunks, 335
sense organs, 78
Leeches
skeletal system, 74-75, 74
chelonians, 176
viscera, 76
lizards, 104
anesthesia, 101-102
Leopard gecko, 75, 80
anorexia, 86, 90, 91, 109, 110, 144
Leptospirosis, rabbits, 269
antibiotics, 115
Leucocytozoon, 389
arboreal, 79-80, 82
Leukocytes, 388
assist feeding, 114-115
birds, 388-391
auscultation, 98
hedgehogs, 329
bandaging, 113-114
rabbits, 260
tail injuries, 88-89, 113
reptiles, 388-391
basking temperature, 82
Lice, guinea pigs, 322
behavior, 71-73, 79, 93-94
Lidocaine, in birds, 32
bite wounds, 88, 95
Light requirements
blood collection, 75, 111-112
amphibians, 216-217, 225
carnivorous, 71-73, 82, 84, 86-87
birds, 51, 370
catheterization
464
Index
Lizards (continued)
intubation, 103
intraosseous, 111, 111
IPPV, 75, 102
intravenous, 110-111, 111
legless, 98
cloacal wash, 113
light requirements, 80-81
colonic wash, 113
locomotion, 74
common species, 71-73
medicine administration, 115-116
dentition, 74
 microchip placement, 187
deworming, 83
native habitat, 71-73, 79
disorders
neonates, 199-200
cardiovascular disease, 89-90
nocturnal, 81
cloacal prolapse, 91-92, 103, 110
nutrition, 79,82-87, 89, 92,94
digestive system, 90-92, 109-110
 nutritional supplements, 85
dysecdysis, 69, 88
oral exam, 98-99
dystocia,92,110,187
oviparous, 77, 99-100
egg-binding, 92, 110
 pain response, 78
extremity necrosis, 88
paralysis, 89, 92-93, 109
gout, 94
parasites of, 83, 91, 103-106, 107, 108
integument, 87-89
physical examination, 98-100
metabolic bone disease, 84-85, 89, 92-93, 109
POTZ, 71-73,81, 84, 102
nutritional, 84-85, 89, 92,94
quarantine, 83
ophthalmic,93
radiography, 100
paralysis, 89, 92-93
record keeping, 83
paraphimosis, 92, 103, 109
reproduction, 71-73
pneumonia, 90, 110
female,76-77
renal failure, 92
 gestation period, 198
secondary hyperparathyroidism, 85
male, 77
stomatitis, 90-91, 91
parthenogenesis, 193, 193
Vitamin A deficiency, 78, 93
sexual maturity, 191
Vitamin B, deficiency, 94
respiration, 75,98
Vitamin E deficiency, 94
restraint, 96-98, 97, 100
dyspnea, 90, 98
sex determination, 77, 78, 188, 189, 189
ecdysis, 69
temperature-dependent, 197-198, 197
eggshell, 77, 198
shell gland, 77
emaciation in, 98
stress in, 98
emergencies, 106, 109-110
surgery, 102-103
enema, 113
tail amputation, 74-75, 87-88, 89
 escape behavior, 75
tail autonomy, 74-75, 88-89
euthanasia, 116
terrestrial, 80
feeding habits, 71-73
thermoregulation, 81
feeding stations, 82-83
toxicities, 94, 109
feeding tubes, 75
transtracheal wash, 112-113
femoral pores, 189, 189
traumatic injury, 87-89, 93, 99, 109
fluid therapy, 111
bite wounds, 88
gape in, 98
from live food, 86, 88
hematology, 390, 390, 391
rostral abrasions, 87-88, 88
herbivorous, 71-73, 84, 85
tail loss, 74-75, 88-89
history, 96
thermal burns, 81, 82, 88
housing, 79-83
uroliths, 99
humidity requirements, 80, 81, 82, 88
ventilation for, 75
husbandry, 78-83
water requirements, 82-83
illegal possession of, 95-96
zoonotic diseases, 94-96
injection sites, 116
Locomotion
insectivorous, 71-73,82, 84, 85-86
amphibians, 210
Index
465
chinchillas, 311
tube feeding, 42
lizards, 74
Maggots, 267, 430
snakes, 121
Malagasy geckos, 96
Loons, 377
Mali uromastyx, 70
Lories
Malnutrition, sugar gliders, 342
 behavior, 45
Malocclusion, 431
hemochromatosis, 18
chinchillas, 313-314
nutrition, 18
rabbits, 268, 272-273, 273, 431
Lorikeets
rodents, 293, 298-299, 298, 431
behavior, 45
Mammals, wild
nutrition, 18
biological data, 428
Lovebirds, behavior, 47
orphan care, 378-382
Lumps
rehabilitation resources, 439
guinea pigs, 321
transporting, 361
snakes, 143-144
Mammary glands, rodents, 294
Lungs
Mammary tumors, rodents, 297-298,
chelonians, 168
298
ferrets, 242,242
Mammography, rabbits, 275
lizards, 75, 76
Mange, See also Mites 
snakes, 123
ferrets, 246
Lung wash, snakes, 161-162, 162, 163
guinea pigs, 322, 323
Lungworms
hedgehogs, 30-31, 330, 331, 332
amphibians, 221, 226
rabbits, 265-266, 265
hedgehogs, 331, 332
rodents, 297, 298
lizards, 106
Mangrove monitor, 70
skunks, 337
Marine toads, 207
snakes, 155
diet, 224
Lymphatic system, snakes, 123
restraint, 230
Lymphocytes
toxins of, 210
birds, 16, 390-391
Marsupial frog, 210
hedgehogs, 329
Mastitis, rabbits, 267
rabbits, 256, 260
Mealworms, 86
reactive, 391
for amphibians, 222
reptiles, 388, 390-391
commercial sources, 433
 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM)
for hedgehogs, 330
from guinea pigs, 321
for songbirds, 375-376
from rodents, 299
Medetomidine
Lymphocytosis, 391
in rabbits, 276-277
Lymphoma
in skunks, 337
ferrets, 246
in snakes, 151
hamsters, 297-298
Medial canthus, blood collection from, 308
 Lymphoplasmocytic ganglioneuritis, 26
Melatonin, 126
Lymphosarcoma, rabbits, 268
Meloxicam
Lymph sacs, amphibians, 213
in birds, 32
in rabbits, 279
Macaws
in rodents, 303
antibiotic administration, 26
Meperidine, in rabbits, 280
behavior, 47, 48
Metabolic bone disease
chlamydiosis, 25
amphibians, 222, 225
common species, 11
chelonians, 171
heart/respiratory rates, 14
lizards, 84-85, 89, 92-93, 109
 juvenile, 57
opossums, 423
papillomatosis, 27
Metatarsal vein, birds, 38, 39, 40
466
Index
Methoxyflurane
reproduction, 198
 in lizards, 101
restraint of, 96-97
in snakes, 152
sex determination, 77, 189
Metronidazole
 traumatic tail amputation, 89
 in amphibians, 227
 Monkeypox, in prairie dogs, 346
in birds, 33
Monocytes
Metronidazole toxicity, lizards, 94
birds, 391, 391
Mexican beaded lizard, 75
hedgehogs, 329
Mice, 293; See also Rodents
parrots, 16
aggression in, 297, 298
rabbits, 260
barbering in, 297, 297
reptiles, 391, 391
gavaging, 306
Morphine, in rabbits, 280
malocclusion in, 298
Morphometry, for sex determination, 190
physiologic data, 295
Mouse hepatitis virus (MHV), 299
restraint, 301, 302
Mouse norovirus (MNV), 299
ringtail, 297
Moxidectin, in rabbits, 266
Microchip placement, reptiles, 187
Mucoid enteropathy syndrome, rabbits, 265
 Microsporum spp., See also Ringworm
Muscle-to-bone ratio, rabbits, 256, 268
in hedgehogs, 330-331, 332
Mutes, raptors, 363
M.canis
Mycobacterium spp.
 in prairie dogs, 346
amphibians, 224-225
in rabbits, 269
reptiles, 145, 174
Midazolam, in rabbits, 276, 277
Mycoplasma pulmonis, in rodents, 299
Milk formula
Mycoptes spp., 296
commercial sources, 433, 434
Mydriasis, amphibians, 231
orphaned mammals, 379
Mynah birds, hemochromatosis, 18
Milk oil, 262
Myobia spp., 296
Milk snakes, 128, 133
Myofascitis, ferrets, 246
Milkweed toxicity, amphibians, 219
Mink, 335
Nail trimming
biological data, 428
birds, 34
canine distemper in, 336
rabbits, 286
restraint, 406
Nares
Mites, See also Mange
birds, 22,22,58
birds, 33
false, 312
ferrets, 246, 248
lizards, 75
guinea pigs, 321, 322, 323
Nasal flush, birds, 40-41, 41
hedgehogs, 331, 332
Nebulization
lizards, 83, 95, 104
birds, 40
rabbits, 265-266, 265,269, 282
chelonians, 179-180
rodents, 296, 297
Necrobacillosis, rabbits, 267
snakes, 154
Nectar
Mockingbirds, 368
hummingbirds, 372, 434
diet, 372
sugar gliders, 342
identification of, 412
Nematodes
Molars, rodents, 293
amphibians, 221, 226, 227
Mole salamanders, 210
chelonians, 176
Molting, birds, 51, 54
chinchillas, 315, 316
Monitors
hedgehogs, 331, 332
aggression in, 93-94
lizards, 106
bite wounds from, 95
snakes, 155
diet, 87
Neoplasia
physical examination, 98-99
hedgehogs, 331
Index
467
rabbits, 268-269
rodents, 296
rodents, 297-298, 298
skunks, 335
sugar gliders, 342
snakes, 138-140, 142
Nephritis
songbirds, 370-373, 375-376
hedgehogs, 331
baby, 371-373
snakes, 142
sugar gliders, 342
Nervous system
tortoises, 171
amphibians, 213-214
waterfowl, 377, 378
snakes, 142
 Nutritional supplements 
Nest guarding, 199
amphibians, 222
Nesting boxes
commercial sources, 433-435
rabbits, 260
reptiles, 85
songbirds, 369
Nyctotherus, 108, 176
 sugar gliders, 341
Nystatin, for candidiasis in birds, 28
wildlife, 356
Nesting products, commercial, 295-296
Obeliscoides cuniculi, 267
Nets
Oberhautchen layer, 120
commercial sources, 433
Obesity
wildlife, 405
 guinea pigs, 321
Neutering. See Castration
prairie dogs, 345,
.346
Neutrophils, hedgehogs, 329
skunks, 335-336
Newts, 205; See also Amphibians
sugar gliders, 342
New Zealand white rabbit, 262, 271
Obstructions
buphthalmia, 267
amphibians, 226
 Nictitating membrane
ferrets, 245
amphibians, 214, 231
lizards, 91, 109-110
lizards, 78
rabbits, 281
Night feces, 259
Occipital venous sinus, chelonians, 179
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. See NSAIDs
Odontomas, prairie dogs, 346
Non-stick cookware toxicosis, birds, 29
Oil glands, ferrets, 241
NSAIDs
Old World chameleons, 74
rabbits, 279
Olfaction, snakes, 124
rodents, 303
Operculum, 14, 22, 22
Nursing reflex, orphaned mammals, 379
Ophionyssus natricis, 154
Nutrition
Opioids
amphibians, 221-222,223-224, 229
in rabbits, 279-280
birds, 17-18, 17, 38
in rodents, 303
canary/finch, 17-18
Opossums
chelonians, 169-171
biological data, 428
chinchillas, 313, 314
housing, 422-423
cottontail rabbits, 425
metabolic bone disease, 423
ferrets, 244-245
nutrition, 422
flying squirrels, 421
 orphaned, 355
grey squirrels, 423-424
releasability, 358, 423
guinea pigs, 320-321
resources, 437
hedgehogs, 330
restraint, 40.5
lizards, 79, 82-87,89,92, 94
species care sheet, 422-423
opossums, 422
transporting, 361
prairie dogs, 345
Optimal foraging theory (OFT), 86
rabbits, 261-262, 270
Oral cavity
raccoons, 419
amphibians, 211, 231
raptors, 367-368
birds, 22, 363
reptiles, 187, 200
lizards, 98-99
468
Index
Oral cavity (continued)
Ovocentesis, percutaneous, 141
rabbits, 272-273
Ovoviviparity
snakes, 125, 149-150
reptiles, 77, 194
Oral medication
snakes, 128
amphibians, 235
 Ovulation, reptiles, 191
birds, 38, 39
Owls
chelonians, 179
feeding guidelines, 366
chinchillas, 318
hematology, 389
ferrets, 250-251
Ox eye, 267
 prairie dogs, 348
 Oxidizing agents, disinfection with,
rabbits, 28.5
186
rodents, 306-307
 Oxymorphone, in rabbits, 280
skunks, 339
Oxyurus spp., lizards, 106, 107
wildlife, 3.57
Organic solvents, toxicity in amphibians, 227
Packed cell volume. See PCV
Organophosphate toxicity
Pain assessment
amphibians, 227
birds, 31-32
lizards, 94, 104, 109
ferrets, 245
snakes, 142
rabbits, 271
Orioles, 372
reptiles, 152
Ornithosis, 24
snakes, 152
Orphaned wildlife
Pain response
determining status of, 354-3.55
lizards, 78
imprinting, 359
reptiles, 78
mammals, 378-382
Palatal ostium, guinea pigs, 319
raptors, 365-368
Palatal ridges, chinchillas, 311
reuniting with mother, 355
Palatine vein, snakes, 159, 160
songbirds, 354, 368-373
Palpation
waterfowl, 376-377
abdominal. See Abdominal palpation
Orthomyxoviruses, ferrets, 245
raptors, 363
Osteodystrophy, sugar gliders, 342
snakes, 149
Otocariasis, rabbits, 265
Palpebral reflex, rodents, 303
Otoscope, 282
Pancreas
Otters, 335
chinchillas, 312
biological data, 428
rodents, 295
resources, 438
snakes, 126
restraint, 406
Papillomatosis, birds, 27
 Ovarian granulosa cell tumors, gerbils, 298
Paralysis
Ovariohysterectomy
 in hedgehogs, 331
ferrets, 248
in lizards, 89, 92-93, 109
hedgehogs, 332
 in sugar gliders, 342
rabbits, 262, 269, 281
Paramyxoviruses, snakes, 144, 183-184
rodents, 302
Paraphimosis
Ovary, birds, 62
lizards, 92, 103
Oviduct, birds, 62, 64
snakes, 140
Oviparity
Parathyroid gland, snakes, 126
amphibians, 213
 Parathyroid hormone, 84
reptiles, 194, 194
Parietal (third) eye, lizards, 78
snakes, 128
 Parotid glands
Oviposition
salamanders, 210
abnormal. See Dystocia
toads, 210
normal, 63
Parrotlets, 48
Index
469
Parrots, 11, 46
snakes, 130, 137
aspergillosis, 46
water birds, 378
behavior, 45-48
Periodontal disease
abnormal, 52-54
skunks, 336
normal, 45-48, 51-52
sugar gliders, 342
blood collection, 37-38
 Peritonitis, egg-yolk, 64
chicks, 58-59
Permethrin toxicity, in rabbits, 289
 common species, 11
Peruvian guinea pigs, 319, 320
feces, 15, 16
 Pesquet's parrot, sex determination, 61
hematology, 16-17
Pesticide toxicity
erythrocytes, 16
lizards, 94, 109
heterophils, 16, 16
snakes, 142
lymphocytes, 16, 390-391
Pheasant, 376
monocytes, 16
Phenol-based compounds, 186
husbandry, 49-51
Phloxine B, 388
intubation, 31
 Photoperiod
kidneys, 14
and ferret reproduction, 243
nutrition, 17-18
snakes, 135, 145
 operculum, 14
Physical examination
polyomaviruses, 26
amphibians, 230-232
 prolapsed oviduct, 64
bearded dragons, 98-99
 proventricular dilation disease, 26
birds, 21-24, 58-59
psittacine beak and feather disease (PBFD), 26-27
chelonians, 175
psittacosis, 25
chinchillas, 315
sex determination, 16, 33-34, 61-62
ferrets, 246-247
Parthenogenesis, reptiles, 193, 193
guinea pigs, 321-322
Passalurus ambiguus, 264-265
hedgehogs, 331
Passerines, 11; See also Canaries, Finches
length of, 5
Chlamydophila psittaci in, 25
lizards, 98-100
feces, 16
rabbits, 271-273
nutrition, 17-18
raptors, 362-364
Pasteurella spp.
rodents, 301
in hedgehogs, 331
skunks, 337
P. multocida, in rabbits, 262, 271
snakes, 146, 148-150
in rabbits, 262, 263, 267, 271, 280
sugar gliders, 342
from rodents, 299
wildlife, 356-357
 PBFD (psittacine beak and feather disease), 26-27
 Physoloptera, in chinchillas, 316
PCV
 Pigeon pox, 26
birds, 36
Pigeons
hedgehogs, 329
canker in, 33
rabbits, 260
Chlamydophila psittaci in, 25
Peanuts, aflatoxins in, 17, 18
diet, 372
Pedal reflex, guinea pigs, 322
feeding, 371
 Pelger-Huet anomaly, 268
 Pileated parrot, sex determination, 61
Pelvic spurs, snakes, 127
Pineal organ, snakes, 123, 126
Penicillins, rabbits, 266
Pin feathers, 429
Penile amputation, snakes, 153
Pinkie mice
 Penile prolapse, chelonians, 173, 173
for amphibians, 223
Pentastomids, of lizards, 95
for hedgehogs, 330
Perches
for lizards, 87
birds, 49-50, 53
medicated, for wild birds, 357, 364
raptors, 364-365
for snakes, 138
470
Index
Pinna reflex, rabbits, 279
lizards, 71-73, 81, 84, 102
Pinworms
snakes, 132-135, 133, 157
lizards, 106, 108
Poultry, feces, 15-16
rabbits, 264-265
Poxviruses, bird, 26
rodents, 297
 Prairie dogs
Piperazine, in birds, 33
alopecia, 346
 Pipping, manual, snake egs, 129-130
 anatomy and physiology, 345
Pit organs, 124, 139
anesthesia, 347
Pituitary gland, snakes, 126
anorexia, 346
 Plastrocarapace bridge, 179
barbering in, 345
Plastron, 168, 168, 169
blood collection, 347
Platelets
body temperature, 345
hedgehogs, 329
dyspnea, 346
rabbits, 260
heart disease, 346
Pneumonia
heart rate, 34.5
chelonians, 173
housing, 345
chinchillas, 314-315
humidity, 345
lizards, 90, 110
 injection sites, 348
prairie dogs, 346
medication administration, 348
snakes, 142
monkeypox in, 346
Pocket pets, 5-6, 241
nasal dermatitis, 345
Pododermatitis (bumblefoot)
nutrition, 345
birds, 23, 24,42
obesity, 345, 346
guinea pigs, 321
odontomas, 346
 prairie dogs, 346
 pododermatitis (bumblefoot), 346
rabbits, 266, 266, 285
radiography, 347
Poikilocytosis, 392
respiratory disease, 346
Poison dart frog, 86, 207
respiratory rate, 345
aposematic coloring, 210
restraint, 347
captive-born, 230
ringworm, 346
diet, 223
torpor, 345
emaciation in, 231
urinalysis, 347
fenbendazole toxicity, 220-221
urine collection, 347
natural history, 214
 zoonotic diseases, 346
poison glands, 210
 Praziquantel
tadpoles, 228
 in amphibians, 227
toxicity of, 230
in lizards, 115
wild-caught, 220, 230
Preanesthesia, rabbits, 275-276
Poison glands, amphibians, 210
Precloacal pores, 189
Poisoning, secondary, in raptors, 364
Preemie nipple, 380, 380
 Polioencephalomyelitis, hedgehogs, 331
Preening
Polychromasia, 17, 392
birds, 12, 51
 Polyomaviruses, birds, 26
water birds, 378
 Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) fumes, toxicity,
 Pregnancy toxemia
29
guinea pigs, 323
Polyuria, birds, 20
rabbits, 268
Porcupines
Prey items
biological data, 428
commercial sources, 434
restraint, 406
gut-loading, 222
Posterior weakness, ferrets, 246
nutrition, 86
POTZ
 pocket pets as, 6
amphibians, 206-208, 217, 219
raptors, 365
chelonians, 170, 171, 175
snakes, 138-140,156
Index
471
Prey prehension, amphibians, 211
Pyrethroids, in lizards, 104
 Primates, 6
Pyrethroid toxicity, amphibians, 227
Progesterone, 191
Pythons, 128
 Propofol
husbandry, 133
in rabbits, 277
inclusion body disease, 144
in reptiles, 101
sexual characteristics, 158
in snakes, 151
 Prostate disease, ferrets, 246
Q-fever, 145
Prothrombin time, rabbits, 260
Quail, 376
Protozoa
Quarantine
 of amphibians, 226-227
amphibians, 220-221
of birds, 33
birds, 55-56
of chelonians, 176
lizards, 83
of chinchillas, 316
reptiles, 183-184
of ferrets, 246, 248
snakes, 137-138
 of guinea pigs, 322
 Quaternary ammonium compounds, 186
of hedgehogs, 331, 332
Quills, hedgehog, 327, 329, 330-331,
of lizards, 105, 107, 108
332
of rabbits, 263-264
of skunks, 337
 Rabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD), 267
of snakes, 154, 255
Rabbits
of sugar gliders, 343
abortion in, 269
Proventricular dilation disease, 26
aggression in, 255, 271
Proventriculus, 15
alopecia, 271
Pseudomonas spp.
analgesia, 279-280
amphibians, 224
anatomy and physiology, 256-259
birds, 25
anesthesia, 275-280
P. aeruginosa, rabbits, 267
anorexia, 265, 270, 280, 282
reptiles, 95,141, 145, 174
antibiotics, 264
Pseudopregnancy
arterial pressure, 279
ferrets, 243
assist feeding, 286-287
rabbits, 272
atropinesterase, 256, 271, 276
 Psittacine beak and feather disease (PBFD), 26-27
bandaging, 285
Psittacine pox, 26
behavior, 255-256
Psittacines. See Parrots and individual species
blood chemistry, 256-257,259, 260
Psittacosis, 24
blood collection, 282-285
Psoroptes cuniculi,265, 266, 282
blood gases, 257
Pulmonic respiration, 212
blood transfusions, 289
Pulse oximetry
body temperature, 272, 280
chelonians, 176
carriers, 271, 273
ferrets, 248
castration, 289
 guinea pigs, 322
catheterization
lizards, 102
intraosseous, 284-285
rodents, 303
intravenous, 283-284
Puppets, hand-feeding, 367
cecotrophy, 256, 258-259
 Pyelonephritis, lizards, 92
common breeds, 269-270, 271
Pyrantel pamoate, in rabbits, 265
CPR,287
Pyrethrins, 430
dehydration, 265, 272,288
in guinea pigs, 323
dentition, 257,258
Pyrethrin toxicity
dewlap, 271,287
amphibians, 227
diarrhea, 264, 288
lizards, 94, 104, 109
digestive system, 257-259, 259, 263-
rabbits, 289
26.5
472
Index
Rabbits (continued)
reproduction, 256, 261
disorders
resources, 437
of dentition, 268
respiratory rate, 272
digestive, 263-265
restraint, 273-274, 273,405
inherited, 267-268
scent marking, 255
integumentary, 265-267
self-mutilation, 279
neoplasms, 268-269
sex determination,272,272,287
Pasteurellosis, 263, 280
shock in, 287
pododermatitis, 266, 266, 285
SPF, 262
pregnancy toxemia, 268
surgery, 280-281
snuffles, 263
teeth trimming, 268, 286, 431
venereal disease, 266
temperature requirements, 259-260
vitamin E deficiency, 264
toxicities, 289
emergency/critical care, 287-289
traumatic injury, 268, 273, 288-289
enrichment devices, 255-256
urinalysis, 282
enterotoxemia, 288
urine collection, 285
euthanasia, 289
urolithiasis, 281, 282
feces, 2.59
viscera, 258
fluid therapy, 283-285, 288
water,262
gastric dilation, 288
wild. See Cottontail rabbits
heart rate, 261, 272
wound care, 285
heat stress, 260
zoonotic diseases, 269
hematology, 256, 257, 260
Rabies
hematuria, 282
hedgehogs, 331
hemorrhage, 289
rabbits, 269
history, 269-270,270
rodents, 300
housing, 260-261
skunks, 336-337
humidity requirements, 260
vector species, 355
hypercalcemia, 257
Rabies vaccine, 352
hyperthermia, 288
ferrets, 247
hypoglycemia, 288
Raccoons
hypothermia, 265, 288
Baylisascaris spp. from, 267
hypoxemia, 288
biological data, 428
ileus, 288
housing, 419
injection sites, 285-286
nutrition, 419
intubation, 256, 277-278
 orphaned, 355
limit feeding, 262
release of, 420
litter box training, 255
resources, 438
malocclusion, 431
restraint, 406
mating behavior, 255
species care sheet, 419-420
muscle-to-bone ratio, 256, 268
transporting, 361
nail trimming, 286
zoonotic diseases, 267, 419
nutrition, 261-262, 270
Radfordia spp., 296
ovariohysterectomy, 269
Radiography
pain assessment, 271
amphibians, 232
parasites of, 263-267, 269, 281-282
birds, 30, 30,31
Pasteurella-free, 262
chelonians, 175
physical examination, 271-273
chinchillas, 316
physiologic values, 261
ferrets, 247-248
 preventive medicine, 271-273
 guinea pigs, 322
pseudopregnancy, 272
hedgehogs, 331
radiography, 274-275, 288-289
lizards, 100
reflex assessment, 279
prairie dogs, 347
Index
473
rabbits, 274-275, 288-289
Red porphyrin, 293, 294, 299
raptors, 363
Red-tailed black cockatoos, 61
rodents, 302
Reflex assessment
skunks, 337
guinea pigs, 322
snakes, 150
rabbits, 279
sugar gliders, 343
rodents, 303
Rails, 378
 Regurgitation
Raptors
amphibians, 226
assist feeding, 363, 363
birds, 52, 53
bandaging, 363
snakes, 143, 144
brooding temperature, 366
Release calls, frogs, 212
 catheterization, intraosseous, 364
Renal cysts, ferrets, 246
dehydration, 362, 363, 364
 Renal-portal system
emaciation, 363-364
birds, 14
feces, 15-16
lizards, 76
feeding, 359, 363, 363, 365, 366, 367
reptiles, 76, 122
fluid therapy, 364
 Reproduction
frounce in, 33
amphibians, 206-208, 212, 227
grounded, 363
birds, 62-63
 gun shot injuries, 364
chelonians, 169, 169, 170,173, 191-192
housing, 364-365, 368
chinchillas, 312-313
imprinting, 359, 366
ferrets, 242-243,244
 injection sites, 364
guinea pigs, 319-320, 320
keel, 363-364, 364
hedgehogs, 327, 329
medicating, 357
lizards, 71-73,76-77, 191, 193, 193,
nutrition, 367-368
198
orphan care, 354, 365-368
rabbits, 256, 261
palpation, 363
reptiles. See Reptiles, reproduction
physical examination, 362-364
rodents, 294
radiography, 363
snakes. See Snakes, reproduction 
releasability, 358
tortoises, 191
reproduction, 62
Reptiles
restraint, 362, 363, 407
abscesses, 141
secondary poisoning, 364
aggression in, 200
shock in, 362
anorexia, 200
Rat bite fever, 300
antivenin, 188
Rats, 293; See also Rodents
assist feeding, 200
behavior, 300
blood collection, 387-388
gavaging, 306
captive-bred, 183
 neoplasia in, 298
dangerous species, 188
physiologic data, 295
dystocia, 141, 187
restraint, 301, 302
fluid therapy, 151, 156
ringtail, 297
heating devices, 134, 136
Rat snake, 128
hematology
hematology, 388
azurophils, 391, 391
husbandry, 133
basophils, 390, 390
RBC. See Erythrocytes
eosinophils, 389-390, 390
 Rectilinear motion, 122
erythrocytes, 391-392, 392
 Red blood cells. See Erythrocytes
heterophils, 389, 390
Red bugs, 104
leukocytes, 388-391
Red-eyed tree frogs, 230
lymphocytes, 388, 390-391
Red-leg disease, frogs, 224
monocytes, 391, 391
Red leg syndrome, amphibians, 227
thrombocytes, 388, 392, 392
474
Index
Reptiles (continued)
open-mouthed breathing, 53
hibernation, 187
rates, 14
housing, 130-137, 184
branchial (gill), 211-212
human injury from, 95
buccopharyngeal, 212
humidity requirements, 133, 135, 177, 191, 198,
chelonians, 168, 172-173
200
chinchillas, 312
lactate buildup, 151
cutaneous, 210, 212
light requirements, 80-81, 135, 136, 137,
lizards, 75, 98
192
pulmonic, 212
 microchip placement, 187
reptiles, 102, 123
neonates, 199-200
snakes, 123, 142
nutrition, 187, 200
Respiratory rate
nutritional supplements, 85
 guinea pigs, 320
oviparous, 194, 194
 prairie dogs, 345
ovoviviparous, 77, 194
rabbits, 272
 pain assessment, 152
rodents, 295
 pain response, 78
skunks, 335
parasites, 103
sugar gliders, 341
population management, 184, 187-188
Restraint
prophylactic deworming, 103
amphibians, 230, 407
quarantine, 183-184
bears, 406
renal-portal system, 76, 122
beavers, 406
reproduction
birds, 20-21,22,23
behavior, 191-193
chelonians, 175, 175, 407
clutch dynamics, 193
chinchillas, 315-316, 316
copulation, 192-193
chipmunks, 406
courtship/mating behavior, 192-193
coyote, 406
egg assessment, 198-199, 199
ferrets, 247,247,248,249
egg development, 193
foxes, 406
egg incubation, 194-198
guinea pigs, 322, 322
environmental factors, 187-188, 191-192
heat dissipation and, 403
follicle development, 193
hoofed animals, 406-407
gestation period, 198
lizards, 96-98, 97, 100
humidity and, 191
minks, 406
light requirements, 192
opossums, 40.5
 maternal incubation, 194
otters, 406
parthenogenesis, 193, 193
 porcupines, 406
sexual maturity, 191
prairie dogs, 347
sperm storage, 193
rabbits, 273-274, 273, 405
temperature and, 191
raccoons, 406
respiration, 102,123
raptors,362,363,407
salmonellosis from, 137, 144, 145
rodents, 301, 302, 405-406
sex determination, 158-159, 188-190
shorebirds, 407
species, 183
skunks, 338, 406
toxicities, 109
snakes, 146-148,407
venomous, coding, 188
songbirds, 373,407
viviparous, 77, 194, 194, 195
squirrels, 406
wild-caught, 183
sugar gliders, 342-343
zoonotic diseases, 94-96, 137, 144, 145
waterfowl, 407
 Respiration
weasels, 406
amphibians, 210, 211-212, 231
wild animals, 357, 403-408
birds, 14-15
wolves, 406
IPPV, 32, 35-36
Reticulocytes, rabbits, 260
Index
475
Retrobulbar sinus, rabbits, 281
physiologic data, 295
Rhabdias spp. See Lungworms
radiography, 302
Ring tail, 297
reproduction, 294
Ringworm
resources, 437
chinchillas, 314, 315
respiratory rate, 295
ferrets, 246
restraint, 301, 302, 405-406
 guinea pigs, 321
scent glands, 303, 304
hedgehogs, 330-331, 332
sex determination, 303, 304
prairie dogs, 346
stress in, 303
rabbits, 269
surgery, 302-303
Robins, 368, 412
tail, 294
Rodents
teeth trimming, 298-299, 431
abscesses, 302
thermoregulation, 294
adrenal glands, 293
traumatic injury, 297, 298, 303
aggression in, 300
viscera, 294
allergies to, 300
vocalizations, 303
alopecia, 297
wound care, 303
 anatomy and physiology, 293-295
zoonotic diseases, 299-300
anesthesia, 302-303
Rostral abrasions 
bandaging, 303
amphibians, 224
behavior, 300
lizards, 87-88, 88
bite wounds, 303
snakes, 143
blood collection, 307-308, 308
Rotaviruses, rabbits, 264
body temperature, 295
Roundworms. See also Baylisascaris spp.
cannibalism, 300
lizards, 106, 107
chronic respiratory disease, 299
skunks, 336, 337
coprophagy, 294
Russian dwarf hamster, 293
dentition, 293, 298-299
dermatitis, 296, 299
Sable ferret, 241
diarrhea, 299
Sables, canine distemper in, 336
digestive system, 294-295
Sacculus rotundus, 259
emergency/critical care, 303
Salamanders
euthanasia, 308-309
blood collection, 213, 233
feeder, 138
common species, 205, 206-207
gavaging, 306-307
diet,222,223
glands, 293, 294
feeding, 221
Harderian glands, 293, 294
larval, 228-229
heart rate, 295
nocturnal, 221
history, 301
parotid glands, 210
housing, 295-296
poison glands, 210
hyperthermia, 405-406
skeleton, 212
hypoglycemia, 302
tail autonomy, 213
hypothermia, 302, 406
Saliva, poisonous, 75
injection sites, 303-306, 305
 Salivary glands
malocclusion, 431
chelonians, 168
mammary glands, 294
ferrets, 242
medication administration, 303-307
lizards, 75
neoplasms of, 297-298, 298
snakes, 125
nutrition, 296
Salmonellosis
oral medication, 306-307
chelonians, 174
palpebral reflex, 303
chinchillas, 315
parasites of, 296-297
 guinea pigs, 321
physical examination, 301
hedgehogs, 330
476
Index
 Salmonellosis (continued)
chinchillas, 316
lizards, 95
ferrets, 248
rabbits, 269
lizards, 101
reptiles, 137,141,144,145
prairie dogs, 347
rodents, 299
rabbits, 274
snakes, 137,144, 145
skunks, 337
Saltation, 122
snakes, 151
Saphenous vein
sugar gliders, 343
chinchillas, 317
Sex determination
ferrets, 249,250, 252
birds, 16, 33-34, 61-62
guinea pigs, 324, 324
chelonians, 188, 189, 190, 197-198, 197
 prairie dogs, 347
chinchillas, 317
rabbits, 282, 283
crocodilians, 190
rodents, 307
ferrets, 242-243,243,250
skunks, 338,339
 guinea pigs, 323
sugar gliders, 343
hedgehogs, 328, 332, 332
 Sarcoptic mites
lizards, 77, 78, 188, 189, 189,197-198, 197
ferrets, 246
rabbits, 272,272,287
guinea pigs, 321, 322, 323
reptiles, 158-159, 188-190
rabbits, 269
 and egg incubation temperature, 196-198
Savannah monitor, 70, 79, 80
rodents, 303, 304
Scales
snakes, 158-159, 189, 190, 196-198
lizard, 69, 98
temperature-dependent, 196-198, 197
snakes, 120-121
terrapins, 188
Scales (weighing), 24
Sex determination methods
Scent detection
 cloacal probing
lizards, 78
lizards, 77, 189-190
snakes, 124
snakes,158,159,189-190
Scent glands
digital palpation, crocodilians, 190
gerbils, 303, 304
DNA sexing
snakes, 121
birds, 62
sugar gliders, 341
reptiles, 190
Scenting, 200
feather sexing, 62
Scent marking, rabbits, 255
hydrostatic hemipenes eversion
Schmorl's disease, 267
lizards, 77
Scratches, from reptiles, 95
reptiles, 190, 190
SCUD, 172
snakes, 158-159
Scurvy, guinea pigs, 321
laparoscopy, reptiles, 190-191, 191
Scutes, 168
 manual hemipenes eversion 
Seizures, gerbils, 293, 299
lizards, 77
Selamectin, in rabbits, 266
snakes, 77, 158, 190
Self-anointing, hedgehogs, 329
morphometric, 190
Self-mutilation, rabbits, 279
plasma testosterone, 190
Senegal parrots, behavior, 47
radiographic, lizards, 77
 Sense organs, snakes, 124
surgical
Septicemia
birds, 61-62
amphibians, 224
lizards, 77
rabbits, 269
ultrasonography, reptiles, 190-191, 191
Septicemic cutaneous ulcerative disease (SCUD),
vent sexing, 61
aquatic turtles, 172
visual, birds, 61
Sevin dust, 104
Shedding. See Ecdysis
Sevoflurane
 Shell gland
birds, 30
birds, 62
Index
477
lizards, 77
feline panleukopenia in, 336
snakes, prolapse of, 140-141
heart rate, 335
Shell rot, chelonians, 172
housing, 335
Shivering, birds, 52-53
injection sites, 339
Shock, 431
leash training, 335
in rabbits, 287
litter box training, 335
in raptors, 362
medication administration, 339
Shorebirds, 376, 407
nutrition, 335
Shunts, intracardiac, 122
obesity in, 335-336
Sialodacryoadenitis, 299
parasites of, 336, 337
Sidewinding, 121-122
physical examination, 337
Sight feeding, amphibians, 221
rabies, 336-337
Sinus flushing, birds, 40-41
radiography, 337
Sinusitis, African grey parrot, 46
respiratory rate, 335
Sirens, 205; See also Amphibians
restraint, 338, 406
diet,222-223
urinalysis, 338
feeding methods, 221
urine collection, 338-339
 Skeletal system
vaccinations, 337
amphibians, 210, 211, 212
zoonotic diseases, 267, 336-337
birds, 12-13, 13
Slap feeding, snakes, 200
chelonians, 168, 168
 Slide-pushing, 121
chinchillas, 312
Slobbers
ferrets, 241, 242
chinchillas, 313-314
hedgehogs, 328
rabbits, 266-267
lizards, 74-75, 74, 89
Slugs, for hedgehogs, 330
rabbits, 256
 Snails, for hedgehogs, 330
rodents, 293
 Snake bags, 140
salamander, 212
 Snakebites, feeding and, 139
snakes, 121-122, 121
Snake hook, 147, 147, 148
Skinks
Snakes
physical examination, 98
aggression, 119-120
restraint of, 97
analgesia, 152
traumatic tail amputation, 89
 anatomy and physiology, 120-126
 Skin regeneration, geckos, 74
air sacs, 123
Skin scrapings
cardiovascular system, 122-123, 142
amphibians, 235
central nervous system, 123-124
rabbits, 282
cranial nerves, 149
rodents, 296
digestive system, 12.5-126, 143
Skin turgor, 430
glands, 125-126
Skunks
integument, 120-121
amyloidosis, 336
lymphatic system, 123
anal sacs, 335
 organ location, 123
 anatomy and physiology, 335
renal system, 126
anesthesia, 337
reproductive system, 126-130
anorexia, 336
respiratory system,
,123
Baylisascaris spp. from, 267
sense organs, 124
biologic data, 335, 428
skeletal system, 121-122, 121
blood collection, 337-338
viscera, 125
body temperature, 335
anesthesia, 150-153
 canine distemper in, 336
anorexia, 146
cardiomyopathy, 336
aquatic,122
dentition, 336
arboreal, 122, 130
dermatitis, 336
auscultation, 149
478
Index
 Snakes (continued)
scent, 121
basking area, 135
venom, 126
behavior, 119-120
glottis, 125,149,162
blood collection, 160, 161
head pinning, 119
captive-bred, 119
heart rate, 149
catheterization
hematology, 391, 392
intracardiac, 161
eosinophils, 389-390
 intravenous, 161
hibernation, 145
colonic wash, 154, 162, 163
history, 145-146
courtship behavior, 119, 127-
housing, 130-137
128
humidity requirements, 129, 133, 135, 137
dehydration, 156
hyperthermia, 157
disorders
hypothermia, 156
abscesses, 93, 141, 143
 injection sites, 159-160
bacterial infections, 141
intracardiac shunting, 122
cardiovascular, 142
intubation, endotracheal, 152, 152
cloacal prolapse, 140
IPPV, 150
 colon, prolapsed, 140
light requirements, 133, 135, 136, 137
digestive, 140, 143
locomotion, 121
dysecdysis, 141-142
medication administration, 159-161
dystocia, 141, 153
 microchip placement, 187
gout,142
neonates, 199-200
hemolytic anemia, 155
nutrition, 138-140,142
hypercalcemia, 142
 oral cavity examination, 149-150
hyperthyroidism, 141
 oral medication, 160
integumentary, 141-142
oviparous, 128
lumps/bumps, 143-144
 ovoviviparous, 128
nervous system, 142
owner responsibilities, 164-165
nutritional, 142
pain assessment, 152
ophthalmic, 93, 143
 paramyxoviruses, 183-184
paraphimosis, 153
parasites of, 105-106, 154-155
renal system, 142
pesticide toxicity, 142
reproductive, 140-141
 photoperiod, 135
respiratory, 142
physical examination, 146, 148-150
retained spectacles, 93, 143
pit organs, 124, 139
viral infections, 144
POTZ, 132-135, 133, 157
dyspnea, 155, 157
quarantine, 137-138
ecdysis, 120, 153
radiography, 150
eggs
regurgitation, 143, 144
anatomy, 128
reproduction
incubation temperature, 129
courtship behavior, 127-128
management, 128-130
disorders of, 140-141
eggshell, 198
egg management, 128-130
emergency/critical care, 155-157
female, 127
euthanasia, 164
 gestation period, 198
fluid therapy, 151, 156
male, 126-127
food refusal, 119, 139-140
mating behavior, 192, 193
force feeding, 161, 161, 162
parthenogenesis, 193, 193
frostbite, 156
sexual maturity, 127, 191
gape in, 121, 155
respiration, 123, 142
glands, 126
restraint, 146-148, 407
endocrine/exocrine, 126
sex determination, 158-159, 189, 190, 196-198
salivary, 126
signalment, 145
Index
479
slap feeding, 200
Sperm storage, 193
spectacles, 93, 124, 143
Spica splints, 114
stress in, 143
 Spinal cord injury, snakes, 149
striking pose, 146, 147
Spinal osteopathy, snakes, 142
surgery, 153
Spindly leg disease, frogs, 225-226
terrestrial, 122
Spirochetosis, venereal, rabbits, 266
thermoregulation, 132-135
 Spirulina powder, 228
transporting, 140
Splay leg, 268
traumatic injury
Spleen
bite w0unds, 138-139, 139,156
chinchillas, 312
rostral abrasions, 143
ferrets, 242
spinal cord, 149
rodents, 293
thermal burns, 157
Splints
venomous, 163-164
birds, 374
safety protocols, 6
lizards, 114
viviparous, 128
 Springtails, for amphibians, 223
water availability, 135, 137
Sprites, 243
wild, 119, 361
Squamous cell carcinoma, gerbils, 297-298
wound healing, 153
Squirrels
zoonotic diseases, 94-96, 137, 144, 145
biological data, 428
Snake tongs, 148, 148
orphaned, 354
Snake tubes, 147-148
restraint, 406
Snares, wildlife, 405
transporting, 361
Snout-to-vent length (SVL), 148
Staphylococcus spp.
Snuffles, rabbits, 263
rabbits, 263, 266, 267
Sodium citrate tubes, 387
reptiles, 141
Songbirds
rodents, 297,299
adult, 373-376
S.aureus
dehydration, 373-374
in rabbits, 266, 267
feeding, 370-371, 375
in rodents, 297
fluid therapy, 373-374
Stomach oil, 262
force-feeding, 375
Stomach worm, rabbit, 267
housing, 369-370, 375
Stomatitis
identification of, 369, 412-415
lizards, 83, 90-91, 91
nutrition, 17-18, 370-373, 375-376
snakes, 143
orphaned, 354, 368-373
restraint, 373, 407
321
transporting, 360-361
Streptococcus spp.
Sore nose, gerbils, 299
 guinea pigs, 321
Sour crop, 429
rabbits, 267
Spaying. See Ovariohysterectomy
reptiles, 141
Species care sheet, 382, 419-426
rodents, 299
cottontail rabbits, 425-426
S. pneumoniae, in guinea pigs, 321
flying squirrels, 421-422
Stress
grey squirrels, 423-425
 in amphibians, 226
opossums, 422-423
in birds, 21
raccoons, 419-420
in captive wildlife, 356, 404
Spectacles
 in guinea pigs, 321
geckos, 99
in lizards, 98
lizards, 78
in rodents, 303
snakes, 93, 124
in snakes, 143
retained, 143
 in sugar gliders, 342
Speculums, for birds, 23
Striking pose, snakes, 146, 147
480
Index
Strongyloides spp.
Syphilis, rabbit, 266
of lizards, 106, 108
Syrian hamster, 293
of snakes, 155
 Syringe feeding, orphaned mammals,
Subcarapacial vein, 177, 178
380
Sublingual vein, frogs, 233, 234
Syrinx, 14
Substrate (bedding)
amphibians, 216, 218, 219, 220
Tadpoles, 228-229
birds, 50, 370
Tail amputation
chelonians, 171
lizards, 74-75, 87-88, 89
chinchillas, 313
rodents, 297
guinea pigs, 320
Tail autonomy
hedgehogs, 329
lizards, 74-75, 88-89
lizards, 80
salamanders, 213
prairie dogs, 345
Tail bobbing, birds, 20, 53
reptile egg incubators, 198
Tail guard, 365
rodents, 295-296
Tail-slip, 294
snakes, 130,131,132
Tail vein
Substrate ingestion, amphibians, 219
chelonians, 177-178
Sugar gliders
chinchillas, 317
anatomy, 341
lizards, 111-112, 112
anesthesia, 343
rodents, 303-304, 304,307
blood collection, 343
salamanders, 213, 233
body temperature, 341
snakes, 160
cannibalism, 342
sugar gliders, 343
coprophagia, 342
Tail wrapping, birds, 409-410
heart rate, 341
Taming, and release potential, 360
housing, 341
Tapeworms, See also Cestodes
hypocalcemia, 342
chinchillas, 316
malnutrition, 342
lizards, 106
neoplasms of, 342
rodents, 297,300
nutrition, 342
skunks, 337
nutritional osteodystrophy, 342
Tears, red, 293, 294, 299
obesity, 342
Teeth
paralysis, 342
acrodont, 74
parasites of, 343
pleurodont, 74
 periodontal disease, 342
 Teeth trimming
physical examination, 342
chinchillas, 314
radiography, 343
rabbits, 268, 286, 431
respiratory rate, 341
rodents, 298-299, 431
restraint, 342-343
Teflon, 29
scent glands, 341
Tegus
stress in, 342
aggression in, 93-94
temperature requirements, 342
bite wounds from, 95
traumatic injuries, 342
diet, 87
Sulcata tortoise, 167
restraint of, 97
Sulfa drugs, rabbits, 264
Telazol
Sulfamethazine, in lizards, 115
in ferrets, 253
Surinam toad, 210
in lizards, 101, 102
Swans, 377
in rabbits, 276
Swifts, diet, 372
in snakes, 151
Sylvatic plague, 346
Temperature
Symphysis pubis, guinea pigs, 319
 body. See Body temperature
Syngamus, 33
cloacal, 148
Index
481
Temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD),
lizards, 75
190, 196-198, 197
Tongueworms, of lizards, 95
Temperature, pulse, respiration. See TPR
Torpor, prairie dogs, 345
Temperature requirements, See also POTZ
Tortoises, 167; See also Chelonians
amphibians, 217, 219
courtship behavior, 192
hedgehogs, 329
hard-shelled eggs, 195
rabbits, 259-260
hematology, 389, 390
sugar gliders, 342
housing, 170-171
Termites, for amphibians, 223
nutrition, 171
Terrapins, 167, 188; See also Chelonians
reproduction, 191
Testes, birds, 63
sex determination, 188-189
 Testosterone, 191
 Toucans, hemochromatosis, 18
Tetanus vaccines, 352
Toxins, amphibian, 210, 230
Tetracyclines, in lizards, 115
Toxoplasmosis
Theobromine, 18
rabbits, 267
Thermal burns
skunks, 337
lizards, 81, 82, 88
Toys, birds, 50-51
snakes, 157
TPR
Thermoregulation
ferrets, 250
lizards, 81
hedgehogs, 333
rodents, 294
Trachea, snakes, 125
snakes, 132-135
Tracheal wash, snakes, 161-162, 162, 163
Thiaminase, in food items, 222
Transtracheal wash
Thiamine. See Vitamin B,
amphibians, 235
Thiobarbiturates
lizards, 112-113
in rabbits, 277
Trematodes
in snakes, 151
of amphibians, 226, 227
 Third eyelid. See Nictitating membrane
of chelonians, 176
Thrashers, diet, 372
Treponema paraluis cuniculi, 266
Thrombin time, rabbits, 260
Tricaine methanesulfonate, in amphibians, 232, 236
Thrombocytes
Trichobezoars, gastric, rabbits, 265
birds, 16, 16,392,392
Trichomoniasis
reptiles, 388, 392, 392
amphibians, 226-227
Thyroid gland, snakes, 126
birds, 33
Tibial artery, sugar gliders, 343
chinchillas, 316
Ticks, 430
Trichophyton spp.
 chelonians, 176
in hedgehogs, 330-331, 332
lizards, 95, 104
T.mentagrophytes
snakes, 154
 in prairie dogs, 346
Tiger salamander, 206, 221
in rabbits, 269
Toads, See also Amphibians
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
blood collection, 233
 in amphibians, 227
common species, 205, 206, 209
in birds, 26
diet, 222
 in lizards, 115
feeding, 221
Trixacaruscaviae, 322
 nocturnal, 221
Tube feeding, See also Assist feeding; Force feeding
parotid glands, 210
birds, 41-42
Toe amputation, hedgehogs, 332
lizards, 75, 114-115
Tokay gecko, 97
orphaned mammals, 381
Toltrazuril, in rabbits, 264
rabbits, 286
Tongs, wildlife, 405
raptors, 363,363, 365
Tongue
Tularemia, in rabbits, 269
birds, 15
Turgor, skin, 430
482
Index
Turtles, See also Chelonians
Uromastyx spp., physical examination, 98, 99
aquatic, 168
 Uropygial (preen) gland, 12, 24
diet, 170
Uterine adenocarcinoma, rabbits, 268-269
housing, 169-170, 170
UV light
septicemic cutaneous ulcerative disease (SCUD),
amphibians, 216-217, 225
172
birds, 370
eosinophils, 389-390
chelonians, 171
sex determination, 188
lizards, 80-81
soft-shelled, 168
 reptile reproduction, 192
terrestrial, 170-171
snakes, 135, 137
wild, transporting, 361
and Vitamin D, 84
Tyzzer's disease
rabbits, 264
Vaccination protocols
rodents, 300
ferrets, 247
skunks, 337
Ulnar vein, cutaneous. See Basilic vein
Vaccine reactions, ferrets, 247, 249
 Ultrasonography
Vaccines
ferrets, 248
canine distemper, 247
reptile eggs, 198-199
polyomavirus, 26, 57
sex determination, reptiles, 190-191, 191
poxviruses, 26
Ultraviolet light. See UV light
rabies, 352
Urates
tetanus, 352
avian, 14, 25
West Nile virus, 28
snakes, 142
Vaporizers, amphibian enclosures, 217-218
Urethral catheterization, ferrets, 250
Vein refill time, birds, 14, 24, 36
Uric acid, 213
Vena cava
Urinalysis
hedgehogs, 333
birds, 14, 25
rat,308
chinchillas, 316-317
sugar gliders, 343
guinea pigs, 323
Venereal disease, rabbits, 266
hedgehogs, 332
Venipuncture. See Blood collection
prairie dogs, 347
Venom glands, snakes, 126
rabbits, 282
Venous sinus/plexus, blood collection from,
skunks, 338
307
sugar gliders, 343
Vent
Urinary system, See also Renal-portal system
disease in rabbits, 266
birds, 14, 25
lizards, 99
chinchillas, 313
sexing, 61
ferrets, 242
Ventral dermal necrosis, snakes, 141
lizards, 76
Ventral gland, gerbil, 294
Urination, stimulating, 379, 381
Ventriculus, 15
Urine collection
heavy metals in, 28, 29
ferrets, 250
Vertebral subluxation/fractures, rabbits, 268, 273,
hedgehogs, 333
288-289
 prairie dogs, 347
Vesicular dermatitis, snakes, 141
rabbits, 285
Vibrissae, 327
skunks, 338-339
Vipers, 128
sugar gliders, 343
Viruses, disinfectants, 57
Urine scald, 266-267
Visceral larval migrans, 346
Urolithiasis
Vision
guinea pigs, 323
birds, 14
lizards, 99
lizards, 78
rabbits, 281, 282
snakes, 124
Index
483
Vitamin A
orphan care, 376-377
deficiency
restraint, 407
amphibians, 227
Water require ments
birds, 22,23,24,29
amphibians, 217-219, 228
chelonians, 172
birds, 18, 38
lizards, 78,93
chinchillas, 313
toxicity, chelonians, 172
ferrets, 245
Vitamin B, deficiency
 guinea pigs, 320
amphibians, 222
hedgehogs, 330
lizards, 94
lizards, 82-83
Vitamin C supplementation, guinea pigs, 320
prairie dogs, 345
Vitamin D2, 84
rabbits, 262
Vitamin D, 80, 84
rodents, 296
deficiency
snakes, 135, 137
birds, 370
sugar gliders, 342
chelonians, 171
waterfowl, 377
sugar gliders, 342
Waxwings, diet, 372
toxicity
Wax worms, for songbirds, 375-376
amphibians, 222
WBC. See Leukocytes
snakes,142
Weasels, 335
Vitamin E deficiency
biological data, 428
lizards, 94
canine distemper in, 336
rabbits, 264
restraint, 406
snakes, 142
West Nile virus, birds, 28
Vitellogenesis, 193
Wet-tail, hamsters, 299, 303
Viviparity
White blood cells. See Leukocytes
amphibians, 212
White cockatoos, sex determination, 61
reptiles, 77,194, 194, 195
White-fronted Amazon parrot, sex determination, 61
snakes, 128
Wildlife, restraint, 357
Vocalization
Wildlife permit offices, 395-397
amphibians, 212
Wildlife rehabilitation
birds, 52
admission form, 400
ferrets, 243
animal care record, 402
guinea pigs, 319, 322
birds. See Raptors; Songbirds; Waterfowl
rodents, 303
clinic protocols, 352-355
Vomeronasal (Jacobson's) organ
determining orphan status, 354-355
amphibians, 214
emergencies, 354
lizards, 78
ethics, 3.56
snakes, 124
euthanasia criteria, 352, 353, 358-359
Vomiting
examination form, 401
birds, 53
history, 353
snakes, 143
housing, 356
Vultures, feeding guidelines, 366
imprinting, 359
intake procedures, 355-356
Wading birds, 377
long-term care, 353
Walrus teeth, 268
medication administration, 357
Water blankets, 279
networking, 352
Waterfowl
nonreleasable animals, 352, 359
feces, 15-16
 organizations, 438
feeding, 378
phone protocols, 353-355
housing, 376-378
physical examination, 356-357
identification of, 376, 377
product sources, 433-435
nutrition, 377, 378
release criteria, 358-359
484
Index
Wildlife rehabilitation (continued)
Xylazine
resources, 352, 437-440
in chinchillas, 316
restraint of animals, 403-408
in rabbits, 276-277
species care sheets, 382, 419-426
stress reduction, 356, 404
Yersinia enterocolitica
taming, 360
amphibians, 228
technician's role in, 351-352, 353
reptiles, 145
temporary stabilization, 352
Yersinia pestis, prairie dogs,
transporting wildlife, 360-361
346
websites, 439-440
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
and zoonotic diseases, 352
prairie dogs, 346
Wing fractures, immobilizing, 375
rabbits, 269
Wing trimming, 34-35
Yohimbine, 280
Withdrawal response, amphibians, 213-214
Wobbling hedgehog syndrome, 330
Zinc toxicosis, birds, 28
Wolves, 406, 438
Zoonotic diseases
Wood, disinfecting, 57
amphibians, 227-228
Woodcock, 376
chelonians, 174
Wood frogs, 220
chinchillas, 315
Woodpeckers, 372
ferrets, 24.5
Worms, feeder, 138
 guinea pigs, 321
Wound care
lizards, 94-96
birds, 42
 prairie dogs, 346
ferrets, 253
rabbits, 269
 guinea pigs, 325
raccoons, 419
hedgehogs, 334
reptiles, 94-96, 137, 141, 144,
rabbits, 285
145
rodents, 303
rodents, 299-300
Wound clips, 281
skunks, 267, 336-337
Wound healing, snakes, 153
snakes, 94-96, 137, 144
Wrens, diet, 372
and wildlife, 352
Plate 2.1. Clostridial overgrowth is apparent in this
Plate 2.2. A Diff-Quick stained blood smear from a
fecal Gram stain from a parrot. Clostridium shown
parrot.Note that birds have nucleated red blood
here is a large Gram-positive rod with no spore, a
cells. The cell at the twelve o'clock position is a
clear central spore (safety pin shape),or clear end
lymphocyte, the two o'clock position is a monocyte,
spore (racket shape).
the six o'clock position is a heterophil (like a
neutrophil),and the nine o'clock position is a
normally occurring nucleated thrombocyte.
Plate 2.3. Examples of seeds found in seed diets.
The left column, from top to bottom, is oat groats,
small blacksunflower seed,and large whitestriped
Plate 2.4. The introduction of pelleted foods for
sunflower seed. The right column,from top to
avian species bas madeit possible to dramatically
improve the overall health of companion and caged
bottom, is safflower seeds, red millet, white millet,
birds.Various brands of natural and artificially
and rape seeds.
colored pelleted food marketed for birds are shown
here. Finely ground formulas are available to mix
with water for hand or tube feeding.
Plate 2.5. Polyuria.
Plate 2.6. Normal feces.
3745 Atlanta Hwy
across from
Ga.Square
OIL,LUBE
andEILTCD
Plate 2.7. Normal feces.
Plate 2.8. Hematuria and melena.
g sales will result in production
n the months ahead as businesses
levels of inventories.
which purchased the bonds wer
and the Robinson-Humphrey Cor
help market gain broad
Simmons plans S8 million
capped off a weekl
day，aided bybett
an Atlanta-bas
trade and domest
of 30 industrials
unch a major
st,officials sai
president and
ecurities
Sabes
ClsChg
lssue
92
655
Inspech
MBS
Plate 2.9. Undigested seeds.
Plate 2.10. Bird with PBFD.
Plate 3.2. Pair of eclectus parrots, one of several
Plate 3.1. Umbrella cockatoo. (Photo courtesy of
sexually dimorphic psittacine species. (Photo
Dr. Tarah Hadley.)
courtesy of Dr. April Romagnano.)
Plate 3.3. Bright orange cheek patches are often
more prevalent inmale cockatiels,such as the one
Plate 3.4. Congo African grey parrot. (Photo
pictured here. (Photo courtesy of Dr. Tarah Hadley.)
courtesy of Cherie Fox.)
Plate 3.6. Blue and gold macaw that has chewed its
Plate 3.5. Congo African grey parrot with an
way partly out one side of a cardboard box.(Photo
enlarged left nare,most likely caused by chronic
courtesy of Dr. Tarah Hadley.)
upper respiratory infections and sinusitis.(Photo
courtesy of Dr. Tarah Hadley.)
Plate 3.7.Hyacinth macaws. (Photo courtesy of
Plate 3.8. Military macaw. (Photo courtesy of
Cherie Fox.)
Cherie Fox.)
Plate 3.10. Yellow-naped Amazon. (Photo courtesy
of Dr. Sam Rivera.)
Plate 3.9. Cuban Amazon in outside aviary on a
natural wood perch. (Photo courtesy of Dr. April
Romagnano.)
Plate 3.12. A feather picker. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
Sam Rivera.)
Plate 3.11. Blue-fronted Amazon. (Photo courtesy of
Dr. Sam Rivera.)
Plate 3.13. Yellow-headed Amazon that presented
Plate 3.14.Cockatiel with fecal staining of vent area
lethargic with eyes closed and fluffed feathers.
secondary to egg binding. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
(Photo courtesy of Dr. Tarah Hadley.)
Plate 5.1. Pair of gang gang cockatoos. Note the
Plate 5.2. Parrot with prolapse of the oviduct.
distinction between the male(left)and thefemale.
(Photo courtesy of Dr. April Romagnano.)
(Photo courtesy of Dr. April Romagnano.)
Plate 6.1. Bearded dragon. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
Cheek.)
Plate 5.3. Egg yolk peritonitis in a parrot. Note the
yellow-tinged coelomic cavity contents caused by a
ruptured egg. (Photo courtesy of Dr. April
Plate 6.2. Mali uromastyx. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
Romagnano.)
Cheek.)
Plate 6.3. Jackson chameleon. (Photo courtesy of
Dr. Sam Rivera.)
Plate 6.4. Chameleon. (Photo courtesy of Ryan
Cheek.)
Plate 6.5. Mangrove monitor. (Photo courtesy of
Plate 6.6. Savannah monitor. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
Ryan Cheek.)
Sam Rivera.)
Plate 6.7. Thermal burns. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
Plate 6.8.Rostrum abrasion.(Photo courtesy of
Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of Georgia.)
ZooAtlanta.)
Plate 6.10. Roundworm, original magnification 40x.
Plate 6.9. Flagellate, original magnification 40 x.
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
Plate 6.11. Ascarid, original magnifcation 40 x.
Plate 6.12. Oxyurid, original magnification 40 x.
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
Plate 6.13. Ascarid, original magnification 40 x.
Plate 6.14. Coccidia, original magnification 40 x.
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
Plate 6.16. Strongyle larva, original magnification
Plate 6.15. Nyctotherus, original magnification 40 x.
40 x. (Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
Plate 6.18. Eimeria, original magnifcation 40 x.
Plate 6.17. Pinworm and eimeria, original
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
magnification 40 x. (Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
Plate 6.19. Capillaria, original magnification 40 x.
Plate 6.20. Pinworm, original magnifcation 40 x.
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
(Photo courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
Plate 7.1. A snake suffering from trauma from a
prey item. (Photo courtesy of Dr. Sam Rivera.)
Plate 7.2. Stomatitis in a snake. (Photo courtesy of
Dr. Stephen J. Hernandez-Divers, University of
Georgia.)
Plate 7.3. Ocular larva migrans in a snake. (Photo
courtesy of Zoo Atlanta.)
Plate 8.1.Male eastern box turtle showing red eye.
Plate 8.2. Sulcata tortoise.
Plate 8.3. Aldabra tortoise.
Plate 12.1. Rabbit blood smear showing heterophil.
(Photo courtesy of Dondrae Coble.)
Plate 21.1. Blood smear from an owl: cluster of
Plate 12.2. Marginal lateral ear vein on the left and
elongate thrombocytes. (Wright stain, EDTA,
the prominent central auricular artery.(Photo
original magnification × 100.)
courtesy of Ryan Cheek.)
Plate 21.2. Blood smear from a rat snake: cluster of
small round thrombocytes, one lymphocyte.(Wright
stain,EDTA, original magnification × 100.)
Plate 21.3. Blood smear from a hawk: beterophil,
Plate 21.4. Blood smear from a tortoise: heterophil
erythrocytes containing hemoparasite,
withband-shapednucleus and area ofbasophilic
Leucocytozoon. (Wright stain, EDTA, original
cytoplasm. (Wright stain, EDTA, original
magnificationx100.)
magnification x 100.)
Plate 21.5. Blood smear from an owl: toxic
mononuclear heterophilwith eccentric nucleus and
both basophilic and eosinophilic granules.(Wright
stain, EDTA, original magnification x 100.)
Plate 21.6. Blood smear from a tortoise: basophil
with granules obscuring the nucleus,ruptured
heterophil with loose granules. (Wright stain, EDTA,
original magnifcation×100.)
Plate 21.7. Blood smear from a tortoise: heterophil
with ill-defined rod-shaped granules,eosinophil with
round distinct granules,heterophil.(Wright stain,
EDTA, original magnifcation x 100.)
Plate 21.8. Blood smear from a lizard: basophil,
Plate 21.9. Blood smear from a lizard: monocyte
band heterophil, monocyte. (Wright stain, EDTA,
with gray-blue cytoplasm and oval nucleus. (Wright
original magnification x 100.)
stain, EDTA, original magnifcation X 100.)
Plate 21.11. Blood smear from a lizard: basophilic
Plate 21.10. Blood smear from a rat snake:
erythrocyte in the center, two thrombocytes.Note
azurophilwith granules at cytoplasmicperiphery
the irregularly shaped erythrocyte nuclei,tiny
instilling a pinkish-purple hue. (Wright stain, EDTA,
cytoplasmic vacuoles in erythrocytes.(Wright stain,
original magnification x 100.)
EDTA, original magnifcation × 100.)
Plate 21.12. Blood smear from a rat snake: cluster of
thrombocytes. (Wright stain,EDTA,original
magnification x 100.)