ADVANCES
VETERINARY
Advances
SURGERY
Small
 Animal
Total Joint
Replacement
JEFFREY N.PECK AND
DENIS J.MARCELLIN-LITTLE
WILEY-BLACKWELL
FOUNDATION
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Advances in
Small Animal
Total Joint
Replacement
Advances
Animal
Small
Total Joint
Replacement
Edited by
Jeffrey N. Peck, DvM, Diplomate American College of Veterinary
Surgeons
Denis J. Marcellin-Little, DEDV, Diplomate American College of
Veterinary Surgeons, European College of Veterinary Surgeons,
American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
FOUNDATION
A John Wiley & Sonis, Inic., Publication
This edition first published 2013 @ 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
 Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editorial offices: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 SSQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuise the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific
uado a ot Aap pied st aan aseq au ieu paiaod uusn hameia Aq pauea si sua
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been
granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for
users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-4709-5961-9/2013.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
paasian ro sreapen 'seu anaias 'saeu ape ane yooq stu un pasn sweu npoud pue sau
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of
a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Advances in small animal total joint replacement / edited by Jeffrey N. Peck, Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
p. / cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-95961-9 (hardback : alk. paper) - ISBN 978-1-118-46271-3 (ePDF/eBook) - ISBN 978-1-
118-46272-0 (ePub) - ISBN 978-1-118-46273-7 (eMobi)
1. Peck, Jeffrey N. I1. Marcellin-Little, Denis J. (Denis Jacques), 1964
ssia  e   ad sd  
SF 911]
636.089'705-dc23
201 2019773
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books.
Cover design by Matt Kuhns
Set in 9.5 on 11.5 pt Palatino by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without
limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every
esal Sunapuai ul paselua jou st iausqnd aul teu Supueisiapun aut ym pios st yiom stui 'uonenis
professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages
arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a
potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the
information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers
should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between
when this work was written and when it is read.
12013
Dedication
This book is dedicated to Kathy and Kayla, and to the memory of Cody Ruderman,
who reminded me that our most serious complications should be our greatest impetus
for advancement.
JeffreyN.Peck
This book is dedicated to Terry, Ariarne, and Julien, and to all loving owners of dogs
and cats.
Denis J. Marcellin-Little
Contents
Contributors
ix
6. Biomechanical Considerations in
Foreword
Total Hip Replacement
53
xi
Michael P. Kowaleski
Marvin L. Olmstead
Foreword
xii
7. Clinical Application of Total Hip
David J. DeYoung
Replacement
69
Foreword
xvii
Jeffrey N. Peck, William D. Liska,
Mark D. Markel, Chair of the Board of Trustees
David J. DeYoung, and
ACVS Foundation
Denis J. Marcellin-Little
Preface and Acknowledgments
xix
8. Revision Strategies for Total Hip
1. The History of Joint Replacement in
Replacement
109
Veterinary Surgery
3
Jeffrey N. Peck and
Mariana Quina and Jeffrey N. Peck
Denis J. Marcellin-Little
2. Implant Materials: Structural
11
9. Biomechanical Considerations in
Simon C. Roe
Total Knee Replacement
131
MatthewAllen andKenneth Mann
3. Implant Materials: Surface Coating
19
David J. DeYoung and
10. Clinical Application of Total Knee
Denis J. Marcellin-Little
Replacement
151
4.Weight-Bearing Surfaces
Melvyn Pond
31
Jeffrey N. Peck
11. Biomechanical Considerations in
5. Methods of Immediate Fixation
39
Total Elbow Development
163
Kei Hayashi and Kurt S.Schulz
Greg Van Der Meulen
vii
vili Contents
12. Clinical Application of Total Elbow
14. Custom Total Joint Arthroplasty
223
Replacement in Dogs
179
Denis J. Marcellin-Little and
Loic M. Dejardin, Reunan P. Guillou,
Ola L.A. Harrysson
and Michael Conzemius
xapu
243
13. Emerging Arthroplasties
199
Jeffrey N.Peck
Contributors
Matthew Allen, Vet MB, PhD
Reunan P Guillou, Doc. Vet.
Associate Professor
Assistant Professor
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Michigan State University
Columbus, OH
East Lansing, MI
Michael Conzemius, DVM, PhD, Diplomate
Ola L.A. Harrysson, PhD
ACVS
Associate Professor
Professor
Fitts Department of Industrial and Systems
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Engineering
University of Minnesota
 North Carolina State University
St. Paul, MN
Raleigh, NC
Loic M. Déjardin, DVM, MS, Diplomate ACVS
Kei Hayashi, DVM, PhD, Diplomate ACVS
Associate Professor
Associate Professor
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Michigan State University
University of Califomia-Davis
East Lansing, MI
Davis, CA
David J. DeYoung, DVM, Diplomate ACVS,
Michael P. Kowaleski, DVM, Diplomate ACVS,
ACVA
ECVS
Adjunct Professor
Associate Professor
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Tufts University
Raleigh, NC
North Grafton, MA
ix
x Contributors
William D. Liska, DVM, Diplomate ACVS
Melvyn Pond, BVMS, MRCVS, Diplomate ACVS
Surgeon
Surgeon
 Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists
New Haven Hospital for Veterinary Medicine
Houston, TX
Milford, CT
Kenneth Mann, PhD
Mariana Quina, DVM
 Professor of Orthopedic Surgery
Surgical Resident
 Affiliated Veterinary Specialists
Director of the Musculoskeletal Science Research
Center
Maitland, FL
 Department of Orthopedic Surgery
Simon C. Roe, BVSc, PhD, Diplomate ACVS
Upstate Medical University
Professor
State University of New York
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Syracuse, NY
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC
Denis J. Marcellin-Little, DEDV, Diplomate
ACVS, ECVS, ACVSMR
Kurt S. Schulz, DVM, MS, Diplomate ACVS
Professor
Surgeon
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Peak Veterinary Referral Center
North Carolina State University
Williston, VT
Raleigh, NC
Greg Van Der Meulen, BSME
Jeffrey N. Peck, DVM, Diplomate ACVS
Director of Research and Development
Surgeon
BioMedtrix, LLC
Affiliated Veterinary Specialists
Boonton, NJ
Maitland, FL
Ketchum, ID
Foreword
The editors have asked me to write about my
Cemented Total Hip Replacement. His second hip
experience and thoughts on canine total hip
replacement occurred a few weeks later and 1
 replacements. I have often said that humans were
jumped at the chance to scrub with him on
the research animal for dogs when it came to total
d pip qa am 'uo jod je wo 'du 1
hip replacements. Although total hip replace-
replacements at OsU. We wanted to document
ments were being implanted in humans in the 
our technique, clinical results, postoperative care,
1940s by surgeons such as Dr. Austin Moore, it
and complications in a marner that would be
was not until the late 1950s and early 1960s that
most beneficial to the profession. Thus, we did
Sir John Charnley's work on implant design, mate-
not rush to publish our results but took time
rials, and fixation with polymethylmethacrylate
to reflect on what we learned. Our complication
(PMMA) bone cement made the
procedure
rate was high (20%) and by today's standards
popular and widely used in humans. In 1957,
would be unacceptable, but we found that as we
Dr. Harry Gorman at The Ohio State University
accumulated cases and critically evaluated each
(OSU) worked on an experimental hip prosthesis
complication, avoidable causes were identified.
 in canines. These implants were cementless and
There was a marked reduction in complications in 
the project was testing a desigm that was to be used
the last 2 years of this study. By continuing this
humans. The femoral head was held in the acetab-
evaluation even today, complication rates are min-
ulum by a constraining metal ring, which was
 imized and now occur in approximately 7% of the
fixed to the pelvis with screws. This design was
cases.
flawed and failed in most patients. However,
 Starting in 1977, an armual continuing educa-
Dr. Richard Rudy did tell me about one dog he
tion course was taught at OSU that included in the
implanted with this hip replacement that lasted
faculty both veterinarians and MDs from around
for 13 years. It was not until 1974 when Dr. William
the country who were implanting total hips. This
Hoefle reported on a cemented total hip replace-
 gave valuable insight that was incorporated into
 ment in one dog that some people again began to
the techniques used at OSU and around the world.
think about doing this surgery in veterinary
aueuoxa o Auoddo ue sn aae sasmos asau
patients.
ideas and to teach the most current technique to
In early August 1976, 1 month after I started
veterinarians. It was not long before many veteri-
working at OSU, Dr. R. Bruce Hohn implanted the
nary surgeons were offering total hip replace-
Veterinary College's first Richards IⅡI Canine
ments to their clients and patients.
!X
xiiForeword
When it became known that we were doing total
to changing the implants and instruments when
hip replacements at OsU, there were those who
clinical findings indicated that something was not
said it was unnecessary to do this in dogs because
working as well as it could, even if that was in
excision arthroplasty (femoral head and neck
 just a few patients, or when a need was found
ostectomy) worked well. We found that the easiest
a e je washs a Aq passarppe jou sm je
way for us to show the benefits of total hip replace-
time.
ment is to compare hip extended radiographs of a
 In an effort to improve what was offered to the
uoisioxa ue yim auo pue d paoeidan e yim sop
 patient, I was part of the group that worked on
arthroplasty taken 6 months after surgery. The
the cementless hip system for BioMedtrix. I saw
total-hip dog will have well-developed muscle
the cemented and cementless systems as comple-
mass, while the excision-arthroplasty dog's
 mentary to each other and felt they would expand
muscles are atrophied. The direct connection of
the options a surgeon had available. I have not
the femoral head to the pelvis is important for the
found one system to be overall superior to the
dog's muscles and limb function to reach their full 
other, but there are some cases where one system
potential.
will work better for a given patient. In some cases,
 Our first major publication on the subject was a
they can even be combined into a hybrid hip
technique paper in a 1981 volume of Veterinary
replacement. The surgeon who wants to provide
Surgery. The paper, documenting the results of the
the best possible service to the client and patient
first 5 years of 221 consecutive clinical cases (216
will be well versed in all aspects of both the
of which had follow-ups for varying periods), did
cemented and cementless total hip replacement
not come out until 1983. Since then, many more
systems.
publications by myself and others have further
 In human medicine, total hip replacement is
expanded our understanding of canine total hip
considered the most consistently reproducible
replacements. Total hip replacements have become
surgery with the most predictable results. This
a well-accepted technique for resolving discom-
should also be true in veterinary medicine. It takes
fort and poor function resulting from canine hip
strict attention to detail, technique, and patient
diseases.
selection and care. The success rate of 95% dogs
It became obvious to me as I worked with the
retuming to normal to near-normal function is
sap h u s r ass s
found no matter which implant is used. It is up to
and instrumentation would be of benefit, so I dis-
the surgeon to choose the best implants for a given
cussed this with the company representatives.
patient.
They declined to make changes. Thus, when in
1989 I was contacted about a new modular hip
Marvin L. Olmstead, DVM, MS
replacement system, I agreed to work on it. This
Emeritus Professor, The Ohio State University
collaboration resulted in the development of the
Emeritus Diplomate, American College
BioMedtrix Canine Cemented Hip Replacement
of Veterinary Surgeons
System. This company has been very receptive
Surgeon, Oregon Veterinary Referral Associates
Foreword
This textbook constitutes a summary of the
While clinical assessment is the most important 
outcome assessment, and was paramount to
The foreword written by Marvin Olmstead pro-
 achieving improvements during the early stages
vides us with a historical perspective of the land-
 of cemented total hip replacement in dogs, addi-
mark work of the pioneers of arthroplasty in
tional advancement could only be achieved using
veterinary medicine over the last quarter of the
more finite criteria for implant performance. It
twentieth century. Not only was the technique
was clear that patient function did not always cor-
developed by these individuals, but they also
relate with radiographic assessment. In the mid-
pushed arthroplasty beyond the barriers of the
1980s, a retrieval analysis program was started at
time and made total hip replacement the treat-
 North Carolina State University (NCSU), offering
 ment of choice for veterinarians, as well as pet
us the opportunity to assess cemented implants,
owners. It is important for the next generation of
and the surrounding cement and bone harvested
orthopedic surgeons to be aware of the steps that
following the death of canine patients. The
 got us to this point and shoulder the responsibility
program
provided the opportunity to assess
of advancing the science and art of arthroplasty in
mechanical stability of the implant-cement and
the future.
cement-bone interfaces, establish the nature of the
As veterinary orthopedic surgeons, we have the
cells in fibrous membranes, and search for the
responsibility to critically assess implant and
 presence of particulate debris. Serial sectioning of
patient performance and continue to develop
femurs with intact implants and cement revealed
implants and techniques to improve the outcomes
cement cracks or an incomplete cement mantle
for our patients. The ultimate goal of total joint
that provided channels for wear debris to gain
replacement is to relieve pain,
improve the
access to the cement-bone interface leading to
patient's quality of life by returning function, and
osteolysis. Over a period of years, serial radio-
improve the client's relationship with their pet. In
 graphic assessment and retrieval analysis pointed
addition, the prosthesis should last the lifetime of
out many of the failure mechanisms associated
the patient. Success toward meeting these goals
with bone cement and cementing techniques.
has been measured using a variety of standards,
These were addressed with varying degrees of
 most often retrospective studies involving assess-
success in dogs over the past decade. Every
ment of patient function, as well as client
attempt has been made to link failures back to
satisfaction
patient selection and surgical techmique, and in
xili
xivForeword
some cases implant materials or design. Critical
studies for all research and clinical animals. Many
assessment of failures is the most direct path to
 of the research studies were subsequently reviewed
improving implant longevity. However, to call
by a third-party consultant, Tom Gruen. The
them failures while the dog is running and jumping
 extensive clinical and research experience gained
asn on isaq si hi sdeuad raedondde aq iou A
using the Canine PCA Total Hip System laid the
-qd ouu jo sr aa, an a
foumdation for the development of the BioMedtrix
lems." Changes leading to loss of implant stability
BFX Cementless Total Hip System nearly 20 years
 are generally slow and insidious. They may take
later Concurrently, others had evolved an interest
years, or in some cases, they may transpire at a
 in cementless fixation leading to the development
frighteningly fast rate. In addition to clinical per-
of the Zurich Cementless Total Hip Replacement
formance, serial radiographic assessment is the
System in the 1990s by Pierre Montavon and
best clinical evidence of the implant performance
Slobodan Tepic in Zurich, Switzerland. Multi-
over time and helps the surgeon reconstruct the
center clinical studies were led by Randy Boudrieau
causes of the failure. The important fact is to rec-
 in the United States and Aldo Vezzoni in Europe.
ognize the mechanisms of failure and take steps to
Another critical initiative in the advancement of
 minimize them or prevent them from occurring in
canine hip arthroplasty was the initiation of a
future cases.
series of conferences,
, "Contemporary Issues in
 In 1986, an opportunity presented itself from
Canine Total Joint Replacement," held in 1999,
David Hungerford, an orthopedic surgeon at
2000, 2001, 2005, and 2008. This conference was
Johns Hopkins University. He proposed to develop
established with the goal to advance the science
a cementless total hip system for clinical and
and art of canine total joint replacement. The
research use in dogs in conjunction with surgeons
objectives were to promote open discussion and
at NCSU. The vision was to create a state-of-the-
 debate on issues in total joint replacement using a
art cementless total hip system complete with
variety of implant systems, actively engage sur-
accurate instrumentation. The system was to be
geons and
d engineers in dialogue, emphasize
used in research animals as well as clinical patients
optimal surgical technique for primary and revi-
and to be implanted by the same team of veteri-
sion arthroplasty procedures, and provide a forum
nary surgeons. Having surgeons familiar with the
for all participating surgeons to share their per-
hip system, implantation technique, performance,
sonal
experiences.
Significant changes were
and assessment would enhance the quality of the
 achieved as a result of the participation and con-
research arm of the program. The same standards
tribution of surgeons attending these interactive
would be used for clinical and research animals
conferences.
and serial radiographic assessment would be used
The first conference focused on the indications
throughout the clinical and research studies, as
for hip replacement, patient selection, patient care,
well as retrieval analysis. This was the critical step
and surgical technique of cemented implants. The
that resulted in the development of the Canine
second conference in 2000 concentrated on surgi-
 PCA Total Hip System by Howmedica Inc. Mul-
 cal technique including canal and acetabular prep-
tiple research studies were completed over a 15-
 aration, implant positioning and complications,
year period, including a long-term prospective
revisions, and radiographic assessment. The 2001
clinical trial. Research projects included the study
 conference expanded to include the clinical expe-
of a variety of implant types and surface coatings
rience using a variety of cemented and cementless
 and provided the team with extensive knowledge
 implants from the United States as well as Europe,
and experience that was applied to clinical
including the CFX, PCA, Zurich Cementless, and
patients. In retrospect, one significant decision
 the Biomecanique implant systems. This meeting
was the training and use of an independent and
proved to be a pivotal moment for cementless
 unbiased observer to read all radiographic assess-
applications. The presentations on the clinical
ments made on the research studies, as well as
experience with the Zurich Cementless and the
clinical patients. A member of our team, Rick
Canine PCA stimulated intense discussions and
Schiller, was responsible for the reading, docu-
revealed how much interest there was in the posi-
mentation, and interpretation of the radiographic
tive results of cementless implants, and the desire
Forewordxv
to move in that direction was established. The next
gap between 2005 and 2008 was a very productive
conference was not held until 2005, 2 years follow-
time for the advancement of total joint replace-
ing the release of the BFX system. The entire
ment in dogs.
meeting was dedicated entirely on the BFX cement-
It is my hope that this textbook will not only
less system, refinement of the operative technique,
provide a valuable reference source for surgeons,
and resolving early complications. The last confer-
but remind them just how far we have come in a
ence held in 2008 focused on refining the CFX and
relatively short time and excite them about the
BFX operative procedures and instrumentation
 possibilities for the future. Through continued
into a single system, the Universal Hip System.
critical assessment including basic research and
Input was provided by surgeons based on their
prospective clinical studies, we will continue to
experiences with the system over the past 3 years.
make strides to achieve our goal. The format of
These discussions led to the later refinement of the
interactive conferences to share ideas and experi-
operative technique into a common Universal
ence is also critical in achieving consensus and
technique for CFX and BFX systems. Key observa-
direction.
tions and input from surgeons including Teresa
Schiller, Denis Marcellin-Little, Loic Dejardin,
David J. DeYoung, DVM,
Melvin Pond, Michael Kowaleski, and Bill Liska
Diplomate ACVS, ACVA
 Were instrumental in refining the surgical tech-
Professor Emeritus, Orthopedic Surgery.
nique, resulting in a reduction of early surgical
College of Veterinary Medicine,
complications. This conference also for the first
North Carolina State University
time expanded to include micro hip implants and
 Dean Emeritus, School of Veterinary Medicine,
total knee and total elbow replacement. The 3-year
Ross University
Foreword
The American College of Veterinary Surgeons
with Wiley-Blackwell will benefit all who are
(ACVS) Foundation is excited to present Advances
interested in veterinary surgery by presenting the
in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement in the book
latest evidence-based information on a particular
series entitled Advances in Veterinary Surgery. The
surgical topic.
ACVS Foundation is an independently charted
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
philanthropic organization devoted to advancing
is edited by Drs. Jeffrey N. Peck and Deris J.
the charitable, educational, and scientific goals of
Marcellin-Little, both Diplomates of the American
the American College of Veterinary Surgeons.
 College of Veterinary Surgeons and prominent
Founded in 1965, the ACVS sets the standards for
small animal orthopedic surgeons in the field of
the specialty of veterinary surgery. The ACVS,
total joint replacement. They have assembled the
which is approved by the American Veterinary
leaders in the field of joint replacement, presenting
 Medical Association, administers the board certi-
-laa ui puaaneldan juiot jo aaoadsad jenrroistu e
fication  process for Diplomates in  veterinary
 erinary surgery, the relevant issues regarding
surgery and advances veterinary surgery and edu-
implant materials, the common sites of total joint
 cation. One of the principal goals of the ACVS
replacement, indluding the hip, knee, and elbow,
Foundation is to foster the advancement of the art
emerging arthroplasties sites, and the use of
and science of veterinary surgery. The Foundation
custom prostheses. T
The ACVS Foundation is
achieves these goals by supporting investigations
proud to parter with Wiley-Blackwell in this
 in the diagnosis and treatment of surgical diseases;
important series and is honored to present this
increasing educational opportunities for surgeons,
book in the series.
surgical residents, and veterinary practitioners;
improving surgical training of residents and vet-
Mark D. Markel
erinary students; and bettering animal patients'
Chair, Board of Trustees
 care, treatment, and welfare. This collaboration
ACVS Foundation
xvii
Preface and Acknowledgments
Joint replacement for companion animals has been
 any new procedure, it is critical that the surgeon's
 available for approximately four decades. Fortu-
knowledge and skill exceed what is necessary to
nately, over time, several pioneers have pushed
simply perform the procedure. A deeper level of
the boundaries of our knowledge, technology, and
understanding is necessary to minimize the inci-
capabilities. Several of these early pioneers, such
dence of complications and to manage them when
as Hap Paul, Dave Nunamaker, and Tom Turner,
they occur. Furthermore, a larger population of
were veterinarians who embraced the "One Medi-
knowledgeable surgeons will accelerate the rate at
cine" philosophy and were involved in the early
which we can improve on existing designs and
development of both human and veterinary joint 
procedures.
prostheses.
This book's aim is to facilitate the advancement
 Until the 1990s, joint replacement in veterinary
of joint replacement in veterinary surgery by
surgery had mostly been limited to the hip and
pooling the existing body of information and
was available at only a small number of institu-
providing a solid foundation of knowledge to
tions. As we grew to expand the breadth of joint
joint replacement surgeons. That knowledge is
replacements available to our patients, we have
necessary to provide optimal patient care, to
been enduring the same growing pains and made
conduct clinical research, and to educate future
errors similar to our human surgeon counterparts.
surgeons.
Most often, we start out by creating highly con-
strained prostheses with restricted kinematic func-
tion. As our understanding of the kinematics and
Acknowledgments
biomechanics of the normal joint grows, so does
the likelihood of repeatable, successful long-term
We thank all implant manufacturers for their
outcomes.
 support. We thank Terry Marcellin-Little for her
 In addition to expanding the armamentarium
assistance with the Index, and Dr. William
of available joint replacements, there has also
D. Liska for the radiograph used on the cover.
been a substantial increase in the number of sur-
geons performing joint replacement procedures
Jeffrey N. Peck
worldwide. In order to maximize the success of
Denis J. Marcellin-Little
xix
Advances in
L Animal
Small
Total Joint
Replacement
The History of Joint Replacement in
Veterinary Surgery
Mariana Quina and Jeffrey N. Peck
Total joint replacement has gained an important
reduce the possibility of damage to the femoral
place in veterinary orthopedic surgery. There are
 component during preparation of the femur. These
currently commercially available prosthetic com-
changes included a 20-degree cutaway on the
ponents and instrumentation for canine and feline
 dorsal aspect of the acetabular component, estab-
total hip replacement, canine total elbow replace-
lishment of a guide system for placement of the
ment, and canine total knee replacement. Although 
acetabular component, several minor changes to
many different implant systems have been devel-
the femoral component design, and introduction
oped for experimental use, descriptions of the
of a femoral component trial prosthesis to be used
implants in this chapter are limited to the com-
during preparation of the femur.
mercially available systems.
In 1979, Leighton reported on the use of the
 Richards II system in nine experimental dogs.
Each of the three available sizes of prostheses was
Total hip replacement
implanted in three dogs each. Of the nine dogs,
 there was one failure due to infection resulting in
Total hip replacement became commercially avail-
 acetabular component loosening. The remaining
able in the dog in 1974 (Hoefle 1974). The implant
 eight dogs reportedly had good or excellent func-
system used was a cemented, fixed-head, stainless
 tion 1 year after surgery. Use of the Richards II
steel femoral component and polyethylene acetab-
system was reported in a clinical setting with good
ular cup that was available in three sizes (Richards
success (Lewis and Jones 1980; Olmstead et al.
Manufacturing, Memphis, TN; Figure 1.1). The
1983). Lewis and Jones performed 20 total hip
Richards II canine total hip prosthesis was the
replacements in 15 dogs and reported the results
only commercially available canine system until
with a minimum of 1-year follow-up. The most
1990. Design modifications to the implants were
common complication was loosening of the ace-
made in the late 1970s in order to decrease the
tabular component, the femoral component, or
tendency for luxation, provide more consistent
both. Causes of aseptic loosening were not clearly
placement of the acetabular component, and
identified or understood at the time of the Lewis
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
4Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
satisfactory function, with owners reporting
increased activity levels, improved muscle mass,
and elimination of pain. Of the dogs with bilateral
hip dysplasia, unilateral hip replacement resulted
in enough improvement in clinical signs that
surgery on the contralateral side was not deemed
necessary for 80% of dogs. Complications included
luxation, infection, aseptic loosening of the acetab-
ular component, femoral fracture, and sciatic
neurapraxia. The overall complication rate was
20%, with 58% of cases with complications eventu-
 ally achieving a satisfactory outcome. Evaluation
of follow-up radiographs, as well as what consti-
tuted a satisfactory outcome, was not discussed.
In June 1990, the BioMedtrix CFX? system
(BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ), a modular cemented
 total hip prosthesis and instrumentation set, was
introduced (Olmstead 1995). The most sigrificant
change in this modular system compared with the
fixed-head system was the introduction of a two-
piece femoral component. The femoral component
consists of a stem and a head secured together via
a locking taper mechanism. This change allowed
for three different neck lengths for each stem. The
original CFX femoral stem was made of titanium
alloy (TiAlVn) and was available in five sizes. The
head was made of cobalt-chrome and available in
three sizes. New instrumentation was also intro-
Figure 1.1  The Richards ll canine total hip prosthesis.
duced, including power reaming of the femur and
(Image courtesy of David DeYoung)
acetabulum to increase accuracy and the ease of
the procedure. Olmstead (1995) reported prelimi-
publication. Contributing factors to implant loos-
nary clinical results for 52 total hip replacements
eming that were identified included infection,
using this system. Follow-up ranged from 2
inadequate preparation of the bone prior to cement
months to 15 months (mean: 6 months) and con-
placement, undersizing of implants, and improper
sisted of owner questionnaires regarding the dogs'
positioning of the implants. Other complications
function following total hip replacement. Only
included failure of the femoral component via
two complications were reported, one luxation
bending or breakage at the stem-neck angle and
 and one iatrogenic intrapelvic hematoma causing
-lsod aaeu jou pip sdru au jo xis Auo uonexn
urethral compression, both of which were resolved
 operative complications. Four of the 20 hips were
successfully with additional surgical intervention.
eventually explanted. Of the remaining 16,
75%
In 2004, Liska reported on 730 consecutive hip
were considered to have excellent outcome.
replacements using the BioMedtrix CFX system,
Olmstead et al. (1983) reviewed 221 total hip
with a mean follow-up of 3.9 years. Complica-
 replacements over a 5-year period. Follow-up
tions included both craniodorsal and ventral luxa-
nformation was available for 216 of the cases. The
tion, infection, aseptic loosening, femur fracture,
minimum follow-up period for inclusion in the
sciatic neuropraxia, pulmonary embolism, inci-
study was 4 weeks, and of the 149 hips that were
sion granuloma, extraosseous cement granuloma,
not lost to follow-up at study completion, none
 medullary infarction, and osteosarcoma. The pro-
had an evaluation period shorter than 25 weeks.
cedure was considered successful in 96% of cases.
At the final evaluation, 91% were reported to have
The Liska study included the most comprehensive
The History of Joint Replacement in Veterinary Surgery 5
description of outcome and complications to date
et al. (1997) also reviewed aseptic loosering in 11
While several of these complications had been
total hip replacements in 10 dogs. Loosening of the
described in case reports (Roe et al. 1996; Marcellin-
femoral component occurred at the cement-
Little et al. 1999a,b; Sebestyen et al. 2000; Bergh et
implant interface at a mean of 30 months postop-
al. 2006), this large study was the most compre-
eratively. Radiographic changes associated with
hensive to date and it allowed a direct comparison
aseptic loosening included asymmetrical perios-
of the rate of all complications. The BioMedtrix
teal reaction along the femoral diaphysis, radiolu-
CFX system is discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
cent zone at the stem-cement interface, altered
The originaltotal
Ihip
0replacement femoral
implant position, and femur fracture. They found
 implants were made of stainless steel. Newer gen-
that aseptic loosening was significantly more
erations of femoral implants were made of tita-
common when the distal tip of the femoral com-
nium alloy. Titanium is resistant to corrosion and
 ponent was in contact with the cortical endosteum
is highly biocompatible, making it an attractive
than when there was no contact.
material for surgical implants. However, under
The clinical use of the PCA Canine Total Hip
certain conditions, particularly when used as a
system (Howmedica, Mahwah, NJ) was reported,
but was not commercially produced for the veteri-
tible to severe abrasive corrosive wear than stain-
nary market (DeYoung et al. 1992; Marcellin-Little
less steel or cobalt-chrome alloys (Agins et al.
et al. 1999a). However, the PCA system is consid-
1988). This is primarily associated with the elastic
ered the predecessor for the BioMedtrix BFX
modulus mismatch between cement and titanium
system. DeYoung et al. (1992) described the PCA
and the proclivity of titanium alloys to generate
implant design as well as the surgical technique
wear debris under such condition (see Chapters 3
for implantation. The femoral component of this
and 6). Lee et al. (1992) found an unusually large
system was available in four sizes, each made of
amount of metal debris in the tissues around tita-
cast cobalt-chromium alloy with porous coating at
nium alloy prostheses showing early failure as
the proximal one-third of the stem. The modular
well as larger polyethylene particles in tissues
femoral head allowed for two different femoral
fromfailed titanium alloy than from cobalt-chrome
neck lengths and to be used interchangeably with
or stainless steel prostheses. These particles lead
the stems and acetabular components. The acetab-
to wear debris, which stimulates macrophage
ular component was a cast cobalt-chromium alloy
recruitment and cytokine release and result in
with a backing of three layers of beads and an
bone resorption and, therefore, aseptic loosening
ultrahigh-molecular-weight polyethylene insert.
(Goldring et al. 1983).
Two polyethylene insert depths were also avail-
Uncemented total hip replacement techniques
able. Both the acetabular and femoral components
have been developed to avoid the use of cement,
which, despite improvements in cementing tech-
by porous bone ingrowth. A preliminary study
niques, continues to be implicated in irreversible
was done on 60 experimental hips followed by 40
 infections and aseptic loosening (DeYoung et al.
clinically affected hips in 32 client-owned dogs.
1992; Marcellin-Little et al. 1999b). Skurla et al.
The overall success rate for the 100 total hips was
(2005) investigated aseptic loosening in 38 total
98%. There were six complications including three
hip replacements from 29 client-owned dogs. The
luxations, two fissure fractures of the femur, and
duration of implantation ranged from 8 months to
one displacement of the acetabular component
 over 11 years and all were postmortem retrieval
sdq au jo om Aquo Suonsod iadondui on anp
specimens. Nine of the femoral components were
were eventually explanted. Marcellin-Little et al.
 grossly loose and 15 were mechanically loose, for
du [eion aanoasuon 0g uo paioda1 (q6661)
 a total of 63.2% loose implants. Stem loosening
replacements in 41 dogs. Mean long-term follow-
 occurred more commonly at the cement-implant
up was 63 months. Radiographically, all cups and
interface than at the cement-bone interface. No
stems had bone ingrowth fixation and no evidence
significant difference was found in loosening rates
 of osteolysis, late stem subsidence, or cup tilting.
for implants retrieved in the short term (defined
At the long-term follow-up, 74% of hips had
as less than 3 years) and in the long term. Edwards
normal function. Of those with abnormal function,
6Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
three had luxations and the remainder had unre-
lated problems causing abnormal hind limb gait.
The Zurich Cementless Total Hip Replacement
system (Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland) has been
available since the late 1990s (Guerrero and Mon-
tavon 2009). In this system, the femoral compo-
nents are made of titanium and titanium alloy and
the acetabular component is lined with ultrahigh-
molecular-weight polyethylene. The femoral stem
in this system is anchored to the medial cortex of
the femur with locking screws. This design is
intended to decrease complications resulting from
subsidence, as well as micromotion at the bone-
implant interface. Stress shielding of the bone is
also meant to be minimized.? This prosthesis is
discussed in detail in Chapter 7. The BioMedtrix
 d ln p  s ss xi
ment system designed to be interchangeable with
the BioMedtrix CFX system. It was commercially
introduced in 2003. The femoral and acetabular
components of the BFX system are press-fit and
designed to allow porous ingrowth for long-term
stability. This prosthesis is discussed in detail in
Chapter 7.
The dog has been used as a model for human
du reon 'sapesap rog luaandan du ro
replacement in the dog as a model for the
   r siss   poa
Figure 1.2 The Gorman total hip prosthesis was used
first reported in 1957 (Gorman 1957). Gorman
in canine patients as a model for human total hip
implanted a cementless, stainless steel prosthesis
replacement. (Image courtesy of David DeYoung)
 in over 50 dogs. The acetabular component was
stabilized using three toggle bolts and the
implants; however, no mechanical testing was per-
femoral component was simply inserted into the
formed in this study to evaluate the strength char-
femoral canal without fixation, although the first-
acteristics of the implants. All of the animals
 generation stem was transfixed to the medullary
walked without functional deficits and all femoral
canal (Figure 1.2). The femoral head was retained
 stems and acetabular cups were stable at 6 months 
within the acetabular component by a retaining
postoperatively.
rim to prevent luxation. The author reported gen-
Gitelis et al. (1982) studied the effects of weight
erally positive results.
bearing on the bone-cement interface in cemented
Chen et al. (1983) performed total hip replace-
total hip replacements in two groups of six
ment in 13 dogs. The cementless femoral compo-
dogs. A cobalt-chrome femoral component and
nent was square in cross section and with
a
ultrahigh-molecular-weight polyethylene acetab-
titanium core and a 2-mm outer layer of unalloyed
ular component were implanted using acrylic
50% fiber titanium composite. Seven dogs were
cement. In one group, immediate weight bearing
implanted with a cementless acetabular compo-
with unrestricted activity was allowed, while in
nent of ultrahigh-molecular-weight polyethylene
the second group amputation distal to the knee
and a cylindrical outer surface, coated with unal-
was performed in order to prevent weight bearing.
loyed titanium fiber. The remaining six dogs were
Three of the dogs in the weight-bearing group had
 implanted with cemented acetabular components.
Bone ingrowth occurred in all porous-coated
nated from the study and replaced with three new
The History of Joint Replacement in Veterinary Surgery 7
dogs. Endosteal bone remodeling with a fibrous
preparation. Robotic preparation resulted in a
membrane located between the endosteal surface
higher implant-bone contact than manual prepa-
of the bone and cement was found in both weight-
ration and resulted in no fissures or cracks.
bearing and nonweight-bearing dogs. The study
found that early postoperative weight bearing was
not a factor in bone remodeling at the bone-
Total elbow replacement
cement interface and surrounding bone.
Dowd et al. (1995) investigated the role
of
The first clinical case of total elbow replacement
implant motion, titanium alloy, cobalt-chrome
in small animals was reported in 1964 (Whittick
alloy, and polyethylene particles in the process of
et al. 1964). A custom-manufactured, hinged, con-
osteolysis and aseptic loosening. Forty dogs had
strained stainless steel prosthesis was implanted
total hip replacements and were assigned to the
in a cat with comminuted fractures of the distal
control group or one of five experimental groups.
humerus and proximal radius and ulna. Due to
The control group had a standard prosthesis
inherent constraints of the implant design the cat
implanted. The prosthesis was modified for the
 had limited range of motion of the elbow postop-
experimental groups to create a motion model,
eratively, but the results were considered accept-
 a gap model, and three particulate debris models
able. Three months postoperatively, the cat was
(a titanium model, a cobalt-chrome model, and a
estimated to use its leg at S0% of normal function
high-density polyethylene model). Two dogs had
and was able to resume its normal activities,
intraoperative femur fracture during implantation
including running and climbing trees.
 and were excluded from the study. One dog had
Unlike total hip replacement and total knee
a postoperative luxation, underwent open reduc-
replacement, there isno comparable human model
tion, and remained in the study. All dogs had a
for
 elbow osteoarthritis in dogs. In addition,
s  s     
the elbow presents the additional challenge of
After 12 weeks, the femurs were harvested. All
being a three-bone joint, with the inherent risks
control implants were stable with no obvious
this poses to implant loosening. Nevertheless,
motion between the implant and bone. All of the
the high incidence of end-stage elbow osteoar-
experimental implants had some degree of motion
thritis in dogs with relatively few treatment
and the femoral prosthesis was easily separated
options has encouraged several groups to work
from the femur. Histological and biochemical
toward total or partial elbow (unicompartmental)
assessment of the periprosthetic tissues from the
replacement.
Since the late 1990s, a constrained hinged
thetic tissue with low levels of biochemical activ-
system, a four-component nonconstrained system,
ity. In contrast, assessment of the motion group as
and a semiconstrained system have been designed,
well as all three particulate debris groups showed
tested, and abandoned prior to publishing any
 increased numbers of macrophages as well
as
results due to high complication rates (see Chap-
increased levels of biochemical mediators of bone
ters 11 and 12; Conzemius 2009). The TATE Total
resorption consistent with osteolysis.
Elbow (BioMedtrix) consists of a preassembled,
Among the most interesting uses of the canine
prealigned combined humeral  and  radioulnar
a sm jaadan d ron ty rg lpo
implant. Preliminary trials using the TATE Total
use of Robodoc, an industrial robot adapted for
Elbow were reported by Acker and Van Der
used in surgery (Paul et al. 1992). The purpose of
Meulen in 2008. The system was implanted in six
this study was to determine whether robotic prep-
client-owmed dogs with elbow pain secondary to
aration of the femoral canal would
result in
 end-stage osteoarthritis.? Complications included
improved implant-bone contact and fewer intra-
 an epicondylar fracture with pin migration, ulnar
operative cracks or fissures compared to hand
 nerve transection, and implant malpositioning
broaching for a cementless total hip prosthesis.
with a humeral crack. At the time of the report,
The clinical portion of this study included 25
none of the dogs had required explantation.
canine patients with robotic femoral canal prepa-
The TATE
 prosthesis is discussed in detail in
ration and 15 patients with manual femoral canal
Chapter 12.
8Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
The BioMedtrix (Iowa State) Canine Elbow has
translational stability. Four of the six dogs regained
been used clinically for more than 10 years. Conze-
 normal function in the leg, including the ability to
mius and colleagues initially reported on its use in
run and jump without lameness or gait abnormal-
six normal dogs in 1998 and again in 2001. The
ity. Of the two with residual deficits, one had a
-deus paauan e sem aisss adonond 8661
pronounced lameness and the other ambulated
semiconstrained system that yielded suboptimal
with the leg externally rotated. Four dogs were
results, with loosening of the radioulnar compo-
explanted, one each at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. All
nent in five of six dogs (Conzemius and Aper
four had loosening of the tibial component. Sig-
1998). The system was modified to an uncon-
nificant bony proliferation was present and a thin
strained, cemented, two-component system con-
layer of fibrous tissue was present between the
sisting of a stainless steel humeral component and
implant and the bone, suggesting micromotion
ani
ultrahigh-molecular-weight
polyethylene
during loading with eventual loosening. None of
radioulnar component (Conzemius et al. 2001).
the four had loosering of the femoral component;
Three of six dogs in the later report had excellent
however, there was substantial bone remodeling
results, with normal use of the operated limb 1
present. The authors concluded that the stability
year after surgery (Conzemius 2009). Modifica-
 of the femoral implants was a positive achieve-
tions to the BioMedtrix elbow were made based
ment and that further changes to both components
on these results, and the system was implanted in
were needed. Turner et al. (1989) evaluated bone
 20 client-owned dogs with severe radiographic
ingrowth into a porous-coated tibial component
elbow osteoarthritis and daily lameness:
from
of a canine total knee replacement model. An
elbow pain unresponsive to medical management
umconstrained total condylar-type prosthesis was
(Conzemius et al. 2003). The revised system was
designed to model the available human prostheses
 still an unconstrained, cemented, two-component
 and implanted in six dogs. The cobalt-chromium
system made from the same materials as previ-
alloy
femoral component was textured with
cobalt-chromium alloy beads and cemented in
design are described in detail in Chapter 12.
place. The tibial component was composed of an
ultrahigh-molecular-weight polyethylene articu-
lar surface bonded to a 1-mm-thick perforated
Total knee replacement
titanium reinforcement plate and 2-mm-thick pad
 of 50% dense fiber porous metal composite with
Dogs have been used as preclinical models for
three cylindrical pegs. These pegs, along with a
human total knee replacement for over 30 years
caudal screw, provided the initial stabilization
(Bobyn et al. 1982; Turner et al. 1989; Summer et al.
for the tibial implant. After 6 months, extensive
- ()  1a 1     
bone ingrowth was identified in all six tibial
 gated biological fixation in a canine total knee
components. Fibrous tissue ingrowth was present
prosthesis in six beagle dogs. A custom-desigmed,
in the areas of the pad that did not have bone
unconstrained prosthesis with a wide bearing
ingrowth, suggesting that there was either a
surface and a single radius of curvature was
gap present at implantation or postoperative
selected in order to facilitate fabrication and surgi-
relative motion between the implant and bone.
cal implantation. The cobalt alloy femoral compo-
Unlike the Bobyn study, bony proliferation was
nent had a porous-surfaced central stem with two
not present in the dogs in this study. The authors
small pins on either side to provide immediate
 concluded that precise attention to surgical tech-
rotational and translational stability. The tibial
nique to create intimate contact between the
component was made of ultrahigh-molecular-
implant and bone, as well as implant design modi-
weight, high-density polyethylene with a pentag-
fications to decrease the incidence of implant-bone
onal projection at the base and a central stem with
 relative motion, would be needed to improve the
V-shaped circumferential grooves allowing for
results for clinical total knee replacement. The
tissue ingrowth. The keel at the base was designed
development of jigs and cutting guides has
to fit into a similarly shaped recess in the tibial
improved the precision, and thus the fit, of knee
plateau in order to provide rotational
and
prostheses
The History of Joint Replacement in Veterinary Surgery 9
Canine total knee replacement in a clinical
 3. Acker R, Van Der Meulen G. TATE Elbow preliminary
setting is still relatively new. In 2007, Liska et al.
trials. In: Proceedings of the 35th Annuat Conference of
described the use of a custom total knee replace-
the Veterinary Orthopedic Society. Big Sky, MT, 2008.
ment in a dog with a nonunion of the medial
femoral condyle. The cobalt chrome femoral com-
ponent and ultrahigh-molecular-weight polyeth-
References
ylene tibial component of the BioMedtrix system
(Canine Total Knee, BioMedtrix) were used along
Agins HJ, Alcock NW, Bansal M, et al. Metallic wear in
with a titanium and porous tantalum augment to
failed titanium-alloy total hip replacements. J Bone
the femoral component to address the femoral
Joint Surg Am 1988;70:347-356.
bone defects present. The outcome in this case was
Allen MJ, Leone KA, Lamonte K, et al. Cemented total
knee replacement in 24 dogs: Surgical technique, clini-
successful. Seventeen months postoperatively, the
dog had returned to his normal activities, includ-
cal results, and complications. Vet Surg 2009;38:
 ing moose hunting, with lameness occurring only
555-567.
Bergh MS, Gilley RS, Shofer FS, et al. Complications and
after strenuous exercise (see Chapter 14). The
radiographic findings following cemented total hip
BioMedtrix Canine Total Knee system that is cur-
replacement: A retrospective evaluation of 97 dogs.
rently commercially available is a modular hybrid
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2006;19:172-179.
press-fit and cemented system. This prosthesis is
Bobyn JD, Cameron HU, Abdulla D, et al. Biologic
discussed in detail in Chapter 10.
fixation and bone modeling with an unconstrained
canine total knee prosthesis. Clin Orthop Relat Res
1982;166:301-312.
Chen PQ, Turmer TM, Ronnigen H, et al. A canine
Conclusion
cementless total hip prosthesis model. Clin Orthop
Relat Res 1983;176:24-33.
Conzemius MG. Nonconstrained elbow replacement in
Regardless of the joint being replaced, continued
dogs. Vet Surg 2009;38:279-284.
 progress in the arena of joint replacement for com-
Conzemius MG, Aper RL. Development and evaluation
 panion animals will require a consistent means of
of semiconstrained arthroplasty for the treatment of
outcomes assessment. Further, the need
for
elbow osteoarthritis in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop
improvement will only be recognized by a critical
Traumato1 1998;11:54a.
Conzemius MG, Aper RL, Hill CM. Evaluation of a
evaluation of outcomes, and what is meant by a
"successful" or "unsuccessful" outcome. A low
study in normal dogs. Vet Surg 2001;30:11-20.
revision rate does not equal a high success rate,
Conzemius MG, Aper RL, Corti LB. Short-term outcome
unless it is clear to the reader that the prostheses
after total elbow arthroplasty in dogs with severe,
are functioning at the level expected. We antici-
naturally occurring osteoarthritis. Vet Surg 2003;32:
pate that, in the future, validated joint scores will
545-552.
be a key component of the decision making for
DeYoung DJ, DeYoung BA, Aberman HA, et al. Implan-
patients with severe joint disease and the outcome
tation of an uncemented total hip prosthesis: Tech-
nique and initial results of 100 arthroplasties. Vet Surg
assessment of total joint prostheses
1992;21:168-177.
Dowd JE, Schwendeman LJ, Macaulay W, et al. Aseptic
loosening in uncemented total hip arthroplasty in
Endnotes
a canine model. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1995;319:
106-121.
Edwards MR, Egger EL, Schwarz PD. Aseptic loosening
 1. Liska WD. Cemented total hip replacement: Experi-
of the femoral implant after cemented total hip arthro-
ence in USA with the BioMedtrix prosthesis. In: Pro-
plasty in dogs: 11 cases in 10 dogs (1991-1995). J Am
ceedings of the Pre-congress of the European Society of
Vet Med Assoc 1997;211:580-586.
Veterinary Orthopaedics and Traumatology. Munich,
Gitelis S, Chen PQ, Andersson GBJ, et al. The influence
Germany, 2004.
of early weight-bearing on experimental total hip
2. Tepic S, Montavon PM. Concepts of cementless
arthroplasties in dogs. Clin Orthop Relat Res
Zirich prosthesis. In: Proceedings of the Pre-congress of
1982;169:291302.
the European Society of Veterinary Orthopaedics and
Goldring SR, Schiller AL, Roelke M, et al. The synovial-
Traumatology. Munich, Germany, 2004.
like membrane at the bone-cement interface in loose
10Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
total hip replacements and its proposed role in bone
with total hip
 arthroplasty in a dog. Vet Surg
lysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1983;65:575-584.
1999b;28:54-60.
Gorman HA. A new prosthetic hip joint; experiences in
 Olmstead ML. The canine cemented modular total hip
its use in the dog, and its probable application to man.
prosthesis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995;31:109-124.
Mil Med 1957;121(2):91-93.
Olmstead ML, Hohn RB, Turner TM. A five-year study
Guerrero TG, Montavon PM. Zurich cementless total hip
of 221 total hip replacements in the dog. J Am Vet Med
replacement: Retrospective evaluation of 2nd genera-
Assoc 1983;183:191-194.
tion implants in 60 dogs. Vet Surg 2009;38:70-80.
Paul HA, Bargar WL, Mittlestadt B, et al. Development
Hoefle WD. A surgical procedure prosthetic total hip
of a surgical robot for cementless total hip arthro-
replacement in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 plasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1992;286:57-66.
1974;10:269-276.
Roe SC, DeYoung D, Weinstock D, Kyles A. Osteosar-
Lee JM, Salvati EA, Betts F, et al. Size of metallic and
Ss i ise d r ae s  
polyethylene debris particles in failed cemented total
1996;25:70-74.
hip replacements. J Bone Joint Surg
1992;74-B:
Sebestyen P, Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung BA. Femoral
380-384.
Leighton RL. The Richard's Il canine hip prosthesis.
arthroplasty. Vet Surg 2000;29:227-236.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1979;15:73-76.
Skurla CP, Pluhar GE, Frankel DJ, et al. Assessment of
Lewis RH, Jones JP. A clinical study of canine total hip
the dog as a model for human total hip replacement.
arthroplasty. Vet Surg 1980,9:20-23.
J Bone Joint Surg Br 2005;87:120-127.
Liska WD, Marcellin-Little DJ, Eskelinen EV, et al.
Sumner DR, Berzins A, Turmer T, et al. Initial in vitro
stability of the tibial component in a canine model of
condylar bone 1oss. Vet Surg 2007;36:293-301.
cementless total knee replacement. J Biomechanics
Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung BA, Doyens DH, et al.
1994;27(7):929939.
Canine uncemented porous-coated anatomic total
Turmer TM, Urban RM, Sumner DR, et al. Bone ingrowth
hip arthroplasty: Results of a long-term prospective
into the tibial component of a canine total condylar
evaluation of 50 consecutive cases. Vet Surg 1999a;28:
knee replacement prosthesis. J Orthop Res 1989;7:
10-20.
893-901.
 Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung DJ, Thrall DE, Merrill CL.
Whittick WG, Bonar CJ, Reeve-Newson JA. Two unusual
Osteosarcoma at the site of bone infarction associated
orthopaedic prostheses. Can Vet J 1964;5:56-60.
2
Implant Materials: Structural
Simon C. Roe
Selecting the best metal for a joint prosthesis is a
used for the implant systems currently available
very complex decision. There is considerable
in the veterinary market.
history in both human and veterinary prosthesis
 production that supports the "classic" choices, but
new metals and manufacturing techniques, com-
General metallurgy
bined with new design concepts, can lead to inno-
vative approaches. The final choice will be dictated
by balancing design, metallurgy, manufacturing.
There are a number of metals commonly used for
biological, and economic factors. This balance
hip implants. Most of the metals that have become
 requires input from specialists in the many aspects
common in the medical field were developed for
of the process. In this chapter, the principles
the aerospace, marine, or chemical industries. As
associated with metallurgy and manufacturing
they were developed and refined, and the various
will be summarized. The common metals used in
aspects of their physical and chemical properties 
joint prostheses—stainless steel, cobalt-chromium
were understood, they were evaluated for medical
alloys, titanium and its alloys-will be covered.
use. Their desirability was dependent on the
The information in these sections is a summary
intended use. For joint prostheses, the important
from a number of texts on biomaterials, metals,
factors are as follows:
and joint replacement fundamentals (Crownin-
shield and Anderson 1985; Lemons 1991; Helsern
1.
Mechanical
properties: strength, modulus,
and Breme 1998; Leng 2006; Wright and Maher
ductility, hardness, fatigue resistance
2007). A brief review of tantalum, a newer metal
Biological properties: corrosion  resistance,
2
Xeu jeu sasausond juel ueumny u pasn Suaq
biocompatibility, toxicity of elements and par-
become more available in the veterinary field, is
ticulates released
 included. The chapter concludes with a descrip-
Manufacturing
processes:
cast,
tion of the materials and processing techniques
 machined, surface treatments, coatings
Adoances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
11
12 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
4.
Business considerations: cost and availability
manipulations of the microstructure, and surface
of materials and manufacturing cost
treatments.
Moderately complex shapes can be formed by
Metals and their alloys have a very closely
investment casting. A wax mold of the part is
packed structure, with strong multidirectional
covered with ceramic slurries to build a heat-
bonds, which impart their strength. At a nano-
resistant cast. The wax is melted and the cavity
structural level, 70%-75% of the volume is filled
filled with molten metal. The rate of cooling is
with atoms.
.The multidirectional bonds also
 controlled to optimize grain size but prevent gas
convey to metals their ability to plastically deform.
retention voids from forming.
The bonds are able to "flow" within the structure
Forging involves heating the metal precursor
with little loss of strength. Alloys are made by
 and then pressing it into its shape using a mold
combining elements within the primary metal
 and a large amount of force. For a femoral stem,
molecules. These additional elements are added
this may involve a series of molds that progres-
to improve the physicochemical properties so
sively build on the complexity of the part until it
that the final "solution" can meet the desired
has reached its desired shape. Because heat and
design criteria. The specific roles of the alloying
pressure are combined, the grain size is often
elements will be presented for each of the metals
reduced, and the final part will be stronger than
discussed.
 one formed by investment casting.
Many of the mechanical and biological proper-
Many of the metals that are suitable for joint
ties are influenced by the manufacturing process.
implants are very difficult to machine because
 Metals start in molten form and, through various
they are very hard, and become harder as they are
processes, end up as solid implants. The first
"worked." As such, usually only small or simple
step—transitioning from liquid to solid—is
san
shapes are produced by machining. Computer-
important factor for the final properties. As the
a pasea a aau saisas pao
metal cools, crystals form and coalesce to form
capability for producing more complex shapes.
 grains. The strength and fatigue properties of the
These systems are also used to finish parts that
 azis un a sa Aq paua aq un lea
were primarily formed by casting or forging.
stays smal. This is influenced by the rate of
A number of techniques have been developed
cooling—generally, the more rapid the cooling, the
to improve the mechianical properties of metals
smaller the grain size—and by the relative sizes
both prior to forming the part and afterward. Hot
 and affinities of the atoms of the composing ele-
working involves heating the metal to near-
ments. There are a number of ways in which the
 melting and extruding it into a basic form. Forging
atoms can arrange themselves, which results in
is a type of hot working. These processes aim to
different phases within the microstructure. These
 reduce grain size and internal stresses but they do
can be beneficial (e.g., chromium in steel) or det-
not change strength and hardness. After process-
rimental (e.g., carbon in steel), so the concentra-
ing, annealing is used in a similar fashion. The
tions must be well controlled. Impurities often end
 part is heated and the rate of cooling controlled to
up at the grain boundaries, and can influence 
optimize microstructure. Hot isostatic pressing
crack propagation and corrosion.
(HIP'ing) is frequently used to consolidate voids
in cast products, particularly Ti alloys. The metal
'uiod Suau sh molaq isnf on paeay st ed
Fabricating shapes
m stu pandde (ue oooi<) samssand yiu pue 
increase the fatigue life and corrosion resistance of
There are several methods for creating metal com-
the part.
ponents. The appropriate approach for a particu-
 Cold working of metal involves rolling or
lar component will be influenced by the complexity
 drawing bulk material to reduce its dimensions
of the shape, the desired mechanical properties,
without heating. The grain size is reduced and the
the preferred metal or alloy, the number of parts
microstructure is made more uniform. This process
needed, and the costs of processing. The steps
will increase the yield strength and reduce ductil-
 include forming the desired shape, postprocessing
ity. It is used most frequently with stainless steel,
Implant Materials: Structural  13
a metal that is not frequently used in joint
by etching the finished implants in a strong nitric
prostheses.
acid bath. The chromium also helps stabilize the
ferritic phase elements. However, medical-grade
stainless steel is in the austenitic phase, which the
Adding porous coatings
nickel helps stabilize. This imparts better mechan-
ical properties and corrosion resistance. It is
The primary forms of porous coating are beads
important that carbon levels are kept low as higher
 and fiber wire /mesh. Adding porous coatings can
levels result in an altered grain structure and vari-
affect the overall implant mechanical properties.
able chromium distribution, making the material
These are usually hand applied to the implant
more prone to corrosion-related fracture. All stan-
surface and adhered by sintering or diffusion
dard implants, other than wire, are machined from
bonding. Sintering involves heating the coating
stock that has been cold worked to increase the
and part to 90%-95% of its melting temperature so
yield and tensile strengths. The amourt of cold
that the coating material bonds strongly with the
working is selected so that the material retains
 base material. However, this can result in growth
some ductility.
 of the grains of the microstructure, resulting in a
reduction of the yield and tensile strength of the
part. Also, if there are impurities, they may melt
Cobalt-chromium alloy
and leave voids. This will also reduce the fatigue
resistance. Diffusion bonding is another method
Cobalt-chromium alloys are commonly used for
used to bond the porous coating to the base part.
joint prostheses because they have very high
It uses less heat and adds sigmificant pressure to
strength and fatigue resistance. The most usual
promote a strong bond. This results in less effect
alloying elements are chromium (27%-30%),
on the base metal. Porous coatings also cause a
molybdenum (5%-7%), and nickel (2.5%). If the
stress concentration, or notch effect at the points
parts are formed by investment casting, the mate-
where they attach to the part, which reduces the
rial is defined by the ASTM F75 standard. HIP'ing
fatigue life of the implant. More details about
can be used to reduce grain size and improve
porous coatings and bone ingrowth and ongrowth
mechanical properties.
are provided in Chapter 3.
Components can also be made by forging.
The nitrogen levels in the alloy are increased
to strengthen the material. This alloy and its
Metals used for implant fabrication
processing are defined by the ASTM F799
standard. This method of fabrication results a
Stainless steel
reduced grain size and thus, the yield and tensile
strengths are double that of ASTM F75, and ductil-
Stainless steel is not used in prosthesis parts as it
ity is 50% greater. Similar to stainless steel, chro-
is not strong enough, nor does it have ideal fatigue
mium imparts corrosion resistance by passively
properties. It is, however, used in many orthope-
forming an oxide layer on the surface. Because the
dic applications and in the management of com-
material is so hard, it is difficult to machine.
plications associated with joint replacement. In
However, this feature results in very good wear
most medical applications, 316L grade 2 stainless
resistance, so it is commonly used as a prosthetic
steel is used, which is defined by the American
head component. To reduce wear of the adjacent
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) F138
polyethylene, the surface of the heads must be
standard. The alloying elements are chromium
highly polished.
(17%-20%), nickel (10%-17%), molybdenum (2%-
4%), with carbon levels specifically kept below
0.03% for the "L" designation, and minor amounts
Titanium
of manganese, phosphorus, sulfur, and silicon.
Chromium is important as it forms a surface oxide
Commercially pure (CP) titanium (ASTM F67)
thiat imparts corrosion resistance. This is enhanced
is used in some orthopedic applications as it
14 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
pue piai mol seu h 1nq 'alqneduosoiq Anaa si
this can beimproved by adding calcium-phosphate
tensile strength, so is not used in load-bearing
coatings.
components.
Tantalum has been used in reconstructive
The most popular titanium alloy is a titanium-
 surgery following tumor excision, failed or chal-
aluminum-vanadium mixture. Aluminum is at
lenging joint replacement, and complex spinal
5.5%-6.5% and vanadium at 3.5%4.5%. The
fusions in humans (Fernandez-Fairen et al. 2008;
common designation is Ti6Al4V (ASTM F136).
Patil et al. 2009; Khan et al. 2012). Some human
The alloy molecules stabilize the titanium and
impart high fatigue resistance. The modulus of
as the metal for the cup and tibial component
titanium is half that for steel and cobalt—116 GPa
(Fernandez-Fairen et al. 2008; Patil et al. 2009). The
c.f. 190GPa and 210GPa. The tensile strength is
polyethylene is injection molded so that it pene-
lower than the cobalt alloys and similar to steel.
trates into the porous metal, making a very secure
Because of the lower hardness, it is not as resistant
bond. This monobloc design means that liner
to wear, so it is not used commonly for the femoral
cannot be replaced, and if bone ingrowth occurs,
head. This material is very notch sensitive, so sites
 revision of a tantalum cup can be difficult. It is
that have extreme changes in geometry may
be
more commonly used for complicated revisions,
points of stress concentration. This may be
an
 or joint replacement in areas that underwent
issue with adding of porous coatings, so processes
radiation therapy.
eids esd se yns ,'sauoa, ssa ae je
 are preferred.
Components can be produced by forging,
Materials used in veterinary joint
casting, or machining. Strain hardening occurs
replacement systems
with cold working. Microhardening occurs during
 machining, so this approach requires considerable
There are a variety of metals used in the manufac-
care. HP'ing improves fatigue strength.
ture of joint prostheses for the veterinary market.
Concern over the possibility of vanadium toxic-
A detailed description is provided in Table 2.1.
ity has led to the development of newer alloys.
The standard BFX? (BioMedtrix Inc., Boonton,
The primary one for medical applications 
has
NJ) femoral stem is cast cobalt-chromium, with a
 niobium as the crystal stabilizing element and
sintered bead porous ingrowth surface. However,
zirconium  instead
ofvanadium.
This
alloy
recently, a machined, plasma-sprayed, titanium
(Ti13Nb13Zr—ASTM F1713) has a lower modulus
alloy stem has been made available, and is in
than, but similar strength to, Ti6Al4V.
limited clinical use. The topography of the bead
and plasma-sprayed surfaces are displayed in
Figure 2.1. The titanium stem is less stiff, particu-
Tantalum
larly in its distal tip.
The BioMedtrix prosthetic head is machined
This section was summarized from Patil et al.
from wrought cobalt-chromium, and then pol-
(2009). Tantalum is a metal that can be fabricated
 ished to a very smooth finish to reduce polyethyl-
with  porosity  and  mechanical  characteristics
ene wear
(Figure 2.2).
. The standard’ CFX
similar to bone. It is made by depositing tantalum
(BioMedtrix Inc.) stem is also cast cobalt-
onto a vitreous carbon scaffold that was created
chromium. A matte surface is created to enhance
from a polyurethane foam. The resulting pore size
bonding
with polymethylmethacrylate. Similar
range from 500 to 600 μm and the volume porosity
materials and methods are used in the manufac-
is 75%-80%. It has a modulus of 3GPa, which is
ture of the knee and elbow prostheses from
similar to that generally given for subchondral
BioMedtrix.
(2GPa) and cancellous (1.5GPa) bone. Its yield
The Helica* (Veterinary Instrumentation Ltd.,
 strength is higher than cancellous bone, enabling
Sheffield, U.K.) prosthetic femoral and acetabular
it to contribute to the strength of a construct. The
components are machined from titanium alloy,
porosity results in excellent bone ingrowth, and
and have a macro thread for initial stability. The
Table 2.1
Implant materials, manufacturing methods, and specifications for veterinary joint replacement prostheses
Manufacturing
Bone ingrowth
Cement fixation
Articular
Product
Component
Material
method
surface
surface
surface
BFX Hipd
Femoral
ASTM F75
Cast
Sintered CoCr
NA
NA
stem: CoCr
Cobalt-chrome
cobalt-
beads (250μm)
chrome
Machine taper,
hand finish
stem
Femoral
ASTM F136
Machined
 Plasma-sprayed
NA
NA
sem: Ti
Ti6Al4V EL1
titanium
titanium particles
Acetabular
cup
Shell
ASTM F1472
Machined
Sintered Ti beads
NA
NA
Ti6Al4V
titanium
(250 μm)
Insert
ASTM F648
Machined
NA
NA
16μin Ra
UHMWPE
polyethylene
xew
Femoral head
ASTM F799
Machined
NA
NA
2.0μin RA
Wrought CoCr
cobalt-
max
chrome
from
wrought bar
stock
CFX Hipd
Femoral
ASTM F75
Cast
NA
Bead blast
NA
stem: CoCr
 Cobalt-chrome
cobalt-
Matte finish
chrome
Machine taper,
hand finish
stem
ASTM F799
Machined
NA.
Bead blast
NA
Wrought
cobalt-
Matte finish
cobalt-
chrome for
 chrome
smaller
 stems (nano,
micro,
#4.*4/5.*5)
Aceta bular
ASTM F648
 Machined
NA.
 Radial and
16μin Ra
dn2
UHMWPE
polyethylene
circumferential
max
grooves
Canine Total
Femoral
ASTM F75
Cast
Sintered CoCr
If required,
4 μin Ra max
Kneed
Cobalt-chrome
cobalt-
beads (250μm)
beads would
chrome
provide
Hand finish
cement fix
 articular
surface
surface
 Tibial
ASTM F648
Machined
NA
Undersurface
16μin Ra
 all-poly
UHMWPE
polyethylene
grooves and
max
central stem
Tibial
metal-
backed tray
Tray
ASTM F75
Cast
Sintered CoCr
NA
NA
Cobalt-chrome
cobalt-
beads (250μm)
chrome
Machined
insert pocket
Insert
ASTM F648
Machined
NA
NA
16μin Ra
UHMWPE
polyethylene
max
15
Table 2.1
Continued
Manufacturing
 Bone ingrowth
 Cement fixation
Articular
Product
 Component 
Material
method
surface
surface
surface
TATE Total
Humeral
ASTM F799
Machined
Sintered CoCr
NA
4 μin Ra max
Elbow
Wrought
cobalt-
beadls (250 μm)
cobalt-
chrome
chrome
Radial-ulnar
Base
ASTM F799
Machined
Sintered CoCr
NA
NA
Wrought
cobalt-
beads (250 μm)
cobalt-
chrome
chrome
Insert
ASTM F648
Machined
NA
NA
16 μin Ra
UHMWPE
polyethylene
max
Helica Hip
 Femoral stem
ASTM F136
Machined
Sand blasted;
NA
NA
Ti6AI4V
titanium
roughness =
0.04 mm;
average porosity
35%:
Macro thread
Acetabular
cup
Shell
ASTM F136
Machined
Sand blasted;
NA
NA
Ti6Al4V
titanium
roughness =
0.04 mm; macro
thread
Insert
ASTM F648
Tampered 
NA
NA
NP
UHMWPE
Femoral head
ASTM F1586
 Machined
NA.
NA.
TiN coating*
 316L stainless
Plasma
steel
 steam
Zurich
 Femoral stem
ASTM F136
Machined
Micropeened
NA
NA
Cementless
Ti6Al4V
titanium
 Plasma sprayed 
Hipc
Screws
ASTM F136
Machined
TiN coating
NA
NA
Ti 6Al 4V
titanium
Acetabular
cup
Shell
ASTM F67
Machined
 Plasma sprayed
NA
NA
CP titanium,
titanium
grade 4
Liner
ASTM F648
Machined
NA
NA
NP
UHMWPE
 polyethylene
Femoral head
ASTM F136
Machined
NA
NA
Amorphous
and neck
Ti6A|4V
titanium
 diamond-
like
coating's
16
Table 2.1
Continued
 Manufacturing
Bone ingrowth
Cement fixation
Articular
Product
Component
Material
method 
surface
surface
surface
VI Hipd
Femoral stem
ASTM F75
Cast
NA
Alumina grit
NA
Cobalt-chrome
cobalt-
blast to
chrome
smooth finish
Machine taper,
hand finish 
stem
Acetabular
ASTM F648
Machined
NA
 Radial and
NP
cup
UHMWPE
polyethylene
circumferential
grooves
Femoral head 
ISO 5832
Machined
NA
NA
Manual
part 1
from
polish
316L stainless
stainless
steel
 steel bar
stock
Information provided by Chris Sidebotham, BioMedtrix Inc, Boonton, NJ.
Information provided by Manssur Arbabian, Innoplant, Hannover, Germany.
Information from Kyon website (http://www.kyon.ch) and Dr. Jeff Peck, FL.
dInformation provided by John Lapish, Veterinary Instrumentation, Sheffield, U.K.
eTiN: titanium nitride; hard ceramic coating to improve smoothness and wear performance.
'Amorphous diamond-like coating: hard coating to improve smoothness and wear performance.
sProduct prior to 2010 had a TiN coating.
NA: not applicable; NP: not provided.
B
Figure 2.1 Photograph of the BFX?
femoral stems. The cobalt-chromium
stem (A) has a sintered bead ingrowth
surface. The titanium stem (B) has a
plasma-sprayed ingrowth surface in the
same region. The bars are 10mm. The
insets show the beaded and plasma-
sprayed surfaces at 40x magnification.
For reference, the beads have a
diameter of 0.25 mm.
17
18Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Figure 2.2
Apparatus for polishing the femoral head
Figure 2.3 Example of a clean room for final processing
component. (Courtesy of Chris Sidebotham, BioMedtrix
and packaging of implants. (Courtesy of Chris Sidebotham,
Inc.)
BioMedtrix Inc.)
surface is sand blasted to enhance ongrowth/
References
ingrowth. The head is machined from 316L stain-
less steel, which is then coated with titanium
Crowninshield RD, Anderson PJ. Mechanical properties
nitride (TiN) to produce a very hard, wear-resistant
and  manufacturing  techniques  for  orthopaedic
bearing surface.
implants. In: Advanced Concepts in Total Hip Replace-
The Zurich Cementless Hip? (Kyon, Zurich,
ment, Harris WH (ed.). Thorofare, NJ: Slack, 1985,
pp. 179-189.
Switzerland) uses titanium alloy for the stem. It is
Fermandez-Fairen M, Sala P, Dufoo M Jr., et al. Anterior
machined, then micropeened (to improve fatigue
cervical fusion with tantalum implant: A prospective
resistance) and plasma sprayed to optimize the
randomized controlled study. Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
ongrowth surface. The screws are also titanium
2008;33:465-472.
alloy, and are coated with TiN to reduce the pos-
Helsen JA, Breme HJ. Metals As Biomaterials. West
sibility of cold welding. The shell of the cup
Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
is machined from CP titanium, grade 4, and is
 Khan FA, Rose PS, Yanagisawa M, et al. Surgical tech-
plasma sprayed. The head and neck component is
nique: Porous tantalum reconstruction for destructive
nonprimary periacetabular tumors. Clin Orthop Relat
machine from titanium alloy, and then coated with
Res 2012;470:594-601.
amorphous diamond-like carbon to create a
Lemons JE. Metals and alloys. In: Total Joint Replace-
smooth, hard, bearing surface. Earlier versions
ment, Petty W (ed.). Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1991,
of the head and neck component were coated
Pp. 21-27.
with TiN.
 Leng Y. Biomedical metallic materials. In: Introduction
The femoral stem from Veterinary Instrumenta-
to Biomaterials, Shi D (ed.). Beijing, China: Tsinghua
University Press, 2006, pp. 110-139.
tion is cast cobalt-chromium, with sand blasting to
Patil N, Lee K, Goodman SB. Porous tantalum in hip and
a smooth finish. The head is machined from 316L
knee reconstructive surgery. J Biomed Mater Res B
stainless steel and is polished to ensure low wear.
App1 Biomater 2009;89:242-251.
After the final manufacturing steps, implants
Wright T, Maher SA. Biomaterials. In: Orthopaedic basic
 are moved to a clean room for final processing
science: Biology and Biomechanics of the Musculosk-
(Figure 2.3). They are degreased, cleaned by ultra-
eletal System, 3rd ed. Einhorm TA, O'Keefe RJ, Buck-
sound, and packaged. Gamma irradiation is the
walter JA (eds.). Rosemont, IL: American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons, 2007, pp. 65-85.
standard sterilization process.
3
Implant Materials: Surface Coating
David J. DeYoung and Denis J. Marcellin-Little
Implants were developed for cementless fixation
stem have been made in an attempt to improve the
for both the acetabular and femoral components
implant-cement interface. These enhancements
in an effort to address the fixation failures with
include roughening the surface of the stem, pol-
cemented total hip prostheses. In spite of this fact,
ishing the surface smooth, and precoating the
both cemented and cementless prostheses appear
stem with polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
necessary and are widespread in veterinary appli-
The use of porous-coated devices has gained
cations mainly due to the size and breed variabil-
considerable acceptance as a method of achieving
ity of canine patients. In addition to the vast
long-term implant fixation. Over the past 35 years,
 differences in femoral bone morphology and bone
much attention has been focused on the area of
quality, the presence of advanced hip dysplasia in
surface coatings and bone ingrowth. A wealth of
most canine patients undergoing total hip replace-
knowledge has been gained, much of which was
 ment presents the veterinary orthopedic surgeon
determined using the dog as an in vivo model.
with significant challenges. While many dogs are
 Many surface coatings have been developed to
 aptly suited for press-fit cementless components,
 enhance biological fixation of these implants to
most small- and giant-breed dogs are not due to
bone, providing long-term fixation. Long-term
their femoral size and shape. They require a
fixation to bone is dependent on achieving initial
cemented femoral stem.
 stability of the implant during surgery either by
In light of a better understanding of the mecha-
 press-fit or by screw fixation. In both instances,
nisms of failure of total hip components over the
bone ingrowth and bone ongrowth are necessary
past 20 years, new implants, both cemented and
for achieving long-term stability. Much of the
cementless (press-fit and screw fixation),
have
initial stability depends on implant design and
 been developed for veterinary applications. Con-
 bone preparation; however, several newer surface
curent with the improvements in prostheses,
treatments have been shown to enhance surface
more focus has been placed on improved cement-
friction and contribute significantly to the initial
ing techniques, including better bone preparation.
stability. The most common implant surface treat-
Also, enhancements to the surface of the cemented
ments for cementless components include sintered
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
6
20 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
beads or powder, fiber metal mesh, and plasma
strength (Chang et al. 1998). A permanent bond
spray coatings. More recent developments include
would result in a motionless interface that mini-
porous metal surfaces with increased porosity and
mizes debonding, cement cracking, and cement
optimal pore sizes when compared with previous
 debris generation resulting from motion (Mohler
coatings. Other surface treatments such as bisphos-
et al. 1995; Huiskes et al. 1998). The concept of
phonates and hydroxyapatite are bioactive coat-
 precoating the stem with PMMA emanates from
 ings that affect the local environment and enhance
the fact that the interface strength between the
the process of osseointegration.
implant and the bone cement is diminished in a
surgical environment as compared with a con-
 trolled manufacturing environment. Under manu-
Surface treatment of cemented
facturing conditions, the PMMA coating can be
femoral stems
applied to the implant following meticulous prep-
aration of its surface and at temperatures condu-
Roughened surface, PMmA precoated,
cive to the curing process (Raab et al. 1982). At the
and smooth polished surface
time of surgical implantation, the unreacted
monomer in the bone cement may soften the
Surface treatment of cemented femoral compo-
surface layer of the PMMA-precoated stem, effec-
nents is a very controversial topic in implant
tively creating a level of chemical bonding between
design. Surface alterations include roughening the
the two cement applications (Raab et al. 1982).
surface by bead or grit blasting, polishing the
Alternatively, the rationale behind the smooth
surface smooth, or precoating of the stem with
 polished stem emanates from the belief that no
 PMMA. Various studies report long-term success,
 cemented stem will remain permanently bonded
as well as high failure rates, with rough and with
(Vail et al. 2003). Once debonded, the smooth
PMMA-precoated stems (Mohler et al. 1995;
tapered stem will subside into the cement mantle
Howie et al. 1998; Sporer et al. 1999; Schmalzried
and minimize the generation of cement debris
et al. 2000; Vail et al. 2003; Duffy et al. 2006; Lachie-
resulting from motion of the stem against the
-0uos jo 1eap ja13 e y8nouv (s0oz Te 1a z31m
cement (Vail et al. 2003). Clinical reports support
versy exists, it is an important issue because it
this claim (Firestone et al. 2007; Ling et al. 2009).
influences the stem fixation to bone cement, gen-
Several investigators have concluded that in the
eration of particulate cement debris, lysis of bone,
presence of a good cement mantle and good
and manufacturing cost (Mohler et al. 1995; Vail et 
cementing technique, there is little difference
al. 2003). The conflicting data reported may be
between a roughened surface stem and polished
related more to the cementing technique, in par-
stems (Shepard et al. 2000; Vail et al. 2003; Duffy
ticular defects in the cement mantle, and to patient
et al. 2006). However, others have demonstrated
selection than to the actual surface treatment
 potentially undesirable consequences of increased
(Shepard et al. 2000; Vail et al. 2003). In the end, it
surface
  roughness on  implant longevity
in
serves to emphasize the importance of the implant--
cemented stems, including rapid bone destruction
bone cement interface, including bone prepara-
following stem debonding (Sporer et al. 1999). The
 tion, proper cementing technique, the use of a
investigators concluded that if debonding of the
 stem centralizer, and appropriate handling of the
stem does occur, a stem with a smooth surface is
stem prior to insertion.
preferable (Sporer et al. 1999).
The surface treatments of roughening or pre-
coating the stem with PMMA have resulted from
the desire to achieve permanent fixation of the 
Surface treatment of cementless femoral
stem to the cement mantle. The concept of a rough-
stems and acetabular cup
ened surface is to enhance the mechanical strength
of the implant-bone cement interface (Bundy and
Sintered beads, fiber metal mesh, plasma
Pern 1987; Davies and Harris 1994). Finite element
spray, porous tantalum
analysis has predicted that bonding of the implant
to the cement will significantly reduce mantle
Cementless acetabular and femoral components
stresses well below the level of cement fatigue
depend on the ingrowth of bone into a textured
Implant Materials: Surface Coating  21
A
Figure 3.1  (A) Transverse histological section through the shaft of a canine femur with a porous-coated press-fit stem. The
section is stained with toluidine blue. The femur was collected 12 months after surgery. Struts of cancellous bones link the
endosteal surface to the stem. The cortical bone does not appear to be osteopenic or atrophic. The horizontal bar measures
5 mm. (B) Transverse histological section through the shaft of a canine femur collected 24 months ater surgery. The section
is stained with toluidine blue. Osseointegration onto and into the beaded region of the stem is visible. The horizontal bar
mea sures 1 mm.
surface for long-term stability (Figure3.1; Cameron
Fortunately for veterinary orthopedic surgery.
et al. 1976; Bobyn et al. 1980; Cook et al. 1985). This
much of the basic research on porous surfaces,
biological means of fixation requires that the initial
bone ingrowth, the ability of bone to grow across
stability of the implants be achieved through
 gaps, and the enhancement of ingrowth has been 
 press-fit or screw fixation. As in fracture fixation,
conducted in dogs using transcortical plugs as
bone contact and initial stability must be achieved
well as with total hip systems. Studies have
in order for bone growth and remodeling to occur
included both mechanical and histological evalu-
into the porous surface of the implant. Optimal
ations (Bobyn et al. 1980, 1987, 1999b; Turner et al.
 poo8 uo juapuadap st qmonaui auoq Aq uonex
1986; Jasty et al. 1993; Schiller et al. 1993).
bone contact with the porous-coated surface (Cook
Commercially available porous implants are
et al. 1988). The stability achieved by press-fit at
made of either cobalt-chromium alloy or titanium.
the time of implantation is dependent on multiple
Porous
metallic coatings consist of cobalt-
design characteristics of the implant, including the
chromium alloy or titanium spherical beads or
 geometric shape of the implant and the texture or
powder, fiber metal mesh, or porous tantalum
resistance offered by the porous surface against
applied to a solid metal substrate. The bead coat-
the bone bed. The fit and fill of the femoral stem
 ings are applied to the substrate with a binder that
in the femoral canal is important to minimize
holds the beads in place and catalyzes the surface
micromotion and subsidence (Rashmir-Raven et
fusion of the beads to each other and to the sub-
al. 1992). Gaps of 1.5-2.0 mm between the porous
strate during the sintering process, creating a
surface and the host bone can be bridged by bone,
highly interconnected system of pores (Figure 3.2).
but may require up to 12 weeks (Bobyn et al. 1981).
By altering the sintering process and the bead size,
The same applies for the acetabular component.
-soiod aumloa aseia ae pue azis anod ageraae au
The design of the implant and instrumentation, as
ity of the coating can be controlled. If the sintering
well as the bone preparation, should result in a
process results in too much particle interconnec-
press-fit free of micromotion and gaps, and be able
-ed uaamaq azis ,yoau, au Suseanu Aq An
to withstand immediate load bearing on the day
ticles, then the interconnection pore size is reduced
of surgery. Preparation of the bone bed requires
and may restrict bone ingrowth. If the intercon-
exact instrumentation and a thorough understand-
nectivity is too large, the structural strength of the
ing of the application of the instrumentation by
coating will be decreased. An average volume
the surgeon (DeYoung et al. 1992).
porosity of 30%-40% for spherical bead coatings
22 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
5 kv
X25
Imm
4005NCCVM
5kV
X25
1mm
4007NCCV
Figure 3.2 Scanning electron micrograph of sintered
Figure 3.3 Scanning electron microscopy image of the
cobalt-chromium beads covering the surface of a canine
plasma-sprayed surface of a canine BFX stem. The surface
BFX stem. Three layers of beads cover the stem. The
texture is visible. The horizontal bar measures 1 mm.
horizontal bar measures 1 mm.
represents a compromise between maintaining
 Other popular porous coatings in use include
strength of the coating and adequate pore size for
fiber metal mesh coatings, plasma sprayed, and
bone ingrowth (Haddad et al. 1987).
porous tantalum. Fiber metal mesh coatings are
A study of pore size using cobalt-chromium
fabricated to form metallurgical bonds between
alloy cylindrical plugs implanted in the femoral
the mesh wires and the substrate through a process
cortex of dogs found that a pore size of 50-400 μm
of solid-state diffusion bonding. An alternative to
 provided thebest results during mechanical testing
sintered beads or diffusion-bonded fiber metal is
at 8 weeks (Bobyn et al. 1980). In a canine study
to plasma spray coatings onto titanium (Figure
using a cobalt-chromium alloy beaded, porous-
3.3). An electric arc is used to ionize a gas, creating
 Jo azis arod aeraae ue um sisasond du paio
a plasma. Metal powder, usually titanium, is
200-250 μm and 35%-40% volume porosity, the
 sprayed through the plasma stream and melted.
same investigator reported that, histologically,
 Once the molten metal is deposited on the implant
the porous region was ingrown with bone around
it resolidifies, creating the porous surface. By
the majority of the implant circumference (Bobyn
manipulating the process, the porosity of the
et al. 1987). Using loaded porous-coated acetabular
coating can be controlled. Following the plasma
components with pore sizes of 140,
：200,
and
spray process, titanium alloy implants retain 90%
450 pμm, excellent and uniform bone ingrowth was
 of their fatigue strength, compared with less than
pue Aise ) suuou g ie soop u Aeoiooqoisiy uaas
50% for sintered beads or diffusion-bonded tita-
Harris 1988). Basically, no differences in ingrowth
nium (Bourne et al. 1994).
were seen between the groups with the various
Although
1 excellent results have been shown
pore sizes. The mean bone ingrowth for the 140-,
with all of these porous coatings, a relatively new
200-, and 450-pμm groups was 7.5%, 13.0%, and
coating material, porous tantalum, may offer some
13.3%, respectively. These studies confirmed that
advantages. Tantalum is a low-modulus metal
bone ingrowth into a wide range of pore sizes will
with excellent biocompatibility. The porous surface
occur in the dog. Biological fixation of porous-
is manufactured by chemical vapor deposition of
surfaced implants is a process influenced by a
pure tantalum into and on a vitreous carbon scaf-
variety of factors in addition to pore size, including
folding with an open-cell dodecahedron repeating
biocompatibility, implant geometry, material prop-
pattern (Bobym et al. 1999b; Levine et al. 2006). The
erties, and stability and proximity of the porous
resulting material has a resemblance to trabecular
surface to the bone, as well as postoperative
bone (Figure 3.4), and the trabecular pattern pro-
loading conditions (Turner et al. 1986).
vides the structural strength for the low-modulus
Implant Materials: Surface Coating 23
metal. The advantages offered by the resulting
of the small-pore implants yielded 18.5MPa
-%) sod aa q e apnu ainns
 minimum shear fixation strength at 4 weeks. This
80%), low modulus of elasticity (3MPa), and high
figure is higher than that obtained by the same
frictional characteristics (Levine et al. 2006). The
investigator using the same model with beaded
mean pore size of current tantalum-coated pros-
cobalt-chromium implants with similar pore sizes.
theses range from 400 to 600 μm. A transcortical
The maximum mean shear strength for the cobalt-
study in dogs investigated the extent of filling of
chromium implants at 4 weeks was 9.3MPa. The
the tantalum pores by bone using two different
difference of 9.2 MPa was sigrificant (Student's f-
pore sizes, 430 μm and 650 μm (Bobym et al. 1999a).
test; p = 0.004; Bobym et al. 1980, 1999a). These
In the small-pore cylinders, 42% of the pore space
studies document that high fixation strength
was filled with bone at 4 weeks, 63% at 16 weeks,
occurs much earlier with porous tantalum. Subse-
and 80% at 52 weeks. The large-pore cylinders
quently, 22 tantalum porous acetabular compo-
averaged 13% at2 weeks, 53% at4 weeks, and 70%
nents were implanted in 11 dogs for a period of 6
at 16 and 52 weeks. Mechanical push-out testing
months. The polyethylene was compression
molded directly into the fully porous tantalum
shell (Figure 3.5). All components were deter-
osa- noisu q aqs aq on pa
contact radiographs, and electron microscopy.
Ingrowth depth ranged from 0.2 to 2mm in all
22 acetabular components. Ingrowth was a mean
of 16.8% for all sections and 25.1% at the cup
periphery. This compares favorably with results of
cobalt-chromium beaded, porous-surfaced cups
(13.4%) and fiber metal mesh titanium porous-
coated cups (21.5%) supported with bone screw
oonsaau pana e Aq u paodan uonex
(Jasty and Harris 1988; Jasty et al. 1993). In a sepa-
rate study in dogs, similar ingrowth (12%) was
reported for a cobalt-chromium beaded, porous-
coated cup with a single fixation peg at 6 months
5 kv
X25
1mm 4009 NCCVM
(Schiller et al. 1993). In a study investigating bone
ingrowth through a perforated titanium-backed
Figure 3.4  Scanning electron micrograph of a
acetabular shell in dogs, bone ingrowth through
canine acetabular cup made of porous tantalum. The
dodecahedron structure resembles trabecular bone.
the perforations was reported to be 50%, 20%, and
The porosity of the implant is approximately 75%.
44% at 2,6, and 12 months, respectively (Lauer
The horizontal bar measures 1 mm.
et al. 2009).
1
Figure 3.5  Front (A) and back (B)
sides of a canine acetabular cup made
of porous tantalum. The bearing
surface of the cup is made of
ultrahigh-molecular-weight
polyethylene molded into the porous
tantalum shell. The cup is courtesy of
BioMedtrix (Boonton, N)).
 Regardless of the type of porous coating, other
 remote from the joint space, provided that they
factors worthy of consideration include the extent
communicate with the joint. Polyethylene has
of the stem that is porous coated longitudinally
been showm to preferentially migrate along these
 and whether or not the coating completely encir-
 smooth implant surfaces, both in long-term carine
cles the stem circumferentially. Regarding the lon-
 and human hip retrievals. Polyethylene particles
gitudinal extent of the coating, less porous coating
have been identified within histiocytes and
results in less cortical bone resorption (Engh and
-soidiad au u paesol slan jueig Apoq-uararoy
Bobyn 1988; Turner et al. 1986). The type of coating
thetic cavity, adjacent to the smooth regions of the
is less important than the extent of the coating on
stem (Bobyn et al. 1995). The migration of polyeth-
the stem (Turner et al. 1986). The current trend
ylene wear debris from the joint to the implant-
seems to be to only coat the proximal region of the
bone interface is a major cause of osteolysis and
femoral stem. Bone ingrowth into the porous
loosening of femoral stems (Kraemer et al. 1995).
surface creates a rigid interface between the bone
The migration of wear debris from the joint into
and the implant resulting in stress shielding of the
the periprosthetic cavity has been shown to be
bone. A proximal porous coating concentrates the
blocked by the ingrowth of bone into a porous-
transfer of stress during loading to the proximal
coated surface (Bobyn et al. 1995; Kraemer et al.
portion of the femur and helps preserve cortical
1995; Emerson et al. 1999; von Knoch et al. 2000).
bone surrounding the uncoupled or smooth
These studies concluded that an ingrown circum-
portion of the stem. The smooth portion of the
ferential porous coating effectively seals off the
 stem is surrounded by a periprosthetic cavity, out-
implant-bone interface from the joint space.
lined by a thin shell of trabecular bone, separated
from the implant by fibrous tissue oriented paral-
lel to the stem (Figure 3.6; Bobyn et al. 1995;
Biologically active coatings
DeYoung and Schiller 1992; Turner et al. 1986).
The periprosthetic cavity surrounding the
Hydroxyapatite, bisphosphonate,
smooth portion of the stem has been shown to
 microtexture, antibiotic, silver particles
d go u a r m e se aar
debris generated by the bearing surface and accu-
Bone ingrowth into porous surfaces has been
mulated in the hip joint. Changes in intracapsular
very successful in obtaining long-term biological
pressure can drive the debris into potential spaces
fixation of implants to the surrounding bone.
Figure 3.6 (A) Longitudinal histological section of the femoral shaft of a dog with a press-fit total hip implant. The section
was made through the smooth portion of the distal stem tip and stained with toluidine blue. The distal portion of the stem is
visible in the femoral canal and surrounded by a thin shell of bone. The space between the implant surface and the shell of
bone forms the periprosthetic cavity and is filled with fibrous tissue. (B) On the detail, longitudinally oriented fibrous tissue is
visible, filling the periprosthetic space. The horizontal bar measures 5o0 μm.
Implant Materials: Surface Coating 25
Circumstances including the age and condition of
nonporous surface, the substrate surface is rough-
the patient, loading conditions, bone defects fol-
juawuoee a aseaiou oi ougsenq io Aq paua
lowing revision, revision following infection, gaps
strength (Sun et al. 2001). Softer titanium alloys
at the implant-bone interface, micromotion, or
provide better bonding strength than does the
bone morphology may benefit from an accelerated
harder cobalt-chromium alloy (Sun et al. 2001).
rate or quantity of bone ingrowth. To address
Also, hydroxyapatite coatings can be applied
some of these issues, much interest has evolved in
directly to porous surfaces to enhance bone
the application of additional surface treatments
ingrowth into pores. The recommended thickness
to stimulate new bone formation and optimize
of plasma-sprayed coating, based on mechanical
initial implant fixation. Some of these applications
testing of transcortical titanium alloy implants in
stimulate new bone formation (hydroxyapatite,
dogs, is 50-75 μm (Wang et al. 1993).
bisphosphonates, and microtexturing),
while
Bisphosphonates are another class of biologi-
others are directed at prevention or elimination
cally active substances, or in this instance drugs,
of bacteria in the local environment in order to
that can be applied to a porous-coated surface to
facilitate fixation by bone (antibiotics and silver
 enhance bone formation and fixation (Bobyn et al.
particles) in specific instances. Hydroxyapatite,
2005, 2009; Tanzer et al. 2005). Zolendronic acid
bisphosphonates, antibiotics, and silver particles
 has received the most attention in recent investiga-
are biologically active chemicals or pharmaceuti-
tions because it is a third-generation drug and is
cals that can be bound to porous implant surfaces,
the most potent bisphosponate. Zolendronic acid
while microtexturing is an additional surface
reduces bone catabolism at the cellular level and
treatment that has the ability to enhance bone
by causing osteoclast apoptosis. Also, evidence
ingrowth by stimulating osteoblasts.
 exists that it may directly affect osteoblastic func-
Hydroxyapatite is an inorganic mineral struc-
tion (Fromigue and Body 2002).
ture that is by itself osteoconductive. It aids bone
Zolendronic acid, through its chemical affinity
formation by releasing calcium and phosphate
for calcium phosphate, chemically and physically
ions directly into the local environment surround-
bonds to hydroxyapatite-coated porous surfaces
ing the implant (van Bliterswijk et al. 1985;
(Tanzer et al. 2005; Bobyn et al. 2009). The drug is
Ducheyme et al. 1990; Beck 2003). In addition,
then delivered directly into the local environment
hydroxyapatite may become osteoinductive by
as an initial surge followed by a slower sustained
binding and concentrating serum morphogenetic
delivery over many weeks (Tanzer et al. 2005). The
proteins, facilitating osteoblastic activity (Kilpadi
targeted delivery of the drug through elution from
et al. 2001; LeGeros 2002; Porter et al. 2002). Osteo-
the surface of the implant is preferred over sys-
blasts may attach directly to the surface and release
 temic delivery that can lead to adverse remodeling
osteoinductive factors (Beck 2003; Hermida et al.
throughout the entire skeletal system. A potential
2010). Hydroxyapatite coatings on porous-coated
application of both hydroxyapatite and zolen-
implants have been shown to enhance bone
dronic acid in canine patients is during revision
 ingrowth and create a stronger interface with
 surgery where bone defects are present and the
bone, both when press-fit and in a gap model
as snonan rani aq Ae Ais -ssand
(Soballe 1993; Tisdel et al. 1994; Dalton et al. 1995).
biologically
make the
-xopay 'sop u ps ieuaaxa ue u 'os
difference between success and failure to achieve
apatite prevented the peri-implant migration of
early fixation under these circumstances or in any
polyethylene wear debris (Rahbek et al. 2001;
situation where initial press-fit stability may be
Coathup et al. 2005). Hydroxyapatite coating was
compromised.
shown to be beneficial in a canine revision model
 Manipulation of the roughness or surface topog-
(Soballe et al. 2003).
 raphy of a porous coating is an interesting concept
A coating of hydroxyapatite 
is
commonly
that offers_great potential for enhancing bone
plasma sprayed directly onto either nonporous or
ingrowth.
1. The use of acid etching is a low-cost
porous-coated surfaces of either titanium, tita-
means of creating a microtextured surface on a
nium alloy, or cobalt-chromium alloy to facilitate
geometrically complex porous coating. The advan-
bone ongrowth or ingrowth. When applied to a
tage of the acid-etched surface is that it eliminates
the possibility of debonding or dissolution. Surface
following intramedullary implantation in dogs,
roughness is described by the parameter R, the
the extent of bone ingrowth into the control rods
arithmetical mean roughness, and is often
was 15.8% ± 12.3%, while bone ingrowth into the
expressed in micrometers (μm).
microtextured surface rods was 25.3% ± 16.5%.
 The superimposition of a microtextured surface
The 60% enhancement of bone ingrowth in the
onto an existing porous-coated surface has been
acid-etched implants was significant (paired anal-
shown to increase bone formation by 60% using
ysis; p = 0.001). Studies looking at the effect of the
a canine intramedullary model (Hacking et al.
surface microtexture of titanium on osteoblastic
2003). Sintered bead porous-coated titanium rods
activity have determined that smooth implants
etched in an acid solution to create a surface
with an R, value less than 0.4 jim are generally
microtexture (R, 1.12 ± 0.72 pm) were compared
surrounded by fibrous tissue, whereas implants
with control rods with a smooth surface texture
with a R, value of 1.0-6.7 pm have a positive effect
(Ra, 0.09 ± 0.02 jum; Figure 3.7). Twelve weeks
on osteoblastic activity, resulting in bone forma-
tion (Hacking et al. 2003). Cell cultures of osteo-
blasts grown on microtextured surfaces have been
shown to increase adherence and release of osteo-
inductive factors (Bowers et al. 1992; Kieswetter
Implant-related infections that result from intra-
operative contamination or from hematogenous
spread have dev astating consequences. The ability
to protect the implant surface against bacteria and
the prevention of formation of biofilm would be
highly desirable, especially if effective against
 antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria. One poten-
tial method of preventing or mitigating peripros-
thetic infection is to render the implant surface
bactericidal. The bonding of antibiotics and the
application of a nanolayer of pure silver particles
directly onto the surface of the implant are promis-
ing options.
Several early investigations have reported on
the process and the efficacy of bonding vancomy-
cin to titanium alloy to prevent bacterial coloniza-
tion and biofilm formation in vivo (Jose et al. 2005;
Antocietal.2
2007). Vancomycin was chosen
because the chemical alteration that occurs during
the bonding process does not affect its bactericidal
properties. Also, since vancomycin acts at the bac-
terial cell wall, it is effective while remaining
bonded to the implant surface. The chemical link-
ages between the titanium and the vancomycin
extend the antibiotic away from the titanium
surface and allow it to enter the bacterial cell wall
Figure 3.7  Scanning electron micrograph of titanium
Unlike a coating that results in free release of anti-
beads used for bone ingrowth. (A) The control implants are
biotic, the titanium-bonded vancomycin was not
in an as-sintered condition. (B) The treated implants have
lost from the surface following incubation with
been etched in a boiling acidic solution, creating an
irregular surface. (Reproduced from Hacking et al. [2003|,
bacteria. During the time period of the studies, the
with permission and copyright of the British Editorial
bonded vancomycin remained active following
Society of Bone and Joint Surgery)
repeated bacterial challenges with Staphylococcus
Implant Materials: Surface Coating 27
by the simultaneous physical vapor deposition of
both silver and titanium onto a titanium substrate
(Ewald et al. 2006). The hard surface was created
to improve the mechanical properties, especially
shear due to abrasion, in a load-bearing implant-
bone interface. The surface demonstrated highly
effective antimicrobial properties and biocompat-
Figure 3.8  Electron micrograph of the surface of a
ibility in vitro. However, in this preliminary study,
silver-coated implant (HyProtectim, Bio-Gate, Nuremberg.
Germany). A SiOxCy biocompatible plasma polymer (A)
load bearing tests were not conducted to evaluate
covers silver particles (arrowheads) affixed to the stainless
the hypothesis that the hard coating would with-
steel substrate (B).
stand shear better when compared with polymer
coatings available at the time.
qureus for more than 6 weeks. The coating resisted
 Silver-based antimicrobials offer the advantage
abrasion following multiple press-fit insertions
that they are highly effective, nontoxic to cells
into the femurs of rats. Other studies have evalu-
including osteoblasts, and there are few bacterial
ated the effect of surface modification of titanium
organisms that are resistant when compared with
on the loading and release of vancomycin and
antibiotic-modified surfaces (Ewald et al. 2006).
 gentamicin out into the periprosthetic area (Radin
The mechanism of action is based on the avail-
et al. 1997; Neut et al. 2011; Swanson et al. 2011).
ability of free silver ions that bind with cellular
A surface coating process currently utilized in a
variety of medical and nonmedical applications
ing with cell membrane integrity and with energy
is the physical vapor deposition of pure silver
 production (Khalilpour et al. 2010). The mecha-
particles on the surface of materials, including
nisms of action of the silver ions make it difficult
medical devices. In an in vitro study investigating
for bacteria to acquire single point mutations.
a silver coating for use in fracture fixation devices,
silver particles 5-50 nm in diameter were applied
to a 316 L stainless steel substrate and completely
References
covered by a biocompatible plasma polymer,
SiOxCy (Figure 3.8; Khalilpour et al. 2010). The
Antoci V Jr., King SB, Jose B, et al. Vancomycin cova-
total thickness of the coating was 30-50 nm. Mois-
lently bonded to titanium alloy prevents bacterial
ture activates the silver particles to generate and
colonization. J Orthop Res 2007;25:858-866.
release silver ions that migrate through and to the
 Beck GR Jr. Inorganic phosphate as a signaling molecule
in  osteoblast(
differentiation. JCell Biochem
surface of the plasma polymer The silver ions kill 
2003;90:234-243.
the bacteria on the surface of the implant. The
Bigerelle M, Anselme K, Noel B, et al. Improvement
coating exhibited excellent antimicrobial activity
in the morphology of Ti-based surfaces: A new
when tested in vitro against Staphylococcus aureus,
process to increase inr vitro human osteoblast response.
Staphylococcus epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant
Biomaterials 2002;23:1563-1577.
Staphylococcus aureus. In an in vivo aspect of the
van Blitterswijk CA, Grote JI, Kuypers W, et al.
study, the antimicrobial activity was sustained
Bioreactions at the tissue/hydroxyapatite interface.
throughout the 28-day study duration. How long
Biomaterials 1985;6:243-251
Bobyn JD, Pilliar RM, Cameron HU, et al. The optimum
the coating remains effective beyond the 28 days
pore size for the fixation of porous-surfaced metal
could not be determined in this study. Adhesion
implants by the ingrowth of bone. Clin Orthop Relat
strength or abrasion resistance of the coating was
Res 1980;149:263-270.
assessed by screwing coated threaded external
Bobyn JD, Pilliar RM, Cameron HU, et al. Osteogenic
fixator pins into cadaveric bone and examining the
phenomena across endosteal bone-implant spaces
 explanted pins with scanning electron microscopy.
with porous surfaced intramedullary implants. Acta
No morphological changes were seen in the
Orthop Scand 1981;52:145-153.
Bobyn JD, Pilliar RM, Binnington AG, et al. The effect
coating of the explanted implants.
of proximally and fully porous-coated canine hip
Other studies have investigated the use of a
stem design on bone modeling. J Orthop Res 1987;5:
2-jm-thick titanium/silver hard coating created
393-408.
28 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Bobyn JD, Jacobs JJ, Tanzer M, et al. The susceptibility
 Techmique and initial results of 100 arthroplasties. Vet
 of smooth implant surfaces to perimplant fibrosis and
Surg 1992;21:168-177.
migration of polyethylene wear debris. Cin Orthop
 Ducheyne P, Beight J, Cuckler J, et al. Effect of calcium
Relat Res 1995;311:21-39.
phosphate coating characteristics on early post-
Bobyn JD, Stackpool GJ, Hacking SA, et al. Characteris-
operative
bone
tissue ingrowth.
 Biomaterials
tics of bone ingrowth and interface mechanics of a
1990;11:531-540.
new porous tantalum biomaterial. J Bone Joint Surg
Duffy GP, Lozynsky AJ, Harris WH. Polished vs rough
Br 1999a;81:907-914.
femoral components in grade A and grade C-2 cement
Bobyn JD, Toh KK, Hacking SA, et al. Tissue response to
mantles. J Arthroplasty 2006;21:1054-1063.
Emerson RH Jr., Sanders SB, Head WC, et al. Effect of
J Arthroplasty 1999b;14:347-354.
circumferential plasma-spray porous coating on the
Bobyn JD, Hacking SA, Krygier JI, et al. Zoledronic acid
rate of femoral osteolysis after total hip arthroplasty.
causes enhancement of bone growth into porous
J Bone Joint Surg Am 1999;81:1291-1298.
implants. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2005;87:416-420.
Engh CA, Bobyn JD. The influence of stem size and
Bobyn JD, McKenzie K, Karabasz D, et al. Locally deliv-
extent of porous coating on femoral bone resorption
ered bisphosphonate for enhancement of bone forma-
after primary cementless hip arthroplasty. Clin Orthop
tion and implant fixation. J Bone Joint Surg Am
Relat Res 1988;231:7-28.
2009,91(Suppl. 6):23-31.
Ewald A, Gluckermann SK, Thull R, et al. Antimicrobial
Bourme RB, Rorabeck CH, Burkart BC, et al. Ingrowth
titanium/silver PVD coatings on titanium. Biomed
d Aoe uin on Sunos Aeids esiid sasens
Eng Online 2006;5:22.
replacements. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1994;298:37-46.
Firestone DE, Callaghan JJ, Liu SS, et al. Total hip arthro-
Bowers KT, Keller JC, Randolph BA, et al. Optimization
plasty with a cemented, polished, collared femoral
of surface micromorphology for enhanced osteoblast
stem and a cementless acetabular component. A
responses in vitro. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants
follow-up study at a minimum of ten years. J Bone
1992;7:302-310.
Joint Surg Am 2007;89:126-132.
Bundy KJ, Penn RW. The effect of surface preparation
Fromigue O, Body JJ. Bisphosphonates influence the
 on metal/bone cement interfacial strength. J Biomed
proliferation and the maturation of normal human
Mater Res 1987;21:773-805.
osteoblasts. J Endocrinol Invest 2002;25:539-546.
Cameron HU, Pilliar RM, Macnab 1. The rate of bone
Hacking SA, Harvey EJ, Tanzer M, et al. Acid-etched
ingrowth into porous metal. J Biomed Mater Res
microtexture for enhancement of bone growth into
1976;10:295-302.
porous-coated implants. J Bone Joint Surg Br
Chang PB, Mann KA, Bartel DL. Cemented femoral stem
2003;85:1182-1189.
 performance. Effects of proximal bonding, geometry,
Haddad RJ Jr., Cook SD, Thomas KA. Biological fixation
and neck length. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1998;355:
of porous-coated implants. J Bone Joint Surg Am
57-69.
1987;69:1459-1466.
Coathup MJ, Blackburm J, Goodship AE, et al. Role of
Hermida JC, Bergula A, Dimaano F, et al. An in vivo
evaluation of bone response to three implant surfaces
migration and osteolysis around acetabular compo-
using a rabbit intramedullary rod model. J Orthop
nents. Biomaterials 2005;26:4161-4169.
Surg Res 2010;5:57.
Cook SD, Walsh KA, Haddad RJ, Jr. Interface mechanics
Howie DW, Middleton RG, Costi K. Loosening of matt
and bone growth into porous Co-Cr-Mo alloy
and polished cemented femoral stems. J Bone Joint
implants. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1985;193:271-280.
Surg Br 1998;80:573-576.
Cook SD, Thomas KA, Haddad RJ Jr. Histologic analysis
Huiskes R, Verdonschot N, Nivbrant B. Migration, stem
 of retrieved human porous-coated total joint compo-
shape, and surface finish in cemented total hip arthro-
nents. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1988;234:90-101.
plasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1998;355:103-112.
Dalton JE, Cook SD, Thomas KA, et al. The effect of
 Jasty M, Harris WH. Observations on factors controlling
operative fit and hydroxyapatite coating on the
bony ingrowth into weight-bearing, porous, canine
mechanical and biological response to porous
total hip replacements. In: Non-Cemented Total Hip
inplants. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1995;77:97-110.
Arthroplasty, Fitzgerald R (ed.). New York: Raven
 Davies JP, Harris WH. Tensile bonding strength of the
Press, 1988, p. 175.
cement-prosthesis interface. Orthopedics 1994;17:
Jasty M, Bragdon CR, Haire T, et al. Comparison of bone
171-173.
ingrowth into cobalt chrome sphere and titanium fiber
DeYoung DJ, Schiller RA. Radiographic criteria for eval-
mesh porous coated cementless canine acetabular
'ssop u juaaseidar du teiot panuaasun yo uoen
components. J Biomed Mater Res 1993;27:639-644.
Vet Surg 1992;21:88-98.
Jose B, Antoci V Jr., Zeiger AR, et al. Vancomycin cova-
DeYoung DJ, DeYoung BA, Aberman HA, et al.
lently bonded to titanium beads kills Staphylococcus
Implantation of an uncemented total hip prosthesis.
ureus. Chem Biol 2005;12:1041-1048.
Implant Materials: Surface Coating 29
Khalilpour P, Lampe K, Wagener M, et al. Ag/SiO(x)
Rahbek O, Overgaard S, Lind M, et al. Sealing effect of
-od qaue ro u laiod ed (
tion of fracture fixation devices. J Biomed Mater Res
particles. An experimental study in dogs. J Bone Joint
B App1 Biomater 2010;94:196-202.
Surg Br 2001;83:441-447.
Kieswetter K, Schwartz Z, Hummert TW, et al. Surface
Rashmir-Raven AM, DeYoung DJ, Abrams CF Jr., et al.
roughmess modulates the local production of growth
Subsidence of an uncemented canine femoral stem.
factors and cytokines by osteoblast-like MG-63 cells.
Vet Surg 1992;21:327-331.
J Biomed Mater Res 1996;32:55-63.
Schiller TD, DeYoung DJ, Schiller RA, et al. Quantitative
Kilpadi KL, Chang PL, Bellis SL. Hydroxylapatite binds
ingrowth analysis of a porous-coated acetabular com-
more serum proteins, purified integrins, and osteo-
 ponent in a canine model. Vet Surg 1993;22:276-280.
blast precursor cells than titanium or steel. J Biomed
Schmalzried TP, Zahiri CA, Woolson ST. The signifi-
Mater Res 2001;57:258-267.
cance of stem-cement loosening of grit-blasted femoral
von Knoch M, Engh CA Sr., Sychterz CJ, et al. Migration
components. Orthopedics 2000;23:1157-1164.
 of polyethylene wear debris in one type of unce-
Shepard MF, Kabo JM, Lieberman JR. The Frank Stinch-
mented femoral component with circumferential
field Award. Influence of cement technique on the
I 'sinuay S yo Apns Asdone uv :Bueos sno.od
interface strength of femoralcomponents.ClinOrthop
Arthroplasty 2000;15:72-78.
Relat Res 2000;381:26-35.
Kraemer WJ, Maistrelli GL, Formasier V, et al. Migration
Soballe K. Hydroxyapatite ceramic coating for bone
of polyethylene wear debris in hip arthroplasties: A
implant fixation. Mechanical and histological studies
canine model. J Appl Biomater 1995;6:225-230.
in dogs. Acta Orthop Scand Suppl 1993;255:1-58.
Lachiewicz PF, Kelley SS, Soileau ES. Survival of
Soballe K, Mouzin OR, Kidder LA, et al. The effects of
polished  compared
with
precoated
roughened
hydroxyapatite coating and bone allograft on fixation
cemented femoral components. A prospective, ran-
of loaded experimental primary and revision implants.
domized study. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2008;90:
Acta Orthop Scand 2003;74:239-247.
1457-1463.
Sporer SM, Callaghan JJ, Olejniczak JP, et al. The effects
Lauer SK, Nieves MA, Peck J, et al. Descriptive
of surface roughmess and polymethylmethacrylate
histomorphometric ingrowth analysis of the Zurich
precoating on the radiographic and clinical results of
cementless canine total hip acetabular component. Vet
the Iowa hip prosthesis. A study of patients less than
Surg 2009;38:59-69.
fifty years old. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1999;81:481-492.
LeGeros RZ. Properties of osteoconductive biomaterials:
Sun L, Bermdt CC, Gross KA, et al. Material fundamen-
Calcium phosphates.(
Clin
Orthop
Relat 1
Res
tals and clinical performance of plasma-sprayed
2002;395:81-98.
Levine BR, Sporer S, Poggie RA, et al. Experimental and
Res 2001;58:570-592.
clinical performance of porous tantalum in orthopedic 
Swanson TE, Cheng X, Friedrich C. Development
surgery. Biomaterials 2006;27:4671-4681.
 of chitosan-vancomycin antimicrobial coatings on
Ling RS, Charity J, Lee AJ, et al. The long-term results
titanium implants. J Biomed Mater Res A 2011,97:
 of the original Exeter polished cemented femoral com-
167-176.
ponent: A follow-up report. J Arthroplasty 2009;24:
Tanzer M, Karabasz D, Krygier JJ, et al. The Otto Aufranc
511-517.
Award: Bone augmentation around and within porous
Mohler CG, Callaghan JI, Collis DK, et al. Early loosen-
implants by local bisphosphonate elution. Clin Orthop
ing of the femoral component at the cement-prosthesis
Relat Res 2005;441:30-39.
interface after total hip replacement. J Bone Joint Surg
Tisdel CL, Goldberg VM, Parr JA, et al. The influence of
Am 1995;77:1315-1322.
 a hydroxyapatite and tricalcium-phosphate coating
Neut D, Dijkstra RJ, Thompson JI, et al. Antibacterial
on bone growth into titanium fiber-metal implants.
efficacy of a new gentamicin-coating for cementless
 J Bone Joint Surg Am 1994;76:159-171.
prostheses compared to gentamicin-loaded bone
Turmer TM, Sumner DR, Urban RM, et al. A comparative
cement. J Orthop Res 2011;29:1654-1661.
study of porous coatings in a weight-bearing total
Porter AE, Hobbs LW, Rosen VB, et al. The ultrastructure
hip-arthroplasty model. J Bone
eJoint SurgAm
of the plasma-sprayed hydroxyapatite-bone interface
1986;68:1396-1409.
predisposing to bone bonding. Biomaterials 2002;23:
Vail TP, Goetz D, Tanzer M, et al. A prospective random-
725-733.
ized trial of cemented femoral components with pol-
 Raab S, Ahmed AM, Provan JW. Thin film PMMA pre-
ished versus grit-blasted surface finish and identical
coating for improved implant bone-cement fixation.
stem geometry. J Arthroplasty 2003;18:95-102.
J Biomed Mater Res 1982;16:679-704.
Wang BC, Lee TM, Chang E, et al. The shear strength
Radin S, Campbell JT, Ducheyne P, et al. Calcium phos-
and the failure mode of plasma-sprayed hydroxyapa-
phate ceramic coatings as carriers of vancomycin.
tite coating to bone: The effect of coating thickness.
Biomaterials 1997;18:777-782.
J Biomed Mater Res 1993;27:1315-1327.
Weight-Bearing Surfaces
Jeffrey N. Peck
The study of bearing surfaces, including the fric-
cycle (mm/cycle) for simulator studies (Liver-
tion, wear, and lubrication of those surfaces, is
more et al. 1990). Despite the relatively shorter life
called tribology. A variety of bearing surfaces and
span of veterinary patients compared with human
surface coatings has been used in joint replace-
patients, annual wear rates are often accelerated
ment. The most common surfaces include plastic
in veterinary patients because of higher overall
(polyethylene), metal, and ceramic. Improvements
activity levels (i.e., increased number of cycles per
in the quality and function of these surfaces are
unit of time). Measurement of the volume of wear
geared toward the development of the ideal: low
debris, or volumetric wear, is generally deter-
friction, low wear debris generation, damage
mined by gravimetric means. Volumetric wear is
resistance, and absence of toxicity. Unfortunately,
based on the weightof the collected debris divided
progress on one front is often associated with a
by the density of the material.
setback on another front or the development of
In 2000, Dowd correlated the development of
an entirely new problem. This chapter describes
wear debris-mediated osteolysis with linear wear
the advantages and disadvantages of the most 
rates. The Dowd study found that osteolysis did
 [on u pasn saems Sueaq-uonam uoon
not occur with linear wear rates less than 0.1 mm/
joint replacement, as well as the variety of articu-
year. With linear wear rates of 0.1-0.2 mm/year,
lating combinations of currently used bearing
there was a 43% incidence of osteolysis, and with
surfaces.
linear wear rates of 0.2-0.3mm/year, the inci-
 Osteolysis secondary to wear debris is the major
dence of osteolysis increased to 80% (Dowd et al.
limiting factor in the longevity of total joint pros-
2000).
theses in people. Consequently, measurement of
wear and wear debris are used to compare among
and between different prostheses and different
Polyethylene
types of bearing surfaces. Wear is most often a
 linear measurement, either in millimeter per year 
The first widely used form of ethylene polymer
(mm/year) for clinical studies, or millimeter per
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
31
ultrahigh-molecular-weight
polyethylene
Several techniques have been utilized to both
(UHMWPE). UHMWPE works well as a low-
maintain material strength and minimize the pres-
friction surface, but is prone to generation of
 ence of free radicals in irradiated polyethylene. In
wear debris and subsequent aseptic loosening.
 one study, the polyethylene was placed at high
The generation of wear debris is accelerated by
temperature and pressure that resulted in transi-
impingement or third-body wear UHMWPE
tion to a hexagonal phase polyethylene structure.
remains the most commonly used form of plastic
This process is called high-pressure annealing
bearing surface in veterinary and human joint
pad ainns asrd-eexay aui (a)
replacements.
Hylamer is a form of UHMWPE exposed to
ene and allowed recombination of elemental
 gamma irradiation in air, and Poly II is UHMWPE
 Oxygen to nearly eliminate the free radicals (Oral
with the addition of carbon fibers. In vitro studies
et al. 2008). In addition to nearly eliminating free
suggested improved wear characteristics over
radicals, the tensile strength of the XLPE was
UHMWPE; however, both of these products had
maintained in low to moderate cross-linked speci-
inferior performance in vivo. Hylamer was found
 mens, but highly cross-linked specimens suffered
to have wear rates of 1.5mm/year, in vivo, in one
mechanical degradation. The HPA process elimi-
study (Livingston et al. 1997) and excessive eccen-
nates the need of postirradiation melting, which
tric wear in other studies (Chmell et al. 1996),
adversely affects the material properties of the
and these findings were consistent with those of
polyethylene.
many other studies. The carbon fiber-reinforced
Another method of eliminating free radicals
UHMWPE, Poly II, was introduced in the 1970s,
from irradiated polyethylene is postirradiation
but was abandoned by the early 1980s. Less surface
 melting. Melting virtually eliminates free radicals,
damage was found in materials that articulated
but decreases the crystalline content of the poly-
with Poly Ⅱ inserts, but the Poly II was more prone
ethylene and adversely affects its mechanical
to abrasion and embedding of wear debris (Medel
 properties (Lewis 2001). Tensile yield strength for
et al. 2008).
cross-linked polyethylene that was annealed
above melting temperature was lower than the
tensile yield strength for cross-linked polyethyl-
Highly cross-linked polyethylene
ene annealed below its melting temperature
(Collier et al. 2003).
Highly cross-linked polyethylene (XLPE) is a
 One additional technique for reduction of free
highly dense form of UHMWPE. Cross-linking is
radicals in irradiated polyethylene is annealing
thought to make the polyethylene more wear
the polyethylene with vitamin E, a free radical
resistant. There are various ways to achieve cross-
paoda1 ie 1a [e1o (900z le 1a [e1o) 1auaa13s
linking; however, heat and radiation are common
 good wear and material properties in vitamin
to all methods. Irradiation is provided by either
E-stabilized, highly cross-linked UHMWPE.
gamma rays or electron beams. With either method
 Both gamma and electron beam radiation result
of irradiation, oxygen, which can be found in the
 in decreased tensile strength compared with non-
polyethylene material itself, or within voids inside
irradiated UHMWPE. Loss in tensile strength is
the polyethylene structure, is transformed into
directly related to radiation dose. Overall, radia-
oxygen free radicals. The free radicals, particularly
tion doses above 5 Mrad results in decreased mate-
those within the amorphous portion of the poly-
rial toughness (Collier et al. 2003).
ethylene, lead to oxidative wear of the polyethyl-
ene. Radicals that are found within the crystalline
portion of the polyethylene are more stable;
however, the crystalline portion of polyethylene
Metal
accounts for roughly 35% of the UHMWPE struc-
ture. Oxidation caused by oxygen radicals reduces
The most common metals used as bearing surfaces
cross-linking and can lead to cracking and delami-
in totaljoint replacementinclude cobalt-chromium
nation (Collier et al. 2003).
(CoCr), stainless steel, and titanium/titanium
Weight-Bearing Surfaces33
alloy. The use of stainless steel as a bearing surface
is uncommon today.
The rate of polyethylene wear, as well as the
generation of polyethylene and metallic wear
debris, differs from metal to metal. The effect of
metallic debris on the periprosthetic tissues, as
 Well as systemic effects, also varies with the type
of metal.
There is substantial variability in the reported
rate of polyethylene wear (i.e., thinning of poly-
ethylene induced by bearing contact with metal)
with the different metals (Bankston et al. 1993;
 Pappas et al. 1995). There is also much variation
 in the volume of wear debris created by the differ-
ent metals. CoCr generates the smallest amount of
wear debris, followed by titanium and stainless
steel. However, uncoated titanium or titanium
alloys are rarely used as bearing surfaces. Weight-
 bearing surfaces of titanium implants are typically
coated with titanium nitride (TiN) or, more
recently, other hardening coatings to improve
wear performance. These surface coatings are
discussed below.
While the generation of wear debris from CoCr
implants is low, the wear particles are cytotoxic
to macrophages. The toxicity of the CoCr wear
 particles is greater than the toxicity of similarly
sized particles from titanium alloys; however, the
inflammatory reaction generated by titanium par-
Figure 4.1 Titanium nitride-coated femoral head-neck
ticles is more severe than the CoCr particles
component from an earlier generation of the Zurich
(Haynes et al. 1993). The degree of inflammation
Cementless Hip (Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland).
 and stimulation of bone-resorbing mediators (e.g.
PGE2, IL-1) may be more significant than toxicity
Additionally, free aluminum ions are potentially
 in the development of aseptic loosening.
neurotoxic. The most common coating used over
The method of fixation affects the size and
titanium or TiAlV alloys is a thin (8 pμm) ceramic
number of wear particles, as well as the roughenr-
coating of TiN (Figure 4.1). In one study, the poly-
ing of the metallic articulating surface. In general,
ethylene wear rate when UHMWPE was coupled
the size and number of particles is greatest when
with a TiN coated head was 2% of the reported
a titanium bearing surface is used with a cemented
wear rate of a CoCr head with UHMWPE (Pappas
prosthesis.
et al. 1995). However, several case series report
that TiN may be inadequate to prevent fretting
 and that TiN coating breakthrough is common
Surface coatings
(Raimondi and Pietrabissa 2000).
Another coating material
1isdiamond-like
The relatively soft pure titanium or titanium
carbon (DLC) or amorphous carbon film (Figure
alloys (titanium-6aluminum-4vanadium) are not
4.2). There are many forms of DLC (amorphous
suitable bearing surfaces without the use of pro-
 carbon, nonhydrogenated amorphous carbon, tet-
tective coating. Surface scratches, freting, and the
rahedral amorphous carbon, etc.), each with some-
development of third-party wear are common
with unprotected titanium or titanium alloy.
Lee 2007). DLC coatings have the advantages of
34 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Ceramic
Ceramic is harder than metal and produces non
reactive wear debris. However, ceramic is prone to
cracking and ceramic-on-ceramic (COC) implants
can have the undesirable side effect of audible
squeaking. The use of ceramics in orthopedic
surgery has evolved through three generations. In
first-generation ceramics, large crystals adversely
affected implant density and made ceramics more
prone  to  cracks. Second-generation ceramics
added oxides that decreased granule size and
improved the mechanical properties of the ceram-
ics (Bae and Baik 1993). Current, or third-
 generation, ceramics are processed utilizing hot 
isostatic pressing (HIP), which further reduces
 grain size and improves ceramic density (Rahaman
et al. 2007). Based on retrieval data, current pro-
cessing methods have dramatically reduced the
incidence of ceramic fracture to 0.004% (Gerd
2000).
 Ceramic acetabular components are generally
metal backed. Because of the high elastic modulus
of ceramic relative to bone, ceramic-only
or
cemented ceramic acetabular components have a
Figure 4.2  Current-generation femoral head-neck 
high incidence of loosening due to modulus mis-
component coated with amorphous diamond-like carbon
match (300 times greater than cancellous bone).
(Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland).
Due to the high elastic modulus, ceramics are
 not capable of deformation without breakage
(Hannouche et al. 2005).
Alumina is the most common ceramic used in
low friction, hardness, wear and corrosion resis-
joint replacement surgery. It is a monophasic
ceramic that is very stable, highly oxidized, and
 As with TiN coatings, results on the effectiveness 
has excellent thermal conductivity. Alumina is
of DLC in improvement of wear characteristics
also chemically and biologically inert. Further,
have been inconsistent. Femoral heads of stainless
alumina is hydrophilic, thus allowing fluid film
steel, CoCr, and TiAlV have been evaluated in
 lubrication of the prosthetic joint and reducing
wear simulators with and without DLC. DLC sig-
production of wear debris. Fluid film lubrication
nificantly improved the wear characteristics of a
is a form of hydrodynamic lubrication where both
stainless steel head, but did not significantly
 improve the wear characteristics of CoCr (Dowling
 by a layer of liquid and the liquid is load bearing.
et al. 1997; Sheeja et al. 2005). The wear character-
Fluid film lubrication dramatically decreases wear.
 istics of TiAlV heads were improved, but not sig-
Volumetric wear rates for alumina are thousands
nificantly better than other surface treatments,
 of times less than those for UHMWPE. The wear
such as thermal oxidation (TO; Dong et al. 1999).
debris that is produced is bioinert and generates
Surface treatment with TO was developed by
minimal inflammatory response (Christel 1992).
 Dong et al. and was found to decrease polyethyl-
Zirconium is a metal; however, oxidation of the
ene surface wear by a factor of 2.5. The TO surface
surface of zirconium transforms the metal into a
treatment has not made its way into widespread
zirconia ceramic surface. Oxidized zirconium has
dlinical use.
wear characteristics that appear to be consistently
Weight-Bearing Surfaces35
superior to CoCrMo. Unlike alumina, which is
 1996). Simulator-produced volumetric wear was
monophasic, zirconia is triphasic and has the 
 compared between MOM and COP prostheses
potential to transform in vivo. Yttrium is used to
 and these results were compared with historically
stabilize zirconia in the tetragonal phase. Transfor-
 reported volumetric wear rates for MOP. When
mation to another phase in vivo can result in crack
<comparing volumetric wear rates using the same
formation. Zirconia also has low thermal conduc-
diameter (28mm) head, the wear rates were
tivity, allowing for heat generation during activity
0.45 mm?/10° cycles, 6.3mm?/10° cycles, and 60-
(Hannouche et al. 2005).
180 mm? /year for MOM, COP (zirconia ceramic),
and MOP, respectively (Goldsmith et al. 2000). The
Articulations
authors of the above study comment that the total
number of particles produced by MOM articula-
tions may be greater than the number produced
In an attempt to reduce or eliminate the problem
by MOP articulations, but the particle size is much
of polyethylene wear debris, a variety of weight-
smaller. It is believed that smaller particles can be
bearing surface combinations have been devel-
 more readily transported away from the peripros-
 oped and are in clinical use. These combinations
thetic tissues and do not incite a significant inflam-
include metal-on-polyethylene (MOP), metal-on-
matory response. Studies consistently find wear
metal (MOM), metal-on-ceramic (MOC), COC,
rates of 20-100 times lower for MOM than for
and ceramic-on-polyethylene (COP). Wood, glass,
MOP prostheses (Silva et al. 2005). The Silva study
and acrylic have also historically been used as
reported an average linear wear rate of 0.004 mm/
articulating surfaces, but are not in current use
year, and their findings were similar to those
due to poor clinical performance (Pramanik et al.
reported in other studies.
2005).
 Despite an apparent improvement in wear
characteristics, MOM prostheses may be associ-
MOP
ated with other complications. There is concern
about the development of allergic reactions
(delayed-type
MOP has been the gold standard for joint replace-
hypersensitivity)
secondary
to
ment and continues to be the most common form
metallosis, as well as concerns about the possibil-
of weight-bearing articulation. The greatest persis-
ity of malignancies secondary to metallosis. A spe-
tent issue with long-term survivability of MOP
implants is aseptic loosening or osteolysis. Since
as aseptic lymphocyte-dominated vasculitis-asso-
the primary cause of aseptic loosening is the pres-
ciated lesion (ALVAL), may be responsible for
ence of wear debris, elimination or minimizing the
failure of MOM prostheses (Langton et al. 2010).
production of wear debris or eliminating the cyto-
Concerns about malignancy have not been sub-
logical reaction to wear debris has been the goal.
stantiated in modern MOM prostheses. One study
 Particle size of the wear debris appears to be the
compared serum levels of cobalt, chromium, and
 molybdenum in patients with MOM hip prosthe-
critical factor that determines
：the
cytological
ses and in patients with MOP hip prostheses.
response to wear products, with the critical size
range of 0.2-0.8 μm necessary for macrophage
Follow-up time, age, and health status were
activation (Ingham and Fisher 2000).
similar between groups. Patients with MOM pros-
thesis had significantly higher levels of cobalt and
chromium compared with the MOP group (Sava-
MOM
rino et al. 2002). A similar study by MacDonald et
al. had the same findings. Additionally, the Mac-
MOM prostheses appear to result in smaller
Donald study found that erythrocyte ion concen-
volumes and smaller particle size wear debris
trations were increasing at the latest follow-up
compared with MOP prostheses. The small parti-
and that there was no difference in outcomes-
cle size of the metallic debris generates less tissue
based clinical function (Harris Hip Score, Western
reaction and, consequently, less osteolysis sur-
Ontario and McMastersArthritis Index [WOMAC],
rounding the implant (Lee et al. 1992; Doorn et al.
and Short Form-12; MacDonald et al. 2003).
36 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Serum and urine metal levels in patients with
prostheses with alumina femoral heads and
MOM prostheses are typically several times the
UHMWPE cemented cups. Linear wear rates in
normal level (i.e., the level in healthy patients
the Urban study were 0.034 mm/year, which com-
without prostheses); however, they are below the
 pares favorably with MOP prostheses (reported
levels considered to be dangerous in industrial
range: 0.08-1mm/year). Osteolysis was not
metal workers. Local tissue levels of these metals,
present in any of the 64 implanted hips in the
conversely, can exceed toxic levels and cause
 series. Higher COP linear wear rates were reported
tissue necrosis (Cobb and Schmalzreid 2006).
 in studies using first- or second-generation ceramic
 Despite these potential issues, MOM proponents 
 implants (Sugano et al. 1995). As noted previously,
consider them the procedure of choice for young.
 first- and second-generation ceramics had high
active patients. This is particularly the case if a
failure rates due to cracking. Increased ceramic
large femoral head is used, as larger femoral heads
wear debris was due to a design flaw that led to
generate greater wear debris.
 impingement in several early prostheses. The find-
 ings of the Urban study were consistent with other
studies in which third-generation ceramic pros-
MOC
theses were implanted (Schuller and Marti 1990;
Wroblewski et al. 1996).
joint replacement. The development of MOC grew
out of concerns over cracking in COC prostheses.
COC
In a recent hip simulator study, a HIP alumina
femoral head and CoCrMo socket were tested
Compared with other bearing surface combina-
over 5 million cycles. Gravimetric analysis did not
tions, current-generation COC prostheses are
    a im  
 reported to have the best overall wear rates. Linear
topography at the pole suggested the presence of
wear rates of COC implants are reported between
wear. Additionally, frictional analysis suggested
0.001 and 0.003 mm/year (Ross and Brown 2010).
that fluid film lubrication occurred in parts of the
In addition, the wear particles that are created are
walking cycle (Williams et al. 2009). Barnes et al.
more biologically inert than MOM particles. If
compared the wear characteristic of MOM bear-
impingement is prevented by appropriate implant
 imgs of similar hardness, MOM bearings of differ-
positioning, there is minimal risk of ceramic
 ent hardness, and COM bearings. COM bearings
cracks. A single incidence of a bearing crack was
produced the least metal wear debris and like-
reported in a large case series, with an overall
hardness MOM produced the greatest amount of
 incidence of 0.54%. The single case was actually a
metal wear debris. The Barnes study also found
revision and had a trochanteric nonunion that
 increased the risk of impingement (Murphy et al.
that, in general, differential-hardness bearings
produce less damage and less surface wear than
 2006). Similar findings were reported in a study
bearings of similar hardness (Barnes et al. 2008).
with a minimum 18.5-year follow-up (Hama-
 douche et al. 2002). Similar to MOM proponents,
This study further found that the harder the
femoral head, the lower percentage of wear debris
proponents of COC implants advise COC joint
that was produced by the femoral head; thus,
replacements for young, active patients. Reports
ceramic femoral heads contributed the least to
 of "squeaking" are inconsistent and the incidence
is unclear.
wear debris production. The benefits of differen-
tial hardness appear to hold true only if the femoral
head is harder than the acetabular liner.
References
Bae SI, Baik S. Sintering and grain growth of ultrapure
COP
alumina. J Mater Sci 1993;28:41974204.
Barnes CL, DeBoer D, Corpe RS et al. Wear performance
Urban et al. (2001) performed long-term follow-up
 of large-diameter differential-hardness hip bearings.
(average: 18 years) on patients with total hip
J Arthroplasty 2008;23(6):56-60.
Weight-Bearing Surfaces 37
Bankston AB, Faris PM, Keating EM et al. Polyethylene
total hip replacements. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1992;
wear in total hip arthroplasty in patient-matched
74:380-384.
 groups: A comparison of stainless steel, cobalt chrome
Lewis G. Properties of cross-linked UHMWPE. Bioma-
and  titanium-bearing surfaces. J Arthroplasty
terials 2001;22:371-401.
1993;8(3):315-322.
Livermore J, Ilstrup D, Morrey B. The effect of femoral
Chmell MJ, Poss R, Thomas W et al. Early failure of
head size on wear of the polyethylene acetabular com-
Hylamer acetabular inserts due to eccentric wear.
ponent. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1990;72:518-528.
J Arthroplasty 1996;11(3):351-353.
Livingston BJ, Chmell MJ, Spector M et al. Complica-
Christel PS. Biocompatibility of surgical-grade dense
tions of total hip arthroplasty associated with the use
polycrystalline
alumina.'Clin Orthop Relat Res
of an acetabular component with a Hylamer liner. J
1992;282:10-18.
Bone Joint Surg 1997;79:1529-1538.
Cobb AG, Schmalzreid TP. The clinical significance of
MacDonald SJ, McCalden RW, Chess DG et al. Metal-
metal ion release from cobalt-chromium metal-on-
on-metal versus polyethylene in hip arthroplasty: A
metal total hip joint arthroplasty. Proc Inst Mech Eng
randomized clinicai trial. Clin Orthop Relat Res
[H] 2006;220(2):385-398.
2003;406(1):282-296.
Collier JP, Currier BH, Kennedy FE et al. Comparison of
 Medel F, Kurtz SM, Klein G. Clinical, surface damage
cross-linked polyethylene materials for orthopedic
and oxidative performance of Poly Il tibial inserts
applications. Cin Orthop I
Relat Res 2003;414:
after long-term implantation. J Long Terrm Eff Med
289-304.
Implants 2008;18(2):151-156.
Dong H, Shi W, Bell T. Potential of improving tribologi-
cal performance of UHMWPE by engineering the
cal results of alumina ceramic-on-ceramic THA. Clin
Ti6A14V counterfaces. Wear 1999;225-229:146-153
Orthop Relat Res 2006;453:97-102.
Doorm PF, Mirra JM, Campbell PA et al. Tissue reaction
Oral E, Christensen SD, Armaz S et al. Wear resistance
to metal on metal total hip prostheses. Clin Orthop
Relat Res 1996;329:187-205.
UHMWPE doped with vitamin-E. J Arthroplasty
Dowd JE, Sychterz CJ, Young AM, Engh CA. Character-
2006;21(4):580-591.
ization of long-term femoral-head-penetration rates.
Oral E, Beckos CG, Moratoglu OK. Free radical elimina-
Association with and prediction of osteolysis. J Bone
tion in irradiated UHMWPE through crystal mobility
Joint Surg Am 2000;82:1102-1107.
in phase transition to the hexagonal phase. Polymer
Dowling DP, Kola PV, Donnelly K et al. Evaluation of
2008;49:47334739.
diamond-like carbon-coated orthopaedic implants.
Pappas MJ, Makras G, Buechel FF. Titanium nitride
Diam Relat Mater 1997;6:390-393.
ceramic film against polyethylene: A 48 million cycle
Gerd W. Ceramic femoral head
1 retrieval data. Clin
wear test. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1995;317(1):64-70.
Orthop Relat Res 2000;379:22-28.
Pramanik S, Argawal AK, Rai KN. Chronology of total
Goldsmith AJ, Dowson D, Isaac GH et al. A comparative
hip replacement and materials development. Trends
joint simulator study of the wear of metal-on-metal
Biomater Artif Organs 2005;19(1):15-26.
and altermative material combinations in hip replace-
Rahaman MN, Yao A, Bal BS, et al. Ceramics for pros-
thetic hip and knee joint replacement. J Am Ceram Soc
Hamadouche M, Boutin P, Daussange J et al. Alumina-
2007;90(7):1965-1988.
on-alumina total hip arthroplasty: A minimum
Raimondi MT, Pietrabissa R. The in vivo wear perfor-
18.5-year follow-up study. J Bone Joint Surg Am
mance of prosthetic femoral heads with titanium
2002;84:69-77.
nitride coating. Biomaterials 2000;21(9):907-913.
Harmouche D, Hamadouche M, Nizard R et al. Ceramics
Ross J, Brown TE. Return to athletic activity following
in total hip replacement. Clin Orthop Relat Res
total hip arthroplasty. Open Sport Med J 2010;4:
2005;430:62-71.
42-50.
Haynes DR, Rogers SD, Hay S et al. The differences in
Roy RK, Lee KR. Biomedical applications of diamond-
toxicity and release of bone-resorbing mediators
like coatings: A review. J Biomed Mater Res 2007;83:
induced by titanium and cobalt-chromium alloy wear
72-84.
Savarino L, Granchi D, Ciapetti G et al. Ion release in
Ingham E, Fisher J. Biological reactions to wear debris
  s    
in total joint replacement. Proc Inst Mech Eng [H]
joint replacement: A comparison with metal-on-
2000;214(1):21-37.
polyethylene bearings. J Biomed Mater Res 2002;63:
Langton DJ, Jameson SS, Joyce TJ et al. Early failure of
467474.
metal-on-metal bearings in hip resurfacing and large-
Schuller HM, Marti RK. Ten-year socket wear in 66 hip
 diameter total hip replacement. J Bone Joint Surg Br
arthroplasties. Ceramic versus metal heads. Acta
2010,92:38-46.
Orthop Scand 1990;61:240-243.
Lee JM, Salvati EA, Betts F et al. Size of metallic
- r NT  'a  ' el
and polyethylene debris particles in failed cemented
tion of surface modified UHMWPE against DLC-
38 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
coated Co-Cr-Mo. Surf Coat Technol 2005;190:
seventeen to 2l-year-results. J Bone Joint Surg Am
231-237.
2001;83:1688-1694.
Silva M, Heisel C, Schmalzried T. Metal-on-metal total
Williams SR, Wu J, Unsworth A et al. Tribological and
hip replacement. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2005;430:
surface analysis of 38Alumina-as-cast Co-Cr-Mo total
53-61.
hip arthroplasties. Proc Inst Mech Eng [H] 2009;223(8):
 Sugano N, Nishi T, Nakata K et al. Polyethylene sockets
941-954.
 and alumina ceramic heads in cemented total hip
Wroblewski BM, Siney PD, Dowson D et al. Prospective
arthroplasty. A ten-year study. J Bone Joint Surg Br
clinical and joint simulator studies of a new total
1995;77:548-556.
hip arthroplasty using alumina ceramic heads and
Lrban JA, Garvin KL, Boese CK et al. Ceramic-on-poly.
coss-linked polyethylene cups. J Bone Joint Surg Br
  n  s  
1996;78:280-285.
5
Methods of Immediate Fixation
Kei Hayashi and Kurt S. Schulz
Introduction
appropriate fixation methods in veterinary total
joint arthroplasty needs to be verified by long-
Recent review articles on human total joint arthro-
term survival in randomized, controlled, prospec-
plasty identified implant loosening as the greatest
tive clinical studies.
current concern for this generally successful pro
cedure (Corbett et al. 2010; Paxton et al. 2010; Huo
et al. 2011). The initial mechanical stability of the
implant is essential for long-term viability of the
Basic biomechanics and implant design
total joint replacement (Mai et al. 2010; Pérez and
Seral-Garcia 2012; Ruben et al. 2012). Numerous
Important mechanical considerations in total joint
clinical and laboratory studies in the human litera-
arthroplasty include (1) the geometric and mate-
ture have evaluated implant stability; however,
rial design of the articulating surfaces and (2) the
information in veterinary literature is quite limited.
design of the interface between the implants and
Unfortunately, data from human literature are not
the surrounding bone (Hallab et al. 2004; Pruitt
always relevant to veterinary medicine due to
and Chakravartula 2011). Most total joint arthro-
differences in anatomy, biomechanics, and the
plasty systems use ultrahigh-molecular-weight
required longevity of the prosthesis (Franklin
polyethylene (UHMWPE) as a bearing surface
et al. 2012). In addition, studies in human litera-
and a metal (either a titanium alloy or a cobalt-
ture can be commercially driven and objective
chromium alloy) for the remaining portion of the
data on the initial stability of implants are often
implant. The metal part of the implant is typically
referenced as "manufacturer's test report" and not 
involved in fixation. The two most widely used
 available for critical review. This chapter includes
methods for fixing the implant to the bone are
a general review of the mechanics of biomaterials
(1) the use of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
involved in immediate implant fixation and the
cement (cemented application) or (2) the use of a
currently available veterinary information in total
press-fit and porous metal surface to allow osseo-
arthroplasty procedures. The ultimate test 
of
la a) (re ssaa) ta
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
6E
al. 2000; Eldridge and Learmonth 2000; Buechel
compressive stresses responsible for bearing the
and Pappas 2011).
applied load. Prevention of debonding depends
Because of the difference in material properties
both on the implant design and surgical experi-
       a 
ence with cement preparation (discussed later in
created where the two materials come into contact.
this chapter).
In total joint arthroplasty, load is transferred from
Mechanical analyses suggest that the successful
the implant to the surrounding bone at the bone-
total arthroplasty implant design is a trade-off
implant interface. In this situation, two closely
 among many factors. Stiff implants may reduce
related factors are major determinants of the
 interface motion, but may lead to stress shielding
immediate stability: (1) implant design (material
and more bone resorption. Increasing surface
properties such as stiffness, shape, and surface
roughness of the implant may increase the friction
architecture) and (2) interface boundary mechan-
coefficient of the implant-cement interface, but
ics (Beksac et al. 2006). The stiffness ratio of the
may also increase the localized stress concentra-
implant to the bone will determine how much
tions within the cement. An alternative to a
load is borne by each. Since the stiffness of implant
cement-implant interface is a press-fit and 
la
is greater than that of bone, the implant carries
porous-coated implant interface.
The
theory
 most of the load, which can lead to stress shielding
behind porous coating is that bone will grow into
 of the bone. The interface needs to withstand high
 pores on the implant surface, which will eliminate
stresses to create the load transition between the
the reliance on poor mechanical properties of the
implant and the bone, which explains why the
cement. However, porous-coated implants rely on
bone-implant interface is the most critical desigm
a biological process (osseointegration) that is not
feature for most implants (Hallab et al. 2004; Pruitt
as predictable as an immediate cemented inter-
and Chakravartula 2011).
face. The interface bond develops over time and a
In addition to the implant design, another
porous-coated implant interface is much more
important determinant of interface stress is the
character of the bond between the implant and the
implant-bone interface (discussed later in this
bone (Mann et al. 2008). Bonding characteristics
chapter).
 Currently available total arthroplasty
can range from a completely bonded interface to
implants are the result of design evolution through
a nonbonded interface with no friction. A bonded
 computational modeling, material engineering.
interface is the characteristic of a cemented implant
 and dlinical experience.
system, while a nonbonded interface is a charac-
teristic of smooth surface (no friction) cementless
implant system. Most current cementless implant
Cemented systems
systems have surface designs to generate desired
friction between the implant and the surrounding
The benefits of modern cementing techniques in
bone.
 improving immediate implant stability have been
 If the interface is bonded as with a cemented
 reported in a clinical study (Ota et al. 2005), and
 implant, shear stresses are generated at the inter-
these modern techniques are currently recom-
face to support the implant. In nonbonded situa-
mended for cemented canine total joint arthro-
tions, shear stresses cannot be generated due to
q s isap n  ) sd
the lack of friction at the interface, and compres-
evolving to improve implant-cement interface
sive stresses must be generated to withstand the
mechanics (Beksac et al. 2006). There are a few
applied force. These compressive stresses can only
commercially available cemented total hip arthro-
be generated when the implant subsides into the
 plasty systems, as well as total elbow arthroplasty
bone. Even in a cemented implant system,
，if
and total knee arthroplasty systems in North
bonding between the implant and the cement,
，or
America (Figure 5.1).
the bone and the cement, is lost, the interface
Implant surface preparation techniques are
cannot withstand shear stresses. If shear stresses
 designed to strengthen the cement-implant inter-
overcome the interfacial bond, then the implant
face (Beksac et al. 2006). Methods of strengthening
will
subside
into the bone and
generate
the interface of femoral stemmed components
Methods of Immediate Fixation  41
Figure 5.1 Cemented total hip arthroplasty implants (left: BioMedtrix CFX, Boonton, N); right: New Generation Devices,
acetabular cup and femoral stem. (Courtesy of BioMedtrix and New Generation)
include roughening of the implant surface and
 precoating the implant with PMMA (Clayton et al.
 2007). The juxta-articular portion of a stem is a
BaMEx3
 common area for implant surface roughening
VETERINARY
BONECEMENT
because of the high interface shear stresses in this
region. Sand or bead blasting can increase the
shear strength of the cement-implant interface.
This pattern of stem surface roughening is exhib-
ited by the BioMedtrix CFX stem (BioMedtrix
LLC, Boonton, NJ; Figure 5.1). In cemented systems
the acetabular cup is made of UHMWPE, with
multiple grooves on its outer side to increase the
Figure 5.2 Commercially available veterinary PMMA
surface area of the implant-cement interface
product. (BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ)
and improve resistance to torsion and pullout
(Figure 5.1). CFX fixation is further described in
cementing techniques resulted in poor mechanical
Chapter 7.
-iprau aienbapeul pue juauan au jo sanradord
 Numerous factors affect the mechanical proper-
tation at the cement-bone interface. These prob-
ties of PMMA and, subsequently, the mechanical
lems have been implicated as important initiating
factors of the cement-bone and cement-implant
factors in aseptic loosening (Ota et al. 2005). The
interfaces (Shields et al. 2002; Dearmin and Schulz
second-generation cementing technique, using
2004; Figure 5.2). First-generation hand-packed
an intramedullary plug and cement gun, was
introduced to achieve more uniform penetration
blood and bone and has been showm, in combina-
and distribution of the cement (see Chapter 6).
-d a cn  s m 
Human studies report significantly lower inci-
 out strength (Askew et al. 1984). Pulsatile lavage
 dence of asepticloosening using second-generation
is incapable of completely drying the femoral
techniques compared with first-generation tech-
canal, and some additional bleeding is likely after
niques. Third-generation cementing techniques
 cessation of lavage. Additional drying of the canal
include the use of centrifugation and vacuum
can be achieved with the use of femoral canal
mixing. The third-generation techniques further
tampons or gauze sponges, further improving the
improved the strength of the cement mantle by
strength of the cement-bone interface.
minimizing air inclusion during cement prepara-
 Similarly, the major goal of acetabular prepara-
tion. Centrifugation and vacuum mixing improved
tion in cemented systems is the maintenance of
tensile and fatigue properties of the cement in
 adequate cortical bone for structural support and
multiple ir vitro mechianical studies (Davies et al.
the creation of appropriate surfaces for maximum
1998). Modified third-generation cementing tech-
cement cohesion. A number of techniques in ace-
 q  ( a  s
tabular bed preparation have been developed to
using commercially available instrumentation
maximize the strength and the longevity of the
(Figure 5.3). The obvious disadvantage to this
cement-bone interface. The strength of this inter-
technique is the cost of the required equipment.
face is dependent on the bone surface area avail-
 Although it can diminish some mechanical prop-
able for cement contact and filling. Techniques
erties, the benefits of mixing antibiotics with
reported for use in cemented veterinary total hip
PMMA in primary total joint arthroplasty have
systems include curette holes and connecting
been evaluated in several clinical studies (Weisman
 trough, three to five large drill holes, and multiple
et al. 2000).
small drill holes (Schulz 2000).
Because PMMA works as a cohesive, not as an
Strength of the cement-bone interface may be
adhesive, maximum strength of the cement-bone
further increased by pressurization of the cement
interface relies on the ability of the cement to pen-
within the femoral canal. Pressurization requires
etrate irregularities in the bone surface (Schulz
the use of a cement-restricting device to create a
 2000). Drilling, reaming, and broaching results in 
limited chamber into which the cement can flow.
filling of these irregularities with blood and bone
Cement restrictors were originally composed of
 fragments. Pulsatile lavage uses simultaneously
 PMMA plugs that were inserted into or formed
pulsed lavage and suction to remove most of the
within the femoral canal before insertion of the
Figure 5.3 Modern "third-generation" cementing techniques can be performed with commercially available instrumentation 
by the liquid monomer, the lid is secured, a 20-22 mmHg vacuum is applied, and the mixture is slowly mixed (eft). The
cement is transferred to the cartridge that is separated from the bowl (middle). The nozzle tip is applied, the cartridge is
snapped into the cement injection gun, and cement is pressurized into the bone (right). (lmage courtesy of Stryker
Orthopedics, Mahwah, NJ)
Methods of Immediate Fixation 43
Figure 5.4 A cement restrictor plug (feft) can be placed in the femur (right) to facilitate a better pressurization of cement.
implant stability (right). (Courtesy of BioMedtrix, Boonton, N))
remainder of the cement. Most current cement
component migration, and pain. The exact mecha-
restrictors are pliable plastic plugs placed approxi-
 i  si sn rg 
mately 2 cm distal to the distal level of the tip of
 contributions from osteolysis and micromotion at
the femoral stem (Figure 5.4). The implant is posi-
the interface, bony changes due to stress adapta-
tioned to ensure maintenance of a cement mantle
 tion and aging, and locally high fluid pressure.
of 2 mm minimum surrounding the entire femoral
The reported incidence of loosening has been a
stem (Schulz 2000). Substantial contact between
major driving force toward the development of
the medial aspect of the ostectomy site and an
cementless implant systems (Mai et al. 2010;
implant collar also improves immediate implant
Khanuja et al. 2011).
stability (Schulz 2000).
 Postoperatively, the bone-cement interface may
be immediately compromised due to cement
Cementless systems
 polymerization, heatnecrosis, the reaming process,
 or local monomer toxicity (Mann et al. 2008). As a
A variety of prostheses utilize cementless fixation
consequence, a small layer of fibrous tissue can
as the means for initial implant stability. The types
develop between the cement and the bone that
of cementless fixation used in veterinary prosthe-
creates a more compliant interface, reduces its
ses are described below.
strength, and leads to early implant migration.
Under ideal conditions, the cement-bone interface
can remain intact for years without an adverse
Cementless systems: Press-fit
biological response. However, conditions are often
compromised, leading to progressive interface
"Osseointegration" (osteointegration) was first
failure accompanied by clinical radiolucencies,
identified in the early 1950s by Per-Ingvar Brane-
markas
the attachment of lamellar
r bone
Ingrowth surfaces include sintered beads, fiber
to implants without intervening fibrous tissue
 mesh, and porous metals (Pilliar 2005). Ongrowth
(Branemark 1983). It has been extensively studied
 surfaces are created by grit blasting or plasma
(Albrektsson et al. 1981; Khanuja et al. 2011). Ade-
spraying. Osteoconductive materials such as
quate osseous contact and firm fixation of the
hydroxyapatite can be applied to the surface of
implant minimize micromotion. Micromotion of
implants and may enhance the growth of mineral-
 >150 μm leads to fibrous tissue formation, between
ized bone onto the implant (see Chapter 3).
40 and 150 μm leads to a combination of bone and
After the introduction of the canine cementless
fibrous tissue formation, and <20pm results in
femoral stem and cup components in the 1980s,
predominantly bone formation (Jasty et al. 1997).
cementless implant design evolved in an effort to
Initial fixation can be obtained by press-fiing a
eliminate "cement-related" complications, such as
slightly oversized component. Anumber of factors
 aseptic loosening, progressive resorption of bone
influence the initial stability of primary fixation,
at the bone-cement interface, and loosening at the
 including implant and bone geometry, roughness
implant-cement interface. The canine uncemented
and coating of the implant, preparation technique,
 porous-coated anatomic total hip prosthesis (PCA
and bone quality.
Canine Total Hip System, Howmedica, Mahway,
Ingrowth occurs when bone grows inside a
NJ) has been extensively tested, but was never
porous surface, and ongrowth occurs when bone
made commercially available (Marcellin-Little et
grows onto a roughened surface (Khanuja et al.
al. 1999). Following the development of the PCA
2011). The surface characteristics of an implant
prosthesis, the Biologic Fixation (BFX) total hip
determine which occurs. Ingrowth requires a pore
system was introduced (BioMedtrix; Figure 5.5).
size between 50 and 400μm, and the percentage of
The mechanical stability of this system initially
voids within the coating should be between 30%
relies on press-fit and, later, on bony ingrowth into
and4
40% to maintain mechanical strength
both femoral stem and acetabular cup. The BFX
(Albrektsson et al. 1981; Haddad et al. 1987).
system is made of cobalt-chromium or titanium
Figure 5.5
 Cementless total hip arthroplasty implants, made of cobalt-chromium (stem) and titanium (cup) (left) with
sintered beaded coatings (right; 250-300-μm bead diameter, pore size 150μm, three layers, "stucco” application, 35%
porosity). (BFX, courtesy of BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ)
Methods of Immediate Fixation 45
stem and the acetabular cup is made of titanium
(Margalit et al. 2010). Mean failure load was
jou seu h yno 'shueon papeaq parauis m
3812 ± 391N, and the mode of failure was via
been critically evaluated, initial stability of this
bone fracture around the cup following minimal
system appears to rely on multiple factors (Ganz
cup displacement in most cases (Figure 5.6). Mean
et al. 2010; Lascelles et al. 2010). These factors
failure load remained high (2924 ± 316N), even
include careful preoperative plarning and case
when the medial wall of the acetabulum was
selection, and the precision of the surgical tech-
intentionally penetrated with the reamer, in order
 nique to prepare the bone surfaces for an ideal
to simulate a clinical situation where the dorsal
press-fit.
rim of the acetabulum is absent and deep reaming
The TATE Elbow (BioMedtrix) also relies on a
becomes necessary. This study, using a normal
press-fit for initial stability. However, hollow posts
are also utilized with the TATE prosthesis to main-
tioned and seated BFX cementless cup is initially
tain initial positioning of this cartridge component
stable under physiological loading conditions.
system. Fixation of the TATE Elbow is further
 BFX fixation is further described in Chapter 7.
described in Chapters 11 and 12.
 The initial stability and femoral strain pattern
during axial loading of BFX femoral implants
Cementless systems: Locking screws
goal of cementless desigm is to create an initially
The Zurich Cementless Hip Prosthesis (Kyon,
stable press-fit that is conducive to bony ingrowth.
Zurich, Switzerland) was the first cementless total
The objective of the in vitro study was to determine
hip arthroplasty system introduced to the veteri-
whether osteotomy level or stem size affected
nary market (Figure 5.7; Haney and Peck 2009).2
initial implant stability of the BFX cementless stem
Under the current design, immediate fixation of
and to assess femoral hoop strain under axial load.
the acetabular cup is provided by a press-fit inser-
Axial load was applied to the potted femurs and
tion, and long-term stability is achieved by bone
 cortical strain was measured with strain gauges.
ingrowth through the holes in the cup surface
The study found that the more proximal osteot-
(Lauer et al. 2009). Locking screws are used for
omy had a higher yield load, greater subsidence
immediate fixation of the femoral stem, and
at failure, less canal fill, and less subsidence stiff-
ongrowth of bone along the rough titanium surface
 ness than did the more distal osteotomy. Larger
of the implant provides long-term stability (Guer-
implants had a higher yield load, greater subsid-
rero and Montavon 2009). There are currently no
ence stiffness, greater maximal load at failure, less
data available regarding the immediate stability of
subsidence at failure, and greater canal fill than
this cementless total hip arthroplasty S
system
did the undersized implants. Strain gauge data
(Hanson et al. 2006).
revealed  nonuniform 
 distributions
of
strain.
The outer shell of the acetabular cup is manu-
Tensile strains were highest over fracture sites. The
factured from perforated, highly compliant tita-
authors concluded that a proximal osteotomy and
nium, with an inner nonperforated shell, and a
a large implant results in increased yield load prior
UHMWPE liner to receive the femoral head com-
to subsidence, likely due to increased stability
 ponent. The double-shelled design is proposed
resulting from a press-fit within the subtrochan-
to provide rapid and consistent osseointegration
teric cancellous bone block. Undersized implants
of the acetabular bone into the outer shell of the
and distal resection level results in lower subsid-
cup (Kyon).? The surface of the outer titanium
ence stiffness and lower yield load, respectively.
shell is plasma titanium coated for additional
The initial stability of the acetabular cup is
microinterlock with the bone. For improved
thought to rely on press-fit at the cranial and
press-fit, the outer shell incorporates small pro-
caudal aspects of the acetabulum. The initial press-
trusions, or "ribs," running circumferentionally
fit facilitates progressive osseointegration at the
just below the equator. The pole of the shell is
bone-implant interface. An in vitro study reported
slightly flattened to prevent the cups from "bot-
the biomecharical properties of the BFX acetabu-
toming out" at the pole without full engagement
lar cup impacted into a normal canine pelvis
at the equator.4
Figure 5.6 Radiograph of a cadaver pelvis made after implantation of a BFX cementless acetabular cup and mechanical
testing. The cup-bone interface was immediately stable. Construct failure occurred after supraphysiological loading. The
Figure 5.7 The Zurich Cementless Total Hip Replacement system (teft). Immediate fixation is provided by a press-fit
insertion for the acetabular cup (center) and by locking screws for the femoral stem (right) (Courtesy of Kyon, Zurich,
Switzerland)
46
Methods of Immediate Fixation 47
Cementless systems: Screw-in implants
The Helica total hip prosthesis was developed in
Gap
·Prevents coupling
the 2000s in an attempt to reduce problems inher-
of the cortices,
ent with current conventional total hip replace-
hence reduces
ment systems (Helica Canine Cementless Hip
Screw fixation
stress shielding
System, 
INNOPLANT Veterinary,
Harmover,
●Provides initial
Circumvents
Germany; Figures 5.9 and 5.10). A helical orthope-
 stability
contact lysis
dic implant has been shown to be superior to con-
●Facilitates bony
Gap
ventional design in implant stability (Windolf
ingrowth from
et al. 2009; Wiebking et al. 2011). The authors
medial cortex
hypothesized that the surrounding trabecular 
structure undergoes a volumetric compaction
with the insertion of a helical implant, and this
consolidation of the material in combination
Figure 5.8 Schematic representation of the hypothesis to
with the viscoelastic
propertiesofcancellous
support the concept of immediate and long-term stability of
bone enhances the i
implant anchorage;
the
the Kyon cementless femoral implant. (Courtesy of Kyon,
increased implant surface projected orthogonally
Zurich, Switzerland)
in the direction of the force may result in stress
reduction at the bone-implant interface (Windolf
The cementless femoral stem of the Zurich
et al. 2009).
Cementless Hip is designed to achieve permanent
The Helica acetabular and femoral implants
anchoraget
through bony ongrowth from the
screw into the acetabulum and femur, respectively,
medial cortex without coupling to the lateral
using self-cutting helical threads. The design
cortex. Immediate stability, required for ongrowth,
allows a force-controlled implantation and firm
is generated by locking screw fixation of the stem
anchorage in the bone. The roughened, titanium
to the medial cortex of the femur (Figure 5.8). The
 alloy, implant surfaces allow for bone apposition
mechanics of the femoral stem fixation are similar
 and ongrowth.
to the PC-Fix plating system of AO/ASIF (DePuy
 One suggested advantage of the Helica implant 
Synthes, West Chester, PA; Tepic et al. 1997).
system is limited bone removal. The femoral
During normal cycling, the femur is subjected to
implant replaces only the femoral head and pre-
compressive loading on the medial side and tensile
serves the neck. Consequently, bone resection is
forces on the lateral side. The femur is naturally
minimal, which, in theory, preserves more normal
more compliant than a solid canal-filling metal
anatomical structure  and   original mechanical
prosthesis. Physiological loading generates high
properties.
Because the femoral neck is not
interface shear stresses, which can initially
be
excised, femoral neck version and inclination are
 resisted by friction alone. It has been shown, by
maintained.
theoretical analysis, that canal-filling press-fitted
An in vitro mechanical study found that the
metal stems cannot be stable at all contact areas
Helica femoral prosthesis sigmificantly alters strain
with the femur under physiological-level loading.
distribution in the proximal aspect of the femur
It has been hypothesized that if any motion occurs
and exhibits initial micromotion (Kim et al. 2012).
before the interface is secured by bone adaptation
Failure strength in axial compression of the Helica-
to the implant by ongrowth and/or ingrowth,
implanted femur is less than that of the normal
 true, solid anchorage of the prosthesis will fail.4
femur, but much greater than expected in vivo
Therefore, this cementless system was created
loads associated with normal activity. This study
 based on a hypothesis for improved implant sta-
also found that the Helica femoral prosthesis has
bility, as shown in Figure 5.8, where the medial
 o ,  s  
tional femoral prostheses. Two recent clinical
the
Zurich
1 Cementless prosthesis
is further
studies reported premature loosening of Helica
described in Chapter 7.
implants (Hach and Delfs 2009; Andreoni et al.
Acetabular Cups
024mm
ww 970
028 mm
030mm
032 mm
Femoraf Heads
018 mm, Short
(ww 0+)
018 mm, Middle
(ww E+)
018 mm, Long
(wwg+)
18 mm, XLong
(ww6+)
018 mm, XXLong (+12 mm)
Femoraf Stems
+ Flanges
018 mm × 31 mm
+ Locking Nut
009mm×32mm
018.5 mm
010 mm × 35 mm
020.0 mm
011mm×37mm
021.5 mm
012 mm × 39 mm
Figure 5.9 The Helica implant system (Helica T PSe). (Courtesy of INNOPLANT Veterinary, Hannover, Germany)
Figure 5.10
The current Helica system is designed to allow deeper insertion of the femoral implant while maintaining the
integrity of femoral neck (a), and secured bone-implant interface by adjustable flanges (b). These modifications are proposed
to result in stable construct in canine total hip replacement (THR) application (c). (Courtesy of INNOPLANT Veterinary,
Hannover, Germany)
48
Methods of Immediate Fixation 49
2010). Due to concerns associated with initial
The rationale for this approach is well descried
instability and subsequent implant loosening, a
 in a recent clinical study (Gemmill et al. 2011). A
few modifications in implanting techniques have
postmortem retrieval study reported that conven-
been suggested. Anecdotally, it is proposed that
 tional canine total hip replacement fixation using
larger and longer femoral implants that engage in
PMMA was associated with a greater-than-50%
the lateral cortex appear to be more stable and to
incidence of implant loosening (Skurla et al. 2005),
 have a lower incidence of implant loosening.56 To
and complications relating to femoral components
achieve secured engagement of femoral implant
remain a problem in cementless canine total
anchoring in the lateral cortex, a more distal neck
hip replacement (Ganz et al. 2010). The modern
ostectomy than originally proposed may be neces-
cementing techniques (described above) led to
sary, which may eliminate the proposed advan-
marked improvement in the survival of femoral
tage of maintenance of femoral neck. Another
components. However, only marginal improve-
 proposed modification is the use of a steeper angle
ments were noted in the performance of acetabu-
      
lar components, possibly because of the techrical
 pasodond sem uoneoypou siul pasod
in
an
 difficulties of achieving cement pressurization
attempt to reduce the force applied to the Helica
into a dry acetabular bone bed (Paul and Bargar
femoral implant by shortening the lever arm
1987).
These observations led many surgeons
length of femoral head and neck (Franklin et al.
to adopt a hybrid approach to fixation, using a
2012). Clinical efficacy of these modifications has
cementless acetabular cup and cemented femoral
not been critically evaluated. However, these
stem, and a recent clinical study reported a sur-
modifications have been incorporated in f
the
vival rate of the prostheses of 99% at a mean
second generation of the Helica implant (TPS;
follow-up of 16 months (range: 6-40 months)
Figures 5.9 and 5.10). T
The second-generation
(Gemmill et al. 2011).
 implant has also added an adjustable flange to
increase surgical plarning flexibility and improve
resistance against shear forces at the interface
between implant and femoral ostectomy site.
Conclusion
To date, there is no consensus with regard to the
optimal fixation method for total joint arthroplasty
Combination: Hybrid fixation
implants in human medicine (Clement et al. 2012,
Khanuja et al. 2011; Ruben et al. 2012). Recent
As discussed above, the optimal method for
meta-analyses in human medicine could not
implant fixation is a subject of considerable con-
ss isdoe s ron as  pdns
juo! jeon Areuaaa pue umy qoq u Asraao
aoo ue ie papnun aaua aae pue
arthroplasty (Gemmill et al. 2011). The hybrid total
surgeon should choose an established system
hip arthroplasty (cementless acetabular compo-
based on patient characteristics, knowledge, expe-
nent and cemented femoral component) has been
rience, and surgeon preference (Corbett et al. 2010; 
 proposed in human medicine (Harris 1996) and
Paxton et al. 2010; Huo et al. 2011; Pakvis et al.
recently in veterinary medicine (Gemmill et al.
2011) . Level of evidence of appropriate fixation
2011). The reverse hybrid method (i.e., cemented
method of total joint arthroplasty is low in veteri-
acetabular component and cementless femoral
nary medicine (Ganz et al. 2010; Margalit et al.
component) has also been evaluated (Lindalen
2010; Hayes et al. 2011). Randomized controlled
et al. 2011). The current generation of the Iowa
trials are considered a standard for evaluating
State University Elbow (ISU Elbow, BioMedtrix)
medical outcomes. However, such trials in total
la
cemented humeral stem for immediate fixation,
long-term risks. A few studies in human medicine
and a porous-coated humeral condyle for long
have demonstrated the effectiveness of national
term fixation. Fixation of the ISU Elbow is further
and regional registry systems in improving clini-
described in Chapters 11 and 12.
cal practice, and such registries may be of benefit
50 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
 in the long-term evaluation of veterinary arthro-
Clayton R, Cravens R, Hupfer T, et al. Intermediate
plasty systems.
results of a cemented Femoral stem with a PMMA
premantle. Orthopedics 2007;30:950.
Clement ND, Biant LC, Breusch SJ. Total hip arthro-
plasty: To cement or not to cement the acetabular
Endnotes
socket? A critical review of the literature. Arch Orthop
Trauma Surg 2012;132:411-427.
Corbett KL, Losina E, Nti AA, et al. Population-based
1. Townsend KL, Kowaleski MP, Johnson KA. Initial
stability and femoral strain patterm during axial
rates of revision of primary total hip arthroplasty:
A systematic review. PLoS One 2010;5:e13520.
loading of canine cementless femoral prostheses:
Davies JP, Conmor DO, Burke DW, et al. The effect of
Effect of resection level and implant size. In: Proceed-
centrifugation on the fatigue life of bone cement in
ings of the Veterinary Symposium,American Cotlege of
the presence of surface irregularities. Clin Orthop
Veterinary Surgeons. 2007.
Rel Res 1998;229:156-161.
2. Vezzoni A. Revision of Kyon THR. In: Proceedings of
Dearmin MG, Schulz KS. The effect of stem length on
the 3rd World Veterinary Orthopedic Congress. 2010,
femoral component positioning in canine total hip
Pp.464-467.
arthroplasty. Vet Surg 2004;33:272-278.
 3. Tepic S. Development and mechanical basis for Kyon
THR. In: Proceedings of the Annual American College
Eldridge JDJ, Learmonth ID. Component bone interface
    so  s 
f Veterinary Surgeons Forum. Denver, CO, 2004,
Hip Arthroplasty, Learmonth ID (ed.). London:
pp. 289-291.
Springer, 2000, pp. 71-80.
4.
Tepic S. Kyor Practicum Proceedings. Las Vegas, NV
Franklin SP, Franklin AL, Wilson H, et al. The relation-
2011.
ship of the canine femoral head to the femoral neck:
 5. Agnello K. Personal communication, January 2012.
An anatomic study with relevance for hip arthro-
6. Dosch M, Garcia TC, Hayashi K et al. Abstract: Bio-
plasty implant design and implantation. Vet Surg
mechanical evaluation of the Helica femoral implant
2012;41(1):86-93.
system using the traditional and a new modified
Ganz SM, Jackson J, VanEnkevort B. Risk factors for
technique. Veterinary Orthopedic Society, 2012.
femoral fracture after canine press-fit cementless total
hip arthroplasty. Vet Surg 2010;39:688-695.
Gemmill TJ, Pink J, Renwick A, et al. Hybrid cemented /
References
cementless total hip replacement in dogs: Seventy-
eight consecutive joint replacements. Vet Surg
2011;40:621-630.
Albrektsson T, Branenmark Pl, Hansson HA et al. Osseo-
Guerrero TG, Montavon PM. Zurich cementless total hip
integrated titanium implants. Requirements for ensur-
replacement: Retrospective evaluation of 2nd genera-
ing a long-lasting, direct bone to implant anchorage
tion implants in 60 dogs. Vet Surg 2009;38:70-80.
in man. Acta Orthop Scand 1981;52:155-170.
Hach V, Delfs G. Initial experience with a newly devel-
Andreoni AA, Guerrero TG, Hurter K, et al. Revision of
oped cementless hip endoprosthesis. Vet Comp
an unstable HELICA endoprosthesis with a Zurich
Orthop Traumatol 2009;22:153-158.
cementless total hip replacement. Vet Comp Orthop
Haddad RJ, Cook SD, Thomas KA. Biological fixation
Traumatol 2010;23:177-181.
of porous-coated implants. J Bone Joint Surg Am
 Askew MJ, Steege JW, Lewis JL, et al. Effect of cement
1987;69:1459-1466.
pressure and bone strength on polymethylmethacry-
Hallab NJ, Jacobs JI, Katz JW. Application of materials
late fixation. J Orthop Res 1984;1:412-420.
 in medicine, biology and artificial organs: Orthopedic
Beksac B, Taveras NA, Valle AG, et al. Surface finish
applications. In: Biomaterials Science: An Introduc-
mechanics explain different clinical survivorship of
tion to Materials in Medicine, Ratmer BD, Hoffman
cemented femoral stems for total hip arthroplasty.
AS, Schoen FJ et al. (eds.), 2nd ed. Amsterdam:
J Long Term Eff Med Implants 2006;16:407-422.
Elsevier Academic Press, 2004, pp. 527-555.
Branemark P. Osseointegration and its experimental
Haney DR, Peck JN. Influence of canal preparation
background. J Prosthet Dent 1983;50:399-410.
depth on the incidence of femoral medullary
Buechel FF, Pappas MJ. The design process. In: Princi-
infarction with Zurich Cementless Canine Total Hip
ples of Human Joint Replacement: Design and Clini-
arthroplasty. Vet Surg 2009;38:673-676.
cal Application. Berlin: Springer, 2011, Pp. 77-90.
Hanson SP, Peck JN, Berry CR, et al. Radiographic
Charmley G, Judet T, Garreau de Loubresse C. Titanium
evaluation of the Zurich cementless total hip acetabu-
a
lar component. Vet Surg 2006;35:550-558.
cemented femoral prosthesis. In: Interfaces in Total
 Harris WH. Hybrid total hip replacement: Rationale and
Hip Arthroplasty, Learmonth ID (ed.). London:
intermediate clinical results. Clin Orthop Relat Res
Springer, 2000, pp. 3-10.
1996;333:155-164.
Methods of Immediate Fixation  51
Hayes GM, Ramirez J, Langley Hobbs SJ. Does the
current
cementing
techmiques.JArthroplasty
degree of preoperative subluxation or soft tissue
1987;2:71-76.
tension affect the incidence of postoperative luxation
Paxton EW, Namba RS, Maletis GB, et al. A prospective
in dogs after total hip replacerment? Vet Surg.
study of 80,000 total joint and 5000 anterior cruciate
2011;40:6-13.
ligament reconstruction procedures in a community-
Huo MH, Dumont GD, Knight JR, Mont MA. What's
based registry in the United States. J Bone Joint Surg
new in total hip arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am
Am 2010,92:117-132.
2011;19(93):1944-1950.
Pérez MA, Seral-Garcia B. A finite element analysis of
Jasty M, Bragdon C, Burke D, et al. In vivo skeletal
the vibration behaviour of a cementless hip system.
responses to porous-surfaced implants subjected to
Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Engin 2012;
small induced motions. J Bone Joint Surg Am
[Epub]
1997;79:707714.
Pilliar RM.
Cementless implant fixation—Toward
Khanuja HS, Vakil JI, Goddard MS, et al. Cementless
improved
reliability.
Orthop
Clin North Am
femoral fixation in total hip arthroplasty. J Bone Joint
2005;36:113-119.
Surg Am 2011,93:500-509.
Pruitt LA, Chakravartula AM. Orthopedics. In: Mechan-
Kim JY, Hayashi K, Garcia TC, et al. Biomechanical eval-
ics of Biomaterials: Fundamental Principles for
uation of screw-in femoral implant in cementless total
Implant Design, Pruitt LA, Chakravartula AM (eds.).
hip system. Vet Surg 2012;41:94-102.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2011,
Lascelles BD, Freire M, Roe SC, et al. Evaluation of func-
pp. 416-471.
tional outcome after BFX total hip replacement using
Ruben RB, Fermandes PR, Folgado J. On the optimal
 a pressure sensitive walkway. Vet Surg 2010;39:71-77.
shape of hip implants. J Biomech 2012;i0(45):
Lauer SK, Nieves MA, Peck J, et al. Descriptive
239-246.
histomorphometric ingrowth analysis of the Zurich
Schulz KS. Application of arthroplasty principles to
cementless canine total hip acetabular component. Vet
 canine cemented total hip replacerment. Vet Surg
Surg 2009;38:59-69.
2000;29:578-593.
Lindalen E, Havelin LI, Nordsletten L, et al. Is reverse
Shields SL, Schulz KS, Hagan CE, et al. The effects of
hybrid hip replacement the solution? Acta Orthopae-
acetabular cup temperature and duration of cement
dica 2011;82:639-645.
 pressurization on cement porosity in a canine total hip
Mai KT, Verioti CA, Casey K, et al. Cementless femoral
replacement model. Vet Surg 2002;31:167-173.
fixation in total hip arthroplasty. Am J Orthop
Skurla CP, Pluhar GE, Frankel DJ, et al. Assessing the
2010;39:126-130.
dog as model for human total hip replacement. Analy-
Mann KA, Miller MA, Cleary RJ, et al. Experimental
sis of 38 canine cemented femoral components
micromechanics of the cement-bone interface. J
retrieved at post-mortem. J Bone Joint Surg Br
Orthop Res 2008;26:872-879.
2005;87:120-127.
Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung BA, Doyens DH, et al.
Tepic S, Remiger AR, Morikawa K, et al. Strength recov.
Canine uncemented porous-coated anatomic total
ery in fractured sheep tibia treated with a plate or an
 hip arthroplasty: Results of a long-term prospective
intermal fixator: An experimental study with a two-
evaluation of 50 consecutive cases. Vet Surg 1999;
year follow-up. J Orthop Trauma 1997;11:14-23.
28:10-20.
Weisman DL, Olmstead ML, Kowalski JJ. In vitro evalu-
Margalit KA, Hayashi K, Jackson J, et al. Biomechanical
ation of antibiotic elution from polymethylmethacry-
evaluation of acetabular cup implantation in cement-
late (PMMA)
and
 mechanical
assessment
of
less total hip arthroplasty. Vet Surg 2010;39:818-823.
antibiotic-PMMA composites. Vet Surg 2000;29:
Ota J, Cook JL, Lewis DD, et al. Short-term aseptic loos-
245-251.
ening of the femoral component in canine total hip
Wiebking U, Birkenhauer B, Krettek C, et al. Initial sta-
replacement: Effects of cementing technique
LIO
bility of a new uncemented short-stem prosthesis,
cement mantle grade. Vet Surg 2005;34:345-352.
Spiron, in dog bone. Technol Health Care 2011;19:
Pakvis D, van Hellemondt G, de Visser E, et al. Is there
271-282.
evidence for a superior method of socket fixation in
Windolf M, Braunstein V, Dutoit C, et al. Is a helical
hip arthroplasty? A systematic review. Intermational
shaped implant a superior altermative to the Dynamic
Orthopaedics 2011;35:1109-1118.
Hip Screw for unstable femoral neck fractures? A
Paul HA, Bargar WL. Histologic changes in the dog
biomechanical investigation. Clin Biomech (Bristol,
acetabulum following total hip replacement with
Avon) 2009;24:59-64.
Biomechanical Considerations in
Total Hip Replacement
Michael P. Kowaleski
Total hip replacement is a highly successful opera-
inclination angle is the angle formed between the
tion for the alleviation of discomfort secondary to
anatomical axis of the femur and the long axis of
debilitating conditions of the hip joint. Increas-
the femoral head and neck (Figure 6.1). Fermoral
 ingly, patients and their owners are demanding
offset is the distance between the center of rotation
more than just pain relief from replaced joints,
of the femoral head and the anatomical axis of the
challenging surgeons and implants to deliver 
femur (Figure 6.1). The offset distance is the lever
highly athletic function as well as longevity. This
arm for the abductor muscles of the hip (Figure
challenge can be met by utilizing modern surgical
6.2). A decrease in the offset distance increases the
techniques and implants to provide pain-free
force required by the abductor muscles to stabilize
function and restore normal biomechanics and
the pelvis during the stance phase of gait, while
kinematics to the hip.
 an increase in femoral offset decreases the force
required. Head-neck ratio is the difference between
the circumference of the femoral head and the
Functional anatomy of the hip joint
femoral neck, which allows movements of the
articulation to occur without impingement of
The femoral head comprises two-thirds of a
the femoral neck on the acetabular rim (Sariali
sphere, and it is connected to the femoral metaph-
et al. 2008).
ysis by the femoral neck. There are several ana-
The acetabulum is a cotyloid (cup-shaped)
tomical aspects of the femoral head and neck that
cavity of the os coxae. In the normal hip, just
influence hip biomechanics. Femoral neck antever-
under half of the femoral head is covered by the
sion is the cranial (anterior) projection of the
acetabulum. The less-than-hemispherical shape of
femoral head and neck relative to the anatomical
the socket portends the Latin origin of the word,
axis of the femur. Anteversion of the femoral head
acetum (vinegar) and -abulum (container), from
and neck increases range of motion in flexion and
the Latin word for vinegar cup, a less-than-
extension that can occur prior to impingement of
hemispherical vessel. The acetabular labrum is a
the femoral neck on the acetabular rim. Femoral
fibrocartilaginous extension of the acetabular rim
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
53
54 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
ABD
BV
Figure 6.2  Schematic of the forces during the stance
phase of gait. The abductor force (ABD) gains mechanical
advantage due to the femoral offset (A). The force of body
weight (Bw) acts at a distance from centerline (B) to create
the joint reaction force (JRF).
Figure 6.1
 The femoral inclination angle (A) is the angle
formed between the anatomical axis of the femur and the
the median plane, and anteversion refers to a cup
long axis of the femoral head and neck. Femoral offset (B)
that faces cranially with respect to the median
is the perpendicular distance between the center of rotation
plane. The angle of inclination is relevant only to
of the femoral head and the anatomical axis of the femur.
acetabular components with a truncated open
face, and is defined as the angle between the ilial-
that effectively increases the depth of the acetabu-
ischial axis and a line connecting the trumcation
lum, resulting in coverage of the femoral head
points of the cup (Figure 6.3C). Radiographically,
beyond its equator. The acetabular labrum extends
the truncation points of a metal-backed compo-
 across the acetabular notch as a free ligament, the
 nent are apparent; this is estimated by the long
 transverse acetabular ligament (Evans 1993).
axis of the marker wire in an all-polyethylene
 An understanding of normal and abnormal
 component. Negative inclination (declined cup)
 acetabular anatomy can be aided by evaluation of 
 refers to an inclination angle that is less than that
the orientation of prosthetic acetabular compo-
of the ilial-ischial axis, and positive inclination
nents. Acetabular component orientation can vary
(inclined cup) refers to an angle that is greater than
about three orthogonal axes, and is defined with
that of the ilial-ischial axis (Dyce et al. 2001). Alter-
reference to the angles of lateral opening, version,
native nomenclature to describe the spatial orien-
and incination (Dyce et al. 2001). The angle of
tation of cemented acetabular components has
lateral opening is the angle between the dorsal
been reported (Cross et al. 2000). In this publica-
plane and the open face of the cup (Figure 6.3A).
tion, the term inclination was used to describe the
The terms closed and open are used to describe
 angle of lateral opening.
acetabular components that have an angle 
of
Many muscles cross, and therefore act upon the
lateral opening of less than 45 degrees and greater
hip joint, not only producing motion but also
 than 45 degrees, respectively. The angle of version 
increasing stability. The hip muscles can be
is the angle between the median plane and the
 grouped based on the direction in which they
open face of the cup (Figure 6.3B). Retroversion
move the hip (Figure 6.4); flexion, extension,
refers to a cup that faces caudally with respect to
adduction,
abduction, j
internal  rotation, and
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Hip Replacement 55
B
Angle
of version
Angle of
lateral opening
Open
Anteversion
Closed
7
Positive
Angle of
inclinatior
Negative
Figure 6.3 (A) Transverse plane cross section through an implanted acetabular component. The angle of lateral opening (9)
is the angle between the dorsal plane (X-Xi) and the plane of the nontruncated portion of the cup face. (B) Pelvis viewed
aui jo sixe suol ayi pue (i-i) aueld ueipaw aui umag alsue aui s! uoisian jo alsue aul dy ual roadse jenuan ayi wo
radiographic projection of the acetabular component. (C) Pelvis viewed from the lateral aspect, left hip. The angle of
inclination is the angle between the ilial-ischial axis and the long axis of the marker wire or truncation points of a metal-
backed component. (Reprinted with permission from Dyce et al. [2001l; Wiley-Blackwell).
external rotation are the major movements of the
Medial
hip. All of these movements occur around a pivot
Caudal
point, or center of rotation, which is the center of
extensors
the femoral head. The primary muscles that flex
the hip are the iliopsoas, rectus femoris, and tensor
fascia lata (Figure 6.5). The superficial, middle,
and deep (gluteus profundus) gluteal muscles and
flexors
the piriformis are the extensors of the hip (Figure
6.5). In order to rotate the femur toward the
midline of thebody (adduction), a series of muscles
must contract, including the adductor (adductor
magnus et brevis and adductor longus), gracilis, and
pectineus (Figure 6.5). Abduction is achieved
mainly through contraction of the superficial,
middle, and deep gluteal muscles; these muscles
extend from the lateral aspect of the ilium to the
 greater trochanter, except for the superficial gluteal
that inserts on the third trochanter. Although these
 are relatively small muscles with short lever arms,
it is likely that they are the most important muscle
pue sonaaan (z'g amsi) Aqis d roy dnono
Figure 6.4 The hip muscles can be grouped based on
Patel 2009); thus, is it critical to preserve these
their action on the joint; this is related to their anatomical
muscles during surgery of the hip. The torque
Iocation with respect to the femur.
created by these muscles is directly influenced by
the femoral offset that defines the lever arm upon
56 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Illiopsoas
which they act (Figures 6.1 and 6.2). Internal (or
(Psoas major part)
medial) rotation occurs with contraction of the
Iliopsoas
superficial, middle, and deep gluteal muscles.
(lliacus part)
External rotation is performed by a series of
Superficial
 muscles that originate caudal to the acetabulum
gluteal
 and insert within the trochanteric fossa, including
Middle
gluteal
the external obturator, internal obturator, gemelli,
Tensor fascia
latae
 and quadratus femoris (Figure 6.6).
Deep
The range of motion of the hip joint in healthy
gluteal
 Labrador retrievers, as determined by goniometry.
Piriformis
was 50 ± 2 degrees of flexion to 162 ± 3 degrees of
extension. The hip joint angle was measured at the
Adductor
intersection of the longitudinal axis of the femur
longus
Pectineus
and a line that joined the tuber sacrale and ischia-
dicum (Jaegger et al. 2002). A kinematic analysis
Adductor
using reflective markers attached to the skin on
magnus
Rectus
 the dorsal iliac spine, greater trochanter, and stifle
et brevis
femoris
between the lateral epicondyle and fibular head
was performed using motion capture to determine
the sagittal plane joint motions in dogs and
humans. During walking, the maximum flexion
of the canine hip was 118 ±3.6 degrees, and
maximum extension was 147.9 ±2.0 degrees
(Richards et al. 2010). Note that in the later study,
the angle measured and reported in the publica-
tion was the complementary angle to that mea-
Figure 6.5
Flexor, extensor, adductor, and abductor
sured by Jaegger; for simplicity, the data was
muscles of the hip joint.
transformed to the analogous angle reported by
Middle
gluteal
Deep
Piriformis
gluteal
Gemelli
 Superficial
gluteal
Articularis
coxae
Internal
obturator
External
obturator
Figure 6.6 Internal and external rotators of the hip joint.
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Hip Replacement 57
D
8 pue y sasewl quauodwos (eioway (a pue o) ssauawan e pue (a pue v) pauawan e jo ainey ansed  /'y ana
courtesy of Dr. Jonathan Dyce.
Jaegger by subtracting the original values from
complete structural failure (Figure 6.7). The fatigue
180 degrees.
behavior of a material can be determined experi-
mentally and expressed as stress versus log
(number of cycles) to failure, referred to as an
Mechanics of total hip replacement
S-N curve. The lower limit of stress below which
the material can be cycled infinitely without
Basic concepts of mechanics are important in
fatigue failure is termed the endurance limit (Hol-
understanding the performance and limits to lon-
lister 1995).
 gevity of total joint replacements. Stress is defined
at force/unit area, and strain is a dimensionless
to bear and transfer load (Hollister 1995). The
measure of deformation, defined as change in
primary point of load transfer is the contact
length/original length. Stiffness is a measure of
between the head of the femoral component
how much deformation a material will undergo
and the socket of the acetabular component. In
with a given applied force. Lltimate strength is the
contrast to the viscoelastic nature of hyaline carti-
amount of stress necessary to reach the failure
lage, the articulating components in a total hip
point of a material or construct with a single appli-
replacement are simple solids that do not exhibit
cation of load. Modes of failure include fracture or
 the time-dependent viscoelastic properties of car-
plastic deformation.
tilage. The elastic modulus, as determined by the
 Devices or constructs may fracture following
stress-strain curve, of cartilage ranges from less
the serial application of loads below their ultimate
than 1 MPa to 3MPa, while that of polyethylene is
strength. This type of failure is known as fatigue
1400 MPa (Hollister 1995).
failure. Fatigue failure occurs because all materials
The secondary region of load transfer occurs at
contain imperfections or flaws, which may be
the interface between the implants and the sur-
 propagated as cracks under conditions of high
rounding bone (Hollister 1995). In a normal joint,
stress, a large numbers of cycles, or both. As
no such interface exists, as there is a continuous
cycling continues, these cracks coalesce, causing
transition from trabecular to cortical bone. The
58 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
interface between either a cemented or cementless
(PMMA) bone cement, bone, metal, or polyethyl-
 total joint replacement is not as seamless. The load
ene trapped between the femoral head and
must be transferred from the metallic implant
acetabular cup may result in third-body wear.
with a stiffness of 100,000-200,000 MPa to either
 Scratching of the metallic femoral heads is com-
cortical bone with a stiffness of 15,000-20,000 MPa
 monly observed during revision surgery, and this
 or trabecular bone with a stiffness ranging from
is likely caused by third-body wear.
100-1000MPa (Hollister 1995). This mismatch in
Adhesive wear and fatigue wear may work
modulus may create large shear stresses or stress
 together, with the surface asperities of the two
concentration points at the material interfaces,
 surfaces momentarily sticking together, causing
which could result in fatique failure or the genera-
shear stresses that, over time, lead to eventual
tion of wear debris. Low-modulus implants have
fatigue of the asperity (Stewart 2010). In addition,
been designed to decrease bone surface strains
surface fatigue, occurs because contact forces
(Harrysson et al. 2008; Marcellin-Little et al. 2010).
 produce subsurface stresses in both the polyethyl-
 ene and metal as they undergo cyclic compression
and tension. In a process similar to fatigue failure,
Wear
these cyclic stresses propagate cracks from subsur-
face imperfections that eventually cause pitting of
Wear is defined as the progressive loss of sub-
the surface and generation of large free fragments
stance from the operating surface of a body occur-
or shards.
ring as a result of relative motion at the surface
Erosive wear is the loss of material from a solid
(Jin et al. 2006). The moving contact between a
surface due to relative motion in contact with a
metal head and ultrahigh-molecular-weight poly-
fluid that contains particles. This is often subdi-
ethylene (UHMWPE) bearing surface is the first
vided into impingement erosion and abrasive
'uaasendan diu leion u rajsuen peon jo juiod
erosion. If no solid particles are present, erosion
This moving contact between these two apposing
can still take place, such as erosion caused by rain
surfaces generates wear debris that result in the
or by cavitation (Jin et al. 2006). Corrosive wear is
cytokine-mediated osteolysis and bone resorption
a process in which chemical or electrochemical
that has been implicated as the primary long-term
reactions with the environment dominate, such as
failure mode in total joint replacement.
oxidative wear (Jin et al. 2006). To avoid corrosive
Five types of wear have been described. Adhe-
wear, it is important to avoid placing metals with
sive wear is the transfer of material from one
different nobility in contact with each other in the
surface to another during relative motion by the
body. Metal nobility is described in the galvanic
process of solid-phase welding. Adhesion occurs
series.
during contact of the opposing bearing surfaces.
 Not all wear debris are generated from the
Sliding breaks these contacts; however, if the
bearing surfaces. Wear debris can be produced
strength of the adhesion exceeds the strength of
from any modular junction at which there is rela-
the material, particles (wear debris) are pulled
tive motion between the components, for example,
from the material. These adhesive wear debris are
backside wear between the inside of the metallic
typically generated from the polyethylene acetab-
-ao rau a jo apisno a pue laus rano
ular component because polyethylene is the
 ene liner in a metal-backed acetabular component.
weaker of the two bearing surfaces.
Unintended contact, such as impingement of the
Abrasive wear is the displacement of materials
femoral neck on the acetabular component will
by hard particles. Two-body abrasive wear occurs
generate debris. These wear mechanisms apply
when a hard projection on one surface cuts into
equally to both hard-on-soft (e.g., metal or ceramic
on polyethylene) and hard-on-hard (e.g., ceramic
cally observed in polyethylene components. Abra-
 on ceramic, metal on metal, and ceramic on metal)
bearing surfaces.
particles are trapped between adjacent surfaces
Of the five types of wear, abrasive wear, adhe-
causing damage; this is known as fhird-body wear.
 sive wear, and surface fatigue are the most rele-
For example, particles of polymethylmethacrylate
vant in total joint polyethylene wear. It should be
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Hip Replacement  
59
Sliding Distance = rα, where α = 2(160 - 50)π/180
The volumetric wear rate of UHMWPE in post-
Sliding Velocity= sliding distance/Time
mortem retrievals of human acetabular compo-
nents has been reported to be 35.0 mm? /year Jasty
DiameterDistance
Velocity
50°
et al. 1997), and that of dogs has been reported to
14 mm
27 mm
34 mm/s
Flexion
be 6.9mm?/year for implants produced by
19 mm
ww gE
45 mm/s
160°
Extension
BioMedtrix (Boonton, NJ) and 8.3 mm?/year for
implants produced by Richards (Memphis, TN)
Figure 6.8
Sliding distance and velocity as a function of
(Skurla and James 2001). Analysis of peripros-
bearing diameter during a single step at a walking gait with
thetic tissues from patients with failed cemented
a stride frequency of 1.25 strides per second.
total hip replacement has revealed a total mass of
polyethylene debris of 216-518μg/g of tissue for
noted that the various wear types might occur
human patients and 200-400μg/g of tissue for
simultaneously or sequentially. For example, wear
canine patients. It appears that the osteolytic
particles produced as a result of adhesive wear can
process responsible for aseptic loosening in man
thern act as third bodies causing abrasive wear (Jin
has a threshold of 1-10 x 10° polyethylene parti-
et al. 2006). Once particles come between adjacent
cles per gram of tissue, and in the dog it has been
bearing surfaces, the amount of wear debris gener-
estimated to be 4.1-8.2 × 10 particles per gram of
ated through abrasive wear depends on the hard-
tissue.' The total mass of metallic particles in the
ness of the material, the magnitude of the contact
periprosthetic tissues of failed cemented total hip
force, and the sliding distance. Sliding distance is
replacements is reported to be 6000-25,000 μg/ g of
related to the diameter of the femoral head. For a
tissue in human patients and was found to be
given range of motion, a small femoral head will
1333-20,000μg/g of tissue in a cohort of canine
have a shorter sliding distance than a large femoral
patients.
head; thus, the small femoral head will generate
 In summary, there are three laws of wear that
less wear in abrasion and fatigue (Figure 6.8).
should be considered in the context of total joint
Mechanical factors
affecting
surface
fatigue
replacement:
include material hardness, material fatigue resis-
tance, contact stress magmitude, and the amount
Wear volume increases as the normal load
 of cycling between tensile and compressive sub-
increases.
surface stresses. The magnitude of both contact
Wear increases as the sliding distance increases.
and subsurface stresses depends on joint reaction
3.
Wear decreases as the hardness of the softer
forces, surface friction, material stiffness, the thick-
sliding component increases.
ness of surface materials, and the conformity of
bearing surfaces (Hollister 1995). Utilizing finite
element analysis of human acetabular cups, Bartel
Cemented implant interfaces
demonstrated that higher conformity, that is, a
better fit between surfaces, reduced
contact
The implant-bone interface is the second major
 stresses, and polyethylene thickness of less than
site of load transfer; thus, it represents the other
6-8mm greatly increased subsurface stresses
 potential site for mechanical failure of total joints.
(Bartel et al. 1985, 1986). Metal backing appears
The implant interface of a cemented component
to slightly elevate the contact stresses, although
can be subdivided into three regions including
this effect is greater on thinner polyethylene than
the cement-implant interface, the inner cement
mantle, and the cement-bone interface. Defects or
reduces cement stresses (Hollister 1995). To reduce
voids within these regions result in stress concen-
contact stress, the surgeon can choose hip replace-
tration at the edge of the defect, increasing the
ments with highly conforming articular surfaces,
likelihood that the cement will mechanically fail
 ensure proper alignment at implantation, and use
locally. Local failure propagates the defect, limit-
the thickest polyethylene liner that is practical,
ing the mecharical performance of the implant
balanced with the available bone stock (Hollister
system and increasing the likelihood of implant
1995).
failure. The material properties of the components
60 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
of the implant interface of a cemented component
Table 6.1
Evolution of contemporary cementing
vary widely. A metallic femoral stem can be made
techniques
from titanium alloy with a stiffness of 114,000 MPa,
First-
Second-
Third-
endurance limit of 400MPa, and ultimate strength
Technique
generation
generation
 generation
of 850MPa, or cobalt-chromium with a stiffness of
200,000 MPa, endurance limit of 350MPa, and ulti-
Filling
 Antegrade
Retrograde
 Retrograde
mate strength of 900 MPa. The bony portion is a
Cement gun
No
Yes
Yes
combination of trabecular bone with an average
Distal
No
Yes
stiffness of 500MPa and an ultimate strength of
Yes
femoral
 20MPa or cortical bone with an average stiffness
restriction
of 15,000 MPa and ultimate strength of approxi-
 Proximal
No
No
mately 150MPa. The PMMA bone cement is the
Yes
femoral
weak link of this interface, as it has a stiffness of
2200MPa and an ultimate strength of 8-10MPa
restriction
Hand mixing
Yes
Yes
(Hollister 1995). Thus, the high endurance limit of
No
metal, and the bone's ability to repair itself, rela-
cement
tively protect these elements, leaving the cement
Vacuum
No
No
Yes
as the most susceptible to fatigue failure. Mechani-
mixing/
cal loosening or debonding at the cement-implant 
centrifugation
 interface appears to be the initial failure event in
cement
both cemented acetabular and femoral compo-
Canal
No
Yes
Yes
brushing
nents in dogs (Skurla and James 2005; Skurla et al.
2005).
Pulsed lavage
No
No
Yes
Cortical area and cortical porosity are signifi-
Distal
No
Yes
Yes
cantly increased in the femurs of dogs with stable,
 centralization
long-term cemented femoral implants compared
 Proximal
No
No
Yes/No
with nonimplanted femurs (Bergh et al. 2004a).
 Net bone loss proximally and increased bone mass
centralization
jdu ue se suaus ssans jodns aieis
 mechanical factor associated with this bone adap-
tation (Bergh et al. 2004a). Interface loosening
theoretically 
 increasing the cement's longevity
occurs due to direct mechanical failure, or due to
(Davies et al. 1988, 1989). Contemporary cement-
bone resorption secondary to wear debris. The his-
ing techniques have followed an evolutionary
tomorphometric changes of femurs with unstable
 process (Table 6.1). First-generation cement tech-
cemented implants include periosteal bone forma-
-lasun lenuu ym Suxu pueu papnu anbu
tion and endosteal bone resorption, supporting
 tion (finger packing). This technique allowed for
mechanisms of stress shielding and wear debris-
cement lamination, creation of voids within the
 mediated osteolysis as factors that may contribute
cement, inadequate or incomplete cement mantles,
to   femoral  adaptation 
pue
 implant
loosening
and poor penetration of cement into cancellous
(Bergh et al. 2004b).
bone. In spite of these limitations, many authors
The mechanical performance of PMMA bone
reported good long-term survivorship (Nerces-
cement can be enhanced by refinement of the
sian et al. 2005).
cementing technique, thereby increasing
cement
 Since PMMA bone cement has no adhesive
intrusion into trabecular
bone and
decreasing
characteristics, it functions as a grout, and not as
voids and porosity of the cement. Bone cement is
glue. Pressurization increases the penetration of
a viscoelastic material that can undergo creep. It is
cement into the interstices of cancellous bone; it is
much stronger in compression than tension, and
this intrusion of cement into the bone that is
is weakest in shear
(Santavirta
al.
1998)
responsible for the shear strength of the interface.
Decreased porosity has been shown to increase
Pressurized cement has better tensile and shear
tensile strength and fatigue strength of cement,
strengthis at the bone-cement interface than
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Hip Replacement 61
finger-packed cement in adult mongrel dogs
hematoma differentiates into either fibrous tissue,
(MacDonald et al. 1993). Bone preparation by
if the implant is unstable, or woven bone, if the
removing fat, blood, and debris promotes better
implant is stable. The threshold of stability neces-
cement penetration, improving mechanical inter-
aq Aieaa s ymo Auq aaatue on Ars
lock and interface shear strength (Breusch et al.
defined as 100 μm of motion at the bone-implant
2000). Based on these findings, second-generation
interface (Hollister 1995). The second stage of bone
 cement techniques, involving canal preparation
ingrowth is remodeling of the interface tissue.
with brushing, retrograde liquid-phase injection
Fibrous tissue at the interface generally remains at
 of cement using a cement gun, a distal canal plug
the interface wherever it was initially deposited,
(cement restrictor), and stem centralizer, were
and bony tissue remodels in response to the
introduced in the 1980s (Table 6.1). These advances
implant-imposed strains. In order to create and
in cementing technique resulted in a marked
maintain bone ingrowth or ongrowth, osseointe-
reduction in the incidence of femoral component
 gration, or synthesis of mineralized tissue within
loosening in people (Savory et al. 2006).
the interface, during the initial phase of healing
 Contemporary or third-generation techniques
must occur, and the subsequent implant-imposed
 introduced the concept of maintaining pressuriza-
strains must be large enough to maintain the ini-
tion of the cement before and during cement inser-
tially deposited bone.
It is not certain how much bone ingrowth or
femoral occlusion (Table 6.1). Retrograde filling,
ongrowth is necessary for implant stability;
 proximal restrictions, and liquid-phase injection
however,
it has been demonstrated that the
with the cement gun allow increased pressuriza-
mechanics of the implant-bone interface depend
tion of the cement, and thus greater cement
substantially on the amount and type of tissue that
intrusion into the interstices of the cancellous
 grows into or onto the implant surface. In a model
bone. In addition, centrifugation and vacuum
of bone ingrowth, Ko evaluated the effect of the
mixing have been advocated to decrease porosity
percentage of bone ingrowth on interface stiffness.
and to remove the noxious fumes of the monomer.
In the case of 65% bone ingrowth, the stiffness
The amount of reduction in porosity that is
parallel to the interface was 25,094MPa and that
achieved remains somewhat controversial.
perpendicular to the interface was 1644 MPa. With
addition, although voids can act as crack initia-
 50% ingrowth the parallel stiffness was 24,850 MPa,
tors, they can also be crack terminators (Savory et
 and perpendicular was 996MPa. If ingrowth is
al. 2006). Nonporous cement can exhibit excessive
reduced to 15%, the parallel stiffness was reduced
contraction after polymerization, and this contrac-
by only 1%, while the perpendicular stiffness was
tion can compromise fixation by (
diminishing
reduced by 40%. Based on these results, it appears
microinterlock.
that the amount of bone tissue ingrowth will dra-
matically affect load transfer perpendicular to the
interface, while it has a much lower effect on load
Cementless implant interfaces
transfer parallel to the interface. Schiller et al.
(1993) reported that the mean percentage of bone
Unlike cemented implants that rely on mechanical
 ingrowth, expressed as mean percent of ingrowth
interlock for stability, cementless ingrowth and
surface volume, into the porous-coated beaded
 ongrowth implants rely on the interaction between
surface of the acetabular component of the PCA
the biological healing process and mechanical
Canine Total Hip System (Howmedica, Mahwah,
stimuli to achieve long-term fixation. In addition,
NJ) was 12% at 6 months, 24% at 12 months, and
the initial stability of these implants achieved by
24% at 24 months. Lauer et al. (2009) reported
frictional forces or screw fixation is often inferior
that the median bone ingrowth, expressed as
to that of the long-term stability that occurs in the
percent of ingrowth surface area, into the cup
weeks following implantation. The processes of
perforations of the Zurich Cementless Total Hip
bone ingrowth and ongrowth are thought to occur
(Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland) acetabular compo-
in two stages. The initial stage is similar to indirect
nent was 50%, 20%, and 44% at2, 6, and 12 months,
 or secondary bony union, in which the initial
respectively
62Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Center of rotation
distance between the center of the femoral head
and the center of the medullary canal, or anatomi-
The center of rotation of the hip joint is the geo-
cal axis of the femur (Figure 6.1). Medialization or
metrical center of the femoral head. Careful pre-
lateralization of the acetabular component alters
operative plarming and intraoperative execution
the offset by changing the center of the femoral
should ensure that, after total hip replacement, the
head. Although offset can be corrected by making
 center of rotation is restored to its predisease posi-
a reciprocal adjustment to the neck length, the
tion. Utilization of modern, highly modular hip
incorrect center of the hip will remain. Reduced
prostheses allows selection of appropriate neck
offset results in abductor muscle dysfunction
length to reestablish femoral offset and soft tissue
 owing to a diminished lever arm. Therefore, the
tension, once the center of rotation has been
abductor muscles must generate a larger force to
established.
balance body weight. The increased force creates
 In the dysplastic patient, it is common for the
a larger joint reaction force and increases wear
center of rotation to be displaced dorsally. Restora-
(Sariali et al. 2008). In addition, reduced offset
tion of the hip center to the center of the true
results in soft tissue laxity that predisposes to
acetabulum during arthroplasty confers both ana-
luxation. Subluxation during the stance or swing
tomical and biomechanical advantages (Sariali
phase also likely results in increased wear by
 et al. 2008). The best acetabular bone stock is gen-
causing microseparation edge loading (Stewart
erally found in the true acetabulum; thus, posi-
et al. 2001).
tioning the acetabular component within the true
acetabulum optimizes dorsal coverage and medi-
alization of the component. Returning the center
Bearing diameter
of rotation to the true acetabulum in these cases
also increases the lever arm for the abductor
In order for dislocation to occur, the femoral head
muscles, restoring biomechanics (Sariali et al.
has to displace a distance "AB" within the cup
      
(Figure 6.9). This distance, referred to as the
have both been implicated in early failure in
jumping distance, is the translation of the center of
people (Stans et al. 1998; Sariali et al. 2008).
Version
The complementary retroversion of the acetabular
component and anteversion of the neck of the
femoral component should reflect normal patient
anatomy, thus restoring range of motion to normal
or near-normal levels prior to impingement. Rela-
tive, or absolute, anteversion of the cup, for
instance, reduces impingement-free range 
of
motion in external rotation, predisposing to cra-
niodorsal luxation. While anteversion of the stem
improves range of motion, it reduces femoral
offset.
Offset
Figure 6.9  The jumping distance is the lateral translation
Cup position, cup size and center of rotation,
(AB) of the center of the femoral head (C) that must occur
femoral head size, stem size, neck length, stem
before dislocation occurs. F is the joint reaction force and
version, and stem position within the medullary
@ is the angle of lateral opening measured in the transverse
canal all influence offset, which is defined as the
plane.
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Hip Replacement 63
the femoral head that precedes luxation. The
cobalt-chromium alloy, and titanium alloy. Labo-
jumping distance increases proportionally as the
 ratory and clinical studies in man have shown
diameter of the femoral head increases, and is
that wear rates of UHMWPE coupled with either
l unado rerae jo alue ct paiean Aiasiaa
stainless steel or cobalt-chromium are comparable
is, as the angle of lateral opening increases,
(Manley and Dumbleton 2006). Historically, cobalt-
jumping distance decreases. Bearing diameter also
chromium was chosen over the 316L stainless steel
affects wear rate, since sliding distance increases
available at the time because the cobalt-chromium
as diameter increases, as discussed above. There-
 alloy was more resistant to corrosion. Newer more
fore, selection of femoral head diameter must take
corrosion-resistant stainless steel alloys are now
resistance to luxation and wear into consideration.
available, and the use of these newer alloys is
The jumping distance is also related to the geom-
increasing. Titanium alloys are more vulnerable to
etry of the cup, and if the desigmn is not a complete
abrasion than cobalt-based alloys; therefore, they
hemisphere, the distance is reduced. Considering
are not commonly used as bearings in people.
an acetabular component with a perfect hemi-
Hardening of the surface of titanium alloy heads
spherical shape and a 45-degree angle of lateral
using techniques such as gas nitriding, solution
opening, distance "AB" is equal to 0.77 times the
nitriding, ion implantation, and diamond-like
bearing radius (Figure 6.9). The distance is reduced
carbon coating may improve performance, but
to 0.43 times the bearing radius if the cup is posi-
wear can still occur if the hardened layer is pen-
tioned with a 65-degree angle of lateral opening
etrated (Manley and Dumbleton 2006).
(Sariali et al. 2008).
In man, cast or forged cobalt-chromium alloy
predominates as the choice of femoral head mate-
rial for articulation against UHMWPE. For this
Bearing type
reason, the wear of cobalt-chromium alloy against
UHMWPE bearing combination is the standard
Bearings can be broadly divided into hard-on-soft
against which all other bearing combinations are
(e.g., metal or ceramic on polyethylene) and hard-
measured (Barrack et al. 2004).
on-hard (e.g., ceramic on ceramic, metal on metal,
and ceramic on metal). Hard-on-soft bearings
operate with boundary lubrication (also known as 
Polyethylene
border lubrication), a condition in which a com-
plete fluid film does not develop between appos-
UHMWPE is manufactured from powder that is
ing surfaces. Thus, there is momentary dry contact
converted into solid form by ram extrusion of
 between wear surface high points or asperities; in
rods, or compression molding of blocks. The com-
this case, friction and wear are sigmificant, and
ponent is then machined from the solid UHMWPE.
wear is proportional to sliding distance; a function
Sometimes a near net shape component is molded
of bearing diameter, as illustrated in Figure 6.8.
from powder prior to final machining. The final
Hard-on-hard bearings operate with mixed lubri-
step in the manufacturing process is sterilization,
 cation, a mixture of characteristics between bound-
which can be performed by ethylene oxide, gas-
ary, or thin film, and fluid film lubrication, in
plasma, or gamma irradiation in air. Sterilization
which there is complete separation of elements by
of UHMWPE by gamma radiation introduces
fluid. Mixed lubrication can lead to lower wear;
cross-linking of the polyethylene molecules from
thus hard-on-hard bearings are ideal for use in
the interaction of the free radicals formed during
larger bearings, since these lubrication mecha-
irradiation.  Laboratory  and clinical studies in
nisms may improve with higher sliding velocities
man have demonstrated improved wear resis-
(Fisher et al. 2006).
 tance of gamma-sterilized UHMWPE compared
with UHMWPE sterilized by nonionizing means
(ethylene oxide or gas-plasma) (Manley and
Femoral head materials
Dumbleton 2006). Sterilization by gamma radia-
tion in air creates the potential for oxidation of
The metallic alloys that have been used with the
UHMWPE because of the existence of free radicals
UHMWPE bearing surfaces are stainless steel,
that are not cross-linked. Oxidation reduced the
mechanical properties of these components. For
axial migration of the stem results in tighter
this reason, some manufacturers have changed the
wedging of the loaded, tapered stem within the
sterilization process to gamma irradiation in an
cement mantle, creating compressive stresses
inert atmosphere such as nitrogen, argon, or
within the cement and reduced shear at the
vacuum; the lack of oxygen in these environments
cement-bone interface (Savory et al. 2006).
prevents initiation of the oxidative process
According to the composite beam model, the
(Manley and Dumbleton 2006).
mechanical bond between the cement-implant
Since cross-linking was shown
1 to reduce
interface can be strengthened by features on the
UHMWPE wear, it was theorized that increasing
 stem surface. These features include roughened
cross-linking further would result in an even more
stem surfaces or precoating the stem with PMMA.
wear-resistant UHMWPE. I
cross-linked
Collars on the stem are thought to strengthen the
UHMWPE can be produced by using higher doses
cement-stem bond by pressurizing the cement,
of radiation followed by or combined with heat to
reducing subsidence, and transferring load to the
 Enhance the cross-linking process and the removal
proximal portion of the femur (Savory et al. 2006).
 of free radicals. Among the many variables that
 Implant material, cross-sectional geometry, and
 go u a u pamd aq t
length of cemented stems affect cement stresses
cross-linked UHMWPE, the key variables are radi-
(Schulz 2000). Stiff materials, such as cobalt-
 ation dose and the temperature of heating (Manley
chromium alloys and stainless steel, create less
and Dumbleton 2006).Manufacturersof UHMWPE
 cement stresses. In addition, since these materials
components for people have introduced different
are harder, they are more resistant to abrasion than
a q sa sn 
softer, less stiff materials. Sharp corners concen-
choices in the radiation dose and heating tempera-
trate stresses, thus they should be avoided. Broad
ture. These efforts have been largely successful,
medial borders reduce proximal cement strain,
and studies on highly cross-linked UHMWPE
and broad lateral borders increase component
liners have consistently showed lower femoral
strength (Estok et al. 1997). In a canine cemented
head penetration and an 87% lower risk of osteoly-
total hip replacement model, shorter implants had
sis (Kurtz et al. 2011). However, cases of in vivo
higher cement strains medial and lateral to the
oxidation at the rim and rim delamination
in
stem tip; however, changes in neck length did not
armealed polyethylene, and rim fracture
in
significantly affect cement strain (Dassler et al.
remelted polyethylene have provided motivation
 2003). In canine total hip replacement, implant
for ongoing research on the long-term stability
 positioning, including fit and geometry of recon-
and mechanical performance of this first genera-
 struction, has been shown to vary depending on
tion of highly cross-linked UHMWPE (Kurtz et al.
the implant design and manufacturer (Schulz et al.
2011).
 2000). Longer femoral stems result in decreased
compressive stresses in the cement; however, long
straight implants have been shown to be difficult
Design considerations of cemented
to accurately position in the curved canine femur
femoral components
(Schulz et al. 1998, 1999). Increasing the cross-
 sectional area of the stem also reduces compres-
The durability of a cemented femoral stem is
sive stresses in the cement, and increases the ratio
highly dependent on both the quality of the
 of compressive to tensile forces, which is prefera-
cementing technique and the design of the implant.
ble, since PMMA is more resistant to compressive
Two separate design philosophies have emerged
loads than tensile loads.
from the last four decades of total hip arthroplasty
experience: the tapered slip and the composite
beam models of femoral design.
Design considerations of cementless
The taper slip design is thought to take advan-
acetabular components
 tage of the viscoelastic behavior of cement (creep).
Under loading conditions, the cement deforms,
Cementless acetabular components were intro-
resulting in slight subsidence of the stem. The
duced in the early 1980s in an attempt to improve
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Hip Replacement 65
the long-term results of acetabular fixation.
use in people in response to concerns over the use
Although cemented acetabular components pro-
 of screws for fixation and in an attempt to maxi-
vided reliable early results in people, long-term
mize initial component stability without the use of
studies noted increased rates of radiographic and
adjunctive forms of fixation (Savory et al. 2006).
clinical loosening. In addition, an increased under-
Although the intermediate results with compo-
standing of the factors affecting the quality of
 nents of this design in people have been accept-
cement technique revealed the demanding nature
able, there is a concern that this design may
of implanting a cemented all-polyethylene cup.
decrease total contact between the dome of the
Specifically, difficulties were noted in routinely
component acetabular bone bed, resulting in a
obtaining a bloodless surgical field and providing
decreased amount of bone ingrowth compared
for optimal cement pressurization.
with components with a simple hemispherical
A variety of strategies for obtaining initial stabil-
design.
ity were explored including dome screws, periph-
Threaded screws have been shown to be the
eral screws, peripheral threads,
dome
spikes,
strongest method to provide or augment the initial
peripheral fins, and insertion with a press-fit tech-
stability
of
cementless acetabular components.
nique in which the component is oversized rela-
Screw holes can be placed in the dome of the com-
tive to the diameter of the acetabular preparation
- as a aa a i ro a
(Savory et al. 2006). These cementless components
ment of peripheral screws often requires a wider
rapidly became the most popular type of acetabu-
exposure, most modern primary acetabular com-
lar implant in both human and veterinary total hip
 ponents for people utilize dome screws. Concerns
replacement surgery because the surgical tech-
with the use of screws include the potential for
nique is more versatile and reproducible than
acetabular fixation with cement.
insertion, concerns that screw holes may act as
access channels for polyethylene wear debris to
 nents varies widely, from hemispheric, oblong, or
access the implant-bone interface, the potential
threaded designs to dual geometry designs. Most
for fretting corrosion and material loss between
threaded acetabular components do not have a
the screw head and the metal shell, and direct
biological surface for bone ingrowth or ongrowth 
contact and subsequent abrasive wear of the screw
and rely on a mechanical interlock with the ace-
head against the femoral head as the polyethylene
tabular bone bed. These components have been
liner thins (Savory et al. 2006; Figure 6.10).
shown to have poorer mechanical stability than
hemispherical components and a smaller amount
of surface area in contact with the acetabular bone
Design considerations of cementless
bed. Few of the threaded designs have demon-
femoral components
strated acceptable survivorship in humans (Savory
et al. 2006). Threaded implants with biological sur-
Cementless femoral components were first
faces for bony ingrowth have been associated with
introduced in the 1970s in an attempt to improve
acceptable results; however, the preparation of the
the long-term survivorship
）experiencedwith
acetabular bed and the reproducible insertion of
cemented femoral stems. A variety of design and
material factors should be considered when evalu-
ating the performance of a femoral component
(Savory et al. 2006).
since these factors may influence the initial and
Some dual geometry designs are characterized
-idl jo asea pue qenp iqeis waisuot
by a larger radius of the component at the periph-
tation. These factors include stem material, stem
ery than at the dome, while others feature a cylin-
shape, extent and type of surface coating, and the
drical locking zone at the face of the hemispherical 
modularity of the system.
cup. The dual geometry design is intended to
Cobalt-chromium and titanium are the two
maximize the contact of the biological surface at
most common materials used to produce femoral
the rim of the acetabulum with the use of a press-
components, and
1 comparable long-term results
fit technique. These desigms were developed for
have been obtained using both. Implants made of
A
Figure 6.10 Abrasive wear of the dome screw of an acetabular component. Note the extensive polyethylene wear (thinning)
(A) that occurred prior to contact of the femoral head (note gray discolored area) (B) and the screw head (note concavity in
screw head due to wear) (C).
titanium have a lower modulus of elasticity that
 The tapered geometry of the stem takes advantage
more closely approximates that of cortical bone.
of the viscoelastic nature of bone, allowing the
This provides the theoretical advantages of more
stem to subside to a position of tightest fit, enhanc-
predictable and physiological patterns of bone
 ing proximal load sharing of the device.
modeling, remodeling, and less stress shielding.
Cylindrical stems usually have a circumferential
which should yield better long-term stability. Bone
porous coating over most or all of the surface area
density studies using dual-energy X-ray absorpti-
of the stem. Both proximal and distal coating of
 ometry in people have corroborated this, demon-
these stems is intended to maximize the region of
strating less overall stress shielding and better
potential bone ingrowth and enhance the long-
maintenance of proximal bone density with stems
term stability of the implant. Initial stability can be
made of titanium with proximal ingrowth com-
pared with stems made of cobalt-chromium, or 
machining the tubular femoral diaphysis in
those with distal ingrowth (Gibbons et al. 2001).
people, or by utilizing screw fixation in dogs.
Despite these theoretical benefits and the observed
 Monocortical, locking screw fixation to the medial
differences in bone density, superiority of one
 cortex theoretically allows independent motion of
stem design over another has not been demon-
the medial (compression) and lateral (tension) sur-
strated in long-term clinical studies with revision
faces of the proximal femur. This motion may be
for stem loosening as the outcome measure
 mitigated as bony ongrowth or ingrowth occurs.
(Khanuja et al. 2011).
Anatomical stems, designed to fit the anatomy
Femoral components have been desigmed with
 of the proximal femur, have been associated with
a variety of shapes including tapered, cylindrical,
significant rates of thigh pain and osteolysis in
and anatomical, depending on the intended 
 people (Knight et al. 1998). Factors that appear
method of fixation. In addition, varying degrees
pioae o1 pue ssaoons wian-ouol ria ol [eionn
of craniocaudal and mediolateral taper can be
thigh pain are adequate fill of the metaphyseal
designed into these stems.
 region in both the coronal and sagittal planes. A
Tapered stems, those with a pronounced proxi-
 prospective analysis of 50 consecutive cases using
mal to distal taper, are designed to interlock into
a similar stem design in dogs revealed long-term
the metaphyseal region with litle or no diaphy-
stability and excellent clinical function (Marcellin-
seal fixation. These stems are usually a collarless
Little et al. 1999).
design to allow wedging of the prosthesis into the
Modularity of the head and neck is common to
metaphyseal region. The proximal fixation surface
 most implant designs, and allows customization
is typically a porous coating, plasma spray macro-
 of the implants to individual patients. Intraopera-
texturing, or fiber mesh pads, designed to create
tive flexibility allows more accurate adjustment of
 adequate initial stability to achieve bony ingrowth.
the prosthetic articulation that may reduce the risk
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Hip Replacement 67
of postoperative luxation (Schulz 2000). The great-
Bergh MS, Muir P, Markel MD et al. Femoral bone adap-
est concern for modularity is corrosion at the junc-
tation to unstable long-term cemented total hip
tion between the modular parts, particularly
arthroplasty in dogs. Vet Surg 2004b;33:238-245.
 Breusch SJ, Norman TL, Schneider U et al. Lavage tech-
between
dissimilar metals such
ascobalt-
nique in total hip arthroplasty: Jet lavage produces
chromium head and a titanium trunion. The gen-
eration and release of particulate debris can lead
proximal femur. J Arthroplasty 2000;15:921-927.
to local tissue hypersensitivity and cause third-
Cross AR, Newell SM, Chambers JN, et al. Acetabular
body wear at the bearing surface. Wear products
component orientation as an indicator of implant
from corrosion at the head-neck junction have
Sins iaA iseidore du reio pauaua u uoex
been identified in periprosthetic tissue from
2000;29:517-523.
 human patients in as little as 8 months following
Dassler CL,Schulz KS, Kass P et al. The effects of fermoral
stem and neck length on cement strains in a canine
surgery (Urban et al. 1994).
total hip replacement model. Vet Surg 2003;32:37-45.
An understanding of hip biomechanics includ-
Davies JP, O'Conmor DO, Burke DW et al. The effect of
 ing the range of motion and kinematics of normal
centrifugation on the fatigue life of bone cement in the
gait, the static and dynamic loads applied to the
presence of surface irregularities. Clin Orthop Relat
articulation, the transmission of mechanical stress
Res 1988;229:156-161.
Davies JP, Jasty M, O'Connor DO et al. The effect of
within and across the joint, and the mechanical
centrifuging bone cement. J Bone Joint Surg Br
interplay of various tissues and structures that
1989;71:3942
cross the joint are fundamental to treating a wide
Dyce J, Wisner ER, Schrader SC et al. Radiographic
range of disorders with total hip replacement.
evaluation of acetabular component position in dogs.
Characteristics of implant materials and implant
Vet Surg 2001;30:28-39.
 design play a large role in the function and longev-
Estok DM, Orr TE, Harris WH. Factors affecting cement
ity of a total hip replacement. Precise maripula-
strains near the tip of a cemented femoral component.
tion of these factors can optimize implant design,
J Arthroplasty 1997;12:40-48.
Evans HE. The skeleton, arthrology, the muscular
long-term patient outcome, and function.
system. In: Mitler's Anatomy of the Dog, Evans HE (ed.),
3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1993, p.245.
 Fisher J, Zin J, Tipper J et al. Tribology of altermative
Endnotes
bearings. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2006;453:25-34.
Gibbons CE, Davies AJ, Amis AA et al. Periprosthetic
1. Wood I. Particulate debris and implant failure in
bone mineral density changes with femoral compo-
nents of differing design philosophy. Int Orthop
cemented canine total hip replacements. MS thesis,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 2004.
2001;25:89-92
Harrysson OLA, Cansizoglu O, Marcellin-Little DJ et al.
2. Ko CC. Mechanical characteristics of implant/tissue
 Direct metal fabrication of titanium implant compo-
interphases. PhD dissertation, The University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 1994.
nents with tailored materials and mechanical proper-
ties using electron beam melting technology. Mat Sci
Eng C 2008;28:366-373.
Hollister SJ. Mechanical factors influencing the outcome
References
of total joint replacement. Curr Orthop 1995;9:2-8.
Jaegger G, Marcellin-Little DJ, Levine D. Reliability of
Barrack RL, Burak C, Skinmer HB. Concerns about
goniometry in Labrador retrievers. Am J Vet Res
ceramics
im
THA.
Clin
Orthop
Relat
tRes
2002;63:979-986.
2004;429:73-79.
Jasty M, Goetz DD, Bragdon CR et al. Wear of polyeth-
Bartel DL, Burstein AH, Toda MD et al. The effect of
conformity and plastic thickness on contact stresses in
An analysis of one hundred and twenty-eight compo-
metal-backed plastic implants. J Biomech Eng
1985;107:193-199.
J Bone Joint Surg Am 1997;79:349-358.
Bartel DL, Bicknell VL, Wright TM. The effect of confor-
Jin ZM, Stone M, Ingham E et al. Biotribology. Curr
mity, thickness and material on stresses in ultra-high
Orthop 2006;20:32-40.
molecular weight components for total joint replace-
Khanuja HS, Vakil JI, Goddard MS et al. Cementless
ment. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1986;68:1041-1051.
femoral fixation in total hip arthroplasty. J Bone Joint
Bergh MS, Muir P, Markel MD et al. Femoral bone adap-
Surg Am 2011,93:500-509.
tation to stable long-term cemented total hip arthro-
Knight JL, Atwater RD, Guo J. Clinical results of
plasty in dogs. Vet Surg 2004a;33:214-220.
the midstem porous-coated anatomic uncemented
68Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
 v :isd d o Ard un us ro
3rd ed. Rosemont, IL: American Academy of Ortho-
nine-year prospective study. J Arthroplasty
paedic Surgeons, 2006.
1998;13:535-545.
Schiller TD, DeYoung DJ, Schiller RA et al. Quantitative
Kurtz SM, Gawel HA, Patel JD. History and systematic
ingrowth analysis of a porous-coated acetabular com-
review of wear and osteolysis outcomes for first-
 ponent in a canine model. Vet Surg 1993;22:276-280.
generation highly crosslinked polyethylene. Clin
Schulz KS. Application of arthroplasty principles to
Orthop Relat Res 2011;469:2262-2277.
canine cemented total hip replacement. Vet Surg
Lauer SK, Nieves MA, Peck J et al. Descriptive histomor-
2000;29:578-593.
phometric ingrowth analysis of the Zurich cementless
Schulz KS, Vasseur P, Stover SM et al. Transverse plane
canine total hip acetabular component. Vet Surg
evaluation of the effects of surgical techmique on stem
2009;38:59-69.
positioning and geometry of reconstruction in canine
MacDonald W, Swarts E, Beaver R. Penetration and
: s    1  r
shear strength of cement-bone interfaces in vivo. Clin
1071-1079.
Orthop Relat Res 1993;286:283-288.
Schulz KS, Vasseur P, Stover SM et al. Effect of surgical
 Manley MT, Dumbleton J. Bearing surfaces. In: Orthopae-
technique and use of a rigid centralizing device on
dic Knowledge LIpdate. Hip and Knee Reconstruction,
stem positioning and geometric reconstruction in the
Barrack RL, Booth RE, Lonner JH et al (eds.), 3rd ed.
sagittal plane during total hip replacement in canine
Rosemont, IL: American Academy of Orthopaedic
cadavers. Am J Vet Res 1999;60:1126-1135.
Surgeons, 2006.
Schulz KS, Nielsen C, Stover SM et al. Comparison of
Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung BA, Doyens DH et al.
the fit and geometry of reconstruction of femoral com-
Canine uncemented porous-coated anatomic total
 ponents of four cemented canine total hip replace-
hip arthroplasty: Results of a long-term prospective
ment implants. Am J Vet Res 2000;61:1113-1121.
evaluation of 50 consecutive cases. Vet Surg 1999;
Skurla CT, James SP. A comparison of canine and human
28:10-20.
UHMWPE acetabular component wear. Biomed Sci
Marcellin-Little DJ, Cansizoglu O, Harrysson OLA et al.
Instrum 2001;37:245-250.
In vitro testing of a low modulus mesh canine pros-
Skurla CP, James SP. Assessing the dog as a model for
thetic hip stem. Am J Vet Res 2010;71:1089-1095.
human total hip replacement: Analysis of 38 post-
Nercessian OA, Martin G, Joshi RP et al. A 15- to 25-year
mortem retrieved canine cemented acetabular compo-
nents. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater
arthroplasty: A single surgeon series. J Arthroplasty
2005;73:260-270.
2005;20:162-167.
Skurla CP, Pluhar GE, Frankel DJ et al. Assessing the dog
Nevelos J, Patel A. Hip Biomechanics and the Implications
 as a model for human total hip replacement. Analysis
of Total Hip Replacement, 1st ed. Mahwah, NJ: HSC
of 38 canine cemented femoral components retrieved
Press, 2009.
at post-mortem. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2005;87:120-127.
Richards J, Holler R, Bockstahler B et al. A comparison
Stans AA, Pagnano MW, Shaughnessy WJ et al. Results
 of human and canine kinematics during level walking,
of total hip arthroplasty for Crowe Type Ill develop-
stair ascent, and stair descent. Vet Med Austria
mental hip dysplasia. Clin Orthop Relat Res
2010;97:92-100.
1998;348:149-157.
Santavirta S, Xu JW, Hietanen J et al. Activation of peri-
 Stewart T, Tipper J, Streicher R et al. Long-term wear of
prosthetic connective tissue in aseptic loosening of
HIPed alumina on alumina bearings for THR under
total hip implants. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1998;352:
microseparation conditions. J Mater Sci Mater Med
16-24.
2001;12:1053-1056.
Sariali E, Veysi V,Stewart T. Biomechanics of the human
 Stewart TD. Tribology of artificial joints. Orthop Trauma
2010;24:435-440.
Orthop 2008;22:371-375.
Urban RM, Jacobs JI, Gilbert JL et al. Migration of cor-
Savory CG, Hamilton WG, Engh CA et al. Hip designs.
IDsion products from modular hip prostheses. Particle
In: Orthopaedic Knowledge LIpdate.Hip and Knee Recor-
auog I shurpun ieotsonouedois pue sishieureoo
structior, Barrack RL, Booth RE, Lonner JH et al (eds.),
Joint Surg Am 1994;76:1345-1359.
Clinical Application of Total Hip
Replacement
Jeffrey N. Peck, William D. Liska, David J. DeYoung,
and Denis J. Marcellin-Little
Introduction and background
published by Olmstead in the 1980s using a
cemented fixed-head  femoral component and
Documentation of joint pathology dates to prehis-
an  all-polyethylene acetabular cup  prosthesis
toric times. For millernia, little could be done to
(Olmstead et al. 1983; Olmstead 1987), and later
treat joint pain or dysfunction. Remedies were
using the modular prosthesis in 1995 (Olmstead
likely discovered on a trial and error basis and
1995a).
relied in part on rest and placebo effect. Nonste
 Ingrowth cementless THR was developed in the
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs were discovered
early 1980s to address the issue of component
and modified over time to increase their safety
loosening that was identified in cemented
and efficacy. These drugs have made a great con-
implants. Several cementless THR systems were
tribution to the quality of life of humans and
 developed and used in experimental studies or in
animals.
short case series (Chen et al. 1983; Paul et al. 1992).
 Prearthroplasty era surgical attempts to allevi
The stems were made of titanium alloy, and fiber
uapiqap of uoneindue papnu ued ae
metal was present on surfaces intended for bone
(Magnuson 1946), corrective osteotomies, excision
 ingrowth. The canine porous-coated anatomical
arthroplasty, denervation, and arthrodesis. The
hip (Canine PCA, Howmedica, Mahway, NJ)
 flourishing era of joint replacement was ushered
was developed by DeYoung and was used for a
in by John Charnley's pioneering development of
nonrandomized long-term prospective clinical
a human total hip replacement (THR) in the 1960s
using metal, plastic, and bone cement (Charnley
Carolina State University (NCSU; DeYoung et al.
1960, 1970).
1992; Marcellin-Little et al. 1999a). The system was
 The first report of THR in dogs was published
also used at several other colleges of veterinary
 in 1957 (Gorman 1957). Widespread clinical inter-
medicine (Montgomery et al. 1992). Through a
est in canine THR grew from the need to treat
series of clinical studies, information on radio-
 dogs with hip pain and the success of THR
graphic criteria for evaluation, short- and long-
in humans. The initial clinical reports were
term radiographic assessment, bone ingrowth
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
69
assessment, and long-term clinical assessment,
thie uncemented prosthesis were established by
the NCSU clinical program formed the scientific
DeYoung in 1992 (DeYoung and Schiller 1992;
foundation of our current clinical knowledge in
DeYoung et al. 1993) and Marcellin-Litle in 1999
ingrowth cementless THR (DeYoung and Schiller
(Marcellin-Little et al. 1999a). These radiographic
1992; DeYoung et al. 1992, 1993; Schiller et al. 1993;
studies described the radiographic changes fol-
Marcellin-Little et al. 1999a).
lowing cementless THR in the dog and standard-
The BioMedtrix press-fit cementless Biological
ized the nomenclature. The studies detailed the
Fixation (BFX) system (BioMedtrix LLC, Boonton,
short- and the long-term clinical and radiographic
NJ) was designed in the early 2000s. The system
results, and set the standards for other surgeons
 addressed many of the shortcomings of the Canine 
to aspire to achieve.
PCA system, including its lack of commercial
The increased interest in canine and feline hip
availability; the relative lack of modularity with
replacement encourages continued biomaterials
regard to stem size, cup size, and prosthetic neck
research. Function and long-term survivorship of
length; the risk of luxation because of a relatively
implants can be increased through improved
 small (15-mm diameter) prosthetic head; and the
materials, implant design, and methods
of
need to stock left and right anatomical stems. The
fixation.
BFX system became commercially available
in
 Equally important, surgeons must be trained to
2003. In 2007, the BFX and the Modular Total Hip
maximize results and to minimize risks and com-
systems were combined into the Universal Total
plications (Hayes et al. 2011b). It is paramount that
Hip system with a common instrument set and
surgeons be able to recognize potential risks and
surgical technique.
 be capable of and willing to manage complications 
The Zurich Cementless Total Hip system (Kyon,
when they arise. The profession must demand
Zurich, Switzerland) with screw fixation was
developed in the late 1990s. Guerrero reported its
outcomes and implant survivorship as the primary
dlinical outcome in 2009 (Guerrero and Montavon
agent of change in arthroplasty.
2009). Stability of this prosthesis is provided by
Tremendous advancements in canine and feline
bone ingrowth into the cup and locking-screw
THR have been made in the past 30 years. Joint
fixation of the femoral stem to the medial femoral
replacement in animals will no doubt continue to
cortex. The histomorphometric analysis of bone
evolve and expand as clients expect the elimina-
mgrowth into the acetabular component
was
tion of hip pain and the return to normal function
reported in 2009 (Lauer et al. 2009). Other concepts 
for their pets. However, it is important to bear in
in canine THR have been explored. A screw-in
 mind that total joint arthroplasty is a salvage pro-
femoral implant that replaces the femoral head
cedure resulting from the failure to adequately
is in the early phase of commercialization and
treat or eliminate the underlying disease condi-
dinical assessment (Hach and Delfs 2009; Kim
 tion. Genetic engineering and cell biology offer the
et al. 2012).
 promise for future medical treatment options for
The size range of hip prostheses was initially
osteoarthritis (OA). However, until such time,
paaa-una pue (o<) -arel Ao os pan
research
1 and development must continue to
dogs were candidates for THR. More recently.
improve total joint arthroplasty.
 smaller prostheses have become available. A min-
iature prosthesis for use in dogs less than 25kg
was reported by Warmock in 2003 (Warnock et al.
Indications and contraindications
2003) and Matis in 2008.1 In 2010, Liska reported
on the use of an even smaller cemented prosthesis
THR in dogs is most often performed to alleviate
liam uea e yim soop ies pue sien ui pasn
the pain resulting from OA secondary to hip dys-
of 7.2kg (Liska 2010).
plasia (Figure 7.1; Olmstead et al. 1983; Marcellin-
In 1996, Budsberg (
documented
sigrificant
Little et al. 1999a; Guerrero and Montavon 2009).
improvement of loading function following hip
However, any cause of nonseptic OA may be an
replacement in dogs using gait analysis (Budsberg
indication, whether its cause is traumatic, devel-
et al. 1996). Radiographic assessment standards of
 opmental, acquired, or idiopathic. In one report,
Figure 7.1  Ventrodorsal radiographs of a 7-year-old Labrador retriever. The dog had severe bilateral hip dysplasia (A) and a
12 large-breed dogs with traumatic hip luxation
were treated successfully with cemented THR
(Pozzi et al. 2004).
 Not all animals presenting with hip pain have
sufficient indications that justify imminent THR.
Animals with coxofemoral OA, with or without
 clinical signs or previous attempts to alleviate pain
nonsurgically, are potential THR candidates. In
some scenarios, surgery can be delayed until pain
management is only partially effective and/or
clinical signs worsen. Additionally, if pain man-
agement combined with attaining an ideal body
condition score of 4 or 5 out of 9 (Mawby et al.
2004) plus exercise resolves symptoms, surgery
can be delayed (Marcellin-Little 2008). Conversely,
 in the presence of uncomplicated unrelenting hip
pain, a THR recommendation should be made to
improve the quality of life of the pet.
THR is becoming more common in cats and
small-breed dogs (Figure 7.2). Just as in large-
Figure 7.2  Ventrodorsal radiograph of the pelvis of a
 breed dogs, OA secondary to hip dysplasia is the
4-year-old cat made 26 months after THR. The THR was
predominant indication for THR in cats and small
done to revise a femoral head ostectomy that had led to
dogs. Other problems, including coxofemoral lux-
disuse of the limb. The femoral head ostectomy was
ation, avascular necrosis, or physeal fractures, are
performed to manage a nonunion of the capital femoral
pue soop lews u YHL roy suoneoipu uouon
 physis. The implants are stable and no radiolucent lines at
the bone-cement interface are visible in the acetabulum or
cats. In one report, hip luxation, avascular necro-
femur.
sis, and capital physeal fractures were the respec-
tive indications for 15 (23%), 17 (26%), and 11
(17%) of 66 small-breed THRs (Liska 2010). Other
72Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
recent case series have also reported the use of
technically challenging. The adverse changes
THR for the treatment of capital femoral physeal
include luxation, acetabular hypoplasia, dorsal
fractures and for avascular necrosis of the femoral
acetabular rim wear, lateral drift of the proximal-
head (Jankovits et al. 2012; Kalis et al. 2012). THR
 medial femoral cortex, medialization of the greater
has also been performed to manage unsuccessful
trochanter, sclerosis of the proximal aspect of the
femoral head ostectomy (Liska et al. 2010; Fitzpat-
femoral medullary canal, narrowing of the femoral
rick et al. 2012).
isthmus, lateralization of the proximal aspect of
qoq uogenapisuon juenod ue si aoe puae
the femur, and muscle atrophy including contrac-
physiologically and from the perspective of the
 ture of the hip musculature muscles resulting from
paaeap aq pmous Aragms 'eiseidsap du go ases
hip luxation (Figure 7.4). The muscle atrophy and
 in immature animals until the acetabular growth
 contracture make rearticulation of the prosthetic
plates are closed, while surgery prior to closure
joint more difficult and increase the risk of luxa-
of the capital physeal plate is inconsequential.
tion after surgery (Hayes et al. 2011a).
Surgery may be performed if the physeal plate at
Concurrent orthopedic and neurological disease
r ao si  ran a o asq a
YHL roy Suuasand spuaed u juasand uao si
closed. However, this growth plate could separate
 surgery. These conditions may exacerbate the clin-
during surgery and require reduction and stabili-
ical sigms of hip dysplasia or may lead one to
zation. The status of the distal femoral physeal
incorrectly attribute the severity of the clinical
plate is also inconsequential since it is not dis-
signs to the hip joint. Degenerative myelopathy
rupted during preparation of the femoral canal.
 and lumbosacral disease may produce symptoms
The stage of hip dysplasia seen in dogs present-
similar to severe bilateral hip dysplasia.
ing between 5 and 12 months of age is important
A thorough physical examination including
in the timing of surgery. A favorable window of
neurological evaluation must be undertaken to
aaaas yim soop Sumon ui isixa Ae Anumoddo
rule out or to identify concurrent disease condi-
coxofemoral subluxation or developmental luxa-
tions during the planning process. Concurrent
tion (Figure 7.3). For these patients, it is generally
neurological or orthopedic disease must be care-
advantageous to recommend surgery early rather
fully assessed and may necessitate postponement
than waiting until the animal and the disease are
of THR until these conditions are resolved or eval-
uated in light of the patient's overall condition or
morphological changes, making surgery more 
function.
mental hip subluxation. Valgus angulation of the femoral shaft is present. The left acetabulum is poorly developed and the
left femoral head is cranially and dorsally displaced, compared with the right femoral head. This type of hip joint presents
challenges during total hip replacement because of the shallow acetabulum, abnormal femoral shape, and tissue tension
after reduction of the prosthetic components.
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 73
sp ayl (a) piaudays uewan pue (v) jaaai jopeigen japlo ue jo juso! dy aui jo sydeisopen iesioponuan t'/ anni
were referred for total hip replacement because of clinical signs resulting from severe osteoarthritis of the hips. Osteophytes
0r enthesophytes surround the femoral neck. The acetabula are shallow due to filling with new bone. Subchondral sclerosis
'anes e lungwasan 'rely Ajeau s! wningeane s,paydays uewah ayl 'luapiaa s! wningeane aul po
B
Figure 7.5 (A) An 11-month-old Saint Bernard is shifting weight forward because of severe hip pain resulting from hip
subluxation. Bilateral talocrural joint hyperextension is present and is most likely the consequence of his weight shift and
reluctance to extend his hip joints. The dog was managed with a THR. (B) A 3-year-old Labrador retriever is shifting most of
his weight to his forelimbs because of partial tears to his cranial cruciate ligaments. Weight shifts from cranial cruciate
Ipsilateral or contralateral orthopedic pathol-  clinical signs, the hip and knee procedures are in
ogy, such as medial patella luxation (MPL) or  most cases staged, with the knee problem usually
cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL) injury, are fre-
given a higher priority.
 Serious and often life-threatening medical con-
(Figure 7.5). Hip dysplasia and MPL appear to be
 ditions must also be considered. Patients with con-
significantly correlated in cats (Smith et al. 1999).
current systemic disease must be treated with
When concurrent hip and kmee problems are sus-
caution. Examples include uncontrollable bacte-
pected, it must be determined whether symptoms  rial dermatitis, neoplasia, coagulopathy, and com-
(lameness and/or pain) originate at the hip, the  pensated heart, liver, or renal failure. Likewise, the
74Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
mellitus, Cushing's disease, and generalized
radiograph film or digital templates for digital
radiographs.  Accurate 1
magnification-calibrated
significant risk to the THR patient. Thoughtful
radiographic images of the acetabulum and of
preoperative assessment and owner counseling is
 the femur are essential for correct implant size
recommended if THR surgery is contemplated,
selection.
even after successful treatment of these or similar
The ventral-dorsal radiographic view of the
diseases. Consideration should be given to testing
pelvis is positioned primarily for assessment of
for von Willebrand factor deficiency in predis-
the pelvis and acetabulum, including acetabular
 posed breeds.
cup size and dorsal rim wear (Figure 7.6). When
Septic arthritis is an absolute contraindication
making the radiograph, preference is given to
for THR. The presence of ipsilateral hindquarter
 provide square alignment of the pelvis rather than
 or generalized dermatitis, otitis externa, urinary
the accurate positioning of the femurs. The lateral
tract infection, and periodontal disease should be
radiographic view of the pelvis is made with the
resolved prior to surgery.
hemipelves superimposed (Figure 7.7). An accu-
Even though neoplasia with or without meta-
rate representation of the femur is best obtained
static disease may be a relative contraindication,
from a cranial-caudal radiographic view of the
neoplasia localized to the hip region may not be.
affected femur (Figure 7.8). The dog is positioned
It is feasible to implant a custom-made prosthesis
in lateral recumbency with the affected limb up
in selected cases (see Chapter 14). The prosthesis
with the radiographic cassette placed caudal and
fixation is typically cemented and shielded if
parallel to the femur. The X-ray beam is directed
immediate postoperative radiation therapy
is
horizontally from cranial to caudal. This view pro-
anticipated. Osseointegration fixation of porous-
vides an accurate and reproducible representation
coated implants is adversely affected by radiation
of the femur. An open-leg lateral radiographic
at 2 weeks, but not at 4 or 8 weeks. The porous-
view of the femur is obtained with the dog posi-
coated area of the prosthesis should also be
tioned in lateral recumbency with the affected
shielded from radiation until ingrowth has ceased
limb down (Figure 7.9). The contralateral limb is
(Sumner et al. 1990).
abducted and flexed to expose the groin area
Whenf
financial
constraints
preempt
THR
and proximal aspect of the femur being examined.
surgery, a femoral head and neck ostectomy (FHO)
 This positioning provides an oblique view of the
 may be an option in selected cases. An FHO carries
acetabulum and a view of the proximal aspect
the risk of not achieving acceptable pain relief and
of the femur without superimposition of the
restoration of fumction in all breed sizes (Off and
opposite femur. The implant-bone and cement-
Matis 2010). An FHO disrupts the normal hip bio-
bone interfaces can be clearly assessed using these
 mechanics, results in limb leg length discrepancy
positions. The same radiographic protocol is fol-
and unpredictable pain relief, and may require
lowed for postoperative and serial radiographic
prolonged rehabilitation (Liska et al. 2009). In
follow-up.
some cases, it is possible to revise a painful FHO
 Once the radiographic magnification is deter-
to a THR, but an FHO should never be advised as
 mined, the appropriate templates are superim-
 an interim procedure.
 posed over the radiograph of the femur in the
 cranial-caudal and lateral views to determine the
likely femoral implant size (Figure 7.10). Fit and
Preoperative planning
fill of the stem in the canal at the appropriate level
are the key indicators for selection of stem size.
Preoperative planning starts with critical assess-
When determining the implant size for a cement-
 ment of the anatomical and pathological changes
less press-fit stem, the surgeon should plan to
in the hip joint. Failure to recogmize all changes 
place the largest implant that fills the confines of
will increase the risk of complications. Regardless
the endosteal margins of the metaphysis and
of the THR system, the approximate size of the
diaphysis. In narrow, "champagne fluted" femurs,
acetabular cup and femoral stem are determined
the diaphysis, rather than the metaphysis, may be
preoperatively using acetate template overlays on
the size-limiting point.
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 75
Figure 7.6 (A) The preoperative assessment of patients evaluated for THR includes a ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph made
with the patient in dorsal recumbency with the pelvic limbs extended. (B) The size of the VD radiograph is calibrated using
a magnification marker. The acetabular size and shape, degree of hip subluxation, and femoral size and shape are assessed.
unowe pue siad aui jo adeys aul (a) uagwnoai jeael ui sop ayn ym apew s! ydeioipei leaiel ayl (t) /'/ anni
of dorsal displacement of the femur in relation to the pelvis is assessed radiographically using this position.
When determining the size for a screw fixation
cortex of the femur, just proximal to the lesser
stem, the same radiographic views are used.
trochanter. The medial aspect of the template is
Femoral stem size is initially evaluated on the
aligmed against the endosteal surface of the medial
cranial-caudal view of the femur (Figure 7.11).
cortex. Adequate space within the medullary canal
Jo ,rapmous, a go padse epa-exord au
should be present. Space medial to the greater tro-
the template is placed against the endosteal medial
chanter should be present. On the medial-lateral
Figure 7.8  (A) The cranial-caudal horizontal beam radiograph is made with the patient in lateral recumbency with the leg
of interest up and extended. (B) This view provides the most accurate craniocaudal projection of the femur.
Figure 7.9  (A) The open-leg lateral radiograph is made with the dog in lateral recumbency with the leg of interest down 
and held in a neutral position. (B) This view provides the most accurate lateral projection of the femur. The size of the
acetabulumcan be assessed on this view.
76
Figure 7.10 The size of the CFX femoral component is determined by superimposing the templates over the craniocaudal
(A) and the lateral (B) radiographic views. The largest CFX stem is selected that allows space for an adequate cement mantle
in the medullary canal of the femoral diaphysis. A BFX stem is selected that fills the confines of the endosteal space of the
metaphysis and diaphysis on both the craniocaudal (C) and lateral (D) radiographic views.
66389
A
Series:3/3
017M
Win/Lvl: 205/ 174
Comp
CANINE VD PELVIS
Figure 7.11  Digital templating for the Zurich Cementless hip using the Orthoview software (Orthoview LLC, Southampton,
UK). On the ventrodorsal hip-extended view (A), the appropriately sized acetabular cup template should extend, both
pue jaueyoon jassal aui on lewixoid isn! paieas uaum xaos leianel pue jueyoon jaieail aui yiog jealo lm juauodo
apposed to the endosteal surface of the medial cortex. The lateral radiographic view (B) is evaluated to ensure that the
femoral component will also fit in the cranial-caudal plane.
radiographic projection of the femur, the template
bed (Figures 7.11 and 7.12). In most instances, the
is used to evaluate adequate cranial-caudal fit for
 medial aspect of the cup template will contact the
the femoral stem (Figure 7.11).
 medial cortical wall of the acetabulum. If the tem-
The proper size of the acetabular component is
 plate does not contact the medial wall, it may indi-
determined by choosing a template that fills the
cate that the cup is too small. The next size template
cranial and caudal dimensions of the acetabular
should be superimposed over the acetabulum. A
78Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Figure 7.12  The appropriate-size acetabular cup is
determined by selecting a template that fills the acetabulum
in the cranial-caudal direction. It is not necessary, however,
that the cup contacts the medial wall. The rim of the cup
should not protrude out beyond the acetabular cranial and
caudal margins.
Figure 7.13 The Universal Total Hip system consists of the
BFX press-fit cup and stem (let) and the CFX cemented cup
and stem (right). Both fixation options use the same-size
size cup should be selected that fills the cranial-
femoral head giving surgeons the option of combining both
caudal dimension of the acetabulum and is flush
cemented and cementless components in the same joint.
with the bone cranially and caudally. Too small a
 Multiple femoral head sizes and neck lengths are available
cup may be placed medially and too large a cup
that provide a variety of options. The horizontal bars
-ex h-ssaid apiaoid oi yonoua daap ieas jou Aeu
measure 10 mm.
tion of a cementfless press-fit cup. Likewise, with
a cemented cup, the bone cement may not be sup-
7.13). A common surgical techmique allows sur-
ported by bone of the dorsal acetabular rim. While
geons the option to change the fixation method
templating should be performed accurately, final
 intraoperatively. The two applications in the same
implant size selection is determined during
modular total hip system increase the surgeon's
surgery.
juanendan juof Kred yoq sump suondo
 and revision surgeries. Both applications use the
 same femoral head, allowing the use of cemented
Surgical overview
 and cementless components in the same patient.
The cementless cup and stem achieve their initial
The most common THR systems in use and with
a i-ssard auaaa a sn 
 outcomes reported in the literature are the Univer-
The Micro Total Hip system components and
sal Total Hip (BioMedtrix), the Micro Total Hip
 instrumentation share their design with the Uni-
(BioMedtrix), and the Zurich Cementless Total
versal CFX system (Figure 7.14). The system con-
Hip (Kyon). The BioMedtrix Universal Canine
 sists of cemented components only and the implant
Hip System consists of Biological Fixation (BFXTM)
 sizes are appropriate for small-breed dogs and
and Cement Fixation (CFXTM) implants (Figure
cats. Micro THR may be performed in small-breed
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 79
Figure 7.14 (A) The Micro THR system is a modular cemented prosthesis. The outside diameter of the cups is 12, 14, or
 su o a  i s s e r   ' r   s  u 
two neck lengths of +0 and +2 mm. (B) The Nano THR system is also a cemented system. The outside diameter of the cup is
10 mm. The femoral stem and head components are fixed, with neck lengths of 0, +2, or +4 mm. The femoral head diameter
is 6 mm. The horizontal bar measures 1 Omm.
dogs weighing less than 12kg, and as small as
shielding of the femur that can occur with conven-
2.5kg, and in cats. The Nano THR is the smallest
tional canal filling femoral components.
implant available and the prosthesis has a fixed
These systems and the broad range of implants
head (Ireifej et al. 2012).
offer the surgeon a variety of options for fixation
The femoral stem of the Zurich Cementless
and cover a wide range of patient sizes. The choice
Total Hip system achieves both immediate and
-adxa pue suien uoaams uo spuadap juerdu jo
long-term fixation with bone screws, while the cup
rience with a particular system, as well as the
is press-fit (Figure 7.15). Perforations in the metal
needs of the patient. Generally, the indications for
backing of the cup allow bone ingrowth in addi-
hip replacement are the same regardless of the
tion to a plasma-sprayed surface. The most novel
 method of implant fixation or the choice of hip
approach of the system is the departure from
system. Currently available total hip systems
achieving stability of the femoral component by
should be able to accommodate almost all of the
 press-fit fixation. The stem achieves primary fixa-
needs of the diverse canine and feline breeds and
tion to the endosteal surface of the medial femoral
 sizes presented to the veterinary surgeon.
cortex using locking-screw fixation. The primary
Cement fixation  requires less precision in
screw fixation of the stem is augmented in time by
femoral canal fit and final positioning of the
bone ingrowth to a plasma-sprayed surface. The
femoral stem. Therefore, in some patients, a
rationale of anchoring the stem to the cortex is to
cemented stem may be the preferred choice
ensure immediate fixation and minimize stress
o adeus,adidaaons, ro azis arago asnoaq
Suisn paxy s! wais eowaj aul llaus jeaw palenojad e ou! palgwasse s! juauoduos jengeiane paull-aualyalod ayl
conical screws that wedge into the implant. The proximal screw is bicortical and the remaining screws are monocortical.
(lmage courtesy of Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland)
the femur, poor bone quality, or advanced age.
superimposed in the sagittal plane and held
Likewise, in very small dogs and cats, cement fixa-
securely in position using a positioning device.
tion of the cup and stem allows the surgeon flex-
The positioning device stabilizes the pelvis and
ibility of implant sizes. In younger patients with a
prevents movement during retraction, reaming.
flared proximal metaphyseal region of the femur,
 and impaction of the implants. This is especially
a press-fit cementless stem may be preferred.
important during placement and alignment of the
Because its initial stability relies on intimate
acetabular component.
contact with bone, the conventional press-fit stem
The hip joint is exposed using the modified
may offer less flexibility in patient selection than
a cemented stem or a cementless screw fixation
 and Johnson 2004). An L-shaped tenotomy of the
stem. In all but the smallest patients, a press-fit
 deep gluteal tendon of insertion and muscle is
cup is preferred over a cemented cup regardless
 performed, leaving the proximal one-third to one-
of the type stem fixation used. During revision of
half of the tendon intact. A T-shaped capsulotomy
a failed cemented stem, a cementless stem may
is performed. If the ligament of the femoral head
 offer the surgeon a better option for revision
is intact, it can be transected with a sharp Hatt
 than recementing a femoral component. The deci-
 spoon or other narrow sharp instrument that will
sion to use cemented or cementless implants is
enter the joint space. The hip is luxated, externally
 preferably made prior to surgery and varies with
 rotated 90 degrees and the femoral neck is osteoto-
surgeon experience, preference, and the bone
mized. The dissection is further developed to
morphology.
provide clear and unobstructed access the acetab-
 The specific surgical techniques for the Univer-
ulum and unhindered access to the central axis of
sal and the Zurich Cementless total hip systems
the femoral canal. If a press-fit cementless cup and
are described in detail in the "Addendum" section.
stem are to be used, the acetabular bone bed is
Although there are differences in technique dic-
 prepared first and the cup implanted, followed by
tated by the implant design and fixation, the pro-
 preparation and implantation of the femoral com-
cedures have many common and similar steps.
 ponent. The Zurich Cementless system prepares
In general terms, the surgical procedure starts
the femur first, followed by acetabular prepara-
by positioning the dog
with the hemipelvi
tion and implantation. If both components are
cemented, the femur is prepared first, followed by
progressively longer duration and distance can
the acetabulum. The cup is then cemented, fol-
begin 6 weeks after surgery. Patients are reevalu-
lowed by cementing of the femoral stem. This
ated after 3 monthis and their activity is unre-
places the cementing procedures in sequence. In
stricted afterward. Specific rehabilitation plans are
cemented hip replacement, the bone is prepared
rarely necessary after THR. They may be consid-
to allow the surgeon to accurately position the
ered in patients with limited hip joint motion
implant within the cement mantle. In cementless
because of tissue tightmess. For example, some
hip replacement, the preparation of the bone
patients whose femur is dorsally displaced for
determines the exact positioning and stability of
 extended periods of time before surgery have
press-fit implants. Also, the absence of a cement 
tight periarticular muscles after surgery, including
mantle necessitates that bone preparation
1be
external rotators, gluteal muscles, and rectus
precise to result in initial press-fit stability and
femoris. These tight muscles interfere with com-
 eventual stable fixation by bone ingrowth
fortable locomotion. A controlled stretching and
Following implantation of both components, a
exercise program may be considered for these
prosthetic femoral head with the appropriate neck
 patients. The rehabilitation of THR patients that
length is assembled onto the femoral stem. The
are amputees on their opposite hind limb may
range of motion of the reduced joint is evaluated.
include specific assisted stance and locomotion
If the range of motion and stability of the joint are
exercises (Figure 7.16). Rehabilitation may also be
satisfactory, the joint and the wound are lavaged
necessary in patients that had traumatic luxation
       
for closure. If bone cement was used, the joint and
orthopedic injuries.
adjacent tissues are carefully inspected and any
The aftercare of small dogs and cats after Micro
remnants of bone cement are removed. The wound
THR is often simplified compared with that of
is closed in layers, beginning with thejoint capsule.
larger dogs because small animals can be carried
The transected tendon of the deep gluteal muscle
from place to place during rehabilitation. Cats
is reattached securely to its insertion. The reflected
require confinement to a space that does not
vastus lateralis muscle is sutured to its origin or,
permit jumping. Cats are allowed free activity
if necessary, to the ventral edge of the tendon of
starting 6 weeks after surgery.
the deep gluteal muscle. The overlying tissues are
closed in layers.
Clinical outcomes and postoperative
complications
Postoperative care and physical
rehabilitation
The outcome of Howmedica's Canine PCA
ingrowth cementless prostheses has been reported
The postoperative management of patients follow-
(De Young et al. 1992; Marcellin-Little et al. 1999a).
 ing THR is basically identical, regardless of the hip
A long-term (>5 years) assessment of 50 consecu-
system or method of fixation. Dogs are discharged
tive patients was included. All patients had bone
 to their owners once they can independently get
ingrowth in their prosthetic cups and stems. The
up and lie down and can walk outside for short
complications included six luxations. Five of these
distances. This occurs after a day or two in most
luxations occurred in the short term and one in the
Aeu sop iamraao ro ael Araa nq 'sais
long term, after trauma. One dog developed an
need prolonged hospitalization. Activity should
osteosarcoma at the site of medullary bone infarc-
be restricted to surfaces with good traction,
tion, distal to the prosthetic stem (Marcellin-Little
indoors, for 6 weeks postoperatively with
Ou1
et al. 1999b).
running, jumping, playing, or stair climbing.
The short-term clinical outcome of the BioMed-
Outdoor activity during this time should always
 trix BFX cementless prostheses has been reported.2
occur under supervision and should be controlled
In a consecutive case series studied from 2003 to
with a leash. Walking must be limited to a few
  am  X  1 '
minutes, several times per day. Leash walks of
patients ranged in weight from 18 to 72kg (mean:
82Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Figure 7.16 A young mixed-breed dog with a previous left pelvic limb amputation underwent a right THR. The dog was 
not able to walk without assistance after surgery and was uncoordinated. (A) In this picture made 4 days after surgery, the
dog is assisted and protected from falls with a chest harness and a sling. (B) Rehabilitation includes trotting on a treadmill 
while controlled and supported by the chest harness and a soft sling.
36 ± 10kg). The implants used most often were
liofemoral sutures were placed in 10 patients.
24- and 26-mm cups (n = 78 and 76, respectively);
 One patient underwent a triple pelvic osteotomy.
#7,#8, and #9 stems (n = 53,59, and 40); and 0- and
 Femoral fractures occurred in nine patients (4.4%).
+3-mm prosthetic heads (n = 78 and 67). Forty-
Five of these were propagations of fissures that
eight percent of patients were free of complica-
occurred at the time of implantation. All fractures
tions. Minor complications requiring no additional
surgery occurred in 25% of patients. They included
reduction and intermal fixation and placement of
stem subsidence without fissure with (n = 1) or
a BFX stem (r = 6) or a cemented stem (n = 3). Five
without rotation (n = 13) and stem rotation without
of nine fractures occurred in dogs older than 6
fissure (n = 3). Intraoperative and postoperative
years of age. One dog had sciatic neurapraxia.
femoral fissures were also seen (n = 19). Of these,
Lack or loss of bone ingrowth was identified with
some occurred without subsidence (n = 11), some
two cups. These cups were successfully revised
with subsidence and rotation (n = 3), and some
with larger BFX cups. One of the patients with a
with subsidence only (n =4) or rotation only
loose cup had an infection due to a Staphylococus
(n = 1). Three dogs had intraoperative fractures of
sp. that was diagnosed based on a bacterial culture
remqeiae ue peq auo pue ranueuoon raieana a
made at the time of revision. That Staphylococcus
fracture managed conservatively. The fissure rate
 sp. also had been cultured from the dog's skin
decreased over time, from 30% for the first group
 after an episode of pyoderma that preceded the
 of 50 patients, to 14% for the second group of 50,
occurrence of lameness. No other infection was
12% for the third group of 50, and 4% for the
identified. Loss of bone ingrowth in the stem was
fourth group of 50. Major complications requiring
not identified. This is similar to the long-term
a surgical revision occurred in 11% of patients.
results of the Canine PCA THR.
 Luxation was the most common major complica-
The functional outcome after BFX THR was
tion (n = 17; 8.4% of patients). The causes of
evaluated prospectively using a pressure-sensitive
luxation included subsidence and
1rotation,
walkway in 35 dogs (Lascelles et al. 2010). Weight
impingement, and lack of tissue tension. Closed
distribution to the operated limb was normal 3
reduction was done in one patient. Open reduc-
-ixoid a u i eue areT Anaams rahe sou
tion was done in all other patients. The prosthetic
 mal portion of the femur and the presence of a
neck length was increased in most patients.
large flare of the proximal portion of the femur
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 83
negatively impacted the normalization of weight
lines
at
thie
 bone-polymethylmethacrylate
distribution.
(PMMA) interfaces. The overall luxation rate in
Overall, the BFX procedure has been a success-
that study was 11.8%.
ful method for primary THR. Bone ingrowth into
Factors predisposing to luxation after CFX were
the cup and the stem is consistent. The most
evaluated in several studies. Cup orientation
common complications, fissures, and luxations
sem ([oTv] Suuado [erael jo aloue paseanu)
appear to be technique-related. The fissure rate in
identified as a predisposing factor for dorsal luxa-
this series of cases decreased dramatically with
tion in one report (Dyce et al. 2000). Another report
improved broaching technique. The BFX system
concluded that the ALO and cup retroversion
has also been used for the revision of failed
were poor predictors for THR luxation (Cross et
cemented THR. One report described the success-
al. 2000). Body size and conformation (e.g., Saint
ful use of BFX stems to revise three failed cemented
Bernard type), a short femoral neck, and cup ori-
stems (Torres and Budsberg 2009). Our group has
entation were identified as factors predisposing to
successfully revised two failed cemented stems
ventral hip luxation in a report (Nelson et al. 2007).
and one failed screw prosthesis stem (Helica,
Preexisting hip subluxation was identified as a
INNOPLANT, Harnover, Germany) with BFX
factor predisposing to luxation of CFX THR in one
stems. One report documented the successful revi-
study (Hayes et al. 201la). A femoral fracture rate
sion of experimental carbon composite stems in
of 2.9% was reported to occur in a consecutive case
two dogs. Septic loosening of the experimental
series of 684 CFX THR performed by a single
stem developed in one dog, and aseptic (polyeth-
surgeon (Liska 2004).
ylene wear debris-induced) loosening in the other
The outcome of micro and nano cemented THR
dog. The single-stage revisions were performed
has been reported in several case series (Warnock
using the Canine PCA cementless hip (Massat
et al. 1998).
overall success rate in the largest series was 91%
 The clinical outcome of cemented THR has been
and complications included luxation and cup
reported in several clinical case series (Olmstead
loosening (Liska 2010).
et al. 1983; Massat and Vasseur 1994; Edwards
The outcome of cemented THR has also been
et al. 1997). A cumulative complication rate of
assessed through several histological studies (Paul
18% and a cumulative satisfactory outcome of
and Bargar 1986, 1987; Skurla and James 2004,
90.7%, extrapolated from six clinical reports, were
 2005; Skurla et al. 2005). In one report analyzing
reported after 506 Richards Canine II prostheses
38 cemented acetabular components retrieved
(Smith & Nephew Richards, Memphis, TN) (Mont-
from client-owned dogs postmortem, 53% of ace-
gomery et al. 1992).(
Complications included
tabular cups were loose, when tested on a materi-
aseptic loosening (5.7%), luxation (5.1%), infection
als testing machine. The apparent source of
(4.7%), sciatic nerve palsy (1.6%), and fractures
loosening was a mechanical failure of the bone-
(1.6%). The outcome of the BioMedtrix CFX pro-
cement interface. In another report assessing the
cedure was reported in a prospective clinical study
cemented stems collected from the same patient
that included 51 dogs (Oimstead 1995b). The com-
series, 63% of the stems were loose (Skurla et al.
plication rate was 7%.
2005).
 Debonding (loosening of the implant-
 In a retrospective study including 284 canine
cement interface) was identified as the primary
cemented THR, the cementing methods did not
mode of failure. Debonding was also identified as
influence the short-term complication rate (Ota et
 a mode of failure after cemented THR in a group
 al. 2005). In a retrospective study of 97 CFX hips,
of 10 dogs (Edwards et al. 1997). These various
a revision rate of 12.1% was reported for the first
studies identified or suggested that the metal used
m sase 1e 1oN (900z 1e 1a yo1ag) YH1 a91s
for stem fabrication, stem handling during surgery,
 major complications in this series underwent revi-
and stem orientation within the femoral canal as
sion surgery. The authors discussed several poten-
factors predisposing to debonding.
tial reasons for this relatively high complication
The clinical outcomes and complications for
rate, including a low case load, eccentrically placed
femoral stems, and the presence of radiolucent
paani sop arl ro wmipa un uaas aso wm
with cemented THR. Sciatic neurapraxia (Andrews
2006; Guerrero and Montavon 2009;Hummel et al.
et al. 2008), infection, femoral fractures, femoral
2010). Implant-associated infection or septic loos-
fissures, pulmonary embolism, and aseptic loosen
ening has been reported in 0%-3.7% of patients
 ing are all potential complications following Micro
(Hanson et al. 2006; Guerrero and Montavon 2009;
THR. These complications had a very low fre-
Hummel et al. 2010). Other than rates of aseptic
-noasuon 99 jo salras e ul msso jou pip 1o Aouanb
loosening, Hummel et al. reported a substantially
tive Micro THR (Liska 2010). There are no reported
higher overall complication and failure rate than
complications that are specific to Micro THR.
In
had been previously published or described. The
1oJ dHL juamrapum jeu soop uaaas jo jrodai auo
authors of that study commented that technical
uilateral avascular necrosis, ground
reaction
errors and surgeon inexperience were the cause of
 forces did not differ between normal hips and hips
a large portion of their complications. Cases of
receiving the Micro THR (Jankovits et al. 2012).
failure of stem fixation and cup dislodgement have
Luxation is the most common Micro THR compli-
also been described anecdotally, but have not been
cation. Luxation occurred in 9 of 66 consecutive
 reported in peer-reviewed literature. In an unpub-
cases in one study (Liska 2010). Five luxations
lished retrospective study of 623 consecutive cases
were managed with revision. Four dogshad dorsal
operated between 2001 and 2008, Vezzoni reported
and ventral luxations for reasons not well under-
an overall complication rate of 10.4%. Of the 65
stood. Explantation (6%) was the end result. There
cases with complications, 59 were successfully
was no detectable correlation between luxation
revised and 6 were explanted.3
and the angle of lateral cup opening. Oversizing
Femoral medullary infarction (FMI) and pulmo-
as well as undersizing the components can predis-
nary
embolism are two additional potential
 8xs'z> Sunrbiam sien 1o saop ui uogexml oi asod
sequelae to THR (Sebestyen et al. 2000; Liska and
Smaller implants (Nano THR, BioMedtrix LLC)
 Poteet 2003). FMI is identified on radiographs
are now manufactured to eliminate the risk of
made several months after surgery as sclerotic
 oversizing in small cats and dogs weighing 2-to
linear opacities within the medullary canal distal
4kg.
to the femoral stem tip. These opacities are typi-
Complications reported for the Zurich Cement-
 cally described as cigarette smoke or "serpig-
less hip are common to all THR systems and
enous,"
 meaning creeping or spreading. The
include luxation, aseptic loosening, femur fracture,
incidence of FMI associated with the Zurich
 septic loosening, implant failure, neurapraxia, and
system was investigated in two studies. The first
 patellar luxation. Of published reports, two retro-
study (Marsolais et al. 2009) reported a 19.5% inci-
spective studies evaluated complications of both
 dence of FMI, comparable with the 14% rate of
the femoral and acetabular components (Guerrero
 FMI in a previous report that included a combina-
 and Montavon 2009; Hummel et al. 2010), and one
tion of cemented and press-fit femoral 
stems
study evaluated only the acetabular component
(Sebestyen et al. 2000). An increased incidence of
(Hanson et al. 2006). Even with this limited number
 of reports, the complication rates have varied
A follow-up study by Haney et al. in which
widely. Hummel et al. reported an intraoperative
reaming for Zurich femoral stems was carefully
femur fracture rate of 7.4% (Hummel et al. 2010).
 controlled to not exceed the depth of reamer flutes
Interestingly,
these fractures were reported as
 or rasp teeth reported a decrease in incidence of
diaphyseal, but were described as occurring in the
FMI to 2.9% (Haney and Peck 2009). While the
calcar region, which is metaphyseal. The overall
specific cause of FMI remains unknown, the Haney
femoral fracture rate ranges from 1.5% to 7.9%
study strongly suggests that FMI is caused by
(Guerrero and Montavon 2009; Hummel et al.
 Excessive reaming depth and damage to endosteal
 2010). Fractures of the greater trochanter and ace-
 blood supply during femoral preparation. The
tabulum, as well as transient sciatic neurapraxia,
clinical consequences of FMI are not well known.
are also occasionally reported. Luxation rates in
However, a femoral osteosarcoma that developed
two reports were 10% and 17% (Guerrero and
 at the site of a medullary infarct following cement-
Montavon 2009; Hummel et al. 2010). Aseptic loos-
less press-fit THR was reported in one patient
ening rates ranged from 0% to 11% (Hanson et al.
(Marcellin-Little et al. 1999b).
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 85
Pulmonary embolism associated with THR was
 process. The femoral neck resection is made paral-
initially reported after cemented THR (Otto and
 lel to the neck cuting guide using the medial edge
Matis 1994; Liska and Poteet 2003). The incidence
 of the greater trochanter as the point of reference.
of pulmonary embolism associated with the 
 The neck resection is identical for both the collared
Zurich THR was evaluated by Tidwell et al. A CFX and the collarless BFX stems. A high osteot-
-d (i) udon pano jo uouqo
- omy is made to preserve proximal cancellous and
monary angiography and nuclear scintigraphy
cortical bone and to enhance stability and tor-
 I u wstoqua Areomd paap cn pasn aam
 sional resistance of the implanted stem. The angle
dogs. No cases of pulmonary embolism were 
 of the neck cut is most important when using a
detected. However, intraoperative transesopha-
collared CFX stem. When the collar is seated
geal ultrasound, a modality that may be used to
against the neck cut, it sets the axial alignment of
detect emboli in real time, was not used in that
the stem in the femoral canal.
study (Tidwell et al. 2007). Sudden intraoperative
death was reported in one patient due to pulmo-
Acetabular preparation
nary embolism associated with cemented THR
(Liska and Poteet 2003)
An unobstructed view of the acetabulum is neces-
sary for proper preparation of the bone bed and
press-fit of the cup. In patients with chronic dys-
Addendum: surgical procedures
plastic changes, the junction of the joint capsule
and the bony acetabular rim must be identified
Universal hip system
and the joint capsule undermined 2-3mm with a
scalpel blade around the circumference of the ace-
tabulum. Meyerding retractors are placed under
The general philosophy of this surgical technique
the reflected joint capsule cranial, dorsal, and
is regardless of whether a BFX cementless or a
caudal to the acetabulum. The caudal retractor can
CFX cemented implantation is intended, the bone
simultaneously retract the femur.
bed of the acetabulum and the femoral canal are
In severe cases of hip dysplasia, identification
always prepared using the precision technique
 required for the BFX implants. If it is desired to
and isolation of the acetabular rim helps to ensure
a stable interference fit and seating the cup against
cement a CFX implant, the preparation is modified
bone without an interposed thick fibrous joint
 at the end of the BFX preparation. This approach
allows the surgeon to develop one consistent sur-
capsule. Likewise, it is crucial to ream the true
 acetabulum and not a dorsally migrated pseudo-
gical technique and have the intraoperative flexi-
acetabulum resulting from hip dysplasia. Before
bility to change implants. In the femur, the mantle
for bone cement is created by simply dowmsizing
reaming, reliable reference landmarks must be
the CFX stem from the BFX preparation. On the
located. The ventral aspect of the true acetabulum
acetabular side, the CFX cup is 1 mm smaller than
can be determined by locating the transverse ace-
the BFX preparation, allowing space for a cement
tabular ligament (Figure 7.17). The ventral edge of
the acetabular reamer is maintained just dorsal to
mantle.
 this landmark. Anylarge osteophytes areremoved,
The BFX technique will be described first, fol-
especially ventrally and caudally, to facilitate posi-
lowed by modifications for the CFX technique.
tioning of the reamer and insertion of the cup and
The Micro Hip technique is similar to the CFX
to improve the range of motion of the prosthetic
with a few differences in instrumentation related
joint. The acetabulum is reamed to create a hemi-
to the small size of patients.
spherical bone bed, free of cartilage, eburnated
Neckresection
bone, or fibrous tissue.
To minimize removal of the dorsal rim and
The femur is rotated externally 90 degrees to
prevent dorsal migration of the reamer, reaming is
expose the femoral head and neck. The neck resec-
started with the reamer shaft directed at an angle
tion guide is held aligned with the central axis of
-uadiad ot renuaa saaioap oz-t araeuxodde jo
the femur as in the radiographic templating
dicular (Figure 7.18), rather than at the 45-degree
the bone bed to achieve an accurate preparation
within the required tolerance for a press-fit. The
starter reamer is used initially to create the depth
because of its ability to remove cartilage and penr-
etrate hard subchondral bone. The hollow reamer
head also collects cancellous bone that can be used
later in the procedure for a bone graft. The finish-
 ing reamer is designed to expand the bone bed in
diameter only. It does not add additional depth to
the reamed bone bed. Once the acetabular bone
bed has been prepared, if the surgeon decides to
use the next largest BFX or CFX cup, the bone bed
must be prepared first with the next-size starter
reamer and completed with the appropriate-size
 finishing reamer. If the starter reamer is not used
 to increase the depth of the preparation, the rim of
Figure 7.17  An acetabulum from a dog with advanced
the BFX cup will not seat nor achieve press-fit
osteoarthritis secondary to hip dysplasia. The location of
 stability and the bed will not be deep enough for
the true (original) acetabulum is delineated by black dots
the CFX cup. The starter reamers are odd-
forming a semicircle. The articular surface migrated over
numbered (19, 21, 23,25, 27, 29,31, 33mm) and
time to the white circular area delineated by black
the finishing reamers are even-numbered sizes (20,
arrowheads. The true acetabulum must be identified and
22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34mm). The surgeon should
reamed to place the cup in the original location. Locating
the ventral acetabular ligament original location (white
select CFX cups that are the same size as the starter
arrow) helps identify the correct location of the acetabu-
reamers and BFX cups the same size as the finish-
lum. A large osteophyte is visible cranial and caudal to the
ing reamer. The CFX cup is 1 mm smaller than the
transverse acetabular ligament. The ventral rim of protrud-
finishing reamer A finishing reamer can be used
ing osteophytes should be removed. A cup with a relatively
when implanting a CFX cup to create cement
large diameter should be implanted to lateralize the cup in
mantle space. For example, if a 26-mm BFX cup is
relation to the bone cranial and caudal to prevent
impingement resulting in dislocation. Other osteophytes
to be implanted, the reaming is started with a
causing impingement should be removed.
 25-mm starter reamer (or with a smaller reamer
    q m
 25 mm) then completed with the 26-mm finishing
anatomical central axis of the acetabulum. To min-
reamer Both the starter and finishing reamer
imize deviation of the reamer or wobbling, the
heads are the same depth as the corresponding
 surgeon must hold the reamer without a wobble
CFX and BFX cup and are used to determine the
and directed at the correct angle. This requires the
depth of the reamed bed. The best anatomical
 surgeon to hold the power reamer in one hand and
indicators for depth are the cranial and caudal
the reamer shaft close to the reamer head with the
aspects of the acetabulum. Because the reamer is
other hand. The reamer handle and shaft are held
-sod jou si h! 'paieoumn si dns au pue aio imy e
stationary as the depth and diameter of the bone
sible to judge the depth of the ream dorsally. Also,
bed are expanded. Acetabular reaming must be
the dorsal rim is frequently partially worn away.
deliberate and accurate to ensure proper position-
 providing a poor anatomical reference. In general,
ng and press-fit.
reaming is to the depth of the medial cortical wall
 Preparation of an accurate acetabular bone bed
 of the acetabulum, but occasionally, adequate
-uoat Sunurean aaeis-oml e Suisn pausiduosoe s!
 depth is achieved before reaching the medial wall.
nique. First, a starter reamer ("cheese grater"
Suoeid pioae ot uaxeiaq pmous aien 'sases yons u
style), 1 mm smaller than the intended BFX cup, is
the cup too deep, or medialized, as this can reduce
used to establish the depth of the bone bed.
joint reduction tension and result in impingement 
Second, a solid core finishing reamer the same size
during external rotation of the prosthetic joint.
as the BFX cup is used to expand the diameter of
Both
decreased joint reduction tension and
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 87
209
Figure 7.18 Acetabular reaming is initiated using the starter reamer positioned approximately 15-20 degrees ventral to
perpendicular to minimize dorsal migration and minimize removal of the acetabular rim (A). Once the depth of the
au po uoeuao aun as pue h-ssaid e aeain oi pasn s! jaeai suusiuy aue 'pasigeisa uaag sey pag auog ieadsia
impingement increase the risk of luxation.
The cementless cup is metal backed; therefore,
Impingement also increases the production 
1of
it is not as imperative that its entire dorsal aspect
wear debris, thus increasing the likelihood
lof
be covered by bone as it is with a cemented poly-
uascon ondase amng
ethylene cup. The perceived advantage of dorsal
Once the initial bed is established, the reamer
coverage must be weighed against the pitfalls of a
shaft must be positioned in the correct anatomical
deep, or medialized, cup. To place a cup deeper to
axis of the final cup position (Figure 7.18). The BFX
provide better dorsal coverage, the surgeon can
cup is a hemisphere to within 3 mm of the rim.
carefully penetrate the medial wall with the
Beyond that depth, it becomes a cylinder and sets
reamer. The size of the opening must remain small
the axis or orientation of the cup. This necessitates
to prevent the cup from migrating through the
the last 34 mm of reaming depth be done at an
medial wall. The periosteum should be left intact
angle of 45 degrees ventral to perpendicular and
to promote bone ingrowth. This step is not recom-
in 20 degrees of acetabular retroversion.
.All
 mended except in special situations, that is, small 
reaming with the finishing reamer should be done
 pelvis, poor acetabular development, or extreme
in the anatomical axis of the acetabulum. This
dorsal rim loss. Reaming through the medial wall
angle is determined by placing the acetabular
must be done with caution; and once done pre-
alignment guide on the two dorsal columns of the
cludes the use of bone cement or it will require
pelvic positioning device and holding the reamer
 sealing the opening with a layer of bone cement 
shaft parallel to the guide. Alternatively, the ace-
prior to cementing a CFX cup.
tabular aligmment assembly is attached to the
 In advanced stages of hip dysplasia, the acetab-
reamer sleeve and the horizontal retroversion
ulum may be shaped like a large flat, or shallow,
aligrment rod is inserted into the appropriate hole
saucer and consist of hard cortical bone (Figure
labeled "right" or "left". When properly oriented,
7.17). In these instances, the bone bed should be
this guide will align the reamer 45 degrees ventral
expanded to the outer rim of the acetabulum by
to perpendicular, with the appropriate degree of
using sequentially larger reamers and a large-
retroversion.
diameter cup implanted. If an undersized cup is
inserted, the face of the cup may be below the rim
same as that used for reaming. Once alignment is
of the shallow dished acetabulum resulting in a
achieved, the cup is impacted partway. At this
medialized cup. On external rotation, a fulcrum 
time, it is important to stop and assess the cup
effect may result and predispose to luxation. The
 alignment before the final seating. The cup align-
presence of eburnated bone in these patients
 ment can be altered by using the offset cup posi-
causes the reamer to chatter and makes accurate
tioner head. Any adjustments are made and the
reaming difficult. The starter reamers are used to
alignment assessed using the positioner handle
sequentially expand the diameter of the acetabular
 and appropriate alignment guide. Once satisfied
bone bed. Once the desired diameter and depth
that the alignment is correct, the cup is seated the
has been established, the final preparation is
remaining distance using the central cup posi-
 accomplished with the finishing reamer.
tioner head by briskly impacting with the mallet
The trial acetabular cup is used to assess the
until fully seated. Following seating, the align-
reamed bone bed and provide an indication of the
ment of the cup is verified using the positioner
 final cup position, orientation, and dorsal cover-
handle and the acetabular alignment guide. It is
age, and to help identify the location of any osteo-
 difficult to reposition the cup at this point. The
phytes or soft tissues that may require removal.
offset cup positioner head can be used to attempt
Large ventral osteophytes should be removed so
small changes in cup orientation. If the cup
is
that they do not displace the cup dorsally during
 grossly malaligned and its orientation cannot be
insertion.
altered, it is best to drive the cup from its bed,
Once the acetabular bone bed has been pre-
reposition it, and impact it at a correct orientation.
pared, the acetabulum is irrigated and any rem-
The cup can be removed by impacting the dorsal
nants of the round ligament, redundant joint
aspect of the metal shell at midtruncation at the 12
capsule, and osteophytes are removed with the aid
o'clock position. The tip of the impactor handle is
of a scalpel blade or rongeur before placement of
placed on the metal shell and impacted with the
the cup. With BFX implants, it is not necessary to
paq auoq sh yo mo dno au ,aieioi, 0 aleu
stop all hemorrhage in the bone bed as it is with
 around its cranial-caudal axis. If appropriate care
a cemented application. In fact, the formation of a
is taken in removing the cup, it can usually be
blood clot is the first step toward fibrous tissue
replaced into the same bone bed without loss of
ingrowth and eventual bone formation.
press-fit.
 A properly placed cup should be flush with the
Cup insertion
acetabulum cranially and caudally. Having the
BFX cup
cup elevated above the acetabulum caudally
(anteversion) may result in reduced range of
-oidde au um pa st aipuey lauoisod dns au
motion in external rotation and could result in
luxation due to neck impingement. The offset cup
handling the cup, avoid excessive manipulation in
 positioner head can be used to impact the cup into
order to minimize contamination.
The
cup
is
retroversion. If the cup is not seated flush with the
started into the prepared bone bed parallel to the
 cranial and caudal columns of bone (i.e., the cup
axis in which the reaming was carried out. It is
is "proud"), this may indicate that the cup is not
often helpful to place the cup into the prepared
seated deep enough in the acetabulum. In this
bone bed from a ventral aspect taking care to
case, the cup should be removed and the bone
retract the ventral soft tissues. If tissue is pulled
preparation reamed deeper.
into the acetabular bone bed as the cup is seated,
it may prevent seating and press-fit of the cup. The
CFX cup
 angle is determined by aligning the positioner
handle with the acetabular alignment guide posi-
If a CFX cup is to be placed, two to three keyholes
tioned on the two dorsal columms of the pelvic
may be made in the cancellous bone dorsally
positioning device, or alternatively using the ace-
using a high-speed bur, small curette, or drill bit
tabular alignment assembly attached to the posi-
(Figure 7.19). The acetabular bone bed is flushed
tioner handle. The angle of cup insertion is the
to clean the cancellous bone of debris and packed
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 89
Figure 7.19  If a cemented polyethylene cup is to be
implanted, three or more keyholes are made into the dorsal
acetabular cancellous bone to allow cement intrusion and 
aid the mechanical stability of the cement-bone interface.
(lmage courtesy of BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ)
until all hemorrhage is stopped. The acetabulum
is filled with bone cement and a CFX cup 1mm
smaller than the finishing reamer is selected and
mounted on the cup positioner. As with the BFX
cup, the CFX cup is fitted onto the cup positioner
 handle with the central cup positioner head. The
Figure 7.20
0The initial opening into the femur (A, red dot)
is made over the central axis of the femur as viewed from
cup is inserted into the cement-filled bone bed
orthogonal planes, medial-lateral (B), and cranial-caudal
using the same alignment instrumentation
(C). The central axis (red dot) lies in the trochanteric fossa
described for the BFX cup. The CFX cup is seated
adjacent to the greater trochanter, not in the femoral neck
by hand rather than impacted with the mallet.
osteotomy site. The initial opening is made with a
Once seated and positioned, excess bone cement
Steinmann pin or drill bit and a fluted reamer and then
is removed, being careful not to disturb the cup
expanded to the appropriate implant size (A, blue oval)
using a series of broaches with increasing sizes. (Ilmage
orientation. Bone cement particles are removed
courtesy of BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ)
from the joint and adjacent soft tissues. If a femoral
stem (sizes 5-9) centralizer is being used, the
instrumentation down the central axis of the canal.
appropriate femoral stem is placed into a warm
 Femoral canal preparation consists of two basic
centralizer mold (flash sterilized just prior to use).
steps: initial opening and final canal preparation.
Prior to injecting cement into the acetabulum, a
portion of the cement batch is injected into the
Initial opening
mold until cement emerges from the top of the
The initial opening is made into the femoral canal
mold around the stem. The mold is set aside to
over the central axis of the femur. The central axis
cure while the acetabular cup is cemented.
is located in the trochanteric fossa medial to the
greater trochanter (Figure 7.20). Proper identifica-
Femoral canal preparation
tion of this point is crucial for canal preparation
The limb is rotated 90 degrees and the proximal
and positioning of both the BFX and the CFX
portion of the femur is elevated from the wound
stems. The point of entry is difficult to visualize
using a large blunt-tipped Hohmann retractor. The
 because of the presence of soft tissue, and poten-
proximal aspect of the femur must be elevated
tially osteophytes, in the trochanteric fossa. The
enough to allow unimpeded passage of the femoral
femoral canal must not be entered through the
90 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
neck osteotomy site. Accurate placement of the
the pin is aimed just proximal to the patella. If
opening is facilitated by creating a pilot hole in the
there is caudal angulation of the femoral shaft, the
trochanteric fossa with a sharp 3.2-mm intramed-
pin is aimed well cranial to the patella. These land-
ullary pin. The pin will penetrate soft tissues and
 marks apply to the aligrment of all instruments
osteophytes and engage the sloping surface of the
used during femoral canal preparation.
trochanteric fossa. This step can be done prior to
or after resection of the femoral head and neck.
 Final canal preparation
 Presence of the head and neck may provide better
 orientation during pin placement. This is the same
After the opening is made in the trochanteric
technique used to place an intramedullary pin or
fossa, the preparation is expanded through the
interlocking nail during fracture repair. Once the
remaining caudal wall of the femoral neck. The
appropriate point is identified, the pin is driven
hard cortical bone of the caudal femoral neck
into the femoral canal, parallel to the long axis
offers considerable resistance to broaching and
 of the femur. The alignment of the pin must be 
 makes it difficult to expand the preparation into
carefully assessed prior to entering the proximal
the osteotomy site. This cortical bone may cause
femur.  Valgus-varus deviation is avoided by
the broach to rotate into retroversion rather than
directing the pin toward the center of the patella.
 penetrate the neck wall and enter the osteotomy
Cranial-caudal tipping is avoided by ensuring that
site. An opening through the caudal femoral neck
the pin is aligned with the long axis of the proxi-
wall is created using a rongeur followed by a side-
mal aspect of the femur as determined during
cutting tapered reamer. Using a rongeur first to
templating on the lateral radiographic view. Intra-
remove the caudal neck facilitates the reaming
operative review of the orientation of the long axis
proces. The location of this opening or pathway
relative to the patella is helpful in obtaining the
through the caudal neck is important as it sets the
    e nr
version of the broach and the stem (Figure 7.21).
A
parallel red lines) with a rongeur facilitates the reaming and broaching process. The power reamer is held axially and
directed or forced against the surface of the cortical wall medially (B). During the insertion of the broaches, the cranial face
of the broach is held parallel to the cranial face of the femoral neck. This sets the version of the stem (dot-dash line through
implant center) to match the original version of the femoral neck (A, heavy dotted parallel lines). (lmage courtesy of
BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ)
The stem version can be determined by placing
redirected or straightened in the canal. The broach
the tip of the #4 broach into the 3.2-mm pinhole
should be retracted until it can be correctly aligned
opening and aligning the cranial surface of the
and the impaction process resumed with the shaft
broach with the cranial surface of the femoral
of the broach held parallel to the long axis of the
cortex at the level of the osteotomy. The point at
femur. The surgeon must resist letting the broach
which the broach contacts the remnants of the
slide back into malalignment during reinsertion.
caudal femoral neck is noted and that portion of
Holding the broach using a golfer's grip, with the
the neck wall is removed using a rongeur, fol-
thumb extended on the shaft rather thian like a fist,
lowed by a power-driven, side-cutting, tapered
helps stabilize the shaft axially. If the malalign-
reamer. The #2-3 or the #5 tapered reamer is
ment is severe, the broach may be partially
inserted axially into the opening (Figure 7.21).
extracted and the tip used as a rasp to remove
During power insertion, the reamer is initially
bone medial to the trochanter or caudally until
 positioned axially and held firmly against the neck
the broach can be aligned axially. Once aligned,
wall as it is inserted. After partial insertion, the
the broach is advanced with the mallet until the
 a  a tn pa s r
ps si rqa g ,rs, eair
into the osteotomy site at the point previously
2-3 mm below the junction of the femoral neck
identified. Care must be taken not to violate the
with
the greater trochanter (Figure 7.22). In
envelope of the stem shape and only remove
enough bone to facilitate the initiation of the
ble as a bony ridge at the level of the origin of
broaching process. The opening
through
the
the vastus lateralis muscle on the cranial surface
caudal neck must be made in the location that
 of the femur. This is the reference point for seating
will direct the broach into the canal in neutral
the broach in the canal. The slotted slap hammer
rotation, not in excessive anteversion or retrover-
is used to extract the broach in the same direction
sion. If a larger size stem is to be implanted, the
in which it was inserted. The next larger size
initial opening made with the 3.2-mm pin can be
broach is inserted and impacted to the appropriate
expanded using a 5-mm drill bit followed by the
level.
#5 reamer. If a #4 or #5 stem is to be used, the #2-3
 Femoral preparation is continued with sequen-
reamer should be used following the 3.2-mm pin.
tially larger broaches until press-fit stability is
To ensure press-fit stability when implanting a
achieved. Like the acetabular reamer, the broach
smaller stem, use the least amount of power
serves as the trial component. When the appropri-
reaming to remove the neck wall and never insert
the reamer to a depth beyond the notch on the
able" resistance to further advancement. The final
reamer fins.
size selection is influenced by preoperative radio-
 To continue the preparation, the cylindrical tip
 graphic templating, but is determined intraopera-
 of the #4 broach is introduced into the opening
tively by the change in resistance during sequential
made with the reamer. The handle of the broach is
broaching. For that reason, sequential broaching is
held parallel to the long axis of the femur as
recommended so the surgeon learns to "feel" the
viewed from two planes. To avoid placing the
 sequential change in resistance to subsidence of
stem in excessive anteversion or retroversion, the
,ieau, 0l pue paiedaid s! [eues aut se qoeoiq au
cranial surface of the broach is aligmed parallel to
ssa pmos ,y um, auu a a
the cranial cortex of the femoral neck as it is
change when the broach impact is resisted by cor-
impacted. This will place the stem in a near-neutral
 tical bone contact. As a general rule, provided the
 position or similar to the original degree of femoral
broach is properly aligned in both planes, the last
neck anteversion. The stem should be placed
5 mm of seating the broach should be significantly
neutral or in slight anteversion. The stem should
more difficult than the previous advancement. In
never be placed in retroversion. Care must simul-
addition, the surgeon should note the amount of
 -ue [eixe radond amsua oi uaxel aq Aisnoau
cancellous bone between the teeth of the broach
ment of the broach as it is impacted. If the broach
and the medial and cranial cortical walls when the
becomes malaligned in varus or if the tip is
broach is seated. If there is 4 mm or more of cancel-
directed caudally, it should not be forcibly
lous bone cranial and medial, the next broach size
P
R
surrounded by bone cement. The distal flow of bone cement is limited by a cement restrictor placed distal to the stem tip.
To allow space for the cement mantle, a CFX stem is selected one size smaller than the final broach. If the femur was
prepared only using reamers, then the stem size matches the final reamer size. The stem is inserted until the collar contacts
the femoral neck cranial and medial. (lmage courtesy of BioMedtrix, Boonton, N))
may be indicated. However, it is desirable that,
 as a rasp to selectively remove bone caudally and
whenever possible, a margin of cancellous bone be
laterally along the greater trochanter. Caution
preserved between the implant and the cortex,
must be exercised not to rasp away too much bone
especially when cementing an implant.
when this technique is used to seat the final broach
When making the decision to increase the size
size. The broach must be custom fit slowly; one or
of the stem, the surgeon must always keep in mind
two strokes or rasping motions with the broach
the largest stem tip that will fit in the femoral
 may be sufficient. The finishing file should only be
diaphysis as determined during preoperative
used very judiciously for this procedure.
a 'sa ,pang aueduu, u suedn
 Forces resulting from impaction of the broach
diaphysis may be the size-limiting point, not the
are distributed uniformly outward. These forces
metaphysis. If the surgeon is not comfortable
 are unlikely to result in a fissure fracture, provided
impacting a broach the remaining distance because
the broach is aligned parallel with the long axis of
wonoedut ,anqeuoseai, wim aueape jou saop 1!
the femur and enters the canal over the central
force, the broach should be removed and not
axis. Situations predisposing to femoral fissure or
forced further into the canal. When this occurs, the
fracture include starting the femoral broach into
technique of inserting, impacting, removing, and
the canal from the femoral neck osteotomy site,
cleaning the broach multiple times until seated
varus and/or caudal alignment of the broach, and
may be utilized. Alternatively, a smaller broach
excessive bending or rotation of the broach in the
can be reinserted into the femoral canal and used
femur or during extraction. Also, inadequate
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 93
elevation of the proximal aspect of the femur, or
remaining "drive" distance with the femoral com-
the femur slipping off the retractor used for eleva-
ponent impactor and a mallet. The proximal-
tion, may tempt the surgeon to use the broach as
lateral "shoulder" of the femoral stem is seated
a lever to elevate the femur from the surgical site.
approximately 2-3 mm below the most proximal
The resulting bending force can cause a fracture.
aspect of the junction of the femoral neck with the
Twisting the broach around its long axis or placing
 greater trochanter (Figure 7.22). In reality, the level
the broach in excessive anteversion can wedge the
of final seating may be anywhere from 2 to 3mm
cortical walls apart resulting in a fracture. It is
above or below this ideal insertion point, based on
recommended that the mallet with a slotted handle
the degree of resistance to impaction. If the com-
be used to impact the broach. Fissure fractures are
ponent was easily advanced beyond the desired
technique related and most often result from varus
seating point, subsidence is likely to occur when
or caudal alignment of the broach. Attention to
the implant is loaded. In that case, the femoral
proper elevation of the proximal aspect of the
component should be extracted and the medullary
femur and appropriate use and alignment of the
canal expanded with the next broach size to
 broaches, combined with selectiverasping, reduces
accommodate a larger implant.
 or eliminates the incidence of fissure fractures.
Following hand seating the stem, the surgeon
Also, during femoral canal preparation, an assis-
must assess the remaining drive distance prior to
tant should provide resistance at the stifle joint to
impaction with the mallet. The drive distance
counteract the impact of the mallet on the broach
 Jo g-ao cn spr-om Aiaxordde aq pmos
in order to minimize the chance of the proximal
the length of the beaded portion of the stem. If the
aspect of the femur slipping off the retractor.
drive distance is greater than this, the preparation
The craniomedial region of the femoral neck
is cautiously expanded using the next larger
should be closely observed during broaching and
broach. This must be done in a manner to avoid
stem insertion for the development of a fissure. If
oversizing the preparation resulting in loss of
a fissure does occur, canal preparation or stem
press-fit. The stem should be removed from the
insertion should be stopped and the broach or
canal and the next largest broach size hand inserted
stem removed. A double-loop cerclage wire
is
util it stops. The broach is advanced approxi-
placed around the femur at the level just distal to
mately two teeth, removed, and the desired stem
the greater trochanter and proximal to the lesser
reinserted. The drive distance is reassessed. This
trochanter. Broaching or stem insertion is then
 sequence is continued until the stem has a drive
resumed. If the fissure extends more than 2cm
distance equal to two-thirds to one-half of the
distally or the patient's bone appears brittle and/
beaded section. Leaving the extractor attached to
or thin, double-loop cerclage wires may be placed
the stem facilitates its insertion and removal
every centimeter, continuing beyond the most
during this custom fitting process.
distal extent of the fissure (McCulloch et al. 2012).
In the event that a stem must be extracted
 In the event that the broaching process or stem
 during surgery, the stem exractor is attached
 implantation cannot proceed without the fissure
firmly to the stem and the stem is removed using
widening, despite the application of cerclage wire,
the slotted mallet against the impaction block. If
conversion to a CFX stem may be necessary.
the stem resists removal with the extractor, the
femoral neck is firmly gripped using a large Vise-
Femoral steminsertion
Grip and the implant extracted by impacting the
Vise-Grip.
BFX stem
The femur is maintained in the same position as
CFX stem
during the broaching procedure. The appropriate
BFX femoral component is held by the femoral
If a CFX stem is to be implanted, the femoral canal
neck and inserted by hand into the prepared
is prepared as described above. A CFX trial stem,
femoral canal in the same plane and degree of
 one size smaller than the broach used for the prep-
anteversion as the broach. When resistance to
aration, is inserted into the prepared bone bed
hand seating is met, the component is seated the
until the collar contacts the cranial and medial
cortex (Figure 7.22). If the collar contacts the
The stem is firmly held in place while the excess
caudal neck cortex first, preventing seating on the
cement is removed from the surrounding tissues,
cranial cortex, a rasp or rongeur can be used to
especially in the area of the joint and acetabular
remove a portion of the caudal neck. If necessary.
cup. It is recommended that a centralizer and
the angle of the osteotomy can be altered using
cement restrictor be used whenever the bone size
the finishing file to optimize the axial alignment
 allows. The centralizer has 1-mm flanges that keep
of the stem.
the stem tip away from the cortical wall and allows
Alternatively, if the surgeon intends to implant
bone cement to remain or flow between the cen-
 a CFX implant from the beginning, the femur can
tralizer and the cortical wall.
be  prepared using
sequential
lpowerreamers
In summary, the integrity and survival of a
inserted axially into the original opening in the
-rdard a q pauanul aq Ae wais panuaan
trochanteric fossa. The final power reamer used is
tion of the bone bed, the amount of cancellous
the same size as the intended stem size. The
bone left proximally, elimination of hemorrhage,
opening can then be finished by impacting 
a
 cleaning and drying the bone, avoiding stem tip
broach one size larger than the CFX stem or hand
contact with the cortical wall with a centralizer,
 aaowan ci dsei e se yoeonq rallews e Susn Suidsei
restricting the cement flow distally, injecting a
bone until the stem can be axially aligned.
homogeneous mass of cement that is free of blood,
With cement fixation, the trial cup and stem,
pressurizing the cement into the bone, inserting a
rather than the components to be implanted, are
dlean and dry implant in axial alignment, and
always used to determine the adequacy of the
holding the implant motionless until the cement
bone bed preparation. Fat and marrow cannot be
has cured. Bone cement should always be mixed
 adequately washed off the implant surface during
 following the manufacturer's recommendations.
surgery. Studies have shown that the bonding
It is highly recommended to fill the canal with
strength of a stem with the cement is decreased by
cement from distal to proximal whether or not a
more than 80% if wet or contaminated with fat or
cement restrictor was used. If a cement restrictor
marrow (Stone et al. 1989). This can predispose to
is not used, care must be taken that the cement is
debonding at the implant-cement interface.
not
pumped distally and inadequate cement
Once the canal preparation has been completed,
remains in the syringe to fill the proximal canal.
a polyethylene cement restrictor is inserted into
Also, it is important to recognize that operating
the diaphysis below the level of the stem tip to
as saanu ais amadan wnn
restrict the flow of cement down the distal femoral
time of the cement. A cooler atmosphere slows
canal. The small restrictor is generally used in
 down the setting time and a warmer atmosphere
canals prepared for stem sizes #5 or #6, and the
(>22°C/72°F) accelerates it.
large restrictor for sizes #7 to #10, although this
 may vary based on canal preparation. Following
placement of the cement restrictor, the canal is
flushed using pressure to remove any debris,
Trial reduction
blood, and loose cancellous bone from the canal.
Trial reduction is performed with trial heads to
The canal is dried and injected with bone cement
determine the reduction tension of the joint. The
in the low-viscosity stage, starting from the cement
reduction tension should not be excessively tight
restrictor out. Once the canal is filled with cement,
 or loose. Proper aligrment of the cup and range of
thumb pressure over the neck resection area can
 motion are more important in maintaining reduc-
be helpful to pressurize the cement into the cleaned
tion than joint tension. Trial reduction generally
and dried cancellous bone. The CFX stem is
begins with the +3-mm trial head and is adjusted
inserted into the cement-filled canal until the
up or down based on the reduction tension.
collar of the prosthesis contacts the femoral neck
During trial reduction, the correct alignment of the
cut. If a centralizer was used on the stem tip, and
 acetabular component can be verified by holding
resistance is encountered during seating,
the
the limb in a normal walking position in relation
mallet is used to tap the stem impactor handle and
to the body. With the limb in this position, the
seat the stem the remaining distance into the canal.
flat surface on the back of the femoral head
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 95
of the greater trochanter should be removed
Lengthening the femoral neck may also increase
the range of motion on external rotation. When
removing the trial head from the trunion, the head
should be firmly grasped with the fingers to
prevent loss in the wound.
Head assembly
The trunion is first wiped free of blood and fat and
dried before attachment of the head. The head,
with the appropriate neck length, is placed onto
the trunion and impacted with a mallet using the
head impactor. Caution must be taken to prevent 
contact of the head component with any metal
instruments or the rim of the metal acetabular
shell during placement or during reduction to
avoid scratching the head surface. It is recom-
mended that cotton gauze be placed between the
impactor head and the bearing surface to prevent
scratching.
Figure 7.23 Trial reduction of the joint is done using trial
Reduction and closure
femoral head components to determine the correct neck 
length and joint tension. The orientation of the cup is
The femoral head is reduced into the acetabular
assessed by holding the limb in a normal standing position
cup. The range of motion of the reduced joint is
to verify that the face of the cup is parallel to the back of
again evaluated. The joint and the wound are
the femoral head (parallel lines). (lmage courtesy of
lavaged copiously with pulsatile irrigation. The
BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ)
joint and adjacent tissues are carefully inspected
and any remnants of bone cement are removed.
 component should be parallel with the plane of 
The wound is closed in layers, beginning with the
the nontruncated aspect of the cup (Figure 7.23).
 joint capsule. The transected tendon of the deep
This is the best indication the surgeon will get of
gluteal muscle is reattached securely to its inser-
the cup positioning, especially with the BFX cup.
tion. The reflected vastus lateralis muscle is
It is dificult to assess the position of a metal-
sutured to its origin or, if necessary, to the ventral
 backed cup on postoperative radiographs. Cup
edge of the tendon of the deep gluteal muscle. The
 position should be ascertained during trial reduc-
Overlying tissues are closed in layers. Postopera-
tion and should be corrected at that point,
if
tive radiographs are made using the same tech-
deemed necessary.
 nique as described for the preoperative assessment
 The range of motion should be checked during
and templating (Figures 7.24 and 7.25).
trial reduction, particularly external rotation.
If
external rotation is limited, the caudal area of the
cup and acetabular bone bed should be checked
Zurich hip system technique
for interference or impingement with the femoral
 neck. Correction of impingement is more easily
The Zurich Cementless THR has been commer-
performed before final head assembly, with the
cially available since the late 1990s. Several changes
joint luxated. If large osteophytes or bone on the
have been made since its introduction, in response
rim of the acetabulum limit range of motion or
to challenges faced over the past 12 years. This
appear to act as a fulcrum resulting in luxation,
section will primarily discuss the prosthesis in its
they are removed with a rongeur. S
Similarly,
current form, with a discussion of prior versions,
large osteophytes present on the caudal aspect
where appropriate.
96Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Figure 7.24 Ventrodorsal (A) and craniocaudal (B) radiographic views made immediately following implantation of a BFX
press-fit stem in a young dog with hip dysplasia. The femoral component is oriented parallel to the long axis of the femur
and fills the metaphysis. On the lateral (C) and open-leg lateral (D) radiographic views, the stem is positioned in the neutral
axis of the femur and fills the canal adequately. On the open-leg lateral view, the acetabular component is fully seated
against the bone bed and is flush with the cranial and caudal poles of the acetabulum.
R
around the radiolucent polyethylene cup is used to assess the cup position on the ventrodorsal and lateral radiographic
views (A and C). The femoral component cannot be assessed on the ventrodorsal view because the chronic changes in the
joint prevent full extension of the limb. The femoral component is best assessed on the craniocaudal radiographic view (B)
and the lateral and open-leg radiographic views (D). The stem is centrally oriented parallel to the femoral axis in both planes
and there is adequate and uniform cement mantle. A cement restrictor outline is visible, distal to the stem tip.
The Zurich hip is a modular total hip system
 perforated, and plasma sprayed with commer-
with three components: acetabular cup, head /
cially pure titanium. The inner shell is solid. There
neck, and femoral stem. The acetabular compo- j
 is a 1-mm space between the outer and inner shells
nent is a press-fit component with a double tita-
-jaauon uado au ,uogoaauon uado, roy moe cl
polyethylene (UHMWPE) liner. The outer shell is  into and out of the perforations in the outer shell
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 97
during weight bearing to allow improved bone
osseointegration, particularly in giant breeds.
ingrowth, compared with blind-ended channels.4
Since the prosthesis is not press-fit, several milli-
Bone ongrowth and ingrowth into the Zurich ace-
asand uao are Aae rnmpa nado jo sraa
-aoudooistu ssn passasse sem dno remqe
lateral to the prosthesis. The femoral head/neck
ric analysis (Lauer et al. 2009). Bone apposition
component is titanium alloy with a diamond-like
with the outer shell of the cup was 75% and bone
carbon coating. The head/neck component is
ingrowth into the perforations was44%, 12 months
affixed to the stem trunion with a Morse taper. The
after implantation. The outer shell, as a result of
angle of inclination of the head/neck with the
its perforations, has a lower elastic modulus that
femoral stem is 135 degrees. Twelve millimeters of
more closely resembles that of bone (Bragdon et
neck length modularity are available in five 3-mm
al. 2004). The acetabular polyethylene liner is not
increments (extra-short, short, medium, long, and
spherical. Rather, there is a fossa at the apex of the
extra-long necks). Each neck lerngth is available for
cup. That fossa decreases the stress on the poly-
both 16- and 19-mm-diameter heads.
ethylene liner by a factor of 2.5 and reduces the
coefficient of friction by a factor of 2 compared
Surgical procedure
with a spherical control, based on finite element
Neck resection
are available in five sizes (21.5, 23.5, 26.5, 29.5, and
The femoral head and neck excision is performed
32.5mm). The 29.5- and 32.5-mm cups accept
via a biplanar osteotomy (Figure 7.26). The vertical
19-mm-diameter femoral heads, while other sizes
portion of the osteotomy is made just medial to
accept 16-mm-diameter femoral heads. The
the greater trochanter, as lateral as possible to
femoral stem is also made of titanium and has a
ensure access to the central axis of the femur. The
plasma-sprayed, commercially pure f
titanium
coating. Five stem sizes are available. The stems
are fixed to the medial cortex of the femur with
conically shaped screws that are wedged into the
implant itself. The smaller two stem sizes (extra-
small and small) are fixed with four screws, and
the others (medium, large, and extra-large) are
fixed with five screws. In the original version of
the stems, all screws were monocortical and
obtained purchase only in the medial cortex. The
rationale for monocortical, rather than bicortical,
screws was that the medial and lateral cortices
cycle at slightly differing rates during loading.
aq o paadxa ari sem uex mas as
load bearing ad infinitum in THR patients, this
design was thought to decrease the likelihood of
screw loosening or screw failure. Additionally,
based on a three-dimensional finite element analy-
sis study, stress shielding of the proximomedial
femoral cortex is significantly lower with the
Zurich prosthesis than with a cemented prosthesis
(Shahar et al. 2003). This advantage, primarily
atributed to the method of fixation, suggests a
lower risk of proximal femoral bone loss. Manu-
Figure7.26
The femoral head and neck excision for a
facturer recommendations now include placing a
Zurich Cementless hip is performed in a biplanar fashion.
The vertical portion of the osteotomy extends distally to the
bicortical screw in the most proximal hole. That
level of the distal extent of the femoral head. The transverse
screw is thought to decrease the likelihood of avul-
portion of the osteotomy exits the medial cortex just
sion of the stem from the medial cortex prior to its
proximal to the lesser trochanter.
vertical portion of the osteotomy terminates at the
level of the distal aspect of the femoral head. The
transverse portion of the osteotomy originates at
the proximal extent of the lesser trochanter medi-
ally and angles proximally to meet the distal end
of the vertical osteotomy.
Femoral canal preparation
During femoral canal preparation, the leg is held
in 90 degrees of external rotation and at approxi-
mately 90 degrees of extension. To improve access
to the medullary canal, the femur is lateralized
using a modified Hohmann retractor placed just
distal to the osteotomy. Initial entry into the
femoral canal should be made as caudolateral as
possible and visualization of the tendon of inser-
tion of the internal obturator muscle is a useful
landmark within the trochanteric fossa. Ateardrop-
shaped proximal portion of the femur rather than
au au ie sisans adeus ienda no ieao ue
Figure 7.27P
 Femoral canal preparation for a Zurich
Cementless hip is initiated by hand-drilling with a 6-mm
cut is too proximal. This complicates the entry into
and then an 8-mm T-handle mounted bit. Note the
the central axis of the femur and predisposes to
presence of the Hohmann retractor used to lateralize the
stem tipping into a varus and caudal orientation.
femur during femoral canal preparation. (Ilmage courtesy of
 Perforation into the medullary canal can be per-
Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland)
formed using a rongeur, a high-speed bur, or the
6-mm drill bit that is used for initial femoral canal
preparation. Femoral canal preparation is per-
formed by hand, using two drill bits (6 and 8mm)
and two files. The drill bits are manually rotated
approximately 180 degrees in both clockwise and
counterclockwise directions. Each bit needs only
be inserted to the point where proximal extent of
the flutes of the bit is at the level of the osteotomy
(Figure 7.27). As the bit is removed from the med-
ullary canal, its T-handle should be gradually
brought cranially while continuing handle rota-
tion to remove the medullary bone associated with
the medial cortex to create appropriate stem
contact with that cortex. The small and large files
are used sequentially (Figure 7.28). All file cutting
is lateral (Figure 7.29). The large file is not neces-
sary for the extra-small or small stems. In order to
file for appropriate stem anteversion, the file may
saap o aaeuxrdde Aq paeioi Aleuaxa a
or the limb may be internally rotated (from the
Figure 7.28 Femoral canal preparation for a Zurich
 Jo saaiaap 0 Aaieurixoidde on (uogisod aaiaap-06
Cementless hip is completed with the small file (pictured)
for small stems or large file for medium or large stems. The
externalrotation.
teeth of the file cut laterally only and the file is oriented at
Filing should be done in short strokes and
approximately 20 degrees of femoral anteversion. (lmage
wedging or jamming the file should be avoided.
courtesy of Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland)
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 99
Figure 7.29  Cranial-caudal radiographs of cadaver bone with the femoral preparation file in the medullary canal at 
appropriate final depth (A) and at excessive depth (B). The arrows indicate the level of the nutrient foramen. Excessively
distal femoral canal preparation is associated with an increased incidence of femoral medullary infarction.
If the file becomes jammed in the femoral canal,
the drill bits, filing should not proceed distally
careful, small amplitude rotations will generally
beyond the end of the cutting portion of the file.
free the file. Careful filing will result in the forma-
After filing is complete, a trial fit should be evalu-
tion of a central ridge laterally, with space
ated for contact with the medial cortex and ability
between the two columns of the file. This ridge
to seat the stem roughly to the level of the shoul-
can be removed, if desired, by refiling at +5 and
der of the prosthesis. The Zurich stem is not a
-5 degrees from the original angles, or by using a
collared prosthesis and does not require full
high-speed bur. The most proximal portion of the
seating. In fact, it may be advantageous to have
ridge can also prevent full seating of the femoral
the stem placed 4 or 5mm "proud" to further lat-
stem. Removal of the ridge allows greater freedom
eralize the femur. The stem must, however, be
to adjust femoral anteversion at the time of
mas o a  os qnoa g ps
implantation, but requires greater care between
hole is at least one screw hole diameter distal to
drilling of holes and screw placement. As with
the osteotomy.
Acetabular preparation
Acetabular bed preparation follows femoral canal
preparation. The femur is retracted caudodistally
using an Army-Navy retractor or can be levered
using a small Hohmann retractor hooked on the
ischium just caudal to the caudal acetabular rim.
Care must be taken to avoid damage to the sciatic
nerve. In poorly muscled dogs, transient sciatic
neurapraxia can occur with even moderate retrac-
tion. Gelpi retractors are placed perpendicular to
the capsular incision. The joint capsule is undercut
circumferentially at its attachment to allow clear
visualization of the dorsal rim, as well as the
cranial and caudal poles. At this point, the
Figure 7.30 Acetabular reaming for a Zurich Cementless
dorsomedial aspect of the dorsal rim is palpated
cup. Adequate acetabular reaming depth is reached when
the rim of the reamer is just below the bone surface
to evaluate bone support and dorsal migration.
cranially and caudally.
In patients with more advanced degenerative
changes, the acetabular fossa may not be visible,
caudal poles, based on planned cup orientation
as it is hidden behind a false medial wall and does
(Figure 7.30). Osteophytes that might interfere
not appear until after reaming has progressed
with cup impaction should be removed. Some sur-
-ae (asasn) ra a sia laas
 geons will drill vascular ingrowth channels in pre-
tabular ligament is a useful landmark at this point
pared areas that do not have exposed cancellous
in the procedure, as it identifies the true ventral
bone. Reamers have a diameter that is 0.5mm
limit of the acetabulum. It is often hidden behind
smaller than the corresponding cup in order to
a ventral rim of osteophytes that must be removed.
achieve press-fit.
The surgeon should not confuse the tendon of
insertion of the iliopsoas muscle with the trans-
 Cup insertion
verse ligament. If desired, if the acetabular fossa
is not visible, a small-diameter pilot hole can be
Appropriate patient
positioning is confirmed
drilled in the cranioventral one-third of the acetab-
before cup insertion. A marker (skin staple or
ulum for monitoring of medial wall thickness
hemostatic forceps) is placed over the ischiatic
 during acetabular reaming. Reaming should begin 
tuberosity and another halfway between the tuber
fairly central and ventral, based on previously dis-
coxae and tuber sacrale. The horizontal bar of the
cussed landmarks, and should start with a reamer
 cup positioner is the central hole and should be
that is at least one size smaller than the final cup
 parallel to floor and aligmed with the long axis of
size. The final reamer size can be used to complete
the femur to create an ALO of 45 degrees. The
the acetabular bed preparation. In order to ensure 
 crariocaudal bar (upper hole for right hip) should
 complete spherical bone preparation, pivoting or 
be parallel to the line connecting the previously
Arssaa s ra a jo qom
during
placed markers. This bar sets the anteversion /
reaming. However, the surgeon should be careful
retroversion angle of the cup (Figure 7.31). The
not to allow the reamer to drift or shift, otherwise
 surgeon should also check for anatomical aligm-
the ability to achieve a press-fit will be lost. It is
ment based on equal cranial and caudal pole
not necessary, and it is frequently undesirable, to
depth of the cup. The ALO is evaluated prior to
ream the acetabulum entirely to the medial wall.
 complete seating of the cup.
 Doing so can decrease lateralization of the femur,
Using the spherical impactor, when the impac-
 resulting in impingement or the requirement of a
tor shaft is at 90 degrees to the table, it should just
longer neck than would otherwise be necessary.
contact the plastic liner (for 29.5- and 32.5-mm
The depth of preparation should allow the rim of
cups, the shaft should be approximately 0.5mm
the final reamer to be covered at the cranial and
from the liner). When the cup is fully seated, the
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 101
Figure 7.31  Acetabular cup impactor/positioning guide. The sagittal bar is parallel to a line connecting the center of the
wing of the ilium to the center of the ischiatic tuberosity (A). This bar sets the retroversion angle of the acetabular compo-
jo sano ai) sip st jo suado eanel yo ale ue aaoe o roo aui on laleed pas s je asasue aul uu
Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland)
cranial and caudal rims of the cup should be of
 neck will be reducible, the upper portion of the
equal depth relative to the cranial and caudal
small drill guide should fit between the osteotomy
 poles of the acetabulum. This is more difficult to
and the impactor shaft.
evaluate in more severely deformed acetabula. In
general, the number of rows of cup perforations
Femoral stem fixation
correspond to the cup size: 21.5-mm cup—one
Screw fixation of the femoral stem is performed
row; 23.5-mm cupone to two rows; 26.5-mm
with the aid of a self-retaining jig attached to the
cup—two to three rows; 29.5- or 32.5-mm cup
threads within the stem trunion. Secure, well-
three to four rows. However, this is less reliable
 aligned fixation is critical and jig-stem alignment
when substantial dorsal rim loss is present. The
is confirmed using the large drill guide at the
surgeon should confirm the stability of the press-
distal stem hole, ensuring that the guide hole and
fit with manual pressure and should confirm that
stem hole are congruent. The 4.5-mm drill bit,
full circumferential implant/bone contact is
used for the lateral cortical guide hole, is adjusted
 present. A trial reduction using an unfixed stem
to ensure that it does not contact the stem during
with a short neck is performed to confirm that
drilling. The femur is lateralized manually or
reduction is possible. Even if the trial stem is not
using the Hohmann as described in the "Femoral
rotationally stable and can subside, it offers a
Preparation" section. The stem is inserted into the
 rough guide to reduction as well as cup position.
medullary canal in an orientation similar to the
For the evaluation of cup positioning, with the hip
orientation created by femoral canal preparation.
in a weight-bearing position, the plane of the
Prior to screw fixation, stem position must be
equator of the femoral head should be roughly
evaluated for medial cortical contact, appropriate
parallel with the plane of the face of the cup. An
anteversion angle and adequate seating depth. A
alternative method for evaluation of the ability to
 gap between the medial cortex and the proximal
reduce the hip involves placing the spherical
part of the stem suggests one of three problems.
impactor into the acetabulum. If a short head/
First, the gluteal musculature may impinge on the
jig and force the stem laterally. This is more
hole is flushed again after removal of the drill. The
common in well-muscled dogs, particularly those 
 3.4-mm conical screw is then inserted and firmly
with large-diameter femoral canals. Second, the
tightened (Figure 7.33). Stem position is rechecked
femoral osteotomy may be too proximal and the
 before proceeding. A bicortical screw is generally
curvature of the femoral neck at the calcar is not
placed in the most proximal hole. A depth gauge
aligned with the medial cortex. Third, there may
on the drill guide is used to determine bicortical
have been inadequate removal of cancellous bone
screw length and screws are available in 5-mm
from the medial cortex during femoral canal prep-
increments. The remaining holes are drilled as
aration. With the limb held parallel to the table,
described above. The screws are retightened in the
stem anteversion is evaluated based on the angle
of the jig relative to a vertical plane perpendicular
to the femur (Figure 7.32). The angle should be
approximately 20 degrees.
The order of screw placement is 3, 1, 2, 4, 5. Until
the first screw is tightened, the assistant must not
shift limb position and the surgeon must avoid
shifting the position of the jig. The guide hole in
the lateral cortex is made using a 4.5-mm drill bit
through the large drill guide. While drilling
(Figure 7.33), lavage is provided at the level of the
hole located at the base of the drill guide. Next,
the small drill guide is inserted into the guide hole
and debris is flushed with pulsatile lavage through
the drill guide. The drill guide is then placed into
Figure 7.32 Axial proximal-distal image of the right femur
with the attached jig. Anteversion of the femoral stem is
the stem hole and kept centered on the jig. A 3.0-
established as the angle of the jig relative to a medial-to-
mm bit is used to drill the medial cortex, taking
lateral line perpendicular to the long axis of the femur.
care not to exert excessive force (Figure 7.33). The
(lmage courtesy of Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland)
hole is drilled in the lateral cortex using a 4.5-mm drill bit (A). The drill sleeve is inserted through the 4.5-mm guide hole
and inserted into the hole in the femoral stem. A 3.0-mm drill bit is used to drill the hole in the medial cortex (B). The
conical screw is then inserted and tightened (C)
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 103
 order in which they were placed and the jig is
or is ineffective in controlling luxation, the cup
removed.
will need to be repositioned.
Trial reduction
Cup repositioning
The length of the head/neck component is esti-
Cup repositioning can be attempted without
mated by observing the distance between the
removing the cup. The head/neck component is
 trunion and the cup with moderate tension applied
 removed by using the pointed impactor placed in
to the distal portion of the femur and with the
the "dimple" on the reduction hook. The impactor
femur perpendicular to the body. A trial set of
is tapped and the head /neck component removed.
head/neck components should be used to avoid
 If luxation is in a craniodorsal direction the cup
damage to the implanted head/neck. The femur
should be further closed and /or retroverted. If the
is externally rotated and the head/neck compo-
luxation is caudal/caudoventral, the cup should
 nent is gently tapped using the head impactor. The
 be opened and/or anteverted. The cup positioner
hip can be reduced using the reduction hook. The
is placed in the cup and moderate pressure is
head is positioned cranial to the acetabulum before
applied in the desired direction of correction while
pulling distally then caudally for reduction.
moderately tapping the impactor with the mallet.
Having an assistant pull on the limb seemingly
The pointed impactor can be applied to the tita-
makes reduction more difficult. An alternative
 nium rim of the acetabular cup for repositioning
method of reduction utilizes a small Hohmann
as well. However, this risks damage or deforma-
retractor, with the tip placed as described for
tion of the cup, necessitating replacement with a
femoral retraction during acetabular preparation.
new cup.
The shaft of the Hohmarn levers between the
 If the cup must be removed to achieve reposi-
greater trochanter and the base of the femoral
tioning,
 or if additional reaming is necessary,
neck. Easy reduction does not imply an unstable
several techniques may be used for cup removal.
hip. Likewise, a very tight reduction does not
A small Hohmann can be hooked under the ven-
imply a stable hip. If appropriate steps are fol-
tromedial aspect of the cup and leverage applied
lowed during the procedure, hip reduction should
as
described for reduction. Alternatively, the
be possible. However, in the event that the hip
surgeon can attempt to wedge a Freer elevator
cannot be reduced, several strategies are available.
 between the acetabular bed and the shell to pry
From simplest to most challenging, these include
the cup loose. Finally, the pointed impactor can be
 using a shorter femoral head/neck, performing a
 applied to the dorsomedial aspect of the shell and
pectineal tenotomy, performing a tenotomy
of
tapped with moderate force. This final method
internal obturator, removing the cup and reaming
risks damage to the cup, necessitating replace-
deeper, repositioning the cup to a more open or
ment withi a new cup. If the press-fit is lost in the
more anteverted position, and repositioning
the
process of repositioning, options include increas-
stem in a more distal position. Following reduc-
tion of the hip, the construct must be evaluated for
less revision cup, cementing a Zurich cup, or use
resistance to luxation. The hip is externally rotated
 of a custom femoral head with a CFX or BFX cup.
 in both weight-bearing and extended positions to
After repositioning, the process of reduction and
evaluate for craniodorsal luxation.
.Osteophytes
testing
 is repeated. Once the appropriate neck
causing impingement should be removed. Next,
 length has been determined, the head is assem-
the hip is placed in full flexion and internally
bled to the femoral stem. Wound closure is as
rotated,
, as well as abducted, to evaluate for
described in the Universal Hip section. Postopera-
caudal/caudoventral luxation. The craniodorsal
tive radiographs are made using the same tech-
 aspect of the acetabulum is evaluated for impinge-
nique as described for the preoperative assessment
ment while testing for caudal/caudoventral luxa-
tion. If impingement or luxation occurs during
tion of the pelvis is not used for evaluation of
testing, the easiest option is to try a longer head/
implant positioning because a complete assess-
neck component, if possible. If that is not possible,
 ment may be made using the lateral, craniocaudal
B
R
DM
Figure 7.34  Postoperative radiographs of a Zurich Cementless hip replacement. The ventrodorsal, hip-extended view (A) is
not utilized for evaluation of implant position. The open-leg medial-lateral view (B) is primarily used for evaluation of full
seating of the acetabular component. The arrowheads on the inset indicate the lucent zone at the pole of the implant. The
osiy alod aui le pauaely s! suauodwos reingeane aun ing 'aiaydsiay e s! pag panedaid aui asnenag uasaid s! Aouain
note the slight caudal tipping of the femoral component, which suggests that the initial opening of the femoral canal was
more proximal than is ideal (B). Cross-table cranial-caudal view of the femur (C). This view is used to evaluate medial
cortical contact of the prosthesis and to ensure that all screws are fully inserted. The tips of all screws should be aligned. The
medial-lateral view of the pelvis (D) is the main view used to evaluate the angle of lateral opening of the acetabular
component as well as its anteversion/retroversion angle.
horizontal beam, and open-leg lateral views
Several other methods for evaluation of acetab-
(Figure 7.34).
ular component positioning have been described.
They are described in Chapter 6.
Evaluation of acetabular component
positioning for the universal hip system and
zurich cementless hip
Endnotes
From the postoperative lateral pelvic radiograph,
the anteversion/retroversion angle of the cup is
1. Matis U, Holz I. Cemented total hip replacement in
small dogs—The European experience. In: Proceed-
determined based on a line connecting the center 
ings of the 2008 European Societyof Veterinary Orthopae-
of the wing of the ilium to the center of the ischi-
dics and Traumatology Meeting. Munich, Germany,
atic tuberosity. The cup version angle is the angle
2008, Pp.140-141.
created by the intersection of the above line with
2. Roe S, Marcellin-Little D, Lascelles D. Short-term
a line drawn through the long axis of the ellipse
outcome of uncemented THR. In: Proceedings of the
of the acetabular cup created by the lateral radio-
2010 American Collegeof Veterinary Surgeons Veterinary
 graphic projection. The ALO is computed based
Symposium. Seattle, WA, 2010.
 3. Vezzoni A. Kyon cementless hip: My first 1000 cases.
on the sin- of the short axis (SA) of the ellipse
In: Proceedings of the 2011 American Cotlegeof Veterinary
divided by its long axis (LA) of the cup, forming 
Surgeons Veterinary Symposium.Chicago, IL, 2011.
the following equation:
4. Tepic S. Development and mechanical basis for Kyon
THR. In: Proceedings of the 2004 Annual American
Cotllege of Veterinary Surgeons Forum. Denver, CO,
LA
2004, pp. 289-291.
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 105
5. Tepic S, Bresina S, Hintmer M, et al. Reduced wear of
Fitzpatrick N, Pratola L, Yeadon R et al. Total hip replace-
UHMWPE THR liner with modified contact geome-
ment after failed femoral head and neck excision in
try (abstract). In: Proceedings of the 2007 Orthopaedic
two dogs and two cats. Vet Surg 2012;41:136-142.
Research Society Meeting. San Diego, CA, 2007.
Gorman HA. A new prosthetic hip joint; experiences in
its use in the dog, and its probable application to man.
Mil Med 1957;121:91-93.
Guerrero TG, Montavon PM. Zurich cementless total hip
References
replacement: Retrospective evaluation of 2nd genera-
tion implants in 60 dogs. Vet Surg 2009;38:70-80.
Andrews CM, Liska WD, Roberts DJ. Sciatic neura-
Hach V, Delfs G. Initial experience with a newly devel-
praxia as a complication in 1000 consecutive canine
total hip replacements. Vet Surg 2008;37:254-262.
Orthop Traumatol 2009;22:153-158.
Bergh MS, Gilley RS, Shofer FS, et al. Complications and
Haney DR, Peck JN. Influence of canal preparation
radiographic findings following cemented total hip
depth on the incidence of femoral medullary infarc-
replacement: A retrospective evaluation of 97 dogs.
tion with Zurich Cementless Canine Total Hip arthro-
plasty. Vet Surg 2009;38:673-676.
Bishop NE, Waldow F, Morlock MM. Friction moments
Hanson SP, Peck JN, Berry CR, et al. Radiographic evalu-
of large metal-on-metal hip joint bearings and other
ation of the Zurich cementless total hip acetabular
moderm designs. Med Eng Phys 2008;30:1057-1064.
component. Vet Surg 2006;35:550-558.
Bragdon CR, Jasty M, Greene M, et al. Biologic fixation
Hayes GM, Ramirez J, Langley Hobbs SJ. Does the
of total hip implants. Insights gained from a series of
degree of preoperative subluxation or soft tissue
canine studies. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2004;86(Suppl.
tension affect the incidence of postoperative luxation
2):105-117.
in dogs after total hip replacement? Vet Surg
Budsberg SC, Chambers JN, Lue SL, et al. Prospective
2011a;40:6-13.
evaluation of ground reaction forces in dogs undergo-
Hayes GM, Ramirez J, Langley Hobbs SJ. Use of the
ing unilateral total hip replacement. Am J Vet Res
cumulative summation technique to quantitatively
1996;57:1781-1785.
assess a surgical learming curve: Canine total hip
 Charmley J. Anchorage of the femoral head prosthesis to
replacement. Vet Surg 2011b;40:1-5.
the shaft of the femur. J Bone Joint Surg Br
Hummel DW, Lanz OI, Werre SR. Complications of
1960;42-B:28-30.
cementless total hip replacement. A retrospective
Charmley J. Total hip replacement by low-friction arthro-
study of 163 cases. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
 plasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1970;72:7-21.
2010;23:424432.
Chen PQ, Turmer TM, Ronmigen H, et al. A canine
Ireifej S, Marino D, Laughin C. Nano total hip replace-
cementless total hip prosthesis model. Clin Orthop
ment in 12 dogs. Vet Surg 2012;41:130-135.
Relat Res 1983;176:24-33.
Jankovits DA, Liska WD, Kalis RH. Treatment of
Cross AR, Newell SM, Chambers JN, et al. Acetabular
avascular necrosis of the femoral head in small
component orientation as an indicator of implant
dogs with micro total hip replacenment. Vet Surg
luxation in cemented total hip arthroplasty. Vet Surg
2012;41:143-147.
2000;29:517-523.
Kalis RH, Liska WD, Jankovits DA. Total hip replace-
 DeYoung DJ, Schiller RA. Radiographic criteria for eval-
ment as a treatment option for capital physeal frac-
 uation of uncemented total hip replacement in dogs.
tures in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2012;41:148-155.
Vet Surg 1992;21:88-98.
Kim JY, Hayashi K, Garcia TC, et al. Biomechanical eval-
DeYoung DJ, DeYoung BA, Aberman HA, et al. Implan-
uation of screw-in femoral implant in cementless total
tation of an uncemented total hip prosthesis. Tech-
hip system. Vet Surg 2012;41:94-102.
nique and initial results of 100 arthroplasties. Vet Surg
Lascelles BD, Freire M, Roe SC, et al. Evaluation of
1992;21:168-177.
functional outcome after BFX total hip replacerment
 DeYoung DJ, Schiller RA, DeYoung BA. Radiographic
Se l mm rs asd e 
assessment of a canine uncemented
lporous-coated
2010;39:71-77.
anatomic total hip prosthesis. Vet Surg 1993;22:
Lauer SK, Nieves MA, Peck J, et al. Descriptive histo-
473-481.
 a o s  a
Dyce J, Wisner ER, Wang Q, et al. Evaluation of risk
cementless canine total hip acetabular component. Vet
factors for luxation after total hip replacement in dogs.
Surg 2009;38:59-69.
Vet Surg 2000;29:524-532.
Liska WD. Femur fractures associated with canine total
Edwards MR, Egger EL, Schwarz PD. Aseptic loosening
hip replacement. Vet Surg 2004;33:164-172.
of the femoral implant after cemented total hip arthro-
Liska WD. Micro total hip replacement for dogs and
plasty in dogs: 11 cases in 10 dogs (1991-1995). J Am
cats: Surgical technique and outcomes. Vet Surg
Vet Med Assoc 1997;211:580-586.
2010;39:797-810.
106 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Liska WD, Poteet BA. Pulmonary embolism associated
Olmstead ML. Total hip replacement in the dog. Semin
with canine total hip replacement. Vet Surg 2003;32:
Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 1987;2:131-140.
178-186.
 Olmstead ML. Canine cemented total hip replacements:
Liska WD, Doyle N, Marcellin-Little DJ, et al. Total hip
State of the art. J Small Anim Pract 1995a;36:395-399.
replacement in three cats: Surgical technique, short-
Olmstead ML. The canine cemented modular total
term outcome and comparison to femoral head ostec-
hip prosthesis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995b;31:
tomy. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2009;22:505-510.
109-124.
Liska WD, Doyle ND, Schwartz Z. Successful revision
Olmstead ML, Hohn RB, Turmer TM. A five-year study
of a femoral head ostectomy (complicated by postop-
of 221 total hip replacements in the dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1983;183:191-194.
in a cat. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2010;23:
 Ota J, Cook JL, Lewis DD, et al. Short-term aseptic loos-
119-123.
ening of the femoral component in canine total hip
Magmuson PB. Technique of debridement of the knee
replacement: Effects of cementing technique
uo
joint for arthritis. Surg Clin North Am 1946;26:
cement mantle grade. Vet Surg 2005;34:345-352.
249-266.
 Otto K, Matis U. Changes in cardiopulmonary variables
Marcellin-Little DJ. Medical treatment of coxofemoral
and platelet count during anesthesia for total hip
joint disease. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV,
replacement in dogs. Vet Surg 1994;23:266-273.
Bonagura JD, Twedt DC (eds.). Philadelphia: Elsevier,
Paul HA, Bargar WL. Histologic changes in the dog
2008, pp. 1120-1125.
femur following total hip replacement with current
Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung BA, Doyens DH, et al.
cementing techniques. J Arthroplasty 1986;1:5-9.
Canine uncemented porous-coated anatomic total
Paul HA, Bargar WL. Histologic changes in the dog
hip arthroplasty: Results of a long-term prospective
     
evaluation of 50 consecutive cases. Vet Surg 1999a;28:
current
cementing
techniques. JArthroplasty
10-20.
1987;2:71-76.
Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung DJ, Thrall DE, et al.
Paul HA, Bargar WL, Mittlestadt B, et al. Development
Osteosarcoma at the site of bone infarction associated
of a surgical robot for cementless total hip arthro-
with total hip arthroplasty in a dog. Vet Surg
plasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1992;285:57-66.
1999b;28:54-60.
Piermattei DJ, Johnson KA. Approach to the craniodor-
Marsolais GS, Peck JN, Berry CR et al. Femoral medul-
 sal aspect of the hip joint through a craniolateral inci-
lary infarction prevalence with the Zurich Cementless
sion. In: An Atas of Surgicat Approaches to the Bones and
jJoints of the Dog and Cat, Piermattei DJ, Johnson KA
 Massat Bj, Vasseur PB. Clinical and radiographic results
(eds.), 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004,
of total hip arthroplasty in dogs: 96 cases (1986-1992).
Pp. 290-295.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;205:448-454.
Pozzi A, Kowaleski MP, Dyce J, et al. Treatment of trau-
Massat BJ, Miller RT, DeYoung BA, et al. Single-stage
matic coxofemoral luxation by cemented total hip
revision using an uncemented, porous-coated, ana-
arthroplasty.
Vet
Comp
Orthop
Traumatol
tomic endoprosthesis in two dogs: Case report. Vet
2004;17:198-203.
Surg 1998;27:268-277.
Schiller TD, DeYoung DJ, Schiller RA, et al. Quantitative
Mawby DI, Bartges JW, d'Avignon A, et al. Comparison 
ingrowth analysis of a porous-coated acetabular com-
of various methods for estimating body fat in dogs.
 ponent in a canine model. Vet Surg 1993;22:276-280.
 J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2004;40:109-114.
Sebestyen P, Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung BA. Femoral
McCulloch RS, Roe SC, Marcellin-Little DJ, et al.
medullary infarction secondary to canine total hip
Resistance to subsidence of an uncemented femoral
arthroplasty. Vet Surg 2000;29:227-236.
stem after cerclage wiring of a fissure. Vet Surg
Shahar R, Banks-Sills L, Eliasy R. Mechanics of the
2012;41:163-167.
canine femur with two types of hip replacement
Montgomery RD, Milton JL, Permell R, et al. Total hip
stems. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003;16:145-152.
arthroplasty for treatment of canine hip dysplasia. Vet
Skurla CP, James SP. Postmortem retrieved canine THR:
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1992;22:703-719.
Femoral andacetabular component interaction.
Nelson LL, Dyce J, Shott S. Risk factors for ventral luxa-
Biomed Sci Instrum 2004;40:255-260.
tion in canine total hip replacement. Vet Surg
Skurla CP, James SP. Assessing the dog as a model for
2007;36:644-653.
human total hip replacement: Analysis of 38
Off W, Matis U. Excision arthroplasty of the hip joint in
postmortem-retrieved canine cemented acetabular
dogs and cats. Clinical, radiographic, and gait analy-
components. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater
sis findings from the Department of Surgery, Veteri-
2005;73:260-270.
nary Faculty of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Skurla CP, Pluhar GE, Frankel DJ, et al. Assessing the
      o
dog as a model for human total hip replacement.
2010;23:297-305.
Analysis of 38 canine cemented femoral components
Clinical Application of Total Hip Replacement 107
retrieved at post-mortem. J Bone Joint Surg Br
Tidwell SA, Graham JP, Peck JN, et al. Incidence of pul-
2005;87:120-127.
monary embolism after non-cermented total hip
Smith GK, Langenbach A, Green PA, et al. Evaluation of
arthroplasty in eleven dogs: Computed tomographic
the association between medial patellar luxation and
uotsnjad Areuournd pue Aqde.onue Areuourind
hip dysplasia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
scintigraphy. Vet Surg 2007;36:37-42.
1999;215:4045.
Torres BT, Budsberg SC. Revision of cemented total hip
Stone MH, Wilkinson R, Stother IG. Some factors affect-
arthroplasty with cementless components in three
ing the strength of the cement-metal interface. J Bone
dogs. Vet Surg 2009;38:81-86.
Joint Surg Br 1989;71:217-221.
Warmock JJ, Dyce J, Pooya H, et al. Retrospective analy-
Sumner DR, Turmer TM, Pierson RH, et al. Effects of
radiation on fixation of non-cemented porous-coated
2003;32:285-291.
 inplants in a canine model. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1990;72:1527-1533.
8
Revision Strategies for Total Hip
Replacement
Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little
Despite careful patient selection, preoperative
Femur fracture
 planning, and skillful surgical execution, compli-
cations occur. An awareness of the risks of such
The Vancouver classification for periprosthetic
complications and the means to correct the cor-
femur fractures associated with human total
rectible complications is as important as the
hip replacement (THR) was described in 1999
 a d cn  p a
(Table 8.1; Brady et al. 1999; Masri et al. 2004). This
surgery. In general, complications can be divided
classification scheme is based on the location of
into those that are the result of either mechanical
the fracture, the stability of the implant, and the
failure or biological failure. Subtle or obvious
quality of the bone stock.
errors in surgical technique are often the root
The etiology of femoral fracture varies with the
cause of complications, regardless of the mode of
implant system used and typical Vancouver frac-
failure. Therefore, whenever possible, the revision
ture classifications illustrate the variation. Femur
strategy should correct, or at least not repeat, the 
fractures that occur with the BFX stem (BioMed-
 original error. This requires that the surgeon rec-
trix, Boonton, NJ) are typically associated with
ognize the factors that led to failure.
subsidence of the femoral stem and are most often
Vancouver classification B2 fractures. However, it
 may be unclear whether fractures occur because
Mechanical failure
of stem subsidence or vice versa. Subsidence can
 occur due to undersizing or because of incomplete
Complications associated with mechanical failure
impaction (see Chapter 7). Noncatastrophic frac-
include femoral or acetabular fracture, luxation,
tures can be managed with the use of multiple
cup or stem avulsion, stem subsidence, and
 cerclage wires. The use of multiple, double-loop
implant failure.
 hsa on parodan Auanai sem sarm aeia
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
109
110Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Table 8.1
Vancouver periprosthetic fracture classification
 occurs early in the broaching process, conversion
to a cemented stem should be considered.
Fracture
Stem
Bone
Femur fractures associated with the use of the
Category
level
tability
quality
CFX system (BioMedtrix) most often occur at
Ac
Greater
Stable
Good
the level of the tip of the stem and are associated
trochanter
with a stress riser at that location. These are most
Lesser
often Vancouver classification type C fractures
AL
Stable
Good
trochanter
that are generally oblique fractures and frequently
B
Stable
have concurrent loss of the cement mantle at the
Involves
Good
tip of the stem. Alternatively, fractures after
prosthesis
cemented THR can be associated with the lack
B2
Involves
Unstable
Good
of a cement mantle at the stem tip due to varus
prosthesis
 stem placement and direct stem contact with the
B3
Involves
Unstable
Poor
 endosteum.
prosthesis
Femoral fractures associated with the Zurich
C
Distal to
Stable
Good
 system (Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland) appear to be
prosthesis
 associated with torsional failure through either the
lateral guide holes or through the medial screw
Source: Adapted from Masri et al. (2004).
holes (Figure 8.2). Most often, these fractures are
Vancouver classification type B1 fractures. They
 are generally long-oblique or spiral fractures that
greater resistance to failure than the intact femur
 most frequently originate at the level of the one or
(McCulloch et al. 2012). The current recommenda-
two most distal holes. Occasionally, the fracture
tions for BFX implantation are to place double-
will traverse the entire length of the implant and
loop cerclages prophylactically in patients who
involve both the medial and lateral drill holes.
appear to be predisposed to fissures, including
Most often, anatomical reconstruction of the frac-
giant-breed dogs with thin cortices, older dogs.
ture can be achieved using cerclage wiring. With
pue Sumoyaa) erouay ,adidaaois, ym ssop pue
 anatomical reconstruction and appropriate wire
Schiller 1992; Figure 8.1). For most dogs, the wire
tension, stem screws in a fracture-involved screw
size is 18 gauge (1 mm). A double-loop cerclage is
hole can often be salvaged. Additionally, mono-
placed around the femoral shaft proximal to the
 cortical stem screws can be replaced with bicorti-
lesser trochanter, making sure that the wire does
cal screws. However, inadequate medial screw
not interfere with femoral canal opening on the
purchase cannot be compensated for with the use
caudal aspect of the trochanteric fossa. A second
 of bicortical screws. Following anatomical recon-
double-loop cerclage wire is placed around the
struction, the fracture is protected using a neutral-
femoral shaft distal to the lesser trochanter. If a
fissure develops during broaching, the broach is
monocortical
removed and the vastus lateralis is reflected dis-
femoral stem and the plate must extend from the
tally to identify the distal extent of the fissure.
most proximal aspect of the greater trochanter.
Double-loop cerclage wires are placed along the
Given the limited availability of proximal bone
femoral shaft every 15 mm so that the most distal
stock, use of a locking plate may be advisable
double-loop cerclage is distal to the distal aspect
(Fitzpatrick et al. 2012). However, the superiority
of the fissure. The sides of the fissure should
 of locking implants in this situation is not proven
contact each other (i.e., no fissure gap) after the
(Figure 8.3). If more than two stem screws are
cerclage wires are placed. The fissure should not
involved in the fracture, or if anatomical recon-
open during broaching or during stem placement.
struction is not feasible, explantation may be
The arms of the double-loop cerclage wires can lift
necessary.
off the bone during broaching or during
stem
 Repositioning of the implant can be considered;
placement. If this occurs, the arms should be fully
however, the surgeon must balance the desire to
bent back after stem placement. If a long fissure
maintain the femoral stem with the knowledge
D
Figure 8.1 Immediate postoperative radiographic
views (A) following BFX THR in a 5-year-old
golden retriever; implant sizes were #9 stem,
28-mm cup, and 17 mm +3 head. Acute onset
lameness occurred 2 weeks postoperatively and
radiographs (B) revealed that stem subsidence,
retroversion, and femoral fracture have occurred.
The fracture was stabilized with single-loop
cerclage wire; the stem was revised to a CFX #8
and a limited-contact dynamic compression plate
(LC-DCP) was placed as a neutralization plate (C).
Twelve weeks postoperatively, the fracture is
healed, and the implants are stable (D).
1 11
Figure 8.2  Photograph (A) made during torsional load-to-failure testing of Zurich Cementless femoral stem-femur construct
with a Universal Testing machine (lnstron, Norwood, MA). A fracture line is visible on the medial aspect of the femoral shaft
(arrows). This fracture line is typically associated with the distal stem screw. On a radiograph of a clinical patient (B), a
fissure is visible at the typical site of initiation of fracture.
that further weakening of the femur will occur
 For Vancouver classification type B3 fractures
with additional drill holes. Consideration should
(i.e., unstable stem and poor bone quality), cortical
also be given to the feasibility of revision with
 strut allografts have been used in human patients
either a BFX or CFX stem. Explantation with frac-
to provide bone stock for fixation (Learmonth
ture repair and future reimplantation can be con-
 2004). With this technique, two halves of an appro-
sidered; however, the proximal femoral migration
that occurs with femoral head and neck excision
host femur in a "clam shell" fashion and stabilized
(FHNE) may complicate later reduction. Addition-
using cerclage wires. Plate fixation can then be
ally, sclerosis may develop at the neck ostectomy
 applied to the graft, incorporating the host bone.
site and great care will need to be taken with
Alternatively, a customized prosthesis can be fash-
repreparation of the femoral canal.
ioned for the patient, as described in Chapter 14.
Revision Strategies for Total Hip Replacement 113
R
Figure 8.3 (A) Lateral radiographic projection of an oblique femur fracture following THR with a Zurich Cementless hip. (B
and C) The femur was stabilized using a locking plate (ALPs, Kyon, Zurich, Switzerland) and single-loop cerclage wires.
(lmages courtesy of Dr. Aldo Vezzoni)
Acetabular fracture
 Custom femoral head /neck components are avail-
 able from Kyon to allow the use of a CFX cup.
Acetabular fracture after THR is far less common
Acetabular fractures occurring during implanta-
than femoral fracture, but is much more difficult 
tion of a BFX press-fit cup have been anecdotally
to manage without reverting to FHNE. Reimpact-
 reported. In one instance, a fracture with minor
 ing a press-fit acetabular component following
displacement was successfully managed conser-
fracture repair, in a single-stage procedure, is
vatively.' A single case report describes the use of
unlikely to achieve a stable prosthesis and is quite
a corticocancellous autograf from the wing of the
likely to result in failure of fixation. Cementing of
ilium in the repair of a comminuted, periprosthetic
the acetabular component is the most common
acetabular fracture in a dog (Torres et al. 2009). A
a press-fit component with acetabular fracture.
 the donor and recipient bone, and reaming and
cup impaction were performed as usual. The dog
a lateral radiographic view, the femoral head is
reportedly had normal limb function at 19-month
 dorsal to the acetabulum. Increasing neck length
follow-up.
is the simplest surgical method of dealing with
luxation. Even in cases where cup positioning is
Aaenbape Ae yaual Yau Suiseanui 'ieapi iou
Luxation
lateralize the femur and prevent impingement.
However, increased neck length can result in a
Dorsal or ventral luxation of the replaced hip most
higher risk of femur fracture, greater postopera-
 often occurs in the first few weeks after hip replace-
tive discomfort, and in gait abnormalities (exter-
ment surgery. However, late luxations can occur
nally rotated limb) because of tension in the
months, or even years, later. Early luxations are
external rotator muscles.
most often associated with errors in implant posi-
Repositioning of the acetabular component,
a  ro  s m 
femoral component, or both is often the most
of neck length (i.e., too much laxity), while late
appropriate means for preventing reluxation. Ace-
luxations are most often, but not always, associ-
tabular repositioning is most common. While tech-
ated with trauma. Dorsal luxations can result from
 niques such as placement of an iliofemoral internal
excessively large angles of lateral opening (ALOs)
rotation suture or pelvic osteotomy (Dyce et al.
and ventral luxations can result from excessively
 2000) may successfully prevent reluxation in some
small ALOs (see Chapter 7). Impingement of the
cases, the surgeon must critically evaluate implant
prosthetic neck on the rim of the acetabular com-
 positioning to determine the best course of action.
ponent, periarticular soft tissues, or periarticular
 In general, craniodorsal luxation is associated
osteophytes results in a levering of the femoral
with an increased ALO, excessive anteversion of
head from the acetabular cup. A further descrip-
the cup or stem, or any combination of these. Con-
 tion of impingement is found in Chapter 6. Luxa-
versely, caudal or caudoventral luxation may be
m soop u mono Aeu Aixel c Arepuonas suog
associated with the opposite positioning errors.
chronic dorsal displacement of the femur before
Peculiarities of individual patient conformation
surgery. At the time of surgery, tissue tightmess
can also contribute to luxation risk.
may lead to the selection of a relatively short
For BFX cups, if luxation occurs before bone
femoral neck. A few weeks later, with relaxation
ingrowth occurs (i.e., during the first few days that
of the periarticular tissues, the prosthetic hip may
follow cup placement), the cup may be removed
be lax and may luxate. An additional risk factor
by tapping its most dorsal aspect and by rotating
for luxation is a contralateral hind limb amputa-
the cup out of its bone bed. If the cup is not
tion (Preston et al. 1999) because, in amputees, the
damaged, it may be reimplanted with proper ori-
pelvis is tilted down on the amputated side, result-
 entation (Figure 8.4). If bone ingrowth into the cup
ing in decreased dorsal coverage of the prosthetic
has occurred, the cup may be removed by tapping
head by the cup. In addition to careful radio-
a thin osteotome on its medial aspect. Ideally, the
 graphic evaluation of implant position, the direc-
 osteotome should be curved to minimize bone loss
tion of luxation must be confirmed in surgery.
(Hip Preservation Surgery Set, Synthes, West
Chester, PA). For a BFX cup, the bone bed is most
often reamed with a starter reamer that is 1 mm
Management of THR luxations
larger than the cup that was removed, followed by
 Some THR luxations can be successfully managed
 a finishing reamer that is 2mm larger than the cup
with closed reduction and activity supervision for
that was removed. A new cup is placed.
ad p  a s pn ro
closed reduced or are managed surgically to elimi-
methacrylate (PMMA) may be removed with a
 nate the factors predisposing to luxation.
large rongeur used to hold the cup and to rotate it
The joint should be reduced during surgery and
ventrally or by placing a thin osteotome medial to
the luxation should be recreated in order to deter-
the cement mantle. All PMMA should be removed
mine the chain of events leading to that luxation.
from the bone bed and the keyholes. A new
Caudoventral luxations can migrate such that, on
 cemented cup is placed.
Revision Strategies for Total Hip Replacement 115
img1m:12
ImgTm:
Figure 8.4 Cranial-caudal (A-C) and lateral (D-F) radiographs of the left hip joint of an 11-month-old Saint Bernard.
Preoperatively (A and D), the hip joint is dorsally luxated. A cementless total hip replacement was performed (B and E)
Postoperatively, the cup appears open (ie., its angle of lateral opening [ALOl appears excessive). The prosthesis luxated
dorsally after surgery (C and F). While the cause of luxation was not known, the large ALO and the preexisting luxation
increased the likelihood of luxation. The luxation was successfully revised with an open reduction and the placement of
monofilament nylon sutures connecting the greater trochanter to the iliopubic eminence.
Repositioning of the acetabular component with 
example, if the ALO needs to be decreased,
a well-seated Zurich prosthesis without damage
 the surgeon should note the number of rows of
to the previously placed cup can be challenging.
visible shell holes at the dorsal rim (e.g., if only
 Mau e aneld oi paiedaid aq pmous uoagms auL
 one row is visible, the cup should be repositioned
acetabular component. If the cup is well seated,
such that two or three rows are visible). Cup
and if it has been in place for several weeks, cup
removal can be accomplished in several ways.
repositioning will almost certainly require cup
One method that is least likely to damage the com-
removal. However, the surgeon should first
ponent is the use of a smali Hohmann retractor
attempt to manipulate cup position as described
placed ventral to the ventral rim of the acetabular
in Chapter 7. If press-fit of the same size cup
a on aroy lsip suidde uau pue juauodon
'pasn aq uen dn nal e uau paaauoe aq joue
handle of the retractor. Alternatively, the pointed
following appropriate reaming. Alternatively, a
impactor or other tapered, blunt instrument can
Zurich Cementless Revision Cup (discussed later)
be placed at the exposed dorsal rim and blunt
can be used. Prior to removal of a Zurich Cement-
force used to dislodge the cup. Any deformation
less, anatomical landmarks should be identified,
 of the titanium shell or polyethylene liner neces-
cup position should be assessed, and changes in 
 sitates placement of a new cup. A press-fit is
cup position should be planned (Figure 8.5). For
imperative for long-term success. Kyon has
Figure 8.5 Caudoventral luxation (A), 1 week after total hip replacement in a 2-year-old Labrador retriever with a concave
or "saddle-shaped" pelvis (arrows). The initial retroversion angle of the cup (21 degrees) does not appear excessive.
However, this pelvic conformation may predispose to caudal or caudoventral luxation. The cup was repositioned to a greater
ALO and was placed in less retroversion (B). After repositioning, the retroversion angle is 15 degrees.
recently developed a revision cup that has a tita-
minimize the number of drill holes. Protection of
nium shell with multiple divergent screw holes 
 the femur using a bone plate in neutral fashion is
that accommodate 2.4-mm screws (Figure 8.6).
 advisable in cases of stem repositioning.
Once the shell is seated and screwed into place,
the corresponding cup can be impacted into the
shell. Long-term follow-up is not available for the
revision cup.
Stem avulsion
 In some cases, initial cup malpositioning (e.g.
an excessively large ALO) may have been the
Avulsion of the femoral stem from the medial
result of recognition of inadequate dorsal rim or
cortex has been described with the Zurich prosthe-
caudal rim bone support for the prosthesis. If
sis (Figure 8.7). Manufacturer recommendations in
repositioning is necessary in such cases, dorsal rim
the first several years after the release of this
augmentation can be considered (Pooya et al.
system included the use of monocortical screws in
2003; Torres et al. 2009). Caudal rim augmentation
each screw hole. Stem avulsion occurs most often
has not been described in the veterinary literature.
in giant-breed dogs, and this was the impetus for
If possible, reaming the acetabulum more deeply
 the use of the proximal bicortical screw. Surgeon
will improve coverage but it will increase laxity
error, particularly valgus stem placement where
and will necessitate increased neck length. Recon-
the proximal portion of the stem does not have
struction rings, as well as tantalum augments, are
intimate contact with the medial cortex, can also
described in the aseptic loosening section of this
predispose to stem avulsion from the medial
chapter Repositioning of the Zurich stem to a
cortex. Avulsion will lead to a valgus shift, subsid-
more anteverted or retroverted position should be
ence, or both. Since avulsion occurs in the first few
undertaken with extreme caution because of the
 Weeks after surgery, the lateral guide holes remain
number of consequent open holes in the femur. If
 open and screw removal is possible through these
a femoral window was created for retrieval of the
holes unless disarticulation at the stem-neck inter-
previous stem, the new stem should be placed
 face occurs, allowing extreme subsidence. Even
 rno   , a  on ro
in such cases, the stem can be gradually shifted
Revision Strategies for Total Hip Replacement 117
B
Figure 8.6 Intraoperative photograph of the shell of the Kyon revision cup. Note the use of multiple 2.4-mm screws (A).
(a) ydeioipei aaesadoisod aui ui uaas se laus dno uoisial aun oui paedui s! dno ssauaa yoinz suuodsaos aul
(lmages courtesy of Dr. Aldo Vezzoni)
proximally using a pin or other instrument intro-
Cup avulsion
duced through the lateral guide holes.
Adequate medial screw purchase is unlikely to
Avulsion of the acetabular component is most
be achieved via the original screw holes. Although
 often due to inadequate initial press-fit, incom-
it may be tempting to replace the monocortical
 plete seating of the implant, inadequate reaming.
screws with bicortical screws, success with this
or inadequate bony support for the implant. Treat-
technique has not been documented. A proximal
ment depends on the etiology. If inadequate initial
 press-fit was the result of a reaming error (e.g.
sary. This shift is challenging, as discussed above
excessive flare of the prepared bed), it may be
in the femoral fracture section. Alternatively,
replacement of the Zurich stem with a BFX or CFX
 adequate bone stock exists. If the initial reaming
implant can be considered. If the surgeon chooses
 did not extend to the medial wall, deeper reaming
a CFX implant, cement that is extruded from the
may allow the surgeon to achieve a press-fit. Alter-
screw holes will need to be removed. The presence
natively, switching from a cementless to
a
sd m  n  sa mas a jo
cemented cup may be considered. For the Zurich
surizing the cement during stem insertion. If a
 prosthesis, the revision shell, described above, can 
BFX stem is used, prophylactic application of
be considered.
 double-loop cerclage wires prior to stem impac-
 Inadequate bone support poses a significant
tion is advisable (McCulloch et al. 2012). If a BFX
challenge. If recognized at the initial surgery,
 or CFX stem is used, a modified head /neck com-
undersizing of the prosthesis may allow adequate
 ponent will be necessary because of differences in
support (Figure 8.8), but will sacrifice polyethyl-
 prosthetic head diameters. The femoral head of
ene thickness
pue
possibly
predispose
the Zurich hip is either 16 mm (for 21.5-, 23.5-, and
luxation.
26.5-mm cups) or 19 mm (for 29.5- and 32.5-mm
 Dorsal rim augmentation via screw fixation of
cups). The femoral head diameter for the Univer-
autogenous cortical or corticocancellous graft
sal system (BioMedtrix) is 17mm.
from the iliac wing or the excised femoral head has
  o  s i   
than the dorsal rim or medial wall. In patients
with very shallow acetabula, the controlled pene-
tration of the medial wall may be considered in
order to medialize the cup and to obtain adequate
cranial and caudal support. This should be done
with caution to avoid the complete protrusion of
the cup through the medial wall.
Subsidence
 Subsidence of cementless press-fit BFX stems may
occur in the first weeks after implantation before
bone ingrowth into the stem (Figure 8.10). Subsid-
ence is often limited to a few millimeters (Marcellin-
Little et al. 1999; Lascelles et al. 2010). This minor
subsidence does not have clinical consequences.
 Major subsidence occurs in some instances. It may
be associated with stem retroversion, femoral
fissure or fracture, and luxation. Major subsidence
is more likely to occur when the femur was pre-
 pared without much resistance to the progression
of the broach (Rashmir-Raven et al. 1992). Most
 instances of major stem subsidence require stem
revision. The stem is extracted. The femur is
inspected for the presence of fissures or fracture.
Any fissure or fracture is repaired and a new stem
is implanted. The new stem may be a cementless
stem if the original stem was undersized and the
 bone bed is normal. If the surgeon is concerned
Figure 8.7 A 6-year-old Labrador retriever presented for
about further mechanical failure, a cemented stem
routine 6-week follow-up radiographs following THR with
is placed.
a Zurich Cementless hip replacement. The stem is noted to
 Subsidence of cemented stems may occur after
have shifted into a valgus position and the femoral stem is
failure of the implant-cement or the cement-bone
no longer apposed to the medial cortex. The owner had
noticed a gait change in the first week after surgery, but
 interface. Fragmentation of the cement mantle and
function continued to improve and no further change in
calcar bone resorption or calcar fracture is neces-
implant position was noted at the 4-month and 1-year
 sary before subsidence of a cemented stem occurs.
reevaluations. However, this radiographic finding implies
Therefore, cemented stem subsidence is seen pri-
instability and would most often suggest the need for
 marily in patients with chronic stem loosening.
revision.
These chronic failures are most often managed
with stem and cup extraction. Revision with
another cemented hip could be considered,
been reported (Pooya et al. 2003; Torres et al. 2009).
depending on the degree of bone change. This
The sclerotic femoral head may have limited
revision requires the removal of all cement and
potential for osseointegration. After screw fixation
 periprosthetic membranes and the reconstruction
of the graft, the graft and the acetabulum are pre-
of the femur, followed by insertion of a new
amhi) sraean pazis Aaenndondde tim pard
 cemented stem. The incidence of aseptic loosening
8.9). It should be recognized, however, that much
increases after the revision of a failed cemented
of the stability for press-fit is provided by the 
stem, compared with primary cemented THR
cranial and caudal poles of the acetabulum rather
(Gramkow et al. 2001).
Revision Strategies for Total Hip Replacement 119
Figure 8.8  Radiograph from a mixed-breed dog with bilateral Zurich Cementless hip replacements. Extensive erosion of the
left dorsal acetabular rim was noted on preoperative radiographs and confirmed intraoperatively. An undersized acetabular
cup was used on the left side in order to ensure adequate bone support for the cup.
Stem failure
failure most often occurs at a screw hole; however,
there were rare cases of failure at the trunion-stem
Failure of the femoral component as a result of
interface prior to a design change in the early
accumulated fatigue stresses is uncommon. When
2000s (Figure 8.12). Retrieval and replacement of
stem failure occurs, replacement of the femoral
a Zurich femoral stem can be accomplished via a
component and removal of the prosthesis are the
lateral femoral window, also described as a "coffin
only options (Figure 8.11).
lid," or by re-drilling the lateral femoral guide
 Failure of the BFX stem has not been reported
holes (presuming they have filled with bone) and
 or encountered to the authors' knowledge. Failure
unscrewing each of the stem screws. While the
of cemented stems is rare and is the likely conse-
 latter option is appealing, it can be quite challeng-
quence of fatigue in stems with loose proximal
 ing. Over time, a cold weld can form, particularly
portions, for example, when the distal aspect of
with titanium implants between the stem and
the stem is rigidly fixed into the cement mantle but
the screw, making screw remove difficult (Fraitzl
its proximal portion is not in contact with the
et al. 201l). The author has met with limited
calcar.
success with the use of various screw removal
 Failure of a Zurich Cementless stem is rare, but
devices. The use of a new screwdriver, without
is most often associated with the use of an extra-
rounding of the hexagonal head, is critical. If the
small stem, particularly when a larger stem is
jau aq Aeu 1! 'paddins 1o pabeuep s! peay maios
more appropriate, based on patient size. Stem
 essary to drill out the stem screw. This generates
Figure 8.9  Radiograph from a 2-year-old Labrador retriever with dorsal acetabular rim (DAR) erosion (A). DAR augmentation
was performed using a corticocancellous graft from excised femoral head that was shaped to fit the DAR using a high-speed
bur (B). The graft is fixed to the DAR defect using two 2.7-mm screws in lag fashion (C). The graft and the acetabular bone
bed are then reamed simultaneously using the appropriate-sized reamer (D). Radiograph made at 1-year follow-up is
consistent with integration of the graft and a stable implant-bone interface (E). (Images courtesy of Dr. Aldo Vezzoni)
P
Figure 8.10  Immediate postoperative cranial-caudal radiographic image of the femur following BFX THR in a 1-year-old
femoral cortical window including the greater trochanter (dashed line) was planned for stem removal (C). The original #8
stem was removed, the femoral window was replaced and stabilized with three cable cerclage bands secured with crimps,
the femur was broached, and a #10 stem was impacted (D). One year postoperatively the implants are stable (E). (Images
Courtesy of Dr.Michael Kowaleski)
120
of creation of the window include adequate
dimensions for access to the implant and rounding
of the window "corners" to avoid creation of stress
risers (Figure 8.13). In order to round the edges of
the window, a narrow oscillating saw blade should
be used. Alternatively, a 1.5-mm drill bit can be
used to make holes at each corner. Ideally, the
insertion of the adductor muscle is maintained
along the caudal border of the bone flap. The saw
blade is angled in order to bevel the edges of the
flap for more secure replacement. Additionally, a
thin blade is used in order to minimize the kerf.
The flap is stabilized using three or more cerclage
wires. The femoral window technique may be
combined with an extended trochanteric osteot-
omy; with that technique, a cut is made on the
cranial aspect of the femur extending distally from
the greater trochanter. The length of the cut is
adapted to the surgeon's needs (e.g., for removal
of a loose cement mantle). The cut is rounded dis-
tally and extends proximally to the greater tro-
chanter on the caudal aspect of the femur. The
extended  greater trochanteric flap represents
approximately one-third of the circumference of
Figure 8.11A cemented stem broke in its midshaft
the femur.
(arrowhead), most likely as a result of the lack of cement
fill in the proximal portion of the femur that resulted in
fatigue fracture of the stem. Also, the stem was undersized.
Cup failure (poly or metal backing)
This situation requires a revision of the stem with an
extended trochanteric window or "coffin lid" femoral
Failure of the polyethylene liner as a result of
window, extraction of the well-fixed distal portion, and
a dn ue m assd s yn-m
revision with another, larger cemented stem.
 8.14) but is unlikely, based on the low rate of cup
wear in dogs (Skurla and James 2001). It is more
likely to occur in cups with thin polyethylene
a substantial volume of debris and can increase the
liners measuring 2mm or less. Oxidation may
risk of loosening of the new stem.
Additionally, the screw hole will likely be com-
 are exposed to oxygen for long periods of time
 promised and the new stem screw will not achieve
(i.e., years) before implantation (Besong et al.
purchase in the medial cortex. It should also be
1997). To the author's knowledge, BFX cup wear-
 noted that fatigue failure of the femoral compo-
 paaoa aq o s a ro nor
nent is more likely in cases where there is loosen-
wear-through is encountered, it is possible to
 ing associated with one or more stem screws, thus
replace the polyethylene liner of a BFX cup without
increasing stress adjacent to the loose screws. The
 extracting the cup. The old liner is pulled using a
surgeon must carefully evaluate the radiographs
 rongeur. A new liner is aligned with the cup and
for evidence of bone resorption associated with
impacted into place with a cup impactor. The
the stem screws. Even with bone resorption, a
failure of cemented polyethylene cup is most often
"cold weld"
 can still make screw removal
the consequence of the failure of the cement
difficult.
mantle, described in the text below.
A femoral window technique was described
Wear-through of the ultrahigh-molecular-
by Dyce and Olmstead (2002). Important aspects
weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) liner of the
122 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
stem at the trunion-stem interface occurred (A). The stem was revised by redrilling the lateral guide holes (arrows) to allow
for removal, and then replacement, of the femoral stem (B). Extensive soft tissue debridement was required at the osteotomy
site in order to allow retrieval of the implant. Note that there was no lucency associated with the original screws and all
 screw holes were reused.
acetabular component of the Zurich prosthesis is 
(Skurla et al. 2005) and Bergh (Bergh et al. 2004).
rare and is primarily limited to the 21.5-mm (i.e.,
 They are described in detail in Chapter 6. In this
the smallest) cup size (Figure 8.15). The UHMWPE
section, we consider the mechanical causes of
liner in the 21.5-mm cup is 1.5 mm thick in the load
cement failure, including fracture of the cement
transfer zone. The risk of this complication is
mantle and debonding at the cement-implant
higher when a 21.5-mm cup is implanted in a very
interface (Figure 8.16). The implantation of a stem
young patient. If wear-through occurs, excessive
exposed to body fluids prior to implantation, the
wear debris and osteolysis will make revision par-
 use of titanium stems, and varus stem orientation
ticularly challenging, unless the problem is noticed
within the femoral canal have been shown to
early. Revision strategies are similar to those for
 increase the risk of debonding. Exposing the stem
cup avulsion. Careful debridement of wear debris
to body fluid before insertion, for example,
 containing soft tissues is imperative.
decreases the strength of the cement-implant
Failure of the titanium shell of the Zurich ace-
(661  a as) %g ade Aq aa
tabular prosthesis is rare as well. Shell failure with
 Titanium stems have a higher debonding rate than
the current generation of double-shell acetabular 
 cobalt-chromium stems with similar morphology
 components has not been reported; however, long-
(Tompkins et al. 1994). In dogs, debonding of tita-
term follow-up of the current design is lacking.
nium stems was described in 10 patients (Edwards
 et al. 1997). Debonding requires stem revision, and
more  specifically,  cement-in-cement  revision
Cement failure
(Edwards et al. 1997; Duncan et al. 2009). Cement-
 in-cement revision is performed by doing a cranio-
Causes of cement failure in canine hip replace-
a ouan quo du a o ydde ean
ment were reported independently by Skurla
loose stem, cleaning the cement mantle with a
Figure 8.13A 7-year-old golden retriever presented for progressive lameness 4 years following THR with a Zurich
Cementless hip. Aseptic loosening of the acetabular component was found and owners elected to have the prosthesis
nent. A sharp angle was inadvertently created at the cranial-distal corner of the window (arrow) (A). One week after the
explant procedure, the owners reported an acute onset of pain and nonweight-bearing lameness. A femur fracture occurred
at the distal aspect of the femoral window (B). Locking plate and cerclage wire fixation was performed (not pictured) and the
fracture healed uneventfully.
high-speed bur without perforating it, drying it,
addressed in the "Mechanical Failure" section of
and reimplanting a new stem with a clean and dry
this chapter. Management of the consequence
surface.
 of failure of integration (i.e., aseptic loosening) is
discussed here.
Biological failure
Aseptic loosening
 Biological failure includes failure of bone ingrowth
or ongrowth for cementless prostheses, as well as
Wear debris-mediated osteolysis is described in
loss of bone support (e.g., bone resorption, oste-
detail in Chapter 6. Techniques for revision will
olysis, and osteonecrosis) with either cemented
be similar to those discussed above, with the
or cementless prostheses. Causes of biological
addition of removal of the periprosthetic fibrous
failure include excessive micromotion, aseptic
membrane. The periprosthetic fibrous membrane
loosening, septic loosening, and stress protection.
surrounding a loose prosthesis contains activated
Excessive micromotion will result in a failure of
macrophages, as well as several mediators of
osseointegration of cementless implants. It will
osteolysis, including tumor necrosis factor-α
 also result in the generation of wear debris and is 
(TNF-α) and oxygen-derived free radicals (Shan-
therefore intimately associated with aseptic loos-
bhaq et al. 1995; Merkel et al. 1999; Kinov et al.
ening. Failure of osseointegration is typically
 2006a). Therefore, revision of a loose implant
 1o -ssaid leu aenbapeu jo aouanbasuon e
should include removal of all grossly evident
other forms of initial fixation and is therefore
periprosthetic fibrous membrane. The removal of
requires critical analysis of any report of dimin-
ished clinical function, as well as careful review of
follow-up radiographs. In particular, follow-up
radiographs should be compared with immediate
postoperative radiographs. In addition to evalua-
tion of lucency surrounding the implant, new
bone deposition medial to the acetabulum is fre-
quently noted in hips with aseptic loosening. This
new bone formation may be useful if deeper
reaming is necessary (Figure 8.17). Any nonarti-
factual radiolucency (e.g., Uberschwinger artifact
in computed radiographs; Hanson et al. 2006)
must be closely monitored. Owners should be
made aware that any hip-associated lameness
eu jou si Aagms H wor Araaonan mg rae
Nuclear scintigraphy can be utilized in evaluation
for possible aseptic loosening: however, aseptic
loosening cannot be distinguished from septic
loosening with standard bone scan isotopes (Te99
Figure 8.14F
Photograph of a Canine PCA (Mowmedica,
 pertechnetate). Furthermore, increased radiophar-
Mahwah, Nj) that has been extracted from a dog during a
maceutical uptake is present for several months
cup revision. The cup had been in place for more than 4
after THR surgery. Radiolabeled white blood cells
years. The fixation peg (arrowhead) is on the cranial aspect
have been used to distinguish aseptic loosening
of the cup. Wear-through of the polyethylene is visible in
from septic loosening in humans and in one dog
the craniodorsal aspect of the cup and the liner fragmented
into several large pieces that were reconstructed before the
(Peremans et al. 2002; Love et al. 2009). Nuclear
cup was photographed. After extraction, the cup was
arthrography has also been used to evaluate
replaced by another cup that was one size larger.
potentially loose THR in humans (Oyen et al.
1996), but a meta-analysis found no advantage of
0 Audenaopen ued naao Aydenorne uonn
diagnose aseptic loosening in humans (Temmer-
man et al. 2005).
Bisphosphonates
decrease osteoclastic bone
resorption, as well as regulate the proliferation of
osteoblasts (Wise et al. 2005). Bisphosphonates
 include zolendronate, risedronate, etidronate, and
alendronate. Multiple studies in the human litera-
Figure 8.15  Radiograph of a pelvis from a dog with
ture support the use of bisphosphonates in the
bilateral Zurich Cementless hips implanted 4 years earlier.
prevention and for the treatment of periprosthetic
The prosthetic heads are located eccentrically in the
21.5-mm acetabular components, indicating polyethylene
bone loss in the presence of wear debris or stress
wear (see Chapter 6—Figures 6.7D and 6.10 for images of
shielding (Sabokbar et al. 1998; Wise et al. 2005;
the explanted implants). The left cup was removed and a
Kinov et al. 2006b). Some studies suggest that
BFX cup was implanted in the right hip. (lmage courtesy of
bisphosphonates may actually encourage bone
Dr. Michael Kowaleski)
apposition (Wise et al. 2005). Sabokbar et al.
 added etidronate to PMMA at the time of the origi-
the membrane is done using a periosteal elevator
 nal THR surgery and concluded that bone resorp-
or a curette.
tion was inhibited in these cases. Wise et al.
Early recognition is the key to successful
administered zolendronate for 26 weeks in a
canine aseptic loosening model. In the Wise study,
ME
R
C
D
Figure 8.16 Cranial-caudal (A) and lateral (B) radliographs of the femur of a 3-year-old Labrador retriever who received a
cemented total hip prosthesis at 9 months of age. A radiolucent line is visible on the caudal aspect of the stem-cement
interface and the stem is retroverted, indicating that debonding has occurred (i.e., the stem is loose within its cement
the stem and proximal portion of the cement mantle were extracted, and a cementless stem was implanted. Bone ingrowth 
and long-term stem stability were confirmed in subsequent radiographs.
Figure 8.17 Aseptic loosening of an acetabular component with circumferential lucency surrounding the cup (A). New
(a) saliel azis auo jauodos jengeane ue uisn pasiai sem dno aul (mone) wningeae aui oi leaw algisi s! auog
 All fibrous membrane tissue was debrided and removed at the time of revision surgery.
125
polyethylene particles were packed into the
tantalum materials are discussed in detail in
femoral component of a cementless femoral
Chapter 3.
stem. Low-dose (2ug/kg-10 dogs), high-dose
sdncia (ssop 01) lonuos pue (ssop 01-8x/8n 01)
were evaluated. In the 10μg/kg group, bone
Septic loosening
resorption was prevented and bone quality, based
on cortical porosity, mineralization, and failure
 Infection as a cause of implant loosening has been
strength, was maximized. In a randomized, pro-
 a major cause of patient morbidity since the devel-
spective study, Kinov et al. found that administra-
 opment of joint prostheses. While many surgeons
tion of risedronate from day 20 to 6 months after
procure bacterial cultures at the time of THR
surgery was associated with a significantly lower
surgery, positive cultures do not necessarily cor-
level of deoxypyridinoline, a resorption marker, in
relate with postsurgical infection (Lee and Kapat-
treated patients, versus control patients. The find-
kin 2002; Ireifej et al. 2012). Attempting to salvage
-oudsoudsiq teu isasans saipnis aaoqe a jo sh
a joint replacement in the face of infection is a
nates may be an underutilized tool in the
daunting challenge. In the presence of active infec-
prevention or early management of aseptic loosen-
tion, salvaging
g the implanted prosthesis with
ing and stress protection. However, long-term use
the use of systemic or locally implanted (e.g.
of bisphosphonates may prevent adaptive bone
 antibiotic-impregnated PMMA beads) antibiotics
remodeling. Many of the studies in the human
is unlikely to succeed. The successful revision of
literature utilize an approximately 6
6-month
an infected cemented prosthesis with a press-fit
 administration period.
cementless stem was reported (Torres and Buds-
Pentoxifylline, a TNF-α inhibitor, as well as
berg 2009). A successful single-stage revision of a
recombinant
human
bone
morphogenetic
loose, infected carbon composite stem was also
protein-2 (rh-BMP2) have each demonstrated
reported (Massat et al. 1998).
capacity  for prevention of aseptic loosening
(Pollice et al. 2001; Thorey et al. 2010). rh-BMP2
has also demonstrated the ability to stimulate
Stress protection
osseointegration.
Impaction allografting has been used in human
THR involves the rigid fixation of a femoral com-
THR revision in cases of periprosthetic bone loss
ponent that has a higher elastic modulus than
(Board et al. 2006). This technique utilizes mor-
selized cancellous bone chips that are progres-
the proximal  femoral  metaphyseal/trabecular
bone, as well as the diaphyseal cortical bone. This
sively compacted into a bony defect. Board et al.
modulus mismatch and its role in bone resorption
concluded that the optimal size of the bone chips
and implant loosening are discussed in detail in
used for impaction allografting is 8-10mm. After
impaction of the bone chips, the prosthesis is
Chapter 6. Revision in the face of extensive bone
loss resulting from stress shielding is a tremen-
cemented into the prepared bone bed.
dous challenge. Early detection and close monitor-
 Reconstruction rings/cages are well described
ing for progression are each critical if revision is
in the human literature (Gross and Goodman
2004). These implants are used in cases with large
to be successful.
bone defects and provide a scaffold for bone graft-
ing. After ring placement, the acetabular compo-
nent is cemented in place.
General recommendations
Tantalum  acetabular
augments
have been
described in the human literature (Siegmeth et al.
Algorithms for general recommendations for a
2009). Tantalum components are created to mimic
loose acetabular component and for a loose
the properties of trabecular bone and are useful for
femoral component are presented in Figures 8.18
filling bone defects. The beneficial properties of
 and 8.19, respectively.
Loose cementless
or cemented
acetabular cup
Septic cup
Aseptic cup
loosening
loosening
Cup explantation
Appropriate dorsal
Inappropriate
 and bacterial 
 dorsal acetabular
acetabular rim
culture
rim
Consider cup
 Augment dorsal
 reimplantation after
Appropriate
 Inappropriate
the end of antibiotic
cranial and caudal
cranial and caudal
rim and reimplant
therapy and
bone stock
 bone stock
cementless or
regative culture
cemented cup.
Consider
Consider
reimplantation of
 reimplantation of
a cementless cup
a cemented cup
Figure 8.18
127
Loose cementless or
cemented stem
Septic stem loosening
Aseptic
stem loosening
 Stem (± cement
Appropriate femoral 
Inappropriatefemoral
 mantle) explantation
 bone stock (no sign of
bone stock
and bacterial culture
osteolysis)
(osteolysis)
 Consider stem 
 Protect shaft with
reimplantation after
 double-loop cerclage
Stem (± cement
the end of antibiotic
wires
therapy and negative
mantle) explantation
± neutralization bone
culture
plate
Consider
Consider
reimplantation of
reimplantation of 
cementless stem 
Cemented or
 cementless stem
Figure 8.19 Algorithm of management recommendations for a loose femoral component.
128
Revision Strategies for Total Hip Replacement 129
Endnotes
Hanson SP, Peck JN, Berry CR. Radiographic evaluation
-odos renqeag d reiot ssuaua unz au ro
1. Roe S, Marcellin-Little D, Lascelles D. Short-term
nent. Vet Surg 2006;35:550-558.
outcome of uncemented THR. In: Proceedings of the
Ireifej S, Marino D, Loughin CA et al. Risk factors and
clinical relevance of positive intraoperative bacterial
2010 American College of Veterinary Surgeons Veterinary
cultures in dogs with total hip replacement. Vet Surg
Symposium.Seattle, WA,2010.
2012;41(1):63-68.
Kinov P, Leithner A, Radl R et al. Role of free radicals in
aseptic loosening of hip arthroplasty. J Orthop Res
References
2006a;24:55-62.
Kinov P, Tircher P, Doukova P et al. Effect of risedronate
on bone metabolism after total hip arthroplasty: A
Bergh MS, Muir P, Markel MD et al. Femoral bone adap-
prospective randomized study. Acta Orthop Belg
tation to unstable long-term cemented total hip
2006b;72:44-50.
arthroplasty in dogs. Vet Surg 2004;33:238-245.
Lascelles BD, Freire M, Roe SC, et al. Evaluation of func-
Besong AA, Hailey JL, Ingham E et al. A study of the
 tional outcome after BFX total hip replacement using
combined effects of shelf ageing following irradiation
    s as e
in air and counterface roughness on the wear of
71-77.
UHMWPE. Biomed Mater Eng 1997;7:59-65.
Learmonth ID. The management of periprosthetic frac-
Board TN, Rooney P, Kearney JN et al. Impaction allo-
tures around the fermoral stem. J Bone Joint Surg Br
2004;86:13-19
2006;88:852-857.
Lee KC, Kapatkin AS. Positive intraoperative cultures
Brady OH, Kerry R, Masri BA, et al. The Vancouver
 and canine total hip replacement: Risk factors, peri-
classification of periprosthetic fractures of the hip:
prosthetic infection, and surgical success. J Am Anim
A rational approach to treatment. Tech Orthop
Hosp Assoc 2002;38:271-278.
1999;14:107-114.
Love C, Marwin SE, Palestro CJ. Nuclear medicine and
 DeYoung DJ, Schiller RA. Radiographic criteria for eval-
the infected joint replacement. Semin Nucl Med
'ssop ut quauaseida du teiot pajuauaoun yo uonen
2009:39:66-78
Vet Surg 1992;21:88-98.
Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung BA, Doyens DH, et al.
Duncan WW, Hubble MJ, Howell JR et al. Revision of
Canine uncemented porous-coated anatomic total
the cemented femoral stem using a cement-in-cement
hip arthroplasty: Results of a long-term prospective
techmique: A five- to 15-year review. J Bone Joint Surg
evaluation of 50 consecutive cases. Vet Surg 1999;
Br 2009;91:577-582.
28:10-20.
Dyce J, Olmstead ML. Removal of infected canine
Masri BA, Meek RMB, Duncan CP. Periprosthetic frac-
cemented total hip prostheses using a femoral window
tures evaluation and treatment. Clin Orthop Rel Res
techmique. Vet Surg 2002;31:552-560.
2004;420:80-95.
Dyce J, Wisner ER, Wang Q, Olmstead ML. Evaluation
Massat BJ, Miller RT, DeYoung BA, et al. Single-stage
 d   x og si  go
revision using an uncemented, porous-coated, ana-
in dogs. Vet Surg 2000;29:524-532.
tomic endoprosthesis in two dogs: Case report. Vet
Edwards MR, Egger EL, Schwarz PD. Aseptic loosening
Surg 1998;27:268-277.
of the femoral implant after cemented total hip arthro-
McCulloch RS, Roe SC, Marcellin-Little DJ, Mente PL.
plasty in dogs: 11 cases in 10 dogs (1991-1995). J Am
Resistance to subsidence of an uncemented femoral
Vet Med Assoc 1997;211:580-586.
 stem after cerclage wiring of a fissure. Vet Surg
Fitzpatrick N, Nikolaou C, Yeadon MA, et al. String-of-
2012;41(1):163-167.
oezs am as  aed ur sd
Merkel KD, Erdmann JM, McHugh KP et al. Tumor
periprosthetic femoral fractures after total hip replace-
necrosis factor-α mediates orthopedic implant oste-
810( o m 1 so xs u ua
olysis. Am J Pathol 1999;154:203-210.
Fraitzl CR, Moya LE, Castanelli L et al. Corrosion at the
Oyen WJ, Lemmens JA, Claessens RA, et al. Nuclear
stem-sleeve interface of a modular titanium alloy
arthrography: Combined scintigraphic and radio-
femoral component as a reason for impaired disen-
graphic procedure for diagnosis of total hip prosthesis
gagement. J Arthroplasty 2011;26:113-119.
loosening. J Nucl Med 1996;37:62-70.
Gramkow J, Jensen TH, Varmarken JE et al. Long-term
Peremans K, De Winter F, Janssens L et al. An infected
results after cemented revision of the femoral compo-
hip prosthesis in a dog diagnosed with a 99mTc-
nent in total
hip arthroplasty. JArthroplasty
ciprofloxacin (Infecton) scan. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2001;16:777-783.
2002;43:178-182.
Gross AE, Goodman S. The current role of structural
Pollice PF, Rosier RN, Looney JL et al. Oral pentoxifyl-
grafts and cages in revision arthroplasty of the hip.
line inhibits release of tumor necrosis factor-alpha
Clin Orthop Relat Res 2004;429:193-200.
 from human peripheral blood monocytes: A potential
130 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
treatment for aseptic loosening of total joint compo-
 of 38 canine cemented femoral components retrieved
nents. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2001;83:107-1061.
at post-mortem. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2005;87:
Pooya HA, Schulz KS, Wisner ER, et al. Short-term eval-
120-127.
uation of dorsal acetabular rim augmentation in 10
Stone MH, Wilkinson R, Stother IG. Some factors affect-
canine total hip replacements. Vet Surg 2003;32:
ing the strength of the cement-metal interface. J Bone
142-152.
Joint Surg Br 1989;71:217-221.
Preston CA, Schulz KS, Vasseur PB. Total hip replace-
Temmerman OPP, Raijmakers PGHM, Berkhof J et al.
ment in 9 canine hind limb amputees: A retrospective
Accuracy of diagnostic imaging techniques in the
study. Vet Surg 1999;28:341-347.
diagnosis of aseptic loosening of the femoral compo-
Rashmir-Raven AM, DeYoung DJ, Abrams CF Jr., et al.
nent of a hip prosthesis. A meta-analysis. J Bone Joint
Subsidence of an uncemented canine femoral stem.
Surg Br 2005;87:781-785.
Vet Surg 1992;21:327-331.
Thorey F, Menzel H, Lorenz C et al. Enhancement of
Sabokbar A,Fujikawa Y, Murray DW et al. Bisphospho-
   o 
nates in bone cement inhibit PMMA particle induced
Health Care 2010;18:217-229.
bone resorption. Anm Rheum Dis 1998;57:614-618.
Tompkins GS, Lachiewicz PF, DeMasi R. A prospective
Shanbhaq AS, Jacobs JI, Black J et al. Cellular mediators
study of a titanium femoral component for cemented
secreted by interfacial mermbranes obtained at revi-
total hip arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty 1994,9:623-630.
sion total
hip
arthroplasty.
Arthroplasty
 Torres BT, Budsberg SC. Revision of cemented total hip
1995;10:498-506.
arthroplasty with cementless components in three
Siegmeth A, Duncan CP, Bassam AM, et al. Modular
dogs. Vet Surg 2009;38:81-86.
tantalum augments for acetabular defect in revision
Torres BT, Chambers JN, Busdsberg SC. Successful
hip arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2009;467:
cementless cup reimplantation using cortical bone
199-205.
graft augmentation after an acetabular fracture and
ny pue auues jo uosteduos  ds sauef 'i en 
cup displacerment. Vet Surg 2009;38:87-91.
UHMWPE acetabular component wear. Biomed Sci
Wise LM, Waldman SD, Kasra M et al. Effect of zoledro-
Instrum 2001;37:245-250.
nate on bone quality in the treatment of aseptic loos-
Skurla CP, Pluhar GE, Frankel DJ et al. Assessing the dog
ening of hip arthroplasty in the dog. Calcif Tissue Int
as a model for human total hip replacement. Analysis
2005;77:367-375.
9
Biomechanical Considerations in
Total Knee Replacement
Matthew Allen and Kenneth Mann
Gait analysis and kinematics of the
a series of clinically normal Labrador retrievers
stifle joint
(Ragetly et al. 2010) at a trotting pace (~2 m/s), the
stifle joint flexion angle (with angle defined in
Gait analysis is used extensively in human and
 Figure 9.1) was approximately 155 degrees at paw
veterinary applications to quantify locomotion
strike, decreasing to 130 degrees at 30% of the gait
patterns for a wide range of activities. Gait analy-
cycle, and then increased to 135 degrees at the end
sis makes use of engineering kinematics to describe
of stance phase. During the swing phase, the stifle
the motion of bodies (the skeleton in this case),
joint flexion decreased to ~90-degree flexion at
without reference to the forces that cause the
70% of the gait cycle, before increasing to 155-
motion. Kinematic data are often collected using
degree flexion at the next paw strike. The angular
optical camera systems that track the two- and
three-dimensional position of reflective markers
ittal plane would then be about 65 degrees for this
placed on anatomical joints. For example, to study
dog breed performing a trot activity. Other activi-
the kinematics of the stifle joint, reflective markers
ties, such as sitting, would increase the magnitude
are placed on the skin at the hip, stifle, and hock
joints. The kinematics of the femur are tracked by
 In any total knee desigm, an excursion that accom-
the hip and stifle markers, while the tibial motion
 modates the full range of motion of the stifle joint
is tracked by the stifle and hock joint markers
is required to restore normal function. However,
(Figure 9.1).
the periarticular changes in an end-stage stifle will
 The angular position of the stifle joint, in terms
likely preclude normal stifle excursion.
of flexion and extension, can be determined by
Extending two-dimensional descriptions of joint 
calculating the relative angular position between
kinematics to three-dimensional cases adds sub-
the femur and the tibia. As shown in Figure 9.1,
stantially to the complexity of the kinematic analy-
with the angular position measured on the flexion
sis. Grood and Suntay (1983) defined a joint
side of the joint, the value of the angle decreases
coordinate system for the knee joint described by
during flexion and increases during extension. For
a set of three clinically relevant rotations and three
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
n 'suos x Aaim uof Aq lo pystnd oun 'suos y ali uuof ho @
131
132
translations. This coordinate system has been
two fixed-bone axes. Translations are measured
extrapolated for use in the stifle joint in dogs
between the femur and tibia along these three rota-
(Korvick et al. 1994). Flexion/extension rotations
tion axes and include medial/lateral, cranial/
are defined with respect to a coordinate system
caudal, and compression/distraction. These three
fixed to the femur, while internal/external rota-
rotations and three translations of the tibia relative
tions are defined with respect to the long axis
to the femur describe the six degrees of freedom
 of the tibia. Adduction/abduction is defined on
(6 dof) of motion. Examples for the rotations and
au ol remoipuadiad st reu ,sixe Suneoy, e
translations for trotting dogs (Table 9.1) show that
flexion motion is largest during the swing phase.
170
Abduction/adduction and external/internal rota-
(degr
ock
tions are smaller, but are not negligible. Transla-
150
tions are also larger during the swing phase, with
Angle
the largest motions in the crarial/ caudal direction.
130
Stifle
 During the first half of the stance phase, the angular
6
 position of the stifle increases from 40 to 55 degrees
110
Hip
and there is a subtle cranial translation of the tibia
Joint
06
(~2mm, according to Korvick et al. [1994]). During
0
20
40
60
80
100
the swing phase, there is a caudal displacement of
Gait Cycle (%)
-5 mm, followed by a 3-mm cranial displacement
in the second half.
In addition to the traditional clinical gait labora-
BW
tory evaluations, there have been developments to
40
Stifle
more accurately measure motion at the stifle joint
Hock
using radiostereometric analysis (RSA). With the
RSA approach, small tantalum beads (-1-mm
diameter) are implanted in the distal femur and
20
40
60
80
100
proximal tibia. The beads are set into the bone and
Gait Cycle (%)
a pair of radiographic images, fitted to a calibra-
tion cage, is captured to determine the three-
Figure 9.1
 Figure illustrating joint angles at hip, stifle, and
 dimensional position of the beads. Because one set
hock joints and ground reaction forces from a gait lab
analysis for a trotting 32.5-kg dog. (Graphs courtesy of the
of beads tracks the kinematics of the femur and
J.D. Wheat Veterinary Orthopaedic Laboratory, University
another set of beads tracks the kinematics of the
of California—Davis)
tibia, the 6-dof relative motion between the two
Table 9.1
Ranges of rotation and translations during swing and stance phases for the stifle joint of the dog
Intact
CrCL deficient
Motion
Swing
Stance
Swing
Stance
Rotation
Flexion (+)/extension (-)
+38 to +101
+40 to +55
+45 to +103
+46 to +55
(degrees)
(-) pnppe/(+) pnpqy
0 to +6
0 to +2
+2 to +8 
+1 to +4
External (+)internal (-)
-8 to +5
-2 to +2
-6 to +4 
-4 to +1
Translation
Cranial (+)caudal ()
-5 to +3
0 to +3
-2 to +4
+4 to +14
(ww)
Lateral (+)/medial (-)
-2 to 0 
0
-5 to -2
-6 to -2
Distraction (+)/compression (-)
-4 to +2.5
-2 to 0
-4 to 0
-10 to 0
Source: Adapted from Korvick et al. (1994), with permission from Pergamon Press.
Joint kinematics were measured using a six-degrees-of-freedom linkage system attached between the tibia and femur. Results for
intact and cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL)-deficient cases are shown. A plus sign (+) indicates motion in a positive direction.
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 133
Lateral
Medial
Lateral
Medial
60 ms after paw strike
100 ms after paw strike
Figure 9.2 Relative velocity vectors indicate initial rotation about the lateral condyle early in the stance phase (60ms after
paw strike). This is followed by a rotation about the medial condyle at 1 00ms after paw strike. (Adapted from Anderst and
Tashman [2010l, with permission from Elsevier)
 bones can be determined. Using foxhounds on a
(Shahar and Banks-Sills 2004; Shahar and Milgram
treadmill at 1.5 m/s, Anderst and Tashman (2010)
2006; Kim et al. 2009).
found that there was 5 degrees of tibial external
Forces that act across joints of the musculoskel-
rotation during the peak loading phase. Early in
etal system can be quite large. In humans, it is
the loading phase (60ms after paw strike), the
common for these forces to reach several times
rotation was about the lateral condyle (Figure 9.2).
body weight (BW) for activities of daily living
Later (at 100ms), this center of rotation shifted to
such as walking (gait), rising from a chair, and
the medial condyle. This illustrates how internal/
stair climbing. Even single-legged stance can
external rotation is an important component of
cause hip joint forces of two times BW. A very
natural joint kinematics and how articulating sur-
simple static force analysis is instructive to illus-
faces will experience sliding and nonsliding load
trate some key features of the stifle joint in terms
transfers during the gait cycle.
of magnitude of the force across the joint. If we
consider the hind limb of a dog near the end of the
stance phase (Figure 9.3), there is a ground reac-
Stifle joint loading
tion force (GRF) acting on the paw from the
 ground. In this example, we are illustrating only
The forces that act on the stifle joint could be con-
the vertical reaction force. There are also cranial/
sidered in terms of external and internal forces
 caudal and medial/lateral directed forces during
(Andriacchi et al. 1986). External forces would
the gait cycle. At the stifle joint, a tensile force acts
include the weight of the dog, inertial forces from
on the patellar tendon (PT), and this force is
 acceleration and deceleration of the limb seg-
aligned with the tendon structure from its point of
ments, and the ground reaction forces acting on
insertion on the tibial tuberosity to its origin on
the paw. Internal forces will balance the external
the patella. The joint force (JF) is the compressive
forces and include muscle forces that act across the
force acting on the proximal tibial surface from the
joint during contraction, ligament forces, and joint 
distal femoral condyles.
contact forces. Extermal forces can be measured or
In this example, the ground reaction force
estimated using force plates and gait analysis.
creates a counterclockwise moment (or torque)
 Internal forces are much more challenging
to
about the stifle joint because the line of action is
measure and are most often estimated using math-
caudal to the stifle joint. The perpendicular dis-
ematical modeling or directly measured using in
tance from this line of action (shown as "a") is the
vitro cadaver studies to simulate in vivo conditions
 a   a  , on
components of the joint force (JF and JFy) as well
as the overall joint force magnitude (JF):
F：
JFy=GRF+
xGRF× cos(30°) =1.8 BW
b
JF = √JF2 + JF² =1.95 BW.
This simple example shows that the force on the
proximal tibial surface could approach two times
BW, even though the ground reaction force was
only 1/2 BW.
More complicated three-dimensional mathe-
matical models of the canine stifle joint during
slow gait including the femur, tibia, and patella
have been constructed (Shahar and Banks-Sills
2004). These models include a full complement
of muscles and tendon forces along with time-
varying ground reaction forces. Results show that
the medial and lateral femoral condyles each
exert 1 BW force on the tibia near the end of the
stance phase of slow gait, for a total tibial force of
 2 BW. Femoral trochlea forces are approximately
Figure 9.3 Free body diagram of the dog stifle joint
0.3BW from the articulation with the patella.
illustrating ground reaction force (GRF), patellar tendon
The cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL) is loaded
force (PT), and joint reaction force (JF). The GRF acts
through the first 80% of the stance phase and
through a moment arm (a) and PT acts through a moment
arm (b) relative to the joint center. (Image courtesy Karen
reaches a tensile force of 0.12 BW during_ mid-
Howard, MS [SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse,
stance. The caudal cruciate ligament (CaCL) is
NYI)
loaded to a much lesser extent (0.02 BW) and only
near the end of the stance phase. It should be
noted that trotting and rurming gait, along with
patellar tendon also creates a moment about the
usean pumons 1aaiel aean pmom dunduml
  a s n q ', s m 
is clockwise with respect to the stifle joint. To
forces and larger muscle forces. These, combined
with greater acceleration and deceleration of the
maintain static equilibrium, these moments will
uof rare un nmsan pmom 'suaas qu pu
balance each other such that
reaction forces.
PTxb=GRFxα
Mechanical versus anatomical axes
then PT =3 GRF.
b
Several different schemes have been developed to
If, for example, the ground reaction force were
quantify the frontal aligmment of the stifle joint in
1/2 BW for the dog, the patellar tendon force
the dog (Dismukes et al. 2007, 2008; Tomlinson et
would be 1.5BW. Continuing with the example,
al. 2007). An anatomical axis system (Figure 9.4A)
we will assume that the patellar tendon force acts
at the stifle joint is determined by drawing axes
at a 30-degree angle relative to the vertical axis.
 along the medullary canal of the tibia and femur
Again, invoking static equilibrium with forces in
through the condylar notch in the femur.
：A
the x and y directions, we can calculate the
mechanical axis system uses the joint centers to
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 135
aLDFA
mLDFA
aMPTA
mMPTA
mTFA
Anatomical Axes
Mechanical Axes
Mechanical Axes
Figure 9.4 Frontal view of hind limb illustrating anatomical axes (A), mechanical axes (B), and mechanical axes showing
pelvic limb line (C). Anatomical and mechanical axes as described by Dismukes et al. (2008). (lmage courtesy Karen 
Howard, MS [SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY|}
define the femoral and tibial axes (Figure 9.4B).
medial condyle contact forces that could contrib-
Recreation of the mechanical axis system is impor-
ute to loosering of the implant components.
tant in total knee replacement (TKR) preoperative
A number of parameters have been developed
plarning, component insertion, and ligamentous 
 to describe the angular and mechanical axes at the
balancing to recreate the natural kinematics of the
stifle joint (Figure 9.4). Anatomical lateral distal
joint and to minimize excessive stresses on the
femoral angles (aLDFA) for four dog breeds (Lab-
implant and soft tissue components. For example,
rador retrievers, golden retrievers, German shep-
making component cuts that place the joint in an
herd dogs, and Rottweilers) averaged 97, 97, 94,
increased varus position would increase external
and 98 degrees, respectively (Tomlinson et al.
moments on the joint resulting in higher joint
2007). Use of mechanical axes (mechanical lateral
distal femoral angle [mLDFA]] resulted in a slight
increases in the lateral collateral ligament and
increase in mean angles to 100, 100, 97, and 100
 compression increases across the medial condyle
degrees. For normal tibiae, the mechanical and
 of the joint. Again, tension forces acting through
anatomical axes would not differ. The mechanical
the patellar tendon can decrease tensile forces on
medial proximal tibia angle (mMPTA) has been
the lateral collateral ligament. In extension, both
reported to be 93 degrees (average) for Labrador
collateral ligaments are taut (Carpenter and
retrievers (Dismukes et al. 2007). The mechanical
Cooper 2000) and they can resist internal rotation.
tibiofemoral angle (mTFA) is 9.1 degrees (95%
During flexion, the lateral collateral ligament
confidence interval [C1] of mean: 8.5-9.7 degrees)
becomes lax, allowing for intermal rotation of the
for mid- to large-size dogs (Dismukes et al. 2008)
tibia relative to the femur.
with a varus orientation (Figure 9.4C). In contrast,
The cranial and caudal cruciate ligaments are
humans have normal mTFA of about 1 degree
the primary structures that control cranial and
(Cooke et al. 2007). The ramifications of this
caudal translation of the tibia with respect to the
become apparent by constructing the pelvic limb
femur. The CrCL functions to prevent cranial
line that passes from the femoral head center to
translation of the tibia relative to the femur and
the location of the ground reaction force, which is
 carries substantial tensile loads during the stance
located between the distal third and fourth meta-
phase as described above. With an internal rota-
tarsal (Dismukes et al. 2008). Loads applied to the
tion torque, the CrCL can twist about the CaCL to
paw will tend to cause a varus moment about the
minimize internal rotation of the tibia. The CaCL
stifle joint. This has been quantified as the mechian-
acts against caudal translation of the tibia with
ical axis deviation (MAD), calculated as the devia-
respect to the femur. However, the estimated loads
tion distance (marked "X" in Figure 9.4C) divided
on the CaCL are substantially lower than the
by the length of the constructed pelvis limb line.
CrCL. There has been a large body of research
For mid- to large-size dogs, the MAD is 3.6% at
focused on disruption of the CrCL as this is a
the stifle joint (Dismukes et al. 2008).
common dlinical issue in dogs. From a research
 perspective, disruption of the CrCL has also been
used as a model for degenerative arthritis (Pond
Role of ligaments
and Nuki 1973). As shown in Table 9.1 rupture of
the CrCL causes cranial translation of the tibia on
The stifle joint has 15 ligaments (Carpenter and
the order of 10 mm (in a 35-kg dog). In addition,
Cooper 2000) and four of these are most important
loss of CrCL function increases internal rotation in
 in terms of joint stability. These four are the medial
the stance phase of gait.
and lateral collateral ligaments and the cranial and
TKR surgery that removes the effective func-
caudal cruciate ligaments. The ligaments act as
tion of the cruciate ligaments requires additional
a s pof rnd cn s iss
passive constraints to prevent excessive cranial/
collateral ligaments stabilize the joint against
caudal translation. One approach to achieve this is
abduction and adduction torques when the joint
to add additional conformity between the tibial
is in extension. During limb abduction (valgus
 and femoral components. Increasing conformity
angulation of the stifle), a moment couple at the
 can be effectively designed to improve joint stabil-
joint is created to resist the externally applied
ity, but will also increase stresses at the fixation
torque consisting of a tensile force in the medial
 interfaces due to lack of the anatomical passive
collateral ligament combined with a compressive
constraints provided by the ligaments. In contrast,
load across the lateral condyle. Tensile loading of
knee replacement designs that retain the cruciate
the patellar tendon from active muscle contraction
ligaments require articular surfaces that are similar
can also contribute to the moment couple and
to the natural surfaces being replaced. Excessive
decrease the tensile forces in the medial collateral
forces in the cruciate ligaments could occur if the
ligament. This active muscle contraction can
conformity of the articular surface is increased for
protect the collateral ligaments from excessive
a cruciate sparing TKR because the articular
loading. During limb adduction (varus angulation
-rns e o  a ary pmon as
of the stifle), the opposite occurs. Tensile force
logical kinematic state.
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 137
Stifle joint contact pressures
cadavers, Kim et al. (2009) placed thin digital pres-
sure sensors subjacent to the menisci to measure
Contact between the articular surfaces of the tibial
the distribution of contact pressure. With a load of
and femoral components is the primary mecha-
30% BW and a stifle angle of 135 degrees, they
nism of load transfer across the joint and these
found average contact areas of 316mm? with
forces are compressive in nature. In the well-
greater contact on the medial condyle (179 mm²)
functioning joint, there is negligible friction
than the lateral condyle (137 mm'). Peak pressures
between the articulating surfaces so that forces
were 2.7 MPa and 2.4 MPa in the medial and lateral
act perpendicular to the articulating surface.
compartments, respectively. Peak pressure loca-
Depending on the conformity between the two
tions were located at a fractional distance of 48%
contacting surfaces, the contact area and contact
 from the caudal edge for the medial tibial plateau
 aqissod jou Aerauas si hl asueuo ues samssaid
and 64% for the lateral tibial plateau (Figure 9.5).
to measure contact areas or pressures directly in
Following CrCL sectioning, there was a substan-
Uivo. Computer simulations using sophisticated
tial caudal shift in position of the contact zone, a
finite element modeling methods and in vitro
large increase in contact pressure (peak of 4.9 MPa,
experiments using cadaver material are often used
 an increase of 81%) and a large reduction in contact
to determine contact mechanics. Using a mechani-
area (total of 178mm², a decrease of 44%). In
cal loading device with pelvic limbs from dog
human knees, the tibiofemoral contact moves
Normal
CrCL Deficient
TPLO Treated
MPa
5.08
4.62
4.15
3.69
3.23
2.77
2.31
1.85
1.38
0.32
0.46
=0.00
Figure 9.5 Axial view of the stifle joint for normal, cranial cruciate ligament (CrCL) deficient, and tibial plateau leveling
osteotomy (TPLO) treatments. Top panel row shows distal femur in dark gray and proximal tibia in silver. The bottom panel
from Kim et al. [2009l, with permission from John Wiley & Sons)
 posteriorly with increasing knee flexion (Andri-
Restoring joint motion
acchi et al. 1986).
The menisci are C-shaped fibrocartilaginous
Flexion-extension is controlled by the sagittal
discs located between the femoral condyles and
plane geometries of the femoral component
tibia (Carpenter and Cooper 2000), and they
and the ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene
increase the stability of the stifle joint by function-
(UHMWPE) tibial component. In the BioMedtrix
ally increasing the conformity between the femoral
(Boonton, NJ) system, the femoral component
and tibial contact surfaces. This increased confor-
 incorporates two distinct radi of curvature (Figure
mity increases the contact area and reduces contact
9.6A); a larger radius that recapitulates the curva-
stresses. Thieman et al. (2010) showed that a
ture of the patellofemoral joint, and a smaller
partial meniscectomy of the medial meniscus in
radius that is based on the center of rotation of the
the canine stifle joint reduced contact area by 38%
femoral condyle. By incorporating both radii into
and increased peak contact stress by 86%.
one smooth curvature, it is possible to achieve
smooth motion and stable femorotibial contact
during the flexion-extension arc. The medial and
Design considerations for TKR implants
lateral condyles have the same radii of curvature
in the sagittal plane, and their radi of curvature
The design of contemporary TKR implants is
in the frontal plane are also matched (Figure 9.6B).
based on the goal of restoring normal motions of
When  combined  with  a symmetrical  femoral
the knee, especially flexion-extension and internal-
trochlea, this allows for the manufacture of a
external rotation, while resisting varus-valgus
single implant design to accommodate both left
angulation and cranial-caudal translation.
and right stifle joints in the dog. Ultimately, this
Extension
8
 Flexion
Figure 9.6
incorporates two radi of curvature, one for extension and the other for flexion (A). Medial-lateral and cranial-caudal
ses pue (a) leuo aui ui suauodwos eig aut jo Aawol ayi g panw!l ane juauodo eiowaj aui jo suoelsuen
(C) planes respectively. (lmages courtesy of Greg van der Meulen, MS [BioMedtrix LLCI)
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 139
eliminates the need for separate left and right
been studied and described extensively (Pozzi and
instrumentation, as well as reducing the implant
Kim 2010) and will not be restated here. However,
inventory required to undertake these surgeries.
it is important to note that loss of the CrCL alone
Rotational constraint within a condylar TKR is
results in a clinically unstable stifle joint. During
also determined by the geometry of the implants.
 non-cruciate ligament-sparing TKR surgery, both
For a conforming articulation, rotational con-
the cranial and caudal cruciate ligaments are
straint is proportional to the relative radii of the
excised, along with the menisci. Consequently, the 
femoral and tibial components. If the radii are
stability of the stifle joint is significantly compro-
closely matched, less rotation will be allowed than
mised when TKR is performed. Following TKR,
for a less conforming design (Wright 2003). It
stability of the stifle joint is determined by the
should be noted that the degree of rotational sta-
inherent stability of the "new" joint, consisting of
bility also changes with knee position. For semi-
the articulating TKR implant and the surrounding
constrained canine TKR components (as described
ligaments (medial and lateral collateral ligaments)
 in the following section), rotational stability
is
and soft tissues (patellar tendon, popliteal tendon,
lower at high flexion angles when there is less
and joint capsule). The relative contributions of
conformity between the femoral and tibial sur-
the implant and the periarticular soft tissue
faces. The BioMedtrix canine TKR implant is
 to knee stability vary according to knee design,
designed to allow -15 to +15 degrees of rotation.
and are best described in terms of degrees of
Rotation in the intact stifle is reported to be -8 to
constraint.
+5 degrees (Korvick et al. 1994; see Table 9.1).
 The earliest TKR designs focused on recreating
 Patellofemoral tracking is a significant issue in
the hinge (ginglymus) function of the joint. The
human TKR and a concern in canine TKR, espe-
clinical performance of these early constrained
cially in light of the significant variations in distal
linked implants was poor, with survival rates of
a 'sop u japia ae e Anao jroua
only ~65% at 5-6 years as a result of complications
normal canine femoral trochlea is asymmetric in
such as loosening, infection, and fracture (Knutson
the transverse plane but the trochlea on the femoral
et al. 1986). The use of a fixed hinge allowed
component is usually symmetric. Although the
flexion-extension but effectively prevented varus-
prosthetic trochlea is relatively deep as compared
valgus tilt, intermal-external rotation, and axial
with the natural trochlea, errors in the rotational
joint distraction. Loads applied to the implant
alignment of the femoral component have the
therefore resulted in high stresses through the
potential to increase the risk of patellar luxation.
hinge joint and increased load transfer across the
Varus-valgus misalignment of the femoral compo-
interfaces between the implant, cement, and bone,
nent can also result in patellar maltracking. It is
resulting in loss of implant fixation. Newer ver-
pe n rd ssass in s A
sions of these linked devices, including rotating-
the time of surgery so that any problems can be
hinge designs, have been developed to overcome
identified and resolved. If there is mild patellar
the limitations of the earlier fixed-hinge designs
instability, it may be sufficient to imbricate the
(Callaghan et al. 2000). In humans, these implants 
joint capsule, but more significant instability may
are used in patients with significant bone or soft
necessitate revision of the femoral ostectomy in
tissue deficits secondary to aseptic or septic loos-
 order to restore optimal alignment of the trochlea
 ening, trauma, or neoplasia. In the veterinary
and extensor mechanism.
arena, there have now been a limited number of
reports on the use of custom fixed and rotating-
hinge designs in the management of dogs with
Restoring joint stability: Constrained,
stifle joint derangement and primary bone neo-
semiconstrained, and minimally
plasms (Figure 9.7).1
constrained TKR implants
Constrained, unlinked condylar TKR implants
have been used in humans but have yet to find an
The majority of dogs presenting for TKR surgery
application in canine TKR. In these implants, a
have experienced rupture of t
the CrCL.
The
central spine made of UHMWPE projects up from
mechanical consequences of CrCL rupture have
the tibial component and engages a recess in the
R
Figure 9.7 Use of a constrained, fixed-hinge TKR implant in a dog. The femoral and tibial components are linked with a
bushing that is inserted at the time of implantation (A). The long stems on the femoral and tibial components are intended
for cemented fixation (B). (Images courtesy of Noel Fitzpatrick, MVB, MRCvS [Fitzpatrick Referralsl)
intercondylar region of the femoral component.
The commercial canine TKR implants that are
Varus-valgus and anterior-posterior movements
currently available incorporate a semiconstrained
are constrained by contact between the plastic
design (Figure 9.8). The radius of curvature of the
 eminence and its enclosure. Although popular for 
concavity in the UHMWPE tibial components is
a while, these implants have generally fallen out 
slightly larger than that of the femoral counterface
 of favor as a consequence of retrieval studies that
in both the sagittal plane and the frontal plane,
showed consistent patterns of UHMWPE wear
resulting in an articulation that allows for some
and deformation on the central spine (Haman
 degree of stifle joint rotation, especially in flexion.
et al. 2005).
The sloped contours of the cranial and caudal sur-
 Recogmition that it was not feasible to use mate-
faces of the tibial concavities serve to reduce the
rials alone to constrain the movements of the knee
ability of the femoral component to translate out
led to the development of semiconstrained condylar
of the articulation. Medial-lateral translation is
oq paed si Aqis m u sisap aa
 resisted primarily by the presence of a raised ridge
through the geometry of the articulation and
of UHMWPE between the medial and lateral tibial
through the contributions of the local soft tissues,
concavities (Figure 9.8B).
especially the collateral ligaments, patellar tendon,
Mirimally constrained TKR implants are used in
and the joint capsule.
humans but are not available in dogs. The most
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 141
    s     a     a 
[INNOPLANT Medizintechnik, Hannover, Germanyl}
common of these is the cruciate-retaining (CR)
 replacement at the time of surgery prevents
implant that spares the posterior cruciate ligament
the need for a second surgery in the event of
(PCL). Proposed benefits of CR implants include
subsequent cartilage degeneration as a result of
better preservation of bone stock and improved
either natural disease that was not diagnosed
kinematics following surgery. However, mainte-
 at the time of surgery, or of damage caused by
nance of the PCL reduces the surgeon's ability to
abrasion against the metal femoral counterface.
balance soft tissues and to manage deformity
However, recent data from a prospective study
(Morgan et al. 2005), so many surgeons prefer to
of over 1700 patients failed to demonstrate any
use either an unlinked constrained implant that
 significant difference in knee function following
restores PCL function or a semiconstrained,
TKR with or without patellar resurfacing (Breeman
cruciate-sacrificing implant of the type used in
et al. 2011).
dogs.
 In dogs, patellar resurfacing has not been
included in TKR for a number of reasons. First, the
size and geometry of the canine patella would
Patellar resurfacing
make resection and replacement with a cemented
UHMWPE button quite challenging. Second,
The issue of whether or not to resurface the patella
 introduction of another implant and another inter-
during TKR surgery remains contentious. Propo-
face increases the risk of implant-related complica-
nents of patellar resurfacing believe that replace-
tions such as loosening or wear. Unless long-term
ment of the patellar cartilage with a UHMWPE
clinical data indicate that patellofemoral compli-
button provides for an optimal  articulation
cations limit the survival of canine TKR implants,
against the metal trochlea. They also argue that
it is umlikely that patellar resurfacing will be
widely adopted as a standard procedure for dogs
following TKR is lacking. Nevertheless, some
undergoing TKR.
important lessons can be learned from human
TKR and these can be used to inform the design
of canine TKR implants and the surgical tech-
Less invasive TKR solutions
niques used to implant these devices.
 In humans, isolated degeneration and /or collapse
 of the medial or lateral femorotibial compartment
Contact pressures and UHMWPE stresses
results in a varus or valgus knee deformity. In
these patients, unicondylar knee arthroplasty
Contact pressures play an important role in deter
(UKA) is a logical and economic alternative to
mining the long-term survival of the UHMWPE
TKR. The procedure is less invasive than TKR and
bearing surface. Bartel et al. (1986) used finite
does not preclude subsequent revision to a TKR.
element analysis to explore the impact of knee
 Since only one joint compartment is replaced and
component constraint and UHMWPE thickness on
the associated soft tissues are maintained, it is pos-
the contact stresses in the UHMWPE. An uncon-
sible to use minimally constrained articulations to
strained knee implant, with limited conformity
 ensure optimal range of motion. Clinical data indi-
between the femoral and tibial components, trans-
cate that UKA produces reliable 8-10-year results
fers load across a small contact area, resulting in
in appropriately selected patients (Deshmukh and
contact stresses that can exceed the yield stress of
Scott 2001).
the UHMWPE, which is reported to range from 13
UKA has not been explored in dogs and, given
to 32MPa (D'Lima et al. 2001; Figure 9.9). Con-
the nature of the pathology that is normally seen
versely, load transfer in a semiconstrained implant
in dogs evaluated for TKR, it is unlikely that this
with increased conformity occurs over a much
will be adopted in the veterinary field. However,
larger surface area and results in lower contact
there is great potential for the development
t of
pe e si aa a uam sassans
minimally invasive condylar implants that can be
Interestingly, peak contact stresses do not occur at
implanted through smaller incisions and simpler
the surface of the UHMWPE but in the subsurface;
instrumentation.
this observation likely explains the observation of
subsurface material failure and delamination that
has been reported in certain designs of TKR
Mechanical factors at the femorotibial
implant (Sathasivam and Walker 1998).
articulation
Data from the human literature indicate that
contact stresses decrease as the thickness of the
The knee joint is the largest joint in the body and,
UHMWPE increases. For contemporary condylar
as described earlier in this chapter, load transfer
knee designs, a minimum thickness of 6mm of
across the canine stifle joint may approach two
UHMWPE is recommended (Bartel et al. 1986).
times BW, depending on the activity and the angle
This means that the tibial insert is usually at least
at which the joint is loaded.
 8-10mm in thickness. In dogs, removal of a centi-
 From a practical perspective, any consideration
 meter of bone from the proximal tibia is not practi-
 of load transfer through an implant must consider
cal as it would risk injury to the insertion sites of
three factors. First, what is the relative distribution
the collateral ligaments. In addition, implantation
of the load across the surface of the implant?
of a cemented or cementless implant into the rela-
Second, what is the mechanical response of the
tively spongiform bone of the proximal tibia
implant to the loads that are experienced? Third,
would likely increase the risk of device subsidence
what proportion of the load does the implant
or liftoff, especially when subjected to off-axis
transmit across the implant-bone or cement-bone
loading. Additional work is needed to determine
interface?
contact stresses in the UHMWPE implants that are
Although there have been a number of studies
currently used in dogs, but reductions in contact
on load distribution in the normal stifle joint,
stress are more likely to come from changes in
information on the relative distribution of loads
implant conformity and modifications to the
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 143
4
van Mises IN/m^21
9.167e+006
/00+000
9.333e+006
7.500e+006
.667e+006
.833e
006
5.000e+006
A00
.667e+006
Figure 9.9 Finite element model analysis of the effects of loading conditions on contact stresses in a UHMwPE tibial insert.
Under static loading (A), contact stresses are relatively low and evenly distributed. With application of quadriceps load and a
shear force (B), the contact pressures increase substantially. Similar increases are seen when the joint is flexed and the
contact area decreases. (lmages courtesy of Evangelos Magnissalis, PhD [Biohexagon Ltd., Athens, Greecel)
material properties of the bearing surfaces than
all-polyethylene tibial components were largely
from increases in the thickness of the UHMWPE
abandoned back in the 1980s in favor of metal-
components.
backed components with an enclosed UHMWPE
articular insert. The primary concem at that time
was that the all-polyethylene implants experi-
Deformation of the implant
enced increased deformation when subjected to
varus-valgus or anterior-posterior loading (Reilly
The mechanical response to loading is dictated
et al. 1982) and that this deformation would result
both by the geometry of the implant and the mate-
 in an increased incidence of implant loosening and
rial from which it is fabricated. In human TKR,
revision surgery. Metal-backed trays were shown
to more effectively distribute and reduce the
should result in a bone surface that is perpendicu-
maximum compressive loads seen in the cancel-
lar to the mechanical axis of the tibia. The femoral
lous bone bed adjacent to the implant and it was
 osteotomies are then made, using the tibial ostec-
postulated that they would result in reduced early
tomy as a reference. The goal is to produce a joint
implant migration and subsequent loosening
space that is rectangular in geometry in both
(Taylor et al. 1998). Additional benefits of metal-
extension and flexion (the so-called flexion and
backed tibial components include modularity
extension gaps; Figure 9.10A). Failure to create
(including the use of long stems), cementless fixa-
flexion and /or extension gaps with a parallel rela-
tion with porous or beaded coatings, and the
tionship between femur and tibia will lead to
potential for revision of a worn UHMWPE insert
varus or valgus angulation of the implants (Figure
without need for removal of the entire implant.
 9.10B). In a laboratory setting, malalignment of the
However, these advantages are offset by the
femoral and/or tibial components results in
increased cost of a metal-backed component, the
increased load transfer and contact pressures on
requirement for a deeper tibial bone cut for a given
the tibial UHMWPE (Werner et al. 2005). These
UHMWPE thickness with a metal backing, and by
effects are even more pronounced when a highly
the potential for backside wear of the UHMWPE
conforming implant desigm is used, especially one
insert.
with closely matched radii in the mediolateral
The use of all-polyethylene tibial implants is
plane. One potential solution to this issue is the
now being revisited in human TKR. Despite the
use of condylar geometries that prevent edge
predictions from the laboratory, a number of all-
loading if they are subjected to off-axis loading. In
polyethylene designs have demonstrated perfor-
 a clinical setting, malalignment results in increased
mance that is equivalent or superior to that of
wear and an increased risk of implant failure
metal-backed components of the same design
(Ritter et al. 1994).
(Browne et al. 2011).
Both cemented, all-polyethylene and cement-
less, metal-backed tibial implants are now avail-
Materials selection and the problem of
able for canine TKR. In the long-term, it will be
implant wear
interesting to see whether the perceived advan-
tages of the metal-backed components are reflected
The materials used in TKR are similar to those
 in differences in clinical performance and implant
 available in THR. The most common bearing sur-
survival.
faces are cobalt-chromium (CoCr), titanium alloy
(Ti6Al4V), and UHMWPE. In humans, ceramics
such as alumina and zirconia have been shown to
Importance of cut geometry and
result in less wear of the UHMWPE counterface,
soft tissue balance
 and are starting to see increased clinical applica-
tion (Oonishi et al. 2005).
The functional stability of a TKR implant is deter
The femoral component of the BioMedtrix
mined by the inherent geometry of the implant
Canine TKR system has an ingrowth surface com
and the surgeon's ability to restore correct joint
posed of two to three layers of CoCr beads with a
 alignment and soft tissue balance. Although liga-
mean diameter of 250-300 μm. The femoral com-
ment balancing procedures, including ligament
ponent of the GenuSys implant (INNOPLANT,
releases and/or lengthening, are commonly used
Hannover, Germany) is fabricated from titanium-
in human TKR, these procedures have not been
 coated CoCr and stabilized using a single screw
 evaluated in dogs. Unless a dog presents with sig-
into the femoral metaphysis.
nificant joint deformity, it is usually possible to
The tibial component of the BioMedtrix implant
maintain aligrment and soft tissue balance by
is fabricated as a monobloc of UHMWPE that is
paying careful attention to the bone cuts that are
designed for cemented fixation. A cementless fixa-
used to prepare the femur and tibia.
tion option, consisting of a CoCr tibial tray with a
The tibial osteotomy, which traditionally pre-
 snap-fit UHMWPE insert, has undergone preclini-
cedes the femoral osteotomy in a TKR procedure,
cal evaluation (Allen et al. 2010) and is now
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 145
Figure 9.10 Flexion and extension gaps in total knee replacement. In extension (A), the tibial ostectomy and the distal
femoral ostectomy are parallel. In flexion (B), the tibial ostectomy and the caudal femoral ostectomy are parallel. (Ilmage
courtesy of Tim Vojt.)
available for clinical use. A metal-backed tibial
compared with THR. In THR, wear occurs pre-
tray (titanium-coated CoCr) is also used in the
dominantly as a result of surface phenomena such
GenuSys knee.
as abrasive or adhesive wear. In TKR, wear is
Wear of the UHMWPE component is inevitable
more commonly the result of fatigue phenomena
given the loads to which the implants are sub-
that manifest as pitting or delamination. Wear par-
jected in vivo. Wear is an important cause of
ticles generated from TKR have been shown to
implant failure in TKR. Particulate debris (metal,
be larger than those from THR, and it has
UHMWPE, or polymethylmethacrylate [PMMA])
been suggested that this is one reason why the
from the articular or nonarticular surfaces of the
 periprosthetic tissue responseis often more aggres.
implant are liberated into the joint tissues, where
sive in failed THR than in failed TKR (Schmalzried
they incite inflammatory reactions that result in
et al. 1994).
periprosthetic inflammation and bone resorption
We recently reported the results of a study of
(Harris 2001). In both cemented and cementless
implant wear following TKR in the dog (Rudinsky
 components, bone loss compromises the fixation
et al. 2010). Although the results from this study
 of the implant and initiates mechanical loosening.
should be considered preliminary, they indicated
Micromotion at the implant-bone, cement-bone,
that the common wear mechanisms seen in human
or stem-cement interface serves to exacerbate the
TKR specimens (Hood et al. 1983) are also evident
release of particulate debris, which are forced
 in canine TKR retrievals. Pitting was evident in six
along the interface by the pumping of synovial
of six implants and delamination was seen in three
fluid (Konttinen et al. 2005).
 of six implants. Additional, longer-term studies
 The mechanisms responsible for the generation
will be needed to more completely quantify the
of wear debris appear to be different in TKR as
incidence and significance of both articular surface
and backside wear mechanisms in canine TKR, as
well as to determine the relationship betweern
wear and implant survival.
Mechanical factors at the implant-bone
or cement-bone interface
Cemented versus cementless fixation
 Data from the Swedish Knee Arthroplasty Regis-
try indicate that the relative risk of implant revi-
sion is 1.6 times higher for implants with a
 cementless tibial component as compared with a
cemented tibial component (Robertsson et al.
2001). The primary cause of implant failure in
these cases is aseptic loosening of the tibial com-
ponent. Femoral component survival does not
appear to be different in cemented, versus cement-
less, components (Robertsson et al. 2001). It should
be noted, however, that these data come exclu-
sively from the human literature. There have not
been any prospective clinical trials of cemented
versus cementless fixation in canine TKR, but a
recent preclinical study indicated that fixation
with a cementless, hydroxyapatite-coated tibial
component was as effective as that achieved
with bone cement at time points out to 6 months
(Allen et al. 2007). More recently, we used a novel
in vitro loading regimen and direct analysis of
implant micromotion to characterize the mechani-
cal performance of the cement-bone interface in
UHMWPE tibial components from a series of
Figure 9.11
 UHMwPE components retrieved from a dog
canine TKR retrievals (Mann et al. 2011). The
results from this study confirmed the stability of
for the implant retrieved from the right stifle (A). This
these cemented implants, with interface motions
implant had been in service for 14 months (A) as compared
that were similar to those seen from a series of
with only 3 months for the left stifle (B). Pits and scratches
clinically successful human retrieval specimens.
are evident on both implants. Damage at the caudal edge
of the implant (A) represents delamination. (lmages courtesy
However, histological analysis of specimens from
of Mark Miller, MS [SUNY Upstate Medical Universityl;
these animals highlighted the potential for cement
retrieval specimens kindly provided by Melvyn Pond,
cracking and the development of cavitary defects
BVMS, MRCVS)
 at the cement-bone interface. Even with appropri-
ate cement technique, it may be difficult to ensure
optimal interdigitation of bone cement into the
dense cancellous bone that typically predominates
 in select clinical cases.2 The GenuSys TKR system
in the subchondral bone of the proximal portion
incorporates a cementless CoCr tibial component
of the tibia (Figure 9.11).
that is secured to the tibia with screws, and a
Cementless tibial fixation has been used suc-
 cementless, metal-backed tibial component is now
cessfully in preclinical models of canine TKR
available for the BioMedtrix TKR implant system
(Turner et al. 1989; Summer et al. 1994), as well as
(Allen et al. 2010).
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 147
Fixation in primary versus revision TKR
kinematics in dogs. A number of research groups
are actively working to develop methods for
In a revision setting, particularly when implant
assessing TKR kinematics through the use of stan-
failure is associated with sigrificant bone loss or
dard three-dimensional motion capture (Hatfield
et al. 2011), biplanar fluoroscopy (Dennis et al.
extensive cement mantle from the proximal tibia,
2003), or uniplanar fluoroscopy combined with
bone loss can be a major challenge. Long stems
 image matching (Okamoto et al. 2011).
that extend beyond the region of bone loss can be
The available data from human TKR indicate
used to ensure fixation with solid bone (Liska et
that although gait patterns change following TKR,
al. 2007); these stems support effective load trans-
they do not return to normal (Noble et al. 2005).
fer to cortical bone, and they can be used with or
 In particular, the functional gait adaptations that
without cement. In humans, fixation may also be
 are seen in patients with advanced osteoarthrosis
achieved through the use of conical metallic aug-
 (OA) are retained. Data addressing this issue are
ments that are press-fit into the proximal tibia and 
 clearly needed in dogs since it will be important
into which a standard tibial implant can be
to be able to determine whether residual gait
cemented (Meneghini et al. 2008).
abnormalities are the result of ongoing postopera-
tive pain or of chronic adaptations in the patient's
gait.
Mechanical factors in
periprosthetic tissues
Summary and conclusions
Stress shielding
Much remains to be learned about the mechanical
performance of canine TKR implants. Particular
The alloys used most commonly in joint replace
areas of interest include the kinematics of TKR
ment implants (CoCr and Ti6Al4V) have material
implants and the significance of wear mechanisms
properties that far exceed those of the native bone
in the development of implant-related complica-
into which they are implanted (see Chapter 2). As
tions. These questions are best answered through
a consequence, loads are preferentially transferred
a combination of controlled clinical trials and labo-
through the implant, resulting in a significant
sasdiad q ,uas, spel a u uognpan
ratory investigations, including systematic analy-
bone. In accordance with the postulates embodied
sis of retrieval specimens.
in Wolff's law, the skeletal response to reduced
loading involves net bone resorption. In canine
TKR, stress shielding has been identified in the
Endnote
distal femur, adjacent to the craniodistal chamfer
cut (Allen et al. 2009). Bone densitometry studies
1. Hitzpatrick N, Asher K. Constrained total knee
have demonstrated stress shielding in similar
replacement: A novel prosthesis for salvage arthro-
plasty in the dog and cat. Vet Surg 2010;39:E36.
locations in human TKR patients (Abu-Rajab et al.
 2. Turmer T. Personal communication.
2006).
References
Kinematics after TKR
Abu-Rajab RB, Watson WS, Walker B, et al. Peri-
Although a number of studies have documented
prosthetic bone mineral density after total knee
joint function and functional loading of the oper-
arthroplasty. Cemented versus, cementless fixation.
ated limb after TKR in the dog (Allen et al. 2009;
I Bone Joint Surg Br 2006;88:606-613.
Allen M, Leone K, Zhang R, et al. Histomorphometric
Liska and Doyle 2009), there is currently a near-
and mechanical evaluation of a peri-apatite coated
complete lack of detailed information regarding
tibial baseplate in a canine total knee arthroplasty
the effectiveness of TKR surgery in restoring joint
model. Trans Orthop Res Soc 2007;32:1864.
148Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Allen MJ, Leone KA, Lamonte K, et al. Cemented total
Grood ES, Suntay WJ. A joint coordinate system for the
knee replacement in 24 dogs: Surgical technique,
clinical description of three-dimensional motions:
clinical results, and complications. Vet Surg 2009;38:
Application to the knee. J Biomech Eng 1983;105:
555-567.
136-144.
Allen MJ, Rudinsky A, Shah S, et al. Preclinical assess-
Haman JD, Wimmer MA, Galante JO. Surface damage
ment of cenmentless total knee replacement in the dog.
and wear in fixed, modular tibial inserts: The effects
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2010;23:A1.
of conformity and constraint. In: Total Knee Arthro-
Anderst WJ, Tashman S. Using relative velocity vectors
plasty: A Guide to Get Better Performance, Bellemans J,
to reveal axial rotation about the medial and lateral
Ries MD, Victor J (eds.). Heidelberg: Springer, 2005,
compartment of the knee.J Biomech 2010;43:
Pp. 85-89.
994997.
Harris WH. Wear and periprosthetic osteolysis: The
Andriacchi TP, Stanwyck TS, Galante JO. Knee biome-
problem. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2001;293:66-70.
chanics and total knee replacement. J Arthroplasty
Hatfield GL, Hubley-Kozey CL, Astephen Wilson JL,
1986;1:211-219.
et al. The effect of total knee arthroplasty on knee joint
Bartel DL, Bicknell VL, Wright TM. The effect of confor-
kinematics and kinetics during gait. j Arthroplasty
mity, thickness, and material on stresses in ultra-high
2011;26:309-318.
molecular weight components for total joint replace-
Hood RW, Wright TM, Burstein AH. Retrieval analysis
ment. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1986;68:1041-1051.
of total knee prostheses: A method and its application
Breeman S, Campbell M, Dakin H, et al. Patellar resur-
to 48 total condylar prostheses. J Biomed Mater Res
facing in total knee replacement: Five-year clinical
1983;17:829-842.
 and economic results of a large randomized controlled
Kim SE, Pozzi A, Banks SA, et al. Effect of tibial plateau
trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2011,93:1473-1481.
leveling osteotomy on femorotibial contact mechanics
Browne JA, Gall-Sims SE, Giuseffi SA, et al. All-
and stifle kinematics. Vet Surg 2009;38:23-32.
 polyethylene tibial components in modern total knee
Kmutson K, Lindstrand A, Lidgren L. Survival of knee
arthroplasty. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 201l;19:
arthroplasties. A nation-wide multicentre investiga-
527-535.
tion of 8000 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1986;68:
Callaghan JI, Squire MW, Goetz DD, et al. Cemented
795-803.
rotating-platform total knee replacement. A nine to
Konttinen YT, Zhao D, Beklen A, et al. The microenvi-
twelve-year follow-up study. J Bone Joint Surg Am
'sasasond juauaserdan d renon punare juaan
2000;82:705-711.
Clin Orthop Relat Res 2005;430:28-38.
Carpenter DH, Jr, Cooper RC. Mini review of canine
Korvick DL, Pijanowski GJ, Schaeffer DJ. Three-
dimensional kinematics of the intact and cranial cruci-
321-329.
ate ligament-deficient stifle of dogs. J Biomech
Cooke TD, Sled EA, Scudamore RA. Frontal plane knee
199427:77-87.
alignment: A call for standardized measurement.
Liska WD, Doyle ND. Canine total knee replacement:
J Rheumatol 2007;34:1796-1801.
 Surgical technique and one-year outcome. Vet Surg
D'Lima DD, Chen PC, Colwell CW Jr. Polyethylene
2009;38:568-582.
contact stresses, articular congruity, and knee align-
Liska WD, Marcellin-Little DJ, Eskelinen EV, et al.
ment. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2001;392:232-238.
Custom total knee replacement in a dog with femoral
Dennis DA, Komistek RD, Mahfouz MR, et al. Multi-
condylar bone loss. Vet Surg 2007;36:293-301.
center determination of in vivo kinematics after total
Mann KA, Miller MA, Townsend KL, et al. The dog as
knee arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2003;416:
 a preclinical model to evaluate interface morphology
37-57.
and micro-motion in cemented total knee replace-
Deshmukh RV, Scott RD. Unicompartmental knee
ment. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2011;25:1-10.
arthroplasty: Long-term results. Clin Orthop Relat Res
Meneghini RM, Lewallen DG, Hanssen AD. Use of
2001;392:272-278.
 porous tantalum metaphyseal cones for severe tibial
Dismukes DI, Tomlinson JL, Fox DB, et al. Radiographic
bone loss during revision total knee replacement.
measurement of the proximal and distal mechanical
J Bone Joint Surg Am 2008,90:78-84.
joint angles in the canine tibia. Vet Surg 2007;36:
Morgan H, Battista V, Leopold SS. Constraint in primary
699-704.
total knee arthroplasty. J Am Acad Orthop Surg
Dismukes DI, Fox DB, Tomlinson JL, et al. Determina-
2005;13:515-524.
 pr  u e q d o 
Noble PC, Gordon MJ, Weiss JM, et al. Does total knee
A cadaveric radiographic study in the frontal plane.
replacement restore normal knee function? Clin
Vet Surg 2008;37:674-682.
Orthop Relat Res 2005;431:157-165.
Feeney LC, Lin CF, Marcellin-Little DJ, et al. Validation
Okamoto N, Breslauer L, Hedley AK, et al. In viv0
of two-dimensional kinematic analysis of walk and
knee kinematics in patients with bilateral total knee
sit-to-stand motions in dogs. Am J Vet Res
arthroplasty of 2 designs. J Arthroplasty 2011;26:
2007;68:277-282.
914-918.
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Knee Replacement 149
Oonishi H, Kim SC, Kyomoto M, et al. Change in
compared to hip replacement prostheses. J Appl Bio-
UHMWPE properties of retrieved ceramic total knee
mater 1994;5:185-190.
 prosthesis in clinical use for 23 years. J Biomed Mater
Shahar R, Banks-Sills L.A quasi-static three-dimensional,
Res B App1 Biomater 2005;74:754-759.
mathematical, three-body segment model of the
 Pond MJ, Nuki G. Experimentally-induced osteoarthri-
canine knee. J Biomech 2004;37:1849-1859.
tis in the dog. Anm Rheum Dis 1973;32:387-388.
Shahar R, Milgram J. Biomechanics of tibial plateau
Pozzi A, Kim SE. Biomechanics of the normal and cranial
leveling of the canine cruciate-deficient stifle joint:
cuciate-deficient stifle treated by tibial osteotomies.
A theoretical model. Vet Surg 2006;35:144-149.
In: Adoances in the Canine Cranial Cruciate Ligament,
Sumner DR, Turmer TM, Dawson D, et al. Effect of
Muir P (ed.). Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010,
 pegs and screws on bone ingrowth in cementless total
Pp. 195-199.
knee arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1994;309:
Ragetly CA, Griffon DJ, Mostafa AA, et al. Inverse
150-155.
dynamics analysis of the pelvic limbs in Labrador
 a       
retrievers with and without cranial cruciate ligament
ysis of the implanted proximal tibia: A relationship
disease. Vet Surg 2010;39:513-522.
between the initial cancellous bone stresses and
Reilly D, Walker PS, Ben-Dov M, et al. Effects of tibial
implant migration. J Biomech 1998;31:303-310.
components on load transfer in the upper tibia. Clin
Thieman KM, Pozzi A, Ling HY, et al. Comparison of
Orthop Relat Res 1982;165:273-282.
contact mechanics of three meniscal repair techniques
Ritter MA, Faris PM, Keating EM, et al. Postoperative
and partial meniscectomy in cadaveric dog stifles. Vet
alignment of total knee replacement. Its effect on sur-
Surg 2010;39:355-362.
vival. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1994;299:153-156.
Tomlinson J, Fox D, Cook JL, et al. Measurement of
Robertsson O, Knutson K, Lewold S, et al. The Swedish
femoral angles in four dog breeds. Vet Surg
Knee Arthroplasty Register 1975-1997: An update
2007;36:593-598.
with special emphasis on 41,223 knees operated on in
Turmer TM, Urban RM, Sumner DR, et al. Bone ingrowth
1988-1997. Acta Orthop Scand 2001;72:503-513.
into the tibial component of a canine total condylar
Rudinsky A, Townsend KL, Thurston S, et al. Wear
 s d  ss r m
analysis is retrieved canine total knee replacement
893-901.
     
Wermer FW, Ayers DC, Maletsky LP, et al. The effect of
A21.
valgus/varus malalignment on load distribution in
d n  n    
total knee replacements. J Biomech 2005;38:349-355.
subsurface damage in tibial inserts of total knees.
Wright TM. Knee biomechanics and implant design. In:
J Orthop Res 1998;16:564-571.
The Aaut Knee, Callaghan JI, Rosenberg AG, Rubash
Schmalzried TP, Jasty M, Rosenberg A, et al. Polyethyl-
HE, Simonian PT, Wickiewicz TL (eds.). Philadelphia:
ene wear debris and tissue reactions in knee as
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2003, pp. 145-161.
10
Clinical Application of Total
Knee Replacement
Melvyn Pond
Introduction
Historical perspectives
Since the 1950s, the canine stifle joint has been the
The human orthopedic literature abounds with
subject of a considerable number of publications
descriptions of arthroplasty to treat intractable
 in the veterinary literature. Issues addressed
pain and loss of function due to pathology of the
include medial patellar luxation, osteochondroses,
knee.
a go sioi au uagap ja pue 'sae
During the 1890s, Themistocles Gluck replaced
majority of these publications is cranial cruciate
knees affected by tuberculosis with a hinged pros-
ligament (CrCL) disease. Despite many improve-
thesis made of ivory. He performed the procedure
ments in the management of stifle joint problems,
on 14 patients, all of which failed (Eynon-Lewis et
the end result is very often osteoarthritis. Canine
al. 1992). It was almost 100 years before further
patients with osteoarthritis of the stifle joint show
attempts were made to replace the human knee,
a wide range of clinical signs, but many develop
but during that time much work was published on
disease that can limit the ability to lead a life of
resurfacing and interposing a wide variety
of
acceptable quality, despite medications, physical
materials between the joint surfaces. Verneuil, in
therapy, acupuncture, and other conservative
 1860, considered interposing soft tissues to restore
means. Surgical techniques for management of
the articular surfaces of the knee joint and this
osteoarthritis of the stifle have traditionally been
stimulated the use of fat, fascia lata, prepatellar
limited to arthrodesis and amputation, but in
bursa, and pig bladder (Verneuil 1860). Even as
recent years, the development of implants and
late as 1958, Brown and colleagues used skin as
instrumentation for replacing the canine stifle joint
interpositional tissue (Brown et al. 1958). Many
has given veterinarians another option for helping
synthetic materials were also used, including
patients with this debilitating problem.
 nylon and cellophane, but, as with the soft tissues,
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
151
152
2Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
all had poor results. Arthrodesis was the surgical
1973; Walker et al. 1983). Further precision in com-
 treatment of choice for severe knee pain until joint
ponent insertion has been made necessary by the
replacements began to be developed in the 1950s.
development of porous-coated (PCA), press-fit
Metal-on-metal implants were initially in vogue,
implants, which require accurate preparation of
until metal-on-plastic prostheses evolved as expe-
the bone surfaces to receive implants and, as a
rience was obtained in the use of such materials in
result, more consistent and reproducible implant
 total hip arthroplasty.
positioning.
During the 1960s, Gunston developed a system
Knee arthroplasty developed into true TKR
of metal runners cemented to the femoral con-
with the introduction of patellar resurfacing in
dyles and polyethylene implants cemented to the
1955. At the time, the femoral component designs
tibial plateau (Gunston 1971).
were condylar and the articulation of the initial
Stability of the replaced knee joint is of major
metal resurfaced patella with the articular carti-
concern and a variety of hinged prostheses were
lage of the trochlear groove resulted in severe
developed with modifications to allow some
wear and very poor results.
degree of rotation. Following patients over the
With cemented polyethylene resurfacing of the
 long term showed the hinged prostheses to have
 a high rate of infection, loosening, and implant
rating a trochlear groove, the modern concept of
failure (Deburge et al. 1979).
the TKR evolved. Patellar resurfacing is not per-
During the 1960s and early 1970s three basic
-iu asinand pue suoams te Aq Aaunnoi pao
designs were developed that have had great influ-
cations as to when it may be beneficial have not
ence on modern total knee replacements (TKRs).
been developed.
First, umicompartmental prostheses 
6resurfaced
 asn ui are sisap riseq omi auia nni u
either the lateral or medial articulation. Next, duo-
 cruciate sparing and cruciate sacrificing. There is
compartmental designs were essentially joined
considerable debate as to the merits of each system,
ds  s n 
especially with regard to soft tissue balancing and
arate tibial components. The femoral component
implant contact over the full range of motion
was curved in two planes, but the tibial compo-
(ROM)(
 of the joint. Increasing
conformation
nent was flat in the sagittal plane. Thus, there was
between the implants results in less contact stress
no constraint built into the desigms and cruciate
 and less wear of the tibial component. This degree
 of conformation is simpler to achieve in cruciate
The third concept was the Geomedic prosthesis
sacrificing designs. Increasing sophistication in
(Mayo Clinic, Minneapolis, MN), which had a
 design of the tibial component has reduced rota-
constant radius femoral component and separate
 tional and craniocaudal instability in cruciate defi-
dished tibial components. The constraint in this
cient joints.
 This type of highly conformed
design was so great that the cemented implants
prosthesis is used in the canine TKR system
rapidly loosened
1  soon  after  weight bearing
described below.
commenced.
The number of knees replaced in human medi-
At the time of the development of the Geomedic
cine now far exceed the number of hips replaced
prosthesis, Freeman and colleagues in London
 and in data published by the Centers for Disease
developed a design with components that reduced
 Control and Prevention, it is seen that during 2007,
shear forces at the bone-cement interface, mini-
534,000 TKRs were performed in the United States,
mized friction, and reduced wear by allowing
compared with 235,000 total hip replacements
contact over a wide area. In addition, this design
  e rae saxa aed t()
allowed for minimal bone resection to allow
expanding beyond simple relief of pain and many
salvage by arthrodesis (Freeman et al. 1973).
 people expect to return to some degree of athletic
Ranawat and Shine, as well as Walker et al.,
 activity beyond basic activities of daily living that,
were the first to introduce instrumentation to aid
by itself, can subject the replaced joint to substan-
the insertion of the femoral and tibial components
tial forces.
.For example, the repetitive climbing
 and laid the groundwork for precision in implant
flights of stairs can place considerable loads on a
positioning and articulation (Ranawat and Shine
 resurfaced patella and high-flexion designs have
Clinical Application of Total Knee Replacement 153
become necessary for patients in cultures who
The dogs ranged in weight between 22 and 58kg.
require more than 130 degrees of flexion in the
and three had had previous surgery on the joint to
knees for sitting cross-legged or kneeling to pray.
be replaced. The dogs underwent supervised and
The current design of the canine TKR is based
 home-based rehabilitation, and regular objective
on the lessons learned from the history of human
assessment of postoperative progress included
total knee arthroplasty as it evolved from Gluck's
force plate gait analysis. The most significant com-
first attempt in 1890 to the advanced materials and
plication was in a seventh patient that could not
nonhinged designs of today.
be followed in the same manner because the
 The first reported veterinary application of TKR
 owner allowed inappropriate activity that resulted
involved implantation of a cementless TKR in cats.
in collateral ligament damage, further surgery.
The prosthesis was used as a model for human
sepsis, and eventually amputation. The overall
finger joint 
t prostheses.  The
prosthesis
was
results of this detailed study were extremely
implanted in 42 cats (Walker et al. 1983).
 encouraging and the current use of this system in
 In 1989, Turner reported on a condylar total joint 
many veterinary centers throughout the world
arthroplasty (TJA) of the canine stifle in experi-
will allow the collection of data to fully evaluate
ments to investigate bone apposition and bone
the system with special reference to technique
 ingrowth in cementless tibial components (Turner
modifications, implant fixation, complications,
et al. 1989).
and expectations over the long term.
These implants were subsequently used with
The implants include a cobalt-chromium (CoCr)
subjectively assessed success in a few clinical
femoral component that replaces the femoral con-
cases.? These results, however, were not reported
dyles and trochlear groove. The femoral compo-
 in the peer-reviewed literature.
nent articulates with a tibial surface manufactured
In 2007, Liska et al. used a custom-designed TJA
from a block of ultrahigh-molecular-weight poly-
to reconstruct a canine stifle joint that had loss of
ethylene (UHMWPE).
the medial femoral condyle, medial patellar luxa-
The implant design prevents rotation and trans-
tion, angular limb deformity, and severe muscle
lation of the surfaces but the construct is not fully
contracture following a gunshot injury. Standard
constrained, so as to reduce stress at the bone-
femoral and tibial components were augmented
implant interface.
by a titanium implant stabilized by a stem
The surface of the femoral component in contact
cemented into the medullary cavity of the femur.
with the bone is covered with three layers of CoCr
 The procedure resulted in a greatly improved
beads and bone ingrowth is expected to occur
ROM in the stifle joint and the patient returned to
to achieve permanent fixation of the implant.
full  activity  following  intensive  rehabilitation
The UHMWPE tibial component is secured with
(Liska et al. 2007).
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) bone cement
Allen et al. described the use of a cemented TKR
(Figure 10.1).
system in 24 purpose-bred dogs followed up to 52
the articulation was not thought to be optimal for
Indications for TKR
long-term implantation because it was noted that
6 out of 24 stifle joints were unstable when inter-
Osteoarthritis of the canine stifle is a common
nally and externally rotated with the joints in
reason for patient visits to primary care veterinar-
 greater than 60 degrees of flexion (Allen et al.
ians and veterinary referral centers. It can result in
2009).
severe joint disease and loss of quality of life, par-
 In 2009, Liska and Doyle published the surgical
ticularly in instances of bilateral disease.
technique and results of the use of a modular TKR
The most common cause of degenerative joint
(Canine Total Knee System, E
BioMedtrix LLC,
disease of the canine stifle is CrCL disease. The
Boonton, NJ). Six clinical patients were followed
inflammation and joint instability associated with
for 12 months after TKR implantation. These
partial or complete tear of the CrCL results in
patients had TKR surgery to relieve the symptoms
osteoarthritis with varying degrees of pathology
of end-stage osteoarthritis (Liska and Doyle 2009).
in the synovium, articular surfaces, and menisci.
injection of long-acting methylprednisolone and
hyaluronate can also be useful in alleviating
symptoms.
 Patients presented with a history of unsuccess-
ful conservative treatment may be candidates for
a TKR. The radiographs of a stifle joint of such a
patient are shown before surgery in Figure 10.2
and then after a TKR in Figure 10.3.
Preoperative considerations
Arriving at the decision to recommend a TKR
 should be based on a detailed history. Concurent
medical, neurological, or musculoskeletal issues
-nrd u as  jo ssans a iredu 
lar, a complete review of prior treatment of the
stifle joint in question is essential. This component
of the history is generally more significant with
TKR compared with THR. Patients evaluated for
sum uasad on ro d a u p
many patients presented with severe stifle osteo-
Figure 10.1  The CoCr femoral component and the
arthritis frequently had surgical intervention on
monoblock UHMwPE tibial component. (Courtesy of
the stifle. Prior surgical intervention increases the
BioMedtrix LLC, Boonton, NJ)
risk of infection after TKR (Peersman et al. 2001).
Because CrCL disease is the most common
Left untreated, and sometimes despite conserva-
cause of stifle osteoarthritis, a large number of
tive and or surgical management, the end result
 patients being considered for a TKR will have had
can be a degree of joint disease that limits the
 previous surgical procedures performed that have
patient's use of the limb and interferes with the
 not resulted in the desired long-term results. These
ability to work or to enjoy day-to-day activities.
 procedures could include arthroscopy and/or the
Other conditions that can result in osteoarthritis in
 insertion of implants such as the crimps and non-
the stifle include injuries to the collateral liga-
 absorbable materials used in a variety of extracap-
ments or menisci, the osteochondroses (e.g., osteo-
sular stabilization techniques or the metallic
chondritis dissecans), avulsion of the tendon of
 implants inserted during a tibial plateau leveling
origin of the long digital extensor (LDE) muscle
 osteotomy (TPLO) or a tibial tuberosity advance-
from the lateral femoral condyle, fractures, luxa-
ment (TTA) or similar procedure.
ton of the patella, and femoral and or tibial
 If there have been repeated surgical attempts to
deformities.
stabilize a CrCL-deficient joint, then there is an
If the osteoarthritis is too advanced for manage-
 increased likelihood of infection being present, in
ment of the primary etiology to be successful, or
addition to the presence of severely inflamed bone
if treatment fails and the osteoarthritis becomes
 and periarticular tissues. The radiographs shown
the most significant problem, then the goals of
in]
Figure10.4i
illustrate severe osteoarthritis
treatment are relief of pain and restoration of
despite a TPLO procedure in one patient and, in
weight bearing ability, ROM, and muscle mass.
the other, after multiple attempts at extracapsular
Conservative management with analgesics, non-
stabilization.
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, chondropro-
 Surgery may also have been performed to repair
tectants, acupuncture, shockwave therapy, or
 fractures and collateral ligaments or to manage
physical therapy is often helpful. Intra-articular
osteochondrosis. Luxation of the patella and
Clinical Application of Total Knee Replacement 155
B
Figure 10.2 Preoperative radiographs of a canine stifle joint with severe degenerative joint disease.
A
component and a cemented tibial component. (A) The CaCr view shows the condyles of the femoral component aligned
with the cut surface of the tibia. (B) The lateral view demonstrates the slope of the cut surface of the tibia, bone cement
around the keel of the tibial component, and the femoral component impacted onto the four ostectomy sites.
deformities of the femur or tibia often are present
 affected joint replaced. However, management
when patients are presented for evaluation for
during the immediate postoperative period may
a TKR.
be more difficult and consideration should be
 Many patients will have problems in other joints
given to this issue when plarming short-term and
of the fore and hind limbs. These problems are
long-term rehabilitation.
rarely a contraindication to performing a TKR
As well as the usual preanesthetic medical eval-
uation, it is accepted practice to obtain a urine
Figure 10.4 Mediolateral radiograph of the left stifle (A) and CaCr radiograph of the right stifle (B) of a dog that had a tibial
plateau leveling osteotomy on one stifle (A) and extracapsular suture stabilization on the other stifle (B). Severe osteoarthritis
is present, despite tibial plateau leveling (A) or extracapsular suture stabilization (B). The presence of implants necessitates
staged procedures to reduce the risk of bacterial infection.
culture, and synovial fluid aspiration for cytology.
All radiographs should include a magnification
culture, and antibiotic sensitivity.
marker. Acetate templates are placed over the
radiographs to assess the implant sizes to be used.
As will be described later, final decisions regard-
Staging
ing the sizes are made using trial implants, but
If any implants, such as plates, screws, crimps, or
important with regard to the femoral component
nonabsorbable sutures are present, these should
because, once the femur is prepared, the only
 -no pue ampasoid jenui ue Sump paaouan aq
change possible is to remove more bone and use
tures obtained from the tissues and the implants.
 a smaller femoral implant (Figure 10.5).
If an infection is detected, the TKR should be
The current canine total knee system has
delayed until repeated cultures obtained by fine-
femoral components ranging in size from 30 to
needle aspiration of tissues and fluid show that
42mm, in 2-mm increments, and tibial compo-
the infection is resolved.
nents ranging in size from 30 to 38 mm, also in
2-mm increments. These sizes of implants are
Implant selection
above 18kg. The author's series of dogs undergo-
ing TKR range in weight from 18 to 80kg. It
Radiographs of the stifle joint are obtained as
is important to note the femoral and tibial
follows:
components do not have to be matching in
size (e.g., a 36-mm femoral component will have
1.
Mediolateral (M-L) view with the stifle joint
a satisfactory articulation with a 30-mm tibial
flexed to 90 degrees and the hock rotated
component).
slightly to ensure that the femoral condyles
are superimposed.
2.
A true caudocranial (CaCr) view of the stifle
Surgical procedure
with the patella centered in the trochlear
groove.
The following is an outline of the procedure
Additional views may be necessary if there are
described in detail by other authors (Allen et al.
bony deformities that will need correcting
2009; Liska and Doyle 2009), with modifications
during the procedure.
that are based on the author's experience.
Clinical Application of Total Knee Replacement 157
Size
mm
ERLIN
The patient is placed in dorsal recumbency and
slope to the proximal tibial surface of approxi-
positioned to allow free movement of the hip and
 mately 6 degrees (Figure 10.7). Vasculature caudal
stifle, such that when the stifle is fully flexed the
 to the stifle joint is protected by full flexion of the
hock is close to the end of the table. Iodine-
joint and the use of an instrument such as a
impregnated adhesive film is used to cover all
Hohmarm retractor to create cranial tibial transla-
exposed skin and intravenous antibiotics are
tion. The collateral ligaments and SPT are pro-
administered during the procedure. The joint can
tected with retractors and an oscillating saw is
a pue Aerael ro Aiepau iaa pauoeoidde aq
used to expose cancellous and cortical bone to the
patella is luxated and flipped to lock it in position
level of the caudal osteochondral junction (Figure
to fully expose the distal femur and tibial plateau.
10.8). A keel-less tibial trial is used to ensure that
The bursa between the tibia and straight patellar
the final implant will have maximum peripheral
tendon (SPT) is opened and the menisci and cruci-
cortical bone support and will fit in a centralized
ate ligaments are excised, leaving a small tag of
position caudal to the SPT. There is often an over-
meniscus attached to the medial collateral liga-
hang of the implant at the point where the LDE
 ment to facilitate identification and protection.
passes over the tibial plateau.
The tibial plateau is further exposed by elevating
The author delays further preparation of the
the joint capsule and periarticular tissues from the
tibia until the femoral ostectomies have been com-
edges of the tibial plateau (Figure 10.6).
pleted and the femoral trial and tibial trial implants
An  extramedullary tibial  alignment guide
can be used in concert to assure that final align-
(ETAG) is attached and positioned to obtain a final
 ment is satisfactory.
158 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Figure 10.6E
Exposure of the tibial plateau after removal of
the cruciate ligaments and menisci. A large Hohmann
retractor translates the tibia craniad and a small Hohmann
retractor protects the medial collateral ligament. (Courtesy
Figure 10.8 The tibial plateau has been removed and
of Dr. Christopher Preston)
cancellous and cortical bone exposed. (Courtesy of Dr.
Christopher Preston)
Figure 10.7  The extramedullary tibial alignment guide
(ETAG) positioned to control the ostectomy of the tibial
plateau. (Courtesy of BioMedtrix LLC, Boonton, NJ)
Figure 10.9 Femoral cutting block (FCB) positioned to
guide the four femoral ostectomies. (Courtesy of BioMedtrix
The femoral cutting block (FCB) is centered on
LLC, Boonton, NJ)
the distal femur using two reference points: first,
the middle of the trochlear groove adjacent to the
is parallel to the cut surface of the tibia and then
origin of the LDE; and second, the middle of the
it is attached with fixation pins. The FCB has four
most proximal extent of the trochlear groove
slots through which an oscillating saw blade is
(Figures 10.9 and 10.10). Minor adjustments in
inserted to make ostectomies in the sequence of
position may be necessary to ensure that the FCB
cranial, caudal, distal, and cranioproximal. All cut
Clinical Application of Total Knee Replacement 159
Figure 10.11  The trial femoral and tibial components are
in place and a 5-mm-thick trial tibial component is being
Figure 10.10 The FCB in place showing the fixation pins,
inserted. The articular surface of the patella can be seen
the datum hole in the FCB, and the slot for directing the
medial to the ridge of the trochlea. The patella has been
oscillating saw during the resection of the distal portion of
flipped to increase exposure of the joint surfaces. (Courtesy
the femoral condyles. (Courtesy of Dr. Christopher Preston)
of Dr. Christopher Preston)
surfaces will be in contact with the beaded surface
When satisfactory alignment between the com-
of the femoral component and precision is critical.
ponents has been attained, the trial femoral com-
 go ,a, t aq mos aa 'ss
ponent is removed. The tibia is prepared by
 blade during cuting and the blade used must be
drilling and reaming to accept the keel and 2-mm-
0.9mm in thickness for a precise fit in the slots.
diameter holes are drilled in the tibial plateau as
Prior to removal of the FCB, a hole is drilled into
 peg holes for the PMMA cement.
the bone at the datum hole on the FCB. This will
To assess the correct thickness of the tibial com-
allow accurate positioning if the use of a smaller
ponent, the metal form is placed on the tibial
femoral component than the size selected during
plateau with the peg inserted into the hole pre-
 preoperative measurements becomes necessary.
 pared for the final implant. With the trial femoral
 Trial femoral and tibial components are used to
component in place, 5-, 7-, or 9-mm-thick tibial
make a final selection of the implants to be used
plateau trials are inserted into the metal form
and to evaluate positioning. The selected femoral
(Figure 10.11).
trial implant is impacted into place and the bone-
The correct choice of thickness of the tibial trial
implant interface checked for satisfactory contact.
will allow a full ROM without medial or lateral
The keel-less tibial trial is placed as before to
instability. Instability is assessed by attempting to
obtain maximum cortical contact and the articula-
a am Aena pue Aa uf a ,uado,
tion between the femoral and tibial components
joint is held in extension and by attempting to
assessed. If the femoral condyles are not accu-
translate the tibia relative to the femur in the M-L
rately centered on the tibial component, the
and a craniocaudal planes.
femoral component can be reapplied slightly
 If full flexion is inhibited by collateral ligament
medial or lateral to the previous position. Alterna-
tightmess with the thinnest (5 mm) tibial trial in
tively, the tibial component can be similarly repo-
place, then a smaller femoral component will be
sitioned, but it is important to maintain cortical
necessary. A further 2mm of bone is removed at
bone support for the tibial component and there
the caudal femoral ostectomy. To achieve this, an
may not be much latitude for adjusting the posi-
FCB one size smaller than that previously used
tion of this component.
is positioned with the first fixation pin passing
Figure 10.12 Use of the trial femoral prosthesis to drill the
femur to accommodate the peg on the femoral component.
(Courtesy of BioMedtrix LLC, Boonton, NJ)
Figure 10.13  Implantation of the femoral component
using the femoral impactor. Note the peg on the proximal
through the datum hole drilled during fixation of
aspect of the femoral component. (Courtesy of BioMedtrix
LLC, Boonton, NJ)
the original FCB. This ensures that the smaller
implant will fit precisely to all ostectomy sites.
When satisfied with the joint stability, ROM,
and accuracy of fit of the femoral component, the
final step in preparation is to drill a hole through
Results
a guide placed in the centrally located hole in the
femoral trial. This hole will accept the peg of the
As described in the "Historical Perspectives"
final implant (Figure 10.12). The selected tibial
section of this chapter, Liska and Doyle published
implant is cemented into place using current-
a study describing six clinical patients followed
 generation cementing techniques (see Chapter 5)
for 12 months after surgery (Liska and Doyle
and then the femoral component is impacted on
2009). This objective study confirmed the subjec-
to the distal femur (Figure 10.13). Care is taken to
tive assessment of sigrificant improvement to
attain maximum contact between the bone and the
almost normal use of the legs despite severe pre-
operative osteoarthritis.
excess cement, the patella is repositioned and the
soft tissues closed.
Complications
Postoperative radiographs
The most significant complications in the author's
experience and as reported in personal communi-
Lateral and CaCr views are obtained and the
cations from Dr. William Liska and Dr. Christo-
implants assessed for femoral bone contact, the
pher Preston are infection and damage to the
caudal slope of the tibial plateau relative to the
collateral ligaments.?4
long axis of the tibia, and, in the CaCr view, overall
Infection is catastrophic if it cannot be controlled
alignment of the implants (Figure 10.3)
with appropriate antibiotics. Implant removal
Cold packing and gentle physical
1therapy
may have to be considered if the infection carnot
begins immediately and the patients are usually
be resolved and temporary stability of the decon-
discharged 2 days after surgery with detailed
structed joint with external skeletal fixation would
instructions for home-based and clinic-based
then be necessary while attempting to manage the
rehabilitation.
infection prior to reimplantation or arthrodesis.
       
This complicated and unpredictable staged treat-
following the TKR and was treated successfully in
ment makes amputation the more likely scenario
a similar manner.
following unresolved infection of a TKR. It canmot
be overemphasized that, if a patient selected for
TKR has implants in place from previous surgical
Future directions
 procedures, implants must be removed and bacte-
rial cultures collected before undertaking the TKR.
As experience is gained with the technique, and if
Either of the collateral ligaments can be damaged
clinical outcomes continue to be encouraging, then
during the TKR procedure, usually during the
it is probable that TKR will come to be used earlier
ostectomy of the proximal tibia. Every effort
in the course of the development of osteoarthritis.
should be made to protect the collateral ligaments
TKR may also be used to correct skeletal abnor-
 and it should be noted that the oscillating edges
malities that may be the cause or result of severe
of the saw blade can be as damaging to the soff
joint disease. Illustrated in Figure 10.14 is a patient
tissues as the cutting end. The amount of bone
  j  q s a  
removed during the tibial and femoral ostectomies
aspect of the stiflejoint and a subsequent malalign-
results in significant instability due to decreased
ment of the long axis of the femur and tibia. This
ligament tension, even without damage to the col-
was corrected by ostectomy of 15mm from the
 lateral ligaments, and assessment of actual liga-
distal medial femoral condyle prior to placement
mentous integrity is made during the evaluation
of the FCB and the tibial ostectomy being made
with the trial implants.
below the collapsed plateau. The result is align-
 If the joint space can be opened medially
or
ment of the tibial axis and the femoral axis, and
laterally with appropriately sized implants
in
this patient recovered to full use of the leg in
place, then ligamentous (
damage has likely
agility work.
Aq pajioddns aq pmous juio! au pue paimooo
Since the Canine Total Knee system (BioMedtrix
ligament repair or reconstruction using a suitable
 LLC) has been in use in a number of veterinary
material attached to the femur and tibia with bone
centers throughout the world, reports from per-
anchiors or screws and spiked washers.
sonal commurications indicate that data is accu-
 The author has used ligament reconstruction
mulating to support the continued use of TKR
successfully in one patient that had obvious
as a viable method of treating canine stifle joint
 medial collateral ligament instability detected
disease, and it is anticipated that objective data
during the TKR procedure. A second patient
will accumulate to guide the use and development
developed  medial joint  instability
1month
of the technique.
Collapseof tibialplateau
Figure 10.14 Pre- and postoperative radiographs illustrating correction of malalignment of the axis of the femur and the
tibia following collapse of the lateral tibial plateau.
162
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Endnotes
Freeman MAR, Swanson SAV, Todd RC. Total replace-
 ment of the knee using the Freeman-Swanson knee
 prosthesis. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1973,94:153-170.
1. DeFrances CJ, Hall MJ. National Hospital Discharge
 Survey. U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
Gunston FH. Polycentric knee arthroplasty: Prosthetic
simulation of normal knee movement. J Bone Joint
vices, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
National Center for Health and Human Statistics,
Surg Br 1971;53:272-277.
Liska W, Doyle N. Canine total knee replacement:
2009.
 2. Turmer T. Personal communication, 2011.
 Surgical technique and 1 year outcome. Vet Surg
2009;38:568-582.
3. Liska B. Personal communication, 2011.
 Liska W, Marcellin-Little D, Eskelinen E, et al. Custom
4. Preston C. Personal communication, 2011.
total knee replacement in a dog with fermoral condyle
loss. Vet Surg 2007;36:293-301.
Peersman G, Laskin R, Davis J, et al. Infection in
total knee replacement: A retrospective review of
References
 6489 total knee replacements. Clin Orthop Relat Res 
2001;392:15-23.
Allen MJ, Leone KA, Lamonte K, et al. Cemented total
Ranawat CS, and Shine JJ. Duo-Condylar total knee
knee replacement in 24 dogs: Surgical technique,
arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Rel Res 1973;94:185-193.
clinical results and complications. Vet Surg 2009;38:
Turner TM, Urban RM, Sumner DR, et al. Bone ingrowth
555-567.
into the tibial component of a canine total knee
Brown JE, McCaw WH, Shaw DT. Use of cutis as an
replacement prosthesis. J Orthop Res 1989;7:893-901.
interposing membrane in arthroplasty of the knee.
Verneuil A. De la création d'une fausse articulation par
 J Bone Joint Surg Am 1958;40:1003-1018.
section ou resection partielle de los maxillaire
Deburge A, Aubriot JH, Genet JP. Current status
inferieur, comme moyen de remédier a l'ankylose
of a hinge prosthesis. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1979;145:
vraie ou fausse de la machoire inferieure. Arch Gén
91-93.
Med 1860;15(Sec 5):174, 284-288.
Eynon-Lewis NJ, Pearse MF, Ferry D. Themistocles
Walker PS, Nunamaker D, Huiskes R, et al. A new
Gluck: An unrecognized genius. Br Med J 1992;305:
approach to the fixation of a metacarpophalangeal
1534-1536.
 joint prosthesis. Eng Med 1983;12(3):135-140.
11
Biomechanical Considerations in
Total Elbow Development
Greg Van Der Meulen
History of total elbow replacements
ultimately arriving at a three-component semicon-
strained system, but was never able to achieve
The elbow, a complex trochleoginglymoid joint
repeatable success(Figure 11.2). Conzemius began
encompassing three articulations, is an inherently
dinical testing on a cemented two-component
difficult joint to replicate. The limited success of
semiconstrained design (lowa State Elbow), which
conservative management and arthroscopic sur-
fused the radius and ulna, in an attempt to reduce
geries to treat end-stage elbow osteoarthritis (OA)
the joint to a simple hinge. In 1998, Conzemius
has stimulated a genuine interest in the develop-
reported positive results on the use of this system
ment of a total elbow replacement (TER) over the
in six normal dogs (Conzemius and Aper 1998),
last 20 years.
and then, 2 years later, on 20 dogs afflicted with
The first TER implants used in custom clinical
naturally occurring OA (Conzemius et al. 2001).3
cases tended to be fully constrained (i.e., hinged)
In 2003, Cook also explored the potential of a two-
cemented designs with little to no success. The
component desigm using a transolecranon surgical
early 1990s brought about the first attempts at
 ssasns ou oi a eu aem ie yedde
developing a TER to treat end-stage OA. BioMed-
clinical cases.* In 2005, after further refinement, the
trix (Boonton, NJ) began research and develop-
Iowa State Elbow became the first commercially
 ment into a cemented three-component resurfacing
available TER, offered through BioMedtrix (Figure
design that was then passed on to Vasseur (Uni-
11.3). In 2008, Acker and Van Der Meulen reported
versity of Califomia—Davis; Figure 11.1). Ulti-
satisfactory results on a biologically fixed two-
mately, this implant design did not proceed into
component system, known as the TATE ElbowTM,
clinical trials due to an inability to biomechani-
On six clinical cases with end-stage elbow OA.$
cally aligm all three components during prelimi-
This system was also licensed to BioMedtrix
 nary testing.' In 1996, Lewis reported on the use
and was released in 2009 to a select group of sur-
 of a cemented hinge design in 10 clinical cases,
geons for further review. The TATE is commer
which had little success.? Lewis continued to
cially available and a second-generation implant
revise his design throughout the late 1990s,
 has been introduced, focusing on improved
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
163
Figure 11.2  Lewis's third-generation semiconstrained
Figure 11.1  Chris Sidebotham (president of BioMedtrix
three-component design with a cemented UHMwPE radial
LLC) gave this TER to Vasseur in the early 1990s. Unfortu-
head in order to retain pronation and supination. The
nately neither group was able to attain a satisfactory result
radioulnar component was attached much like a standard
due to an inability to biomechanically align all three
bone plate. (Courtesy of Dr. Loic M. Déjardin)
components, and as a result the project was discontinued.
(Courtesy of Chris Sidebotham)
osseointegration  through  an  improved  bone-
multicenter clinical study’ and is now commer
mgrowth surface and a reduction in articular con-
 cially available. Another medial umicompartmen-
straints (Figure 11.4). A two-component system
tal system is currently under development by
developed by Innes, known as the Sirius Elbow,
 Wendelburg and Tepic and is also undergoing
uses a hybrid fixation system. The Sirius Elbow
clinical testing.*
uses both cement and biological fixation for the
humeral component and screw fixation with bio-
lbgical apposition surfaces for the radioulnar
Chapter overview
component.
As our understanding of OA in the elbow has
 The purpose of this chapter is to provide a founda-
advanced, attempts have been made to develop
tion of the anatomy, biomechanics, and implant
medial  umicompartmental  replacements  in  an 
desigm principles to better understand TERs. The
attempt to deter the progression of OA. Cook and
 anatomy is briefly reviewed, including the osteol-
Schulz, working with Arthrex, developed the
ogy of the distal humerus, proximal radius, and
Canine Unicompartmental Elbow (CUE), which
ulna, the ligamentous structures, the surrounding
functions much like an Osteochondral Autograft
musculature, and pertinent nerves and vascula-
Transfer System (OATS), but with metal and
ture. The anatomical review is followed by an
polyethylene implants substituted for osteochon-
overview of our current understanding of the bio-
      
mechanics of the elbow and the transarticular
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Elbow Development 165
Figure 11.4  The second-generation TATE EIbowim implant 
components: the humeral component, the radioulnar
component, and the set plate insert as a single unit, or
"cartridge," simultaneously. The set plate, in blue, is
removed after insertion, allowing the joint to articulate.
Figure 11.3 The fifth-generation of the lowa State implant
shows the addition of sintered beads to the medial and
lateral surfaces of the humeral component in place of
Cement pockets.
forces. In addition, a review of the common surgi-
The distal humerus
 cal approaches used for elbow replacements are
discussed as they pertain to the necessary expo-
The humeral condyle essentially consists of the
sure of the elbow joint for establishing a repeat-
diaphysis splitting into two bony columns that
able, accurate surgical technique. This knowledge 
 support the humeral articular surfaces. The sagit-
base is the foundation for the discussion of estab-
tally circular humeral articular surface may be
lishing the basic design principles for succesful
further described as two distinct surfaces. The
elbow replacement.
 capitulum, which includes the nearly spherical
lateral articular surface, and the trochlea, a pulley-
shaped surface located medially. The humeral
The elbow: Anatomy
 capitulum articulates with theradial head, forming
the humeroradial joint. The humeral trochlea
The elbow is a complex trochleoginglymoid syno-
articulates with the trochlear notch of the ulna,
vial joint encompassing the articular surfaces of
forming the primary articulation of the elbow, the
the distal portion of the humerus, the proximal
humeroulnar joint, an inherently stable hinge
portion of the radius, and the proximal portion of
joint. The lateral epicondyle, located caudolateral
the ulna. It comprises the humeroulnar, humero-
to the capitulum, is the origin of the extensor
radial, and radioulnar articulations. Flexion and
muscle group (functionally referred to as the
extension is the primary fumction of the humeroul-
extensor epicondyle) and the proximal end of the
nar joint, while pronation and supination occur
lateral collateral ligament (LCL). The medial epi-
primarily at the humeroradial and the radioulnar
condyle gives origin to the flexor muscle group
joints (Figure 11.5).
in addition to the proximal end of the medial
166Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Mumerus
Radlial Fossa
Olecranon Fossa
SupracondylarForamen
AnconealProcess
Trochlear Notch
Lateral Epicondyle
Radial Head
Medial Epicondyle
Radial Neck
Trochlea
Capitulum
Olecranon
Medial Coronoid
Ulna
Radius
Lateral Coronoid
Figure 11.5 Cranial and lateral views of the elbow joint, showing anatomical structures pertinent to an implant designer.
collateral ligament. Although the medial and
aspect of the radial head, is the articular surface
lateral epicondyles are not coincident with the
that articulates against the radial notch of the ulna
central axis of rotation, an important reference
forming the radioulnar joint. The radioulnar joint,
with some implant designs, they are commonly
which allows pronation and supination, previ-
used as anatomical references during surgery. Cra-
 ously has been thought to provide very little to the
nially and caudally, there are two fossae, the radial
overall function of the elbow and has therefore led
fossa, which accepts the radial head while in deep
to the fusion of this joint in an effort to simplify
flexion, and the olecranon fossa, which accepts the
implants and surgical techniques. The radial head
anconeal process of the ulna when the joint is in
has a bulbous protuberance that extends laterally
extension. The radial and olecranon fossa partially
 and does not have any muscular or ligamentous
overlap, creating the supratrochlear foramen and
attachments, but does function as a visual refer-
thus the separation of the humeral shaft into the
ence for some surgical techniques. The radial
aforementioned two bony columns.
tuberosity, which is located along the medial
 aspect of the radius just distal to the radial neck,
is a roughened area that functions as an insertion
The radius
point for the biceps brachii and the brachialis
muscles.
The proximal portion of the radius consists of the
radial head, which is an irregular semicircular
shape in the transverse plane, and quickly tapers
The ulna
distally, forming the radial neck. The articular
surface has a slightly concave surface that func-
The proximal portion of the ulna, unlike its human
tionally mirrors that of the humeral capitulum and
equivalent, has a large olecranon that extends
thus forms the aforementioned humeroradial
 proximally, away from the joint surface, and func-
joint. Extending distally, along the mediocaudal
tions as a lever arm for amplifying the forces
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Elbow Development 167
generated primarily by the triceps muscle. The
Musculature
articular surface of the ulna, a semilunar notch
that faces cranially, encompasses three primary
The musculature that inserts and originates
structures: the trochlear notch, the coronoid
around the elbow can be divided into two groups:
 process, and the anconeal process. The trochlear
musculature responsible for the primary function
notch mirrors the pulley-like shape of the humeral
of the elbow (i.e., flexion and extension), located
trochlea and thus creates a highly constrained
within the brachium; and musculature that con-
articulation. The coronoid process, just distal to
trols the carpus, found in the antebrachium.
the trochlear notch, is divided into medial and
The muscles of the brachium encompass the
lateral surfaces, with the medial surface signifi-
entire humerus, except for a small exposed region
cantly more prominent. The anconeal process,
located
mediodistally.
Theprimary(
cranial
which extends cranially and makes up the proxi-
muscles, responsible for flexion of the elbow, are
mal articular surface, inserts into the olecranon
the biceps brachi and the brachialis. The biceps
fossa and supratrochlear foramen of the humerus
brachii tendon of insertion divides distally into
when the elbow is in extension.
two distinct branches attaching to the previously
mentioned radial and ulnar tuberosities. The bra-
chialis tendon of insertion travels between the
branches of the biceps brachii tendons and inserts
Ligaments
at the ulnar tuberosity. The primary extensor
muscles of the brachium are the triceps brachii
The healthy elbow is a very stable joint not only
and the anconeus. The triceps muscle, located
because of the high congruency of its articular sur-
caudal to the humerus, has four separate heads:
faces but also because of the surrounding ligamen-
the lateral, long, medial, and accessory heads that
tous structures and joint capsule. The elbow has
share a common insertion along the most proxi-
two collateral ligaments, one medial and one
mal edge of the olecranon process. The anconeus
lateral, that each originate proximally to either
 muscle originates primarily along the caudal edge
epicondyle and divide into two crura just distal to
of the lateral epicondyle; however, the origin con-
the armular ligament where they insert on the
tinues proximally and medially over the perimeter
radius and ulna. Within the cranial aspect of the
of the supratrochlear foramen along the caudal
elbow resides the arnular ligament. It lies deep to
edge of the medial epicondyle as well. The anco-
the collateral ligaments, attaches to the medial and
neus inserts along the cranial and lateral surfaces
lateral extremities of the radial notch, and wraps
of the proximal ulna.
around the radial head. Attaching proximally to
The muscles of the antebrachium, although
the armular ligament, along the dorsal edge of the
 numerous, have few attachment points that need
supratrochlear foramen of the humerus and cross-
to be considered when evaluating an elbow
ing the flexor surface of the elbow, in a distomedial
replacement. Medially, the primary flexor group
direction, is the oblique ligament. At the point that
attaches to the distal surface of the epicondyle.
the oblique ligament crosses the annular ligament,
The pronator teres, responsible for flexion of the
the oblique ligament divides into two
0separate
carpus and pronation of the elbow, originates at
branches. The shorter of the two branches blends
the tip of the medial epicondyle. The extensor
with the cranial branch of the medial collateral
 muscle group and the supinator muscle arise from
ligament and the longer branch attaches to the
the lateral epicondyle of the humerus, with the
medial edge of the radius, after looping around
 origin of the extensor carpi radialis extending
the tendons of the biceps brachi and brachialis.
proximally along the lateral aspect of the humerus.
The caudally located olecranon ligament attaches
The supinator extends distally, inserting on the
to the caudolateral ridge of the lateral epicondyle
craniolateral surface of the radius, distal to the
and into the olecranon fossa and distally to the
radial head. The proximal portion of the ulna has
distolateral margin of anconeal process. The func-
two ancillary muscle origins that should be con-
tion of the olecranon ligament is to prevent elbow
sidered: the flexor carpi ulnaris, located along the
hyperflexion.
medial concave surface and caudal aspect of the
 olecranon; and the ulnar origin of the deep digital
goniometric study, is 36 ± 2 degrees in flexion and
flexor that extends distally down the ulnar
up to 165 ± 2 degrees in extension (Jaegger et al.
diaphysis.
2002). In addition, the elbow, measured with the
forelimb and palmar surfaces in neutral extension,
is able to supinate 50 degrees and pronate up to
Nerves and vasculature
90 degrees (Newton and Nunamaker 1985).
The use of gait analysis has led to an evolution
An understanding of the primary nerves and vas-
in the understanding of the elbow and how the
culature in the immediate vicinity of the elbow
functional ROM is utilized. Two-dimensional
joint is critical when deciding upon and perform-
 analysis of a series of clinically normal mixed-
ing a surgical exposure. The medial aspect of the
breed dogs at a walk was collected via force plat-
elbow has multiple critical structures: the ulnar
form and three-dimensional (3D) videography
nerve, the median nerve, and the median artery
(Nielsen et al. 2003). The elbow joint was at an
and vein. The ulnar nerve, which runs just cranial
angle of 112 ± 12 degrees of flexion at the point of
to the medial head of the triceps muscle, passes
 initial ground contact. After initial ground strike,
the elbow just caudal to the medial epicondyle.
the elbow extended slightly and then flexed to its
The median nerve runs parallel to the ulnar nerve
starting angle as it was loaded. It then extended
through the brachium, but diverges cranially,
steadily throughout the stance phase to a maximum
along with the median artery, just proximal to the
 angle of 136 ± 10 degrees and flexed slightly prior
elbow and crosses the joint at the flexor surface.
to liftoff.
The deep branch of the radial nerve runs along the
In order to achieve a more comprehensive
lateral aspect of the brachium. Like the median
understanding of the complexities of the canine
nerve, the deep branch transitions the elbow at the
elbow, Guillou et al. implanted radiopaque
flexor surface, but on the lateral side.
markers in the right humerus, radius, and ulna of
six adult dogs.? The dogs were then walked and
trotted on a gait analysis track equipped with a
Elbow biomechanics
dynamic radiostereometric analysis (RSA) system.
Using custom software to track the individual
Motion
reconstructions from computed tomography (CT)
The canine elbow has two degrees of freedom:
 scans, they were able to establish kinematic curves
flexion-extension and axial rotation. The range of
 of the elbow in 3D space (Figure 11.6). Through
 motion (ROM) of the elbow, established through a
the individual examination of the humerus, ulna,
Figure 11.6
After having tantalum beads implanted in the humerus, radius, and ulna, the dogs were walked and trotted on
a motion analysis track equipped with a biplanar radiographic system (left and center). This data was then merged with the
three-dimensional reconstructions of each elbow (right) and, using proprietary software, the relative motion was tracked.
(Courtesy of Dr. Reunan Guillou)
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Elbow Development 169
Table 11.1
Three-dimensional kinematics of the normal canine elbow at the walk and trot
Max
Max
Min varus during
Varus
Pronation/
 Proximal/distal translation
extension?
flexiond
midstance?
amplituded
supination
of radial head?
Walk
151.3 ± 3.94
80.6 ± 4.2a
4.9 ± 3.4a
16.6 ± 3.4
15.2 ± 4.1a
0.93 ± 0.16 mm
10.1
148.3 ± 4.5
77.1 ± 7.5a
4.8 ± 4.0
19.6 ± 3.4
17.4 ± 4.4
0.9 ± 0.16mm
Data compiled from the work of Dr. Reunan Guillou et al., Michigan State University.
*No significant difference between the walk and trot.
 and radius, the study identified sigmificant aspects
of how each bone contributes to the overall kine-
matics of the joint (Table 11.1). The varus angle
fluctuated through an ROM. Specifically, the varus
was minimal through the stance phase, at an angle
Lateral Epicondyle
of 4.9 ± 3.4 degrees, but continued to increase
Medial
through the swing phase with a varus amplitude
Epicondyle
of 16.6 ±3.4 degrees for the walk and 19.6 ± 3.4
degrees for the trot, which were not significantly
different. In addition, at the point of ground
 contact, the elbow quickly pronated: 5 degrees
Center of the Capitulum
during the walk and 8 degrees during the trot, and
Center of the Trochlee
Axis of Rotation'
returned to neutral just prior to liftoff. Entering the
Figure 11.7Axis of rotation. A cranial view of the distal
 7 degrees for both the walk and the trot, returning
humerus showing the two consistent reference points for
back to neutral just before ground strike.
establishing the axis of rotation of the elbow.
The Guillou study illustrated the subtle com-
plexities of the elbow joint. The study also dem-
joint replacements, must accurately replicate
 onstrated the challenges to be faced in the attempt
this axis in order to achieve a ROM free of con-
to achieve the natural kinematics of the joint.
flict with periarticular soft tissues. The ability
to replicate the axis is most commonly dictated
by the repeatability of the surgical technique
Axis of rotation
and how consistently a surgeon can implant the
prosthesis.
The axis of rotation of flexion-extension in the
human elbow occurs around a tight locus of points
only 2-3mm wide at the broadest dimension
Varus angle/mechanical axis deviation
(Morrey and Chao 1976). This axis can be identi-
fied at two points within the human and canine
The canine elbow, much like the human knee, has
humerus: (1) the center of the humeral trochlea
 a naturally occurring varus angulation." Saviori et
and (2) the center of the capitulum. If this axis
al. found that this angulation in the frontal plane
were to extend outside of the humerus, it would
can be evaluated by establishing the mechanical
emerge just distal and cranial to both the medial
axes of the humerus"l and radius-ulna' and mea-
and lateral epicondyles (Figure 11.7). If the canine
suring their angle of intersection at the elbow.13 In
elbow functions in a manner similar to the human
a study performed on 100 adult canine forelimbs
elbow, this axis is one of the most critical features
they found this angle, the mechanical humeral
of the biomechanics of the joint. Therefore, any
radial-ulnar angle, to be 9.0 ± 3.6 degrees (Figure
implant design concerned with the balancing 
of
11.8). When compared with the mechanical axis of
the surrounding soft tissues, specifically unlinked
the overall limb, the mechanical axis deviation
 intrinsic and extrinsic stabilizers in a healthy joint
counter this transarticular shear force and allow it
to function as normal. However, if one or more of
the stabilizers are compromised (the medial coro-
noid, LCL, etc.), then the eccentric loading of the
 joint results in an increase in transarticular forces
in the medial compartment. Over time, this
increased load could erode the articular cartilage
of the medial compartment resulting in 
an
increased varus angle and an off-loading of the
lateral compartment.
Transarticular forces
The radial head, once thought to carry "practically
all the weight transmitted from the arm to the
forearm" (Evans 1993), actually carries approxi-
mately 52% (Mason et al. 2005) of the total trans-
articular forces, thus sharing a substantial amount
with the humeroulnar articulation. This is con-
trary to initial assumptions based on the relative
limited size of the articular surface of the distal
ulnar styloid process when compared with the
distal radial articular surface. A partial under-
standing of this near-equal load sharing came
through an understanding of the human elbow.
When a compressive force is transmitted through
the hand, the majority of this load is transmitted
through the radiocarpal joint and, thus, into the
radius. As this force moves proximally—-up the
Figure 11.8  Varus angle and mechanical axis deviation
radial diaphysis—it stretches the interosseous
(MAD). The blue lines represent the three mechanical axes
membrane and transfers a portion of this compres-
of the forelimb, the red line shows the mechanical axis of
sive force to the ulna and, as a result, across the
the entire limb, the orange line represents the MAD, and
the asterisk represents the location of the varus angle
elbow at the humeroulnar joint (Figure 11.9; Pfaef-
measurement. (Courtesy of Dr. Derek B. Fox)
fle et al. 2000). This results in a nearly equalloading
 of the humeroradial and humeroulnar joints in the
human elbow when a compressive force is trans-
(MAD) is described as the shortest distance from
 mitted from the palm. Assuming the canine inter-
the mediolateral center of the articulating surface
 osseous ligament has similar function, we conclude
of the distal humerus to the limb mechanical axis.
that the humeroulnar joint is loaded in a similar
Expressed as a percentage of overall limb length,
manner.
to normalize the effect of dog size, this value was
2.6% ± 0.02%. Therefore, a dog, for example, with
a limb length of 45 cm would have a MAD mea-
Stability
surement of 12mm.
This varus angulation or MAD creates a medial
 Complete joint stability can be broken down into
to lateral shear force at the level of the elbow due
two different facets: intrinsic stability, which is
to the eccentricity of the limb mechanical axis. The
provided by the shape of the articular surfaces;
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Elbow Development 171
under increased tension. Therefore, any disrup-
tion to either of these two primary extrinsic struc-
tures could lead to instability capable of joint
luxation.
The radioulnar articulation, responsible for pro-
nation and supination, is not as intrinsically stable
as the humeroulnar articulation. The radius relies
Radius
Ulna
heavily upon extrinsic structures such as the inter-
osseous ligament and the annular ligament to
 refrain the radial head from luxating.
Surgical approaches
Over the years, the preferred surgical approach for
Radiocarpal joint-
Ulnocarpal space
an elbow replacement was through a lateral inci-
sion (i.e., Lewis, Iowa State Elbow, etc.); however,
in recent years, with the introduction of the TATE
Elbow, a medial approach has become a viable
option. This is a result of a number of factors, but
the primary reason is that most indications for an
elbow replacement start in the medial compart-
Figure 11.9 A human arm in compression, much like a
ment, with what is now referred to as medial com-
canine forelimb, transmits forces through the wrist (1) and
partment disease (MCD). Therefore, to accurately
into the distal radius, (2) proximally up the radial diaphysis
excise and replace the diseased tissue in the medial
and across the interosseous ligament, (3) into the ulna, and
compartment, the medial approach becomes the
(4) across the humeroradial and humeroulnar joints as
clear option, as it is the most direct approach to
balanced loads. (Reproduced with permission from Pfaeffle
the afflicted region.
et al. [2000l, copyright Elsevier)
The medial and lateral approaches, described
and extrinsic stability, which is provided by the
 below, are very similar but with subtle differences
periarticular soft tissues. The intrinsic stability of
Si yoeoidde lenaen au ounou ynom are ie
the elbow is substantial compared with other
easily accessed and has few critical structures
joints such as the knee or shoulder due to the
(nerves and arteries) that need to be identified and
trochlear features of the humerus and ulna. The
isolated; however, it has a number of muscular
primary extrinsic stabilizers in the elbow are
insertions in the vicinity that need to be negoti-
the medial collateral ligament, the LCL, and the
 ated. The use of a medial approach requires the
anconeal process. According to Talcott et al., when
identification and translocation of the ulnar nerve
the elbow is at 135 degrees (i.e., angle of extension
as it crosses directly over the medial aspect of the
during peak vertical force of trotting dogs), the
joint, but has no musculature covering the disto-
anconeal process, which inserts into the supra-
caudal surface of the humerus resulting in less
 trochlear foramen, is the primary rotational stabi-
muscle damage. Ultimately, due to the varus
lizer in pronation and the LCL is a primary
angulation of the elbow and its potential to
stabilizer in supination (Talcott et al. 2002).
increase as the medial compartment collapses, the
Incorporating the varus nature of the elbow, and
medial collateral ligament carries less of a load
thus the naturally occuring mediolateral shear
than the LCL. As a result, whether a desmotomy
force, it is possible to conclude that the anconeal
or an osteotomy is used to release the elbow, the
process would be the primary stabilizer in exten-
method for closing the joint and reconstructing the 
sion opposing luxation. In addition, the LCL
collateral ligament must not become the weak
would, if intrinsic stabilizers were reduced, be
link.
172
Although other surgical approaches have been
CONSTRAINT AND CONFORMITY
used for TER (i.e., transolecranon process osteot-
MAXIMUM
MINIMUM
omy, etc.), they will not be discussed here due to
the lack of postoperative success.
Figure 11.10 Like most ginglymoid joints, the elbow has a
complex articulation that can be described through varying
Design principles of TER
degrees of constraint and conformity. The image depicts
three different potential articular surfaces decreasing, from
An ideal TER is fundamentally designed to
left to right, in constraint and conformity. The first
provide the patient with a pain-free joint that kine-
articulation, which is highly constrained (A), would result in
matically and mechanically replicates the original
a high kinematic control, high surface contact minimizing
articulation. As previously mentioned, over the
wear through load distribution, and minimal soft tissue
last 20 years, multiple teams have worked
uo
accomplishing these objectives. These designs
second articulation (B) shows medium constraint and is
closer to what one might expect in an implant. It has some
have ranged from fully constrained, cemented,
kinematic restriction but allows for out-of-plane motion, has
hinged prostheses to minimally invasive, biologi-
reduced articular surface contact, and relies upon soft tissue
cally fixed, resurfacing implants. Every joint,
，in
contributions for joint stability. The third articulation (C)
this case the elbow, has its own "window of accep-
provides no kinematic restrictions and has minimal articular
tance." To fall within that window, the designer
surface contact. As a result, it would rely solely on the
must consider the following: the articular surface
surrounding soft tissue for stability and the minimal
 articular surface contact would greatly increase the
as it relates to motion and stability, possible bio-
potential for wear decreasing the life span of the implant.
materials, method of fixation, and how the implant
will interact with periarticular tissues.
implant) results in excessive interfacial stresses at
the bone-implant interfaces. Early hinged elbow
designs, in both human and canine applications,
The articulation
failed to utilize the extrinsic stabilizers, which led
to implant failure at the bone-implant interfaces
The articulation of any joint replacement is a
(Dee 1972).
complicated balance between three intertwined
 The manmer in which the articular surface con-
factors: (1) joint kinematics, (2) intrinsic stability.
 strains the motion of the joint must be done gradu-
and (3) implant wear potential. Although the
ally. As elbow motion moves through multiple
primary articulation of the elbow (i.e., flexion
planes, it is important that the articular surfaces
and extension) appears to be a simple hinge,
it
 guide this movement and, upon reaching the
is much more complex than that. Extensive
limits, engage the extrinsic stabilizers through a
research in the human field found that the elbow
 gradual tensioning in order to limit this motion.
did not rotate about a fixed axis and that slight
In contrast, abrupt limits imposed by articular
"out-of-plane" motion does occur throughout
surfaces will result in high stresses and, in the
fexion and extension (Armstrong et al. 2005).
Therefore, the articular surfaces of the implant
(UHMWPE), could lead to cold flow and wear
must either reproduce or compensate for these
debris.
 motions. This is accomplished through a compro-
 Implant fixation, either cemented or cementless,
mise between conformity—how
geometrically
is also affected by the desigm of the articular sur-
similar the two surfaces are and constraint-
faces. The articular surfaces of the two commer-
how restrictive the two surfaces are in relative
cially available implants, the Iowa and the TATE,
 motion (Figure 11.10). These features are balanced
are quite similar; however, the Iowa is more con-
with the surrounding soft tissues to further stabi-
strained in torsion than the TATE.14 As a result,
lize the joint and minimize the stresses imposed
this would theoretically lead to an increase in
on the bone-implant interfaces. Excessive articu-
stress at the bone-implant interfaces. However,
lar constraint (i.e., hinge) or misalignment of the
the Iowa, being a fully cemented implant, may be
implant and anatomical axes (i.e., malpositioned
able to tolerate these higher stresses. In contrast,
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Elbow Development 173
the TATE, which relies on biological fixation,
end-stage elbow OA, then the use of a two-
works in concert with the surrounding soft tissues
component elbow implant, requiring synostosis of
to assist in stabilizing the implant in the early
the radius and ulna, can provide a successful clini-
 post-op period. This is critical for bone ingrowth
cal result.
 and long-term stability.
Mechanical fixation
Pronation and supination
The methods for stabilizing any joint replacement
 In an attempt to simplify the implant design, the
design can be divided
Iinto two techniques:
 articulation between the radius and ulna (i.e., pro-
cemented fixation or biological fixation. The use of
nation and supination) has been eliminated in
several implant designs. The synostosis is typi-
 ing" joint replacements has existed since the 1940s
cally created by removing the radioulnar articula-
and still exists today as a proven and viable option
tion and attempting to eliminate relative motion
for fixing implant components. Biological fixation,
through placing an interosseous screw or plating.
which is the use of biocompatible materials with
In some surgical techniques, a distal ulnar ostec-
rough or porous surfaces allowing for bone appo-
tomy is performed. While there are benefits to
sition or integration, came about in the 1950s. Both
synostosis—the reduction from a three- to a two-
methods of fixation can result in a lasting stable
component design and the resulting simplification
implant, but both have potential complications.
of the surgerythere are also drawbacks. The
radioulnar articulation contributes to the overall
Cemented fixation
motion and stability of the elbow; however, this
has only recently been evaluated and defined.
Cemented fixation has been successfully used in
Based on the clinical follow-up of total elbow
canine total joint applications since the early 1970s.
patients, an elbow with a radioulnar synostosis
This fixation method is a very different model
can still achieve a functional range of flexion and
compared with biological fixation. While biologi-
extension, and therefore, the implant can still
cal fixation may take over a year to develop its
provide functional motion for daily activities.
maximum
interface
strength, the cemented
However, from a biomechanical standpoint, the
implant reaches its maximum within the first 24
hours.
Cement fixation therefore affords the
cussions of this fusion are not fully understood
patient a quick return to activity. This early return
and may potentially result in an unpredictable gait
to activity is even more beneficial in the veterinary
abnormality (i.e., lameness). Another
rpotential
field, where patient compliance to postoperative
complication arises when a synostosis fails and
care protocol is commonly neglected.
relative motion remains. Depending on implant
Although the cemented implant is typically
design, persistent relative radioulnar
motion
very stable immediately after surgery, the quality
could lead to complications. A failed synostosis
and consistency of the cement mantle will be
would result in unpredictable motion between the
tested over 
the longevity of the implant (see
radius and ulna, possibly jeopardizing osseointe-
Chapter 5).
 The cemented implant introduces
 gration and producing a fibrous bone-implant
 a unique element, the bone-cement interface,
interface.
which, like any mechanical bond under cyclic
The decision to fuse the radioulnar articulation
 loading, has a finite life expectancy. This life expec-
 is a critical decision in the implant design process
tancy is subject to a number of elements: the
and is done with the knowledge of compromising
quality and consistency of the cement mantle, the
motion for the simplification of the implant and
magnitude of stress imposed, and the number of
the surgical technique. This design approach takes
cycles. Some of the early elbow designs, which
into consideration both the patient and the surgi-
-r pa  r s ra am
cal indications. If the primary goal is to provide a
tions, ultimately failed due to the high stress levels
limb salvage technique for dogs suffering from
at the cement interfaces (i.e., cement-bone and
 cement-implant). However, as a result of moving
 periprosthetic bone. The final stage, around 1 year,
away from highly constrained articulations, the
should see no change to the surrounding bone and
longevity of cemented elbow replacements has
 any remodeling would be indicative of excessive
increased considerably. Cement has proven to
 stress shielding or implant instability (Schiller
be a consistent and reliable fixation method in
et al.1993)
implants such as the Iowa State Elbow. As a result,
The long-term success of a biologically fixed
TER systems that are still in development, such as
implant is dependent upon a number of factors:
the Sirius Elbow, are utilizing the benefits of a
the implant design (e.g., implant surface finish,
 cemented interface.
material, coatings); the surgical technique; and the
Over time, every cemented implant will loosen
host (e.g, available bone stock, age).
due to fatigue at the implant-cement interface;
The implant design, from the articular surfaces
however, depending on the implant design, this
to the surface finishes and material of the implant,
could be in months or well beyond the life expec-
 greatly affect the potential for biological fixation.
tancy of the patient.
If the articulation is too constrained and the bone-
implant interface is absorbing too much of the
transarticular stabilizing forces, a fibrous union
Biological fixation
may result as a consequence of excessive motion
A biologically fixed implant must reach a number
 in the first stage, or late failure due to insufficient
of "checkpoints" postoperatively in order to create
osseointegration. The second generation of the
 a bone-implant interface capable of lasting the life
TATE, released in 2010, has a modified polyethyl-
of the patient. Biological fixation is dependent on
ene articular surface in an attempt to reduce the
the implant itself remaining stable (<40μm of
transmission of transarticular stabilizing forces
motion) (Bragdon et al. 1996) in the first postop-
to the bone-implant interface of the radioulnar
erative stage, 0-8 weeks, for osteointegration to
 component. This modified polyethylene surface
occur. During the first 8 weeks, the implant is sta-
improves the possibility for bone ingrowth into
 aaaa o n-sand a uno pai
the radioulnar component, but it also increases the
created during insertion of the implant or by screw
potential for implant wear due to reduced articu-
fixation. In the canine recovery phase, normal
lar surface contact.
activities will typically begin during this stage, so
The location and the variety of implant surfaces
the implant stabilizers must resist normal physi-
and coatings that create the bone-implant inter
ological loads. Studies have shown that excessive
face are critical for long-term success. A smooth
 micromotion will disrupt the stroma, resulting in
surface can achieve bone apposition, but will
 a fibrous encapsulation of the implant. In order to
result in a weak bond capable of resisting minimal
sufficiently stabilize the implant in the first stage,
shear forces. An irregular surface, such as a tita-
different techniques are curently being explored
nium plasma coating or machined divots, will
for canine elbow replacements, such as screw fixa-
lead to a mechanical bond due to interdigitation
tion (e.g., Kyon) and press-fit (e.g., TATE Elbow,
 of the bone with the implant surface, resulting in
CUE). In the canine elbow, which typically experi-
an interface with greater shear strength than a
ences some load immediately after surgery, achiev-
 smooth surface. Porous surfaces, which allow for
ingthelevel ofstability required for osseointegration
bone ingrowth into the implant, are capable of
can be challenging.
.The second postoperative
 resisting even higher shear and tensile strengths
 stage, 8 weeks to 1 year, results in an adaptation
than smooth or irregular surfaces. Therefore, not
of the bone to the new distribution of loads
only the use of these finishes and coatings but also
through the bone-implant interface. The interface
their location on an implant can greatly affect the
will continue to strengthen through bone ingrowth
longevity
and strength of an osseointegrated
and remodeling until it is proportionally equal to
implant.
the interfacial stresses to which it is subjected.
The surgical technique of osseointegrative-
Ultimately, a balance of bone remodeling.
，at
dependent implants is a critical factor that can
approximately 1 year, is achieved where there is
 greatly influence the success of the implant. The
no change to the structure and density of the
optimal design will result in compression, or
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Elbow Development 175
 minimal gap (<1 mm), between the surfaces of the
Varus angle abnormality
 a pue uonexg lenrsonoiq roy paiedard juendu
bone. Any gap exceeding 1mm might result in a
The progression of elbow OA leads to substantial
des au ,apiq, louues auoq au se 'uorum snoiq
bone and soft tissue remodeling, resulting in large
prior to the primary stabilizers (e.g., screws)
osteophytic growth and extensive changes to the
failing.
kinematics of the joint. Early on, these changes
 Osseointegrative implants are fundamentally
tend to be isolated to the medial compartment due
dependent upon the regenerative capabilities of
to a number of potential dysplastic abnormalities.
the host. Biologically fixed implants have a provi-
Ultimately, as a result of medial articular cartilage
sional method for achieving the postoperative sta-
erosion, there is a resulting increase in the natu-
bility necessary to create an environment favorable
rally occurring varus angle. This varus increase
to bone ingrowth. These methods include the
compounds the osteoarthritic changes in the
 interference fit, or press-fit, between the posts and
medial compartment simultaneously off-loading
the bone as with the TATE Elbow, or by screw fixa-
the lateral compartment, forcing the trochlea to
tion in the radioulnar component as with the
function like a fulcrum. This "snapshot" of the
Sirius Elbow. Because these techniques are not
progression of elbow OA is what is now com-
desigmed to sustain the stabilizing loads for the life
monly referred to as MCD. As the disease pro-
of the patient, they need to be reinforced, or off-
gresses to end-stage elbow OA (Figure 11.11), there
loaded, through bone ingrowth. Therefore, bio-
is a "dramatic medial collapse and a laterally
logically fixed implants are better suited for
younger and healthier hosts capable of superior
  p m a
patients.
Hybrid fixation
Clearly, there are benefits to both cement fixation
and biological fixation when considering an elbow
replacement. Cement offers immediate postopera-
tive stability that is critical for the success of any
implant. However, biological fixation, with suffi-
cient bone ingrowth, should provide a dependable
interface for the life of the patient. Therefore, in an
attempt to adopt the benefits of both methods of
fixation, the Iowa and the TATE have both created
what could be described as a "hybrid" fixation
method. In the most recent generation of the Iowa,
sintered beads were added to the medial and
lateral surfaces of the humeral component. Ideally,
this would allow for bone ingrowth and slightly
off-load the cement mantle. Similarly, the TATE
Elbow was modified to have hollow, slotted posts
instead of solid posts. This provides the surgeon
viscous cement (i.e., PMMA, calcium phosphate,
etc.) into the posts and substantially improving a
less than adequate press-fit. This "hybrid" adapta-
Figure 11.11  This radiograph depicts an elbow that has
tion to the TATE facilitates the stabilization of the
undergone substantial medial compartment collapse
implant during the critical first postoperative
resulting in a significant varus deformity. (Courtesy of Dr.
stage.
Susan A Cannon from the work of Dr. Ralph H Lewis)
displaced elbow."1s This is very similar to what
it is nearly unavoidable with current implant tech-
 occurs in human knees afflicted with severe OA,
nology. The cemented stems of the Iowa State
and as a result, the angular deformity must be
Elbow are understandably reliant on a substantial
 cement mantle for implant stability; however, this
release and ligament balancing to restore the
 results in a higher potential for stress shielding of
mechanical axes of the limb (Insall et al. 1985). This
the distal humerus. Therefore, the fifth generation
is done not only to achieve the optimal biome
of this implant resulted in the addition of porous
chanics of the joint, but it is also critical to the
surfaces to the medial and lateral surfaces of the
fumction and longevity of the implant. In cases of
humeral component. Ideally, if bone ingrowth is
severe canine elbow OA where excessive varus
achieved at these interfaces, it will off-load the
deformity has occurred, it would seem logical that
cement mantle surrounding the stem and increase
the correction of this abnormal angulation would
the stress in the distal humerus, reducing the
be necessary for optimal limb function.
potential bone resorption. The TATE, which is
The two commercially available elbow systems,
reliant on bone ingrowth for stability, also has
the Iowa and the TATE, addressed this notion
 potential for stress shielding (Dejardin and Guillou
 from different perspectives. The Iowa's humeral
 2011). A biological implant interface will only be
 articular surface is perpendicular to the long axis
as strong as the stresses it is subjected to. There-
of the implant stem, resulting in an articulation
fore, the semicircular humeral component has
that is normal to the anatomical axis (i.e., the axis
high potential for shielding the subchondral bone
of the diaphysis) of the humerus. This results in a
where bone ingrowth has not occurred. Another
straight elbow without the previously described
location of potential stress shielding with the
MAD. In order to achieve this, the periarticular
TATE implant is the bone surrounding the caudal
soft tissues must be released and ligaments
post of the radioulnar component. Stress shielding
adjusted in order to balance the articulation.
is not a new phenomenon; for the most part, we
Because the TATE is a resurfacing implant, it is not
kmow how and why it occurs. Therefore, implants
dictated by the medullary cavities and therefore
can theoretically be designed to transfer stress to
has no preset angle that must be established,
optimal locations, reducing the negative impacts
straight or otherwise. The TATE allows for correc-
of stress shielding.
tion of the varus deformity intraoperatively
through realignment of the limb to the desired
varus angle prior to removal of the articular
Supratrochlear foramen
surfaces.
The supratrochlear foramen of the distal humerus
creates a unique challenge for implant design. The
Stress shielding
combination of large, concentric, articular surfaces
 and a considerable ROM result in the biological
The material properties (i.e., tensile strength,
need for the supratrochlear foramen and thus the
modulus of elasticity, etc.) of alloys commonly
twobony(
amu a uodns  smo
used in joint replacements (e.g., Ti6Al4V and
 condyle. From an implant design perspective, this
CoCrMo) are substantially greater than that of
 obstacle has been dealt with by two different tech-
bone. As a result, the natural load distribution
niques. The Iowa State Elbow uses a medullary
through the surrounding bone is reduced, which,
stem that effectively fills the supratrochlear
according to Wolff's law, leads to periprosthetic
foramen. However, in order to still retain a com-
bone resorption, or osteolysis. Depending on the
plete ROM, the caudal aspect of the humeral com-
implant design, this can lead to fracture of the sur-
ponent has what resembles a supratrochlear fossa
rounding bone or implant loosening as the bone
and the radioulnar component has a substantially
atrophies to a state unable to endure the required
abbreviated articular surface compared with the
loads.
natural joint surface (Conzemius et al. 2003). This
 A degree of stress shielding has been found to
is an effective method for retaining a full ROM,
occur with both the Iowa and TATE implants, as
but does come with potential complications. Due
Biomechanical Considerations in Total Elbow Development 177
to the removal of the anconeal process, one of the
As mentioned above, there are currently groups
joint's primary stabilizers, there is an increased
pursuing implant designs that would ideally
potential for joint luxations. The TATE, being a
replace the medial compartment and retard the
resurfacing implant, does not fill the supratroch-
 progression of OA throughout the rest of the joint.
lear foramen and therefore has a radioulnar com-
Whether this method of retardation would work
ponent that utilizes the biological foramen.
for the life of the dog will need further study, but
Although the anconeal process is still removed, the
early clinical results show promise. As the disease
radioulnar component articular surface approxi-
progresses out of the medial aspect and into the
mates a substantial amount of the natural joint
lateral compartment,
the resulting arthritic
surface; thus, it does not jeopardize joint stability.
changes dictate the need for a TER capable of
The primary drawbacks to this design approach
restoring complete function back to the joint.
are primarily confronted in the surgical technique.
Regardless of implant design and arthritic
For the implant to achieve a full ROM, it must
application, the ideal TER system would funda-
collaborate with the natural bony structures, spe-
mentally need to embody a number of features
cifically the supratrochlear foramen. Therefore,
that would optimize the life expectancy of the
accurate placement of the components must be
implant and restore the natural kinematics of the
achieved to avoid caudal impingements when
joint. The implant should be designed to facilitate
 articulated into extension. Impingements that are
a simple surgical technique that accurately allows
not dealt with intraoperatively can lead to either
for implantation, replication of the axis of rotation,
wear of the bone or, in the case of polyethylene
no detrimental effect to joint stability, and the
contact, implant wear and potential osteolysis due
capacity to achieve the kinematics necessary for
to third-body wear.
normal life. In an effort to minimize potential
bone-implant interface stresses, utilization of the
natural joint stabilizers, intrinsic and extrinsic, is
Conclusions
critical; therefore, any 1
ligamentous structures
essential to joint stability that have been compro-
Although much remains to be learned, there have
mised must be accurately and anatomically
been great strides made in establishing a better
repaired.
understanding of elbow kinematics in recent
years. With these advances will come a more suit-
able foundation for the development of prosthetic
Endnotes
implants designed to manage not only end-stage
OA but early OA (i.e., MCD) as well.
1. Sidebotham C. Personal communication, September
 Implant designs, up until the last few years,
4, 2011.
were clearly based upon a limited collective
2. Lewis RH. Development of elbow arthroplasty
kmowledge of the biomechanics and kinematics of
(canine) clinical trials. In: Proceedings of the 6th
the elbow. As a result, prosthetic implants were
Annual ACVS Symposium. San Francisco, CA, 1996.
desigmned to achieve no more than basic function
3. Conzemius MG. Total elbow replacement in the
(i.e., flexion and extension) and, at best, possibly
dog—Development and evaluation. PhD disserta-
tion, Iowa State University, 2000.
"salvage" a limb. However, the addition of recent
4.
Cook JL, Lower J. Elbow arthroplasty system. Patent
kinematic studies and future research will lead to
US007419507B2. USA, The Curators of the Univer-
an implant design and surgical technique capable
sity of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 2008.
of restoring all levels of function to the canine
5. Acker R, Van Der Meulen G. Resurfacing arthro-
patient.
plasty of the canine elbow. In: Proceedings of the 34th
 Ultimately, the ideal elbow implant may not be
Annual Veterinary Orthopedic Society Conference.Sun
jeanl oh pauisap waisks e inq suendu anus e
Valley, ID, 2007, p. 55.
6.1
 Innes J. Personal communication, August 10, 2011.
the dramatically different stages of OA. Due to
7. Schulz KS, Cook JL, Karmes J. Canine unicompart-
the way in which the elbow isolates the disease
mental elbow arthroplasty system. In: Proceedings of
to the medial compartment early on, a manner of
the Arrual ACVS Symposium. Chicago, IL, Novem
intervention at this juncture would be welcome.
ber 15, 2011.
178 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
8. Wendelburg K. Personal communication, November
Conzemius MG, Aper RL. Development and evaluation
4, 2011.
of semiconstrained arthroplasty for the treatment of
9. Guillou RP, Dejardin LM, McDonald C, et al. Three
elbow osteoarthritis in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop
dimensional kinematics of the normal canine elbow
Traumatol 1998;11:54A.
at the walk and trot. In: Proceedings of the 39th Arrual
Conzemius MG, Aper RL, Hill CM. Evaluation of a
Veterinary Orthopedic Society Conference. Crested
canine total-elbow arthroplasty system: A preliminary
Butte, CO, March 3-10, 2012.
study in normal dogs. Vet Surg 2001;30:11-20.
10. Lewis RH. Elbow arthroplasty replacement course
Conzemius MG, Aper RL, Corti LB. Short-term outcome
notebook. Elbow Course, Diagnostic Osteonecrosis
after total elbow arthroplasty in dogs with severe,
Center and Research Foundation, Lakeport, CA,
naturally occurring osteoarthritis. Vet Surg 2003;32:
2003.
545-552.
11. Wood MC, Fox DB, Tomlinson JL, et al. Determina-
Dee R. Total replacement arthroplasty of the elbow for
tion of the mechanical axes and joint orientation
rheumatoid arthritis. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1972;54(1):
lines in the canine humerus: A radiographic cadav.
88-95.
eric study. In: Proceedings of the 38th Annuat Veteri-
Dejardin LM, Guillou RP. Total elbow replacement in
nary Orthopedic Society Conference. Snowmass, CO,
dogs in veterinary surgery. In: Small Anirmal Surgery,
March 5-12, 2011.
Tobias KM, Spencer JA (eds.). St. Louis, MO: Saun-
12. Fasanella FJ, Tomlinson JL, Welihozkiy A, et al.
ders, 2011, pp. 752-759.
Radiographic measurements of the axes and joint
Evans HE. The skeleton. In: Miler's Anatomy of the Dog,
angles of the canine radius and ulna. In: Proceedings
3rd ed., Evans HE (ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders, 1993,
of the 37th AnnualVeterinary OrthopedicSociety Con
Pp. 122-218.
ference. Breckenridge, CO, March 4-9, 2010.
Insall JN, Binazzi R, Soudy M, et al. Total knee arthro-
13. Saviori CM, Fox DB, Flynn P. Determination of the
 plasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1985;192:13-22.
thoracic limb mechanical axis in the dog: A cadav-
 Jaegger G, Marcellin-Little DJ, Levine D. Reliability of
eric radiographic study in the frontal plane. In: Pro-
goniometry in Labrador retrievers. Am J Vet Res
ceedings of the 36th Annual Veterinary Orthopedic
2002;63:979-986.
Society Conference. Steamboat, CO, March 1-6, 2009.
Mason DR, Schulz KS, Fujita Y, et al. In vitro force
14. Dejardin LM, Guillou RP. Total elbow replacement
mapping of normal canine humeroradial and humer-
continues to produce good results. Internal Michi-
oulnar joints. Am J Vet Res 2005;66:135-135.
 gan State University Publication, 2010, VTH Mes-
Morrey BF, Chao EY. Passive motion of the elbow joint.
senger, 5(4).
J Bone Joint Surg Am 1976;58:501.
15. Conzemius M. Iowa State TER. Results and compli-
Newton CD, Nunamaker DM. Appendix B: Normal
cations. In: Proceedings of the 3rd WVOC and 15th
yoogixai un ies pue sop aul u uoou jo ahue juo
ESVOT Congress. Bologna, Italy, 2010.
of Small Animal Orthopaedics, 1st ed., Newton CD,
Nunamaker DM (eds.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Wil-
liams & Willkins, 1985.
Nielsen C, Stover S, Schulz KS, et al. Two-dimensional
References
link-segment model of the forelimb of dogs at a walk.
Am JVet Res 2003;64:5.
Armstrong AD, King GJW, Yamaguchi K. Total elbow
Pfaeffle HJ, Fischer KJ, Manson TT, et al. Role of the
arthroplasty design. In: Shoulder and Etbow Arthro-
forearm interosseous ligament: Is it more than just
 plasty, vol. i, Williams GR, Yamaguchi K, Ramsey ML,
longitudinal load transfer? J Hand Surg 2000;25A:
et al. (eds.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Wiiams &
683-688.
Wilkins, 2005, pp. 297-312.
Schiller TD, DeYoung DJ, Schiller RA, et al. Quantitative
 Bragdon CR, Burke D, Lowenstein JD, et al. Differences
ingrowth analysis of a porous-coated acetabular com-
in stiffness of the interface between a cementless
ponent in a canine model. Vet Surg 1993;22:276-280.
porous implant and cancellous bone in vivo in dogs
Talcott KW, Schulz KS, Kass PH, et al. In vitro biome-
due to varying amounts of implant motion. J Arthro-
chanical study of rotational stabilizers of the canine
plasty 1996;11:945-951.
elbow joint. Am J Vet Res 2002;63:1520-1526.
12
Clinical Application of Total
Elbow Replacement in Dogs
Loic M. Déjardin, Reunan P. Guillou, and Michael Conzemius
History of canine total elbow
TATE design is, unlike previous conventional
replacement
cemented and stemmed systems, a cementless
implant designed to use a new resurfacing concept
The last two decades have seen a growing
with less aggressive bone removal and without the
interest in total elbow replacement (TER) as a
 need for elbow luxation for surgical exposure.7
salvage treatment of intractable, end-stage canine
Short-term satisfactory results in dogs affected
elbow osteoarthritis (OA). Early prostheses were
with end-stage OA led to the clinical use of this
desigmed as pure cemented hinges in the late 1980s
Apaeuxoidde u uaisap uoneraua-puoas e pue
 - 1od a zt (11 raideu aas) s0661 Aea pue
200 patients worldwide (Figure 12.1B).? In an
cal outcome associated with the use of these
 effort to preserve the kinematics of the elbow, par-
linked, fully constrained systems rapidly led to
ticularly with regard to radioulnar (RU) pronation
their demise and to a paradigm shift toward
and supination, this group is curently investigat-
- (o e pa osr) sisa  pan
ing a three-component TER (Figure 12.2D).
More recently, Innes devised a hybrid system
most early unlinked designs by Vasseur, Lewis,2
that combines resurfacing of the humeral and RU
Cook, and Conzemius (Conzemius and Aper
components with cementing of the stemmed
1998; Conzemius et al. 2001) were abandoned.
humeral component. Unlike the TATE system, the
 Iterations of an earlier design by Conzemius led
RU component is screwed into the radius and the
 to encouraging results in research dogs initially
ulna (Figure 12.1C). At the time of this writing, the
 and later in dogs affected with end-stage OA
prosthesis has been implanted in two clinical cases
(Conzemius et al. 2001, 2003). The fifth generation
beginming in December 2011. Short-term subjec-
of the Iowa State Elbow became available in 2005
tive feedback (10 weeks) showed no complications
(Iowa State University [ISU] Elbow, BioMedtrix,
uonouny poog Aiaa pue
Boonton, NJ; Figure 12.1A).
 Finally, new research efforts have been geared
 In 2008, Acker and Van Der Meulen proposed a
toward addressing early stages of OA with medial
novel TER system (TATE Elbow system, BioMed-
hemiarthroplasty systems developed by Tepic and
trix). Although unlinked and semiconstrained, the
Wendelburg, as well as Acker and Van Der
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
179
Figure 12.1 Postoperative lateral radiographs of the three unlinked, semiconstrained TER systems currently available. The
lowa State University Elbow (Conzemius; A) and TATE (Acker/Van Der Meulen; B) have been used clinically since 2005 and
ayl 'lloz jegwanaa auis shop omi ui leuawjadxa paueldui uaag sey ( isauu) wass sns aul laadsai 2o
current lowa State prosthesis is a cemented hybrid design that allows bone ingrowth at the level of the lateral and medial
condylar surfaces. The TATE prosthesis is designed as a resurfacing cementless cartridge unit. The Sirius system combines a
cemented and stemmed design with resurfacing components. (Courtesy of Chris Preston, Animal Surgery Center, Sydney,
NSW [Al; and John Innes, University of Liverpool, School of Veterinary Medicine, United Kingdom [Cl}
C
D
by Tepic and Wendelburg. Computer-assisted designs of a TATE hemi- (C) and three-component (D) prostheses currently
under development (C). Hemiprostheses are designed to address early stages of elbow dysplasia when osteoarthritis is limited
allow radioulnar pronation and supination. (Courtesy of Kirk Wendelburg, Animal Specialty Group, Los Angeles, CA [A and
Bl; and Greg Van Der Meulen, BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ [C and Dl}
180
Clinical Application of Total Elbow Replacement in Dogs181
Meulen.At the time of writing, the Tepic-
components were machined from ultrahigh-
Wendelburg prosthesis has been implanted in one
 molecular-weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) for
live dog (Figure 12.2A,B), while the Acker-Van
this short-term (4-month) study (Figures 12.3
Der Meulen prosthesis is in a design and develop-
and 12.4).
ment phase (Figure 12.2C).
At the conclusion of the 1998 study, only two of
This chapter will focus on currently commer-
six dogs had ground reaction forces that were
cially available prostheses (i.e., the fifth-generation
more than 80% of their preoperative normal limb
ISU and the TATE elbow systems).
function (Figure 12.5). Findings suggested that
failure was common, the RU design would require
Evolution rationale of the ISU Elbow
The maturation of the ISU TER components and
system has been described in the veterinary litera-
 ture and this historical documentation provides a
aaaap a ,ssam, cn o anbm
of design rationale. The initial report of the ISU
Ebow in 1998 depicted two semiconstrained
(snap-fit) components (humeral and radio-ulnar
a jo uooasuen eia pauedi aram je (ln]
lateral collateral ligament (Conzemius and Aper
1998). The components and cutting guide system
were developed from morphometric data of the
Figure 12.3  Intraoperative photograph of the humera
humerus, radius, and ulna of normal dogs, tested
component cemented into the humerus (eft), and a
in plastic and cadaver bones and piloted in an
 photograph of a lateral view of the humeral component in
in vivo study in six, normal greyhounds. The
the humerus of a cadaveric bone (inset)
Figure 12.4 Intraoperative photograph of the radioulnar component of the initial ISU Elbow before (left) and after (right)
placement and cementing of the component.
182 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
several key changes, and the cuting guide system
100
Total hip imoplant
was unacceptably bulky. However, it also demon-
06
strated that success was possible and several
80
Fenxoral head and neck excisic
70
aspects of the humeral component worked well.
Norm
60
Ultimately, the 1998 study provided key data that
50
helped explain both failures and successes. For
古
40+
example, early failure at the cement-bone inter
%
30
face of the RU component was identified via com-
20
10f
puted tomography (CT) and gross pathology in
four dogs (Figure 12.6). The short pegs of the RU
2
Time after surgery (months)
component and the semiconstrained nature of the
articulation likely contributed to this by placing
Figure 12.5   Peak vertical force of the operated leg of the
too much strain at the cement-bone interface,
two dogs that did not have premature loosening of their
semiconstrained total elbow implants. The shaded areas
resulting in early loosening. Thus, two immediate
represent previous reports of limb function in normal
design changes were made in order to reduce this
greyhounds 4 months after research surgeries. Note: % of
 strain. The design changes included switching to
Normal = Peak vertical force (%Bw) presurgery/Peak
a nonconstrained (urlinked) articulation between
vertical force (%Bw) postsurgery. (Reproduced from
 the humeral and RU components and lengthening
Conzemius et al. [2001l, with permission from 
the pegs of the RU component. This study also
Wiley-Blackwell)
found that (1) the proximal ulnar osteotomy
resulted in an ulna thiat was too unstable and that
a distal ulnar osteotomy was suficient; (2) a
 screw between the radius and ulna to encourage
Figure 12.6 A CT image (left) of a dog 2 months after elbow replacement (ISU initial study). Note the lucency (dark line)
u uuaui uo uaiads japen e se umous si moga aes aul (mone) juauodunn jeuinopei aui jo juawn aui punone
space between the cement and bone is again identified with a black arrow.
Clinical Application of Total Elbow Replacement in Dogs 183
synostosis (initially thought to be necessary
because the implant bridged the two bones) may
have been unnecessary, as an autogenous cancel-
lous bone graft placed between the two bones was
sufficient to produce synostosis without the screw;
and (3) the humeral component was exceptionally
stable and that screws to secure it to the humerus
were not required.
Translation to the next phase of development
required reengineering of each component and the
cutting guides, as well as modifying the surgical
technique. Retesting was necessary prior to clini-
cal application of the second-generation prosthesis
and technique. Thus, the purpose of the second
R
in vivo study was to test long-term function of a
modified TER system in six large-breed dogs
(Conzemius et al. 2001). The second-generation
instrumentation and implants were used and
prostheses were implanted as with the first-
generation implants (Figure 12.7). Due to either
osteomyelitis or ulnar fracture, three of six dogs
did not reach the planned 1-year termination of
the study. The three dogs that remained in the
study had limb function on the side of TER
that was similar to the unoperated, normal limb
(Figure 12.8).
The study evaluating the second-generation
explain both success and failure. First, the humeral
 and RU components remained stable, confirming
that a nonconstrained articulation and the length-
ening of the RU pegs were beneficial design
 changes. Second, the cutting guides used (Conze-
mius et al. 2001) were adequate, although they
remained bulky, to correctly position each compo-
nent. Since the components were positioned inde-
Figure 12.7
 Intraoperative photograph of the humeral (A)
pendently of each other,it was possible to position
and the radioulnar (B) components cemented into position.
each component in a different center of rotation,
An intraoperative photograph of the implants after
potentially resulting in malalignment. A cutting
reduction (C) is also shown.
guide system that allowed the implants to be posi-
tioned on the same center of rotation needed to be
synostosis successfully formed in each case with
developed. Third, while the articulation was semi-
only the placement of an autogenous cancellous
constrained, it still had corners with a small radius
bone graft (from the excised humeral condyle)
 that could result in the metal component cutting
placed between the radius and the ulna. These and
into the UHMWPE and leading to rapid polyeth-
several other factors led to a design that could be
ylene wear. The articulation needed softer corners.
used in a controlled clinical case series.
Fourth, the caudal aspect of the RU component
A prospective clinical case series for the treat-
had a nearly 90-degree corner that could function
ment of 20 canine patients with severe, naturally
as a fulcrum and predispose to ulnar fracture. The
occurring OA using TER was reported in 2003
corner needed to be eliminated. Fifth, an RU
(Conzemius et al. 2003). Inclusion criteria for this
160
 posts. Primary fixation is achieved via cementing
 Norma
140
the humeral stem and RU posts. Porous-coated
120
lateral and medial humeral surfaces provide addi-
ative
Contralateral Front
tional long-term fixation via osseointegration. The
00
Surgical Limb
humeral and RU components are implanted indi-
80
vidually in sequence following preparation of the
60
respective bones.
古
40
The design rationale for the TATE Elbow was
20+
discussed in Chapter 11. The TATE Elbow system
PVF
0+
(second generation) is a cementless resurfacing
8
16
24
32
40
48
uauodon enaq io e jo unsisuon uisap
Time (Postoperative Weeks)
and a 175-degree-arc UHMWPE RU component
Figure 12.8
The mean peak vertical force of each front
supported by a CoCr backing (Figure 12.9). Using
limb of dogs studied is expressed as a percent of the force
an approach via osteotomy of the mdial humeral
recorded before surgery. Standard deviation bars are
epicondyle, the side-specific prosthetic compo-
shown. (Reproduced from Conzemius et al. [2001l, Figure
apiies, e se Aisnoaumus parasui ae shua
8, with permission from Wiley-Blackwell)
implant" within a milled articular groove. Primary
 and secondary fixations are respectively achieved
via mechanical interlock of mediolateral hollow
investigation required that dogs have forelimb
posts and bone ingrowth onto porous surfaces
lameness and pain from elbow OA that was unre-
coated with hydroxyapatite (HA).
sponsive to nonsurgical management. Informed
Contrary to linked systems, the stability of
parosuods 1nq ‘panmban sem juasuon naumo
unlinked prostheses is provided by the surround-
funding allowed for no financial burden to the pet
ing soft tissues and by the geometry of the pros-
owner. The primary outcome measure for this
thetic articulating surfaces (Armstrong et al. 2005).
study was force platform gait analysis, with
Specifically, varus and valgus disruptive forces
success defined as an improvement in ground
are counteracted by collateral ligaments, while
reaction forces. Radiographic evaluation and gait
internal/external rotation and mediolateral trans-
 analysis was performed before surgery and at 3, 6,
lation are controlled by the geometry of the articu-
and 12 months after surgery. The components
lar surfaces of both the humeral and the RU
used for this case series were modified based
 components. To replicate normal elbow kinemat-
 on the studies reported above. The major changes
ics and optimize long-term stability, TER prosthe-
included (1) removal of the 90-degree corner
ses would require a complex three-component
 on the caudal aspect of the RU component,
system (Figure 12.2D). Nonetheless, both current
(2) removal of the hole (supratrochlear foramen)
TER systems were eventually designed with a
 in the humeral component, and (3) larger radi to
single RU component that constrains RU motion
the surfaces of articulation of both components
as a compromise between optimal joint kinemat-
(Conzemius et al. 2003). The outcome of this pro-
ics, as well as decreased prosthetic complexity and
 spective study and interpretation of the findings
 related risk of implant failure. In either system, the
are reported in a subsequent paragraph in this
surgical procedure includes an RU synostosis to
chapter.
reduce bone/RU component interfacial motion.
Current systems: Design rationale
Indications and contraindications
summary
The primary indication for TER is severe, intrac-
The ISU Elbow is a hybrid system featuring
table degenerative joint disease that is not respon-
a symmetrical cobalt-chromium (CoCr) humeral
sive or ispoorly responsiveto medical management.
stem component and a side-specific, 120-degree-
Although elbow OA is most commonly associated
arc UHMWPE RU component with asymmetrical
with elbow dysplasia, it can also result from
Clinical Application of Total Elbow Replacement in Dogs185
Figure 12.9 Computer-assisted drawing (A) and postoperative radiographs (B and C) of a TATE second generation. Note the
presence of new hollow slotted posts used for primary fixation. Compared with the original design, the TATE second
generation features porous HA-coated humeral and RU components and less congruent articular profiles. These later
modifications, along with the use of radioulnar synostosis via lag screw fixation, were implemented to optimize secondary
fixation through improved bone ingrowth and reduced interfacial shear stresses. (Courtesy of Greg Van Der Meulen,
BioMedtrix, Boonton, N] [A]}
articular fracture, elbow luxation, or angular limb
skeletal  immaturity  represent  other  potential
deformities with subsequent elbow incongruity.
contraindications.
Because of the potential complications and/or
limited long-term follow-up available for the cur-
rently available systems, TER should be restricted
Preoperative evaluation and planning
to older dogs with a clearly decreased quality of
life on a day-to-day basis, which cannot be satis-
Comprehensive physical, orthopedic (including
factorily managed with medical treatment. As
goniometry), and neurological examinations are
for any total joint replacement, systemic or local
mandatory to fully assess functional alterations in
infections (e.g., local pyoderma, bacterial cystitis,
the affected elbow joint in order to rule out other
otitis externa, periodontal disease) increase the
possible causes of thoracic limb lameness and to
risk of postoperative infection and should be iden-
document concurrent abnormalities.
tified and addressed prior to surgery. Chronic
Well-positioned standard mediolateral and cra-
elbow luxation is a relative contraindication to
niocaudal views are essential for accurate templat-
TER. The compromised periarticular soft tissue
ing. Accordingly, radiographs should be obtained
envelope may increase the risk of postoperative
under heavy sedation or general anesthesia. The
luxation with the currently available, unlinked,
use of a calibration marker (spherical or linear) is
systems. However, successful use of the ISU Elbow
mandatory in order to use appropriately magni-
system after chronic elbow luxation has been
fied templates (acetate template overlays), or to
reported (Conzemius et al. 2003). Finally, severe
calibrate
the
e radiograph  (digital templating;
 malunion may preclude the use of the resurfacing
Figure 12.10).
TATE Elbow system. Cases with severe malunion
Although not absolutely necessary, CT scan of
may be successfully addressed using the ISU
the elbow is highly recommended when extensive
Elbow (Conzemius et al. 2003). Severe malunion
osteophytosis is present. Comprehensive three-
may preclude the use of the resurfacing TATE
 dimensional understanding of the size and distri-
Elbow  system.  Neurological  dysfunction  and
bution of the osteophytes is invaluable during the
humeral trochlear diameter is 17mm, the 17-mm
implant will be chosen; if the diameter of the
trochlea is 18 mm, then the 19-mm implant will be
chosen. The template of the elected implant is then
placed at the planned location, and several criteria
are verified (Figure 12.10). First, the cranial aspect
of the RU component is aligned with the cranial
aspect of the native radial head. As a redundant
feature, the radial post should then be approxi-
mately at the center of the radial head. It is impor-
tant to estimate where the native radial head is
and not align the prosthesis with osteophytes that
are often prominent at this location in chronically
Figure 12.10 Digital templating for a TATE prosthesis
arthritic elbows. Second, the milling path should
using the OrthoView Veterinary Orthopaedic Digital
equally remove the subchondral bone on all three
Planning software (www.orthoview.com). The size of the
prosthesis (19mm in this case) should be equal or greater
articular surfaces. Lastly, the surgeon should
than the diameter of the humeral trochlea (18.5mm; purple
ensure that enough bone stock will remain after
circle). Ideal implant position requires that (1) the cranial
the milling process in the proximal portion of the
aspects of the humeral and RU components are respectively
ulna. This step is particularly important when a
aligned with the osteochondral junction (green arrow) and
relatively oversized implant is to be used and/or
with the native radial head (red arrow); (2) the radial post
when the caudal aspect of the ulna has a concave
approximately bisects the radial head (11.5 and 10 mm in
profile. Although important, templating of the
this case); and (3) the width of the ulnar bridge behind the
humeral component is less critical as a slight posi-
prosthesis (1 7.5 mm) is no less than the width of the
prosthesis (8 mm).
tioning error will be more forgiving. Conversely,
templating erors of the RU component can sig-
implantation procedure, as poor identification of
nificantly affect postimplantation range of motion,
 anatomical landmarks can result in an improperly
 aligned implant, and ad versely affect the outcome.
Digital templating is recommended as it may be
 more accurate and allows independent templating
 of the humeral and RU components, irrespective
ISU Elbow preoperative planning
of the elbow flexion angle.
Preoperative lateral and craniocaudal radiographs
can be used to estimate component size; however,
Surgical techniques
final decisions for sizing are made intraopera-
tively. Four ISU total elbow sizes are available for
ISU Elbow
medium-, large-, and giant-breed dogs with an
approximate range of body weight of 25-65kg.
This replacement system requires transection of
the lateral collateral ligament; lateral luxation of
TATE Elbow preoperative planning
the elbow; removal of a wedge-shaped portion
of the humeral condyle that includes the articular
surface; removal of the articular portion of the
The humeral trochlear diameter is measured (in
 proximal radius and ulna; and securing the com-
millimeters) from the mediolateral radiograph.
ponents with a combination of bone cement,
Current TATE prostheses are described based on
locking screws, and press-fit mechanisms.
the diameter of the humeral component and are
currently available from 15 mm to 21 mm in 2-mm
increments. Selection of the implant size is such
Humeral preparation
that it is equal to or slightly greater than the mea-
The current surgical technique involves position
sured trochlear diameter As an example, if the
 ing the patient in lateral recumbency and a caudal
Clinical Application of Total Elbow Replacement in Dogs 187
lateral approach to the elbow via transection of the
Similarly, at the conclusion of the RU prepara-
lateral collateral ligament. After inducing lateral
 tion, a trial RU component is placed and the elbow
luxation of the elbow, the humerus is prepared.
 is reduced to ensure that the two trial components
Humeral preparation involves drilling a 5- to
 articulate correctly. If they do articulate correctly
9-mm-diameter hole from the supratrochlear
the elbow is luxated and a hole for the locking
foramen into the medullary canal. A cutting guide
screw is made by drilling through the caudal hole
is introduced into the medullary canal and used
in the RU component. Again, the size of this hole
to remove a wedge-shaped piece of humerus that
 is dependent on component size.
includes the majority of the humeral articular
The trial components are removed, the surgical
surface. Great care is taken to preserve bone stock
field flushed, and the final components are posi-
proximally so that fracture of the condyle is
 tioned and secured (bone cement for the stem of
avoided. A larger cut can be made later if the origi-
the humerus; press-fit for the radial stem; and a
nal cutting guide used was too small. The drill
locking screw for the RU body). The elbow is
guide and the ostectomized bone are removed.
reduced and a final check is performed to confirm
proper placement of the components.
RU preparation
Surgical closure
The anconeal process of the ulna is excised and the
elbow is reduced. With the elbow reduced, a cir-
Before closing, a distal ulnar osteotomy is per-
cular mounting bracket is placed laterally onto the
formed and autogenous bone graft (from the
drill bit that extends from the humerus and the
excised bone) is placed between the radius and
humeral trial component. The RU cutting guide is
ulna. Closure is mainly focused on reconstruction
then placed onto the mounting bracket. Linking
of the lateral collateral ligament.
the RU cutting guide to the humeral component
helps to ensure congruity of the prosthesis. The
RU cutting guide has drill bit guide holes; two
TATE Elbow
3.2-mm drill bits are used. One bit is drilled into
the radius and one into the ulna. These steps
Preoperative preparation
secure the RU cutting guide onto the radius and
ulna on the same center of rotation as the humeral
 After routine preparation for aseptic surgery, the
component. The mounting bracket is removed and
dog is temporarily placed in dorsal recumbency in
the elbow is luxated laterally. The RU cutting
 the operating room (OR). To facilitate unrestricted
guide is then used to remove the articular portion
movement of the surgical team, anesthesia person-
of theradius and the ulna using the circular cutting
 nel and equipment are located at the rear end of
saw that fits into the cutting guide. After this step
the dog. The uppermost, nonoperated thoracic
is completed, the cutting guide and ostectomized
 limb is pulled caudally and secured to the surgery
bone are removed. A hole is then drilled from
table. After routine four-corner draping, the dog is
 proximal to distal down the medullary canal of the
positioned in lateral recumbency with the oper-
radius; the size of the hole is dependent on the
ated limb down, such that the vertical post of a
implant size.
dedicated bracket secured to the table is located at
the level of the axillary fold. Layered draping is
Implant positioning and fixation
then completed routinely using cloth and impervi-
 ous paper drapes as well as stockinette around the
Following humeral preparation, a humeral trial
forelimb. Superficial, adherent antimicrobial sur-
component is positioned. The humeral trial com-
gical incise drapes are strongly recommended
ponent has a hole that accepts a 3.5-mm drill bit.
A long 3.2- or 3.5-mm drill bit is used to drill from
(Figure 12.11).
the origin of the lateral collateral ligament, through
Surgical approach to the elbow joint
the hole in the trial component to the medial col-
lateral ligament. This hole ensures proper place-
[ e yn pae si u moqa au
ment of the humeral component.
incision. The ulnar nerve is carefully dissected and
fdentificationoftheelbow axis ofrotationand
joint positioning
A dedicated trochlear clamp is used to identify the
axis of rotation (AOR) of the elbow, which closely
corresponds to the mediolateral axis of thehumeral
trochlea. A datum pin, inserted along the AOR,
 serves as a reference throughout the remainder of
the procedure (Figure 12.12A). A sterile position-
ing system is then attached, over the draping, to
the previously mentioned bracket. The datum pin
is secured to the positioning device, thus immobi-
Figure 12.11  Typical operating room setup for a TATE
lizing the humerus. A dedicated aligmment plate,
prosthesis at Michigan State University. General (far center)
loaded over the datum pin, is rotated until the
prosthesis-specific (feft), and milling (right) instrumentations
 cranial humeral osteochondral junction is aligmed
are kept on two separated tables and a Mayo stand. With
with a corresponding laser mark on the plate. The
the dog in lateral recumbency, the operated limb is
abducted over an additional dedicated Mayo stand to
plate is secured to the humerus using one or two
expose the medial aspect of the elbow. The entire dog and
cortical bone screws. The elbow is then flexed until
limb is covered with several layers of sterile impervious
the cranial aspect of the radial head is aligned with
drapes. These include a stockinette and plastic iodine-
a second laser mark on the plate). This typically
impregnated adhesive drape over the operated limb.
brings the elbow to 85-95 degrees of flexion.
 Proper joint congruity is ascertained and adjusted,
if needed, with the positioning system. The align-
ment plate is fixed to the radius (one screw) and
retracted cranially. Transection of caudal branches
the ulna (two screws), which effectively secures
of the ulnar nerve innervating the joint capsule
the elbow in the desired position before articular
and the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle allow appro-
surface preparation (Figure 12.13A).
priate mobilization and protection of the ulnar
nerve during the remainder of the surgery. The
cranial and caudal aspects of the humeral condyle
Articular resurfacing and implant impaction
are exposed in order to identify the medial osteo-
chondral junction cranially and the edge of the
A drilling guide is then loaded onto the alignment
plate and used to drill four transverse holes (two
joints, thorough osteophyte debridement is imper-
in the humerus, one in the radius, and one in the
ative for accurate identification of proper anatomi-
ulna) that will accommodate the mediolateral
cal landmarks.
 primary fixation posts in the matching prosthetic
 A medial epicondylar osteotomy is performed
 components. Using a custom end mill, the proxi-
using an oscillating saw, starting at the caudal
mal (humeral) and distal (RU) articular surfaces
edge of the medial epicondyle, aiming at the 
are simultaneously removed along a 200-degree
arc concentric to the AOR (Figures 12.12A,B and
tion of the osteotomy, the epicondyle is prepared
12.13B). A plastic trial prosthesis is used to confirm
for later lag screw fixation. The osteotomy is com-
pleted with a proximal chevron cut and the epi-
is then gradually impacted into the open joint
condylar bone flap is retracted distally. Access to
 space (Figures 12.13C and 12.14). The set plate
the caudal joint space is permitted by the release
 used to link the components during impaction and
of tendon of origin of the deep digital flexor
the aligmment plate are sequentially removed to
muscle followed by an oblique ostectomy of the
 allow assessment of the elbow range of motion. If
caudodistal corner of the medial epicondyle. The
 cranial or caudal impingements are present, osteo-
phytes are debrided using rongeurs or a high-
ostectomy of the anconeal process.
speed bur.
Clinical Application of Total Elbow Replacement in Dogs189
Figure 12.12 Intraoperative views of a TATE implantation procedure. The joint is exposed via an osteotomy of the medial
epicondyle and the elbow axis of rotation is identified (A). To optimize postoperative range of motion and avoid impinge-
ment, the RU component must be aligned with the radial head, which requires meticulous debridement of osteophyte(s)
cranial to the radial head (blue arrow). A milling bit is used to simultaneously remove the articular surfaces of the humerus,
radius, and ulna (resurfacing) along an arc centered on the joint axis of rotation (B). H: humerus; U: ulna (coronoid process);
R: radial head
Surgical closure
ISU Elbow
A proximal RU synostosis is performed immedi-
ately below the level of the radial fixation post
Implant aligmment, positioning, cementing tech-
 Uo papeol maios Sel pazis Alaielidoidde ue Sussn
nigue, as well as bone / cement/implant interfaces
a washer. The medial aspect of the RU joint is
are evaluated on orthogonal radiographic views.
Regular follow-up radiographs are recommended
roughened with a high-speed bur and a generous
autogenous cancellous bone graft from the previ-
to evaluate implant stability, implant failure, and
 ous milling is packed at that location. The medial
aseptic loosening. Postoperatively, the joint can be
epicondyle is reduced and fixed with trans- and
supported with a spica splint until suture removal
at 2 weeks.11 Implementation of a physical reha-
epicondylar lag screws or a bone plate (Figure
12.13D). Routine closure in layers concludes the
bilitation program is advocated following an
initial 6-week period of restricted activity. Postop-
procedure.
erative antibiotic therapy is left to the discretion of
Different characteristics of the ISU and TATE
the surgeon.
procedures are summarized in Table 12.1.
Postoperative evaluation and
TATEElbow system
management
Particular attention is paid to the position of the
True mediolateral and craniocaudal elbow radio-
cranial aspect of the radial component, which
 graphic views are obtained to assess proper
should be flush with the native radial head, and
implant alignment and positioning as well as 
 to the radial post, which should bisect the radial
ostectomy reduction and fixation.
head (mediolateral views). To avoid postoperative
B
Figure 12.13 Schematics of the four key steps of the TATE implantation procedure. With the elbow is flexed at -85-95
degrees, an alignment plate centered on the axis of rotation of the joint is affixed to the humerus, radius, and ulna (A). A
circular groove is milled along the joint articular surface (B) prior to impaction of the TATE cartridge (C). A blue X-shaped set
plate maintains the prosthetic components aligned during simultaneous impaction. Following removal of the alignment and 
set plates, the joint range of motion is evaluated for possible impingement. A radioulnar synostosis is performed using an 
autogenous cancellous bone graft and a lag screw immediately below the prosthesis RU component (D). Finally, the medial
epicondyle is reduced and stabilized using two lag screws, one of which is applied through the joint axis of rotation.
(Courtesy of Greg Van Der Meulen, BioMedtrix, Boonton, NJ)
190
(A). Once fully impacted, the medial surface of the prosthesis should be flushed with the plane of the medial epicondyle
osteotomy (B). The X-shaped set plate links the humeral and RU component, thus facilitating their simultaneous
implantation.
Table 12.1
Characteristics of the ISU and TATE prostheses
ISU Elbow system
TATE Elbow system
Surgical approach
Lateral collateral ligament (LCL) desmotomy
Medial epicondyle osteotomy
 Elbow luxation
No elbow luxation
Bone preparation
Sequential ostectomies (condylar wedge
Simultaneous humeral and RU articular
[humerus|—semicircular [RU|}
resurfacing
Limited bone resection
Implantation
Sequential—individual humeral and RU
Simultaneous-
-cartridge implant design
components
Primary fixation
 Bone cement
Press-fit—four fixation posts
Secondary fixation
Bone ingrowth (mediolateral humeral
Bone ingrowth onto HA-coated porous
component interfaces)
surfaces
impingement, the ulnar component should be cen-
Postoperatively, a soft-padded bandage is
tered over the ulna on craniocaudal views. Of criti-
applied for a few days to control local swelling.
cal importance is the evaluation the bone-implant
Dogs are typically released within 48 hours after
interfaces, which requires that the X-ray beam
 surgery. Restricted in-house activity and limited
be precisely tangent to the interface of interest.
leash walks are recommended for approximately
Ideally, intimate contact between each prosthetic
4-6 weeks. During that period, passive range of
component and corresponding bone should be
motion exercises as well as distal to proximal mas-
present, although a thin (less than 1 mm wide)
sages are advocated as often as possible. Follow-
interfacial gap may be acceptable. Subsequent
ing the first satisfactory radiographic and clinical
radiographic evaluations are recommended at 6,
recheck (6 weeks), intense physical rehabilitation
12, 24, and 52 weeks and yearly thereafter to assess
is strongly encouraged. Typical exercises may
bone ingrowth and implant stability (e.g., aseptic
 include underwater treadmill, swimming, as well
loosening).
as below and above Cavaletti rails.
192
Complications
%
80中
(PVF
垂
 Regardless of functional outcome, the study found
60
重--
that elbow replacement was a viable treatment
6
 option and confirmed that many of the design and
40
中
--PVF-OP
operative changes that had been instituted were
Limb 
B—PVF-N
effective in decreasing the complication rate and
0
improving efficacy. The four dogs with failed out-
6
12
 comes had either osteomyelitis (one case), fracture
Time after surgery (months)
of the humeral condyle (one case), or lateral luxa-
Figure 12.15  Peak vertical force of the unoperated (N)
tion (two cases) (Figure 12.16). There will always
and operated (OP) front limbs of the 16 dogs with
be a risk of infection with joint replacement. The
successful outcomes. (Reproduced from Conzemius et al.
 fracture was associated with surgeon error, as the
[2003l, with permission from Wiley-Blackwell)
humeral component was impacted into place and
the wedge shape of the component split the
remaining portion of the condyle.
Clinical outcome: Complications
Lateral luxation represented 10% of all cases; a
complication rate that alerted the investigators
that additional work was required. While the exact
To date, except for two peer-reviewed publications
cause for lateral luxation was not identified, the
addressing the ISU Elbow replacement, objective
information on the clinical outcome after TER is
primary concerns were that the lateral collateral
ligament was transected during the approach to
scarce. Prospective  clinical  and experimental
studies on the TATE system are ongoing and
the joint and that the cutting guide system still had
the components inserted independent of each
should lead to peer-reviewed data in the future.
However, information presented on the outcomes
other and thus did not ensure that the components
had the same center of rotation. Different centers
of the TATE system presented here is based on the
 of rotation will allow for binding and/or twisting
authors' (LMD and RPG) experience and on per-
of the components during a range of motion. Since
sonal commurications.
stability of the lateral aspect of the joint is much
lower than normal during the recovery period, the
combination of instability and malalignment
ISU Elbow
could explain lateral luxation. Empirically, this
hypothesis is supported by the fact that nearly all
The overall success rate of a prospective clinical
luxations occur in the first 2-3 months following
trial was 80% (Figure 12.15; Conzemius et al. 2003).
This study was performed prior to many of the
 surgery. Thus, if the components remained stable
util the lateral collateral ligament healed, luxa-
previously noted changes in prosthesis design.
tion was essentially eliminated. Since correct posi-
tioning of the implants was dependent on surgeon
Force plate analysis
 ro a   e aa
The average dog with a successful outcome had
luxation was anticipated with wider distribution
j aal paerado au uo sarog unat pumono
of this elbow replacement system. Several solu-
increased by more than 25% over presurgical
tions to this problem have been reported. First,
levels. Certainly, some of this improvement was
buttressing the primary suture repair of the lateral
the result of case selection. This clinical trial only
 collateral ligament with suture anchors appeared
accepted dogs that were severely affected and
to contribute to the lateral stability (Conzemius
were ideal candidates for an experimental inter-
and Vandervoort 2005). Second, a cutting guide
vention. However, it is important to note that even
system where placement of the cutting guide for
with the improvement, limb function in the oper-
the RU component is dependent on the center of
ated leg did not reach that of the opposite, unoper-
rotation of the humeral trial component has been
ated leg that in many cases also had elbow OA.
described (Conzemius 2009). This system ensures
Clinical Application of Total Elbow Replacement in Dogs 193
合
Figure 12.16  An immediate postoperative radiograph (teft) of a clinical case after total elbow replacement. At an &-week
recheck (midde), lateral luxation of the radioulnar component is noted. This was treated with cerclage wires (right) and
exercise restriction for & weeks.
 a more congruous placement of the humeral and
the surgical procedure technically simpler. These
 RU components. In addition, this system is more
 included (1) removal of the ulnar stem, (2) creation
"user friendly" than the first- and second-
 of a hole in the caudal aspect of the RU component
generation systems and seemed reduce, but not 
 for placement of a locking screw into the ulna, and
eliminate, the frequency of lateral luxation.Finally,
(3) creation of a metal backing for the RU compo-
a change in the articulation of the components to
nent with a porous ingrowth surface. The clinical
create greater resistance to lateral luxation has
 ramifications of these changes remain to be inves-
been shown, in an in vitro experimental study, to
tigated in a clinical setting.
Ad a ( ie na as) aa  
Recently, Innes described the results of 13 dogs
modification of the components involved increas-
implanted with an Iowa State prosthesis between
ing the size of the lateral aspect of the humeral
2004 and 2009 in the United Kingdom.'2 In the 10
condyle and reducing the size of the medial aspect
dogs (11 elbows—therefore percentage is greater
 of the humeral condyle while maintaining the
than 100) that survived to follow-up examination,
same center of rotation. Changes were made to the
-pou, (%og) ,poos, se paqiosap aram sauoino
RU component to match the changes to the articu-
- 10 (%00) ,100, 10 ‘(%0) ,1a
lar surface of the humeral component. These mod-
tions occurred in 60% of 10 dogs that survived to
ified components use the identical cutting guide
a follow-up examination and included four ulnar
system as the components described above but are
fractures and two subluxations. Based on this
up to seven times more resistant to lateral luxation
experience, Innes stated that "the [ISU Elbow]
when shear forces or torsional forces are applied
suaisas rao jum aren jo prepuis, a surean
at the articulation. The other major changes were
made to the RU component in an effort to make
To date, the most common complications reported
for the ISU Elbow are luxation and
ulnar
elbow OA. The mean (± standard deviation [SD])
fracture.1
pue sieak g1 6 sem uoneuendn ie ae paned
average weight was 35 ± 10kg.
Force plate analysis (FPA) was conducted prior
TATE Elbow
to and up to 2 years following surgery on seven
dogs. Postoperative FPAs were performed at 6 and
The lack of objective data on the TATE system
12 weeks (n = 7), then at 24 weeks (n = 5), 52 weeks
results, in part, from the recent release of this pros-
(n =3), and 104 weeks (n =2). Based on the
thesis and from the desire to present longer-term
 ongoing evaluation, gradual improvement of the
follow-up periods (>1 year). The information con-
peak vertical ground reaction force (PVGRF) was
tained in the next three paragraphs represents a
evident over time, albeit after an initial worsening
synthesis of subjective data from fellow surgeons
of the lameness at 6 weeks. Conversely, the PVGRF
who performed at least five TER procedures with
of the contralateral limb significantly decreased
the TATE system. We emphasize that since this
over time. By approximately 1 year postopera-
jou seu pue amjeu ul [elopsaue st uogeuou
tively, the PVGRF of the operated limb exceeded
been subject to peer review to date, it should be
that of the contralateral limb. In the two cases with
assessed cautiously
available long-term data, that trend continued
It is estimated that, since July 2007, the TATE
until 2 years postoperatively. The PVGRF ulti-
prosthesis has been implanted in ~180-200 cases
mately reached the normal range previously
worldwide over a 4.5-year period at the time of
 reported by Lascelles et al. (2006) (Figure 12.17).
this writing. This total is based on the number of
Clinical evaluation consisted of assessment of
prostheses (281) sold by BioMedtrix as of January
gait and range of motion (veterinarian evaluation)
2012, minus 30%-35% to account for unused
as well as pain level and quality of life (owner
implants. Purchased and returned implants (114)
evaluation). While subtle lameness was occasion-
are not included.
ally reported, in the absence of complications,
In 2009 (~34 months follow-up), we reported
subjective data on 43 procedures performed in 42
rored objective FPA in all dogs. Similarly, dogs
dogs.13 Severe complications had occurred within
5 weeks postoperatively in 7% of the patients (two
humeral fractures and one implant loosening
Mean peak vertical force over time (±SEM)
associated with secondary infection [two cases]
140
and ulnar fracture [one case]). Two dogs were
120
euthanized without reevaluation by the primary
(%BW)
Normal I115% +/- 10% BW
 surgeon and one was amputated due to concomi-
100
tant deep infection. Other complications, consist-
PVGRF
ing of pin migration, screw loosening and fracture
80
of the medial epicondylar fragment, were seen in
60
+ Contralateral→ TATE
three dogs (7%) and were successfully treated.
Since that report, 39 more TATE prostheses were
40
12243648607284
implanted in 37 dogs by the same groups of sur-
196108
 geons. The following is an update on these 39
Time (postoperative weeks)
cases, of which 14 were evaluated prospectively
Figure 12.17
Mean (± standard error of the mean [SEM|)
(LMD and RPG) and 25 were evaluated retrospec-
front limbs peak vertical ground reaction force (PVGRF) at
tively (Acker).
the trot of dogs implanted with a TATE prosthesis over 2
years. The shaded bar represents the PVGRF in normal dogs
at the trot (115% ± 10% BW; Lascelles et al. [2006l). The
Prospective study
PVGRF of the operated limb significantly improved over
Between April 2008 and October 2011, our group
time and exceeded that of the contralateral limb by
 s       
implanted 14 TATE prostheses in 13 dogs affected
tively, the PVGRF of the implanted front limb had returned
with intractable foreleg lameness attributed to
to normal.
Clinical Application of Total Elbow Replacement in Dogs 195
surgery (A), then at 1 year (B) and 2 years (C) postoperatively. In most cases, there was no evidence of periprosthetic bone
resorption over time. Occasionally, mild early widening of the RU component/bone interface was seen around the ulnar
post. This, however, did not seem to progress beyond the postoperative 12-week time point. Unlike the smooth solid posts of
the TATE first generation, the second-generation prosthesis features porous HA-coated hollow, slotted posts, as seen in Figure
12.1B, to optimize local bone ingrowth.
showed improvement and pain-free range of
suboptimal milling technique and subsequent
motion, mainly in extension, and were more
excessive
gapatt
the bone-RU component
active.
interface.
 Radiographic evaluation revealed quiescent
bone/implant interfaces over time (Figure 12.18).
 Occasionally, however, some limited bone resorp-
Retrospective study
tion occurred near the ulnar post. In one case,
Twenty-five TATE prostheses were implanted in
extensive RU periprosthetic osteolysis progressed
0l res sem puaueuis oz m auis sop 
up to 36 weeks postoperatively.
the prospective study described above. Subjective
Minor
 complications
 included
superficial
clinical evaluation was conducted by the lead
wound dehiscence (n = 1). The wound was suc-
surgeon and by client assessment. Functional
cessfully treated with local wound care and sys-
improvement beyond preoperative levels, consis-
temic antibiotics for 3 weeks.
tent elimination of pain, and improved quality of
Major complications (i.e., a
any complication
 life were reported in most cases. Based on client
requiring additional surgery) consisted of epicon-
assessment, overall outcome was very good in
dylar screw loosening (n = 1) and a humeral frac-
84% of the cases (return to normal activity), fair
ture (n = 1) with secondary infection (noted above)
in 12% of the cases (improvement compared
that led to amputation of the limb 2 weeks post-
with preoperative activity level), and poor in 4%
asa sm ms on a ao
(no improvement compared with preoperative
treated using an additional screw implanted per-
activity).
 cutaneously under fluoroscopic guidance.
The
 Complications were reported as intraoperative,
case of extensive, self-limiting periprosthetic oste-
 as well as minor and major. Iatrogenic, intraopera-
olysis described above is included as a potential
tive complications consisted of a transection of the
severe complication, although catastrophic failure
ulnar nerve without clinically evident conse-
has not occurred at this point. Both complications
quence (n = 1) and of a trochlear fracture that was
were attributed to surgical errors associated with
stabilized at the time of surgery (n = 1). A minor
Figure 12.19 Ulnar fracture 2 months after implantation of a TATE prosthesis (A). This complication was successfully
u po yeap aue lun panuuo Aaonai leuoung (al uoex aeld pue pueg uoisuat jo uoeuigmon e uisn pasia
animal 1& months postoperatively for reasons unrelated to this procedure. (Courtesy of Randy Acker, Sun Valley Animal
Center, Ketchum, ID)
 fairly early after surgery. There were no instances
 migration) was successfully treated by removal of
 of elbow luxation or primary ulnar fracture. Simi-
the migrating implant. One major complication 
 larly, explantation or arthrodesis has not been
occured 2 months postoperatively. This ulnar
 necessary. Forequarter amputation, however,
fracture was successfully revised using a pin/
 particularly in cases of deep infection, may be a
tension band combined with a caudal locking
valid revision option if the contralateral elbow is
compression plate (Figure 12.19).
sound.
Clinical summary (prospective and retrospective
studies)
Needed and ongoing studies
In this limited series of 39 cases, long-term objec-
tive and subjective evaluations seem to agree on
An important aspect of long-term evaluation of
the following points: (1) functional recovery
 any prosthesis is retrieval analysis. This informa-
steadily improves over time; however, return to
tion is currenly lacking with either system. At
normal function is slow and may take between 6
the time of writing, one TATE has been evaluated
months and 1 year; (2) the procedure seems effec-
for osseointegration 6 months postoperatively
tive in controlling pain and improving quality of 
after the dog had died of an unrelated cause.
life; (3) minor complications occurred in less than
While limb function had subjectively improved
 8% of the cases; (4) some major complications may
compared with preoperative evaluation, high-
be revised successfully; (5) with nearly 4 years
auoq paul paisasns sudenoorper uonnnosan
follow-up, the rate of major complications is
ingrowth at the bone/implant interfaces despite
lae % pue uo1siaa1 o1 rod %8 Aaexo1dde
 the fact that both implant components appeared
revision; and finally, (6) complications occurred
grossly stable.
Clinical Application of Total Elbow Replacement in Dogs 197
Design modifications have been recently
performed in the field of canine TER in recent
devised for both systems in response to their per-
years. Nonetheless, the ideal prosthetic design and
ceived respective shortcomings, whether docu-
 surgical procedure remains elusive. Numerous
mented (e.g., elbow luxation in the ISU Elbow) or
questions regarding optimal articular surface con-
potential (e.g., incomplete osseointegration of the 
straint as well as long-term periprosthetic osteoly-
TATE Elbow components). Modifications aimed at
sis or osseointegration have yet to be answered.
improving resistance to luxation with the ISU
Similarly, long-term prospective, objective clinical
Ebow are described above. In an effort to opti-
trials, and retrieval analyses are desperately
mize bone ingrowth, a second-generation TATE
needed. Imperfect revision options will continue
s uis  a psr sm s
to constitute one of the most serious hurdles to
included hollow primary fixation posts and HA
overcome for the foreseeable future and may limit
coating. In addition, reduced prosthetic constraint
the widespread acceptance of TER as a reliable
 in rotation and mediolateral translation
was
treatment option for end-stage canine elbow OA.
achieved through modification of the RU articular
Novel ideas, along with promising, although
profile.14,15
imperfect, clinical results, will likely continue to
 generate interest and much needed research in the
puauanedan moqla jo piay Suiouateuo pue uado
Limitations of TER
surgery.
Regardless of design, a major limitation of TER is
the absence of satisfactory options for revision in
Endnotes
the event of failure. The bilateral nature of end-
stage elbow OA precludes amputation in most
 1. Chancrin J. Personal communication, December
cases, and thus arthrodesis remains the most valid
2008.
alternative. Although some fractures or luxations
 2. Lewis RH. Development of elbow arthroplasty
may be successfully revised, others may require
(canine) clinical trials. In: ACVS Symposium. 1996,
explantation and arthrodesis. Infection remains
p. 110.
the most challenging complication, as antibiotic
3.
 Sidebotham CG. Personal communication, February
therapy is unlikely to be effective in the presence
2008.
4. Cook JL, LowerJ. Elbow arthroplasty system. Patent
 of the prosthesis. Accordingly, explantation with
subsequent arthrodesis may be the only viable
US007419507B2. USA, 2008.
 5. Conzemius MG. Total elbow replacement in the
revision. Alteration of limb function, or even
dog—Development and evaluation. Thesis, Iowa
quality of life, following arthrodesis should be
State University, Ames, 2000.
carefully considered, particularly if painful con-
6. Acker RL, Van Der Meulen GT. Joint prosthesis
 tralateral ankylosis is present. With unilateral
and
methodof 
implanting
same.
Patent
arthrodesis, however, limb function may be accept-
US20070073408A1. USA, 2007.
7. Acker RL, Van Der Meulen GT. Joint prosthesis.
able despite continuous limb circumduction. Con-
Patent US20080154384A1. USA, 2008.
8.Acker R, Van Der Meulen GT.
Tateelbow
alternative in dogs affected by unilateral end-stage
preliminary trials. In: 35th VOS Anruat Conference.
OA. Considering these limitations, owner educa-
2008.
tion is critical and must be thorough and objective.
9. Inmes J. Personal communication, January 2012.
A fair disclosure of alternative treatments and
10. Wendelburg K. Personal commmunication, January
realistic expectations, particularly with regard to
2012.
complications and revisions should be presented
11.
Conzemius MG. Total elbow replacement: facts)
fiction and opinions. In: ACVS Veterinary Symposium.
to clients contemplating TER.
2007, p. 440.
12. Inmes J. Total elbow replacement—The UK experi-
Conclusions
ence. In: BVOA Saloage Surgery foint Replacement and
Arthrodesis. 2009, p. 19.
13. Dejardin LM, Guillou RP. Total elbow replacement
Thanks to forward-thinking surgeons and engi-
in dogs—Recent design evolution and early results
neers, an enormous amount of work has been
with the TATE system. In: 18th Arrual Scientific
198 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Meeting,European College of Veterirary Surgeons.2009.
Conzemius MG. Nonconstrained elbow replacement in
[CD-ROM]
dogs. Vet Surg 2009;38:279.
14. Dejardin LM, Guillou RP, Sawyer MJ, et al. Effect of
Conzemius MG, Aper RL. Development and evaluation
articular design on rotational constraint of two
of semiconstrained arthroplasty for the treatment of
unlinked canine total elbow prostheses. Presented at
elbow osteoarthritis in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop
the 3rd World Veterinary Orthopedic Congress (WVOC).
Traumatol 1998;11:54.
Bologna, Italy, September 5-18, 2010. [CD-ROM]
Conzemius MG, Vandervoort J. Total joint replacement
15. Guillou RP, Demianiuk R, Dejardin LM, et al. Effect
in the dog. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
of articular design on mediolateral constraint and
2005;35(5):1213-1231.
stability of two unlinked canine total elbow prosthe-
Conzemius MG, Aper RL, Hill CM. Evaluation of a
ses. Presented at the 38th Arrual Meeting of the Vet-
 canine total-elbow arthroplasty system: A preliminary
erinary Orthopedic Society (VOS). Snowmass, CO,
study in normal dogs. Vet Surg 2001;30:11-20.
March 5-12, 2011. [CD-ROM]
Conzemius MG, Aper RL, Corti LB. Short-term outcome
after total elbow arthroplasty in dogs with severe,
naturally occurring osteoarthritis. Vet Surg 2003;32:
545-552.
References
Lascelles BD, Roe SC, Smith E, et al. Evaluation of a
limb forces in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res
Armstrong AD, King GJW, Yamaguchi K. Total elbow
2006;67:277-282.
arthroplasty design. In: Shoulder and Elbow Arthro-
Rose ND, Freeman A, Conzemius MG. Resistance to
plasty, Williams GR, Yamaguchi K, Ramsey ML,
lateral luxation of two canine total elbow replacement
Galatz LM (eds.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
 systems under variable mechanical loads. Vet Surg
Wilkins, 2005, p. 297.
2012; in press.
13
Emerging Arthroplasties
Jeffrey N. Peck
Total joint arthroplasty for the elbow, hip, and
1990s. There were no Food and Drug Administra-
stifle has been described in previous chapters.
tion (FDA)-approved TDA devices in the United
These are the three joints for which commercially
States until 2004 (Le et al. 2004). The development
 produced joint replacements are available for dogs
 and use of lumbar disc arthroplasty preceded cer-
     
vical disc arthroplasty. People who undergo either
plasty is commercially available for other joints in
lumbar or cervical spinal fusion surgery are at
human surgery and several of these have potential
increased risk of developing adjacent site degen-
Jo asd  as ra u e
eration, compared with patients managed without
this chapter is to collate information from the
fusion. Approximately 3% of patients need to
undergo second site surgery each year following
e a   p s
either lumbar or cervical disc fusion. Roughly 25%
tions, but for which prostheses are not yet avail-
 of patients have had second site surgery by 10
able. Certainly, the development of a commercially
years after their original surgery (Le et al. 2004;
available and efficacious prosthesis requires years
Harrop et al. 2008). In one study (Goffin et al.
of development and investment. The veterinary
2004), 92% of patients with anterior cervical disc
jou Ae sisasond pof remonred e rog peoasen
fusion (ACDF) developed radiographic changes,
 be adequate to garner commercial attention in
 although not necessarily clinical signs, consistent
many cases. However, the information in this
with degenerative disc disease. Similar numbers
chapter could also be utilized as a springboard for
are reported in the veterinary literature following
the development of custom prostheses for indi-
 decompression, with or without stabilization, for
vidual patients.
caudal cervical spodylomyelopathy (CCSM) (da
Costa 2010). While it is tempting to extrapolate
results from lumbar or lumbosacral fusion in
people, reports of adjacent site degeneration are
Total disc arthroplasty
 not available for lumbosacral stabilization in vet-
 erinary patients. Therefore, this discussion will
Total disc arthroplasty (TDA) is a relatively new
 focus more on cervical disc replacement than on
procedure, emerging in the late 1980s and early
lumbar disc replacement.
Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
199
200Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
In general, the primary justification for the
 or compression secondary to articular facet hyper-
development of TDA has been to maintain the
trophy or synovial hypertrophy.
range of motion at the site of decompression. As
The general requirements for TDA are similar to
with veterinary patients, human patients that
the requirements for other forms of arthroplasty.
 have had ACDF are at higher risk of developing
The materials must be biocompatible, implants
adjacent site disc disease, often described as a
should have long-term stability, and implantation
"domino lesion." It is theorized that spinal fusion
should relieve pain and restore function. Addi-
 results in a transfer of load to adjacent disc spaces
tionally, if TDR is to be successful in the preven-
 and articular facets (Pickett et al. 2005; Chang et
tion of adjacent site degeneration, as well as relieve
al. 2007a). A second theory for the development of
clinical signs at the affected site, it must fulfill
adjacent site disc degeneration is that it is the
several additional requirements. It must provide
natural progression of degenerative disc disease
distraction, if necessary, in order to relieve forami-
(Le et al. 2004).
nal stenosis. The range of motion of the prosthesis
should be similar to the range of motion of the
 increased intradiscal pressure, increased range of
normal, natural joint. Range of motion and dis-
motion and increased articular facet joint loads
traction must be preserved in the long term (i.e.,
at sites adjacent to the fused segment (McAfee
the implantation procedure must not predispose
 a   e a
2007a).
The increase
to future ankylosis, with its associated loss of
 in intradiscal pressure will, theoretically, prevent
range of motion). The center of rotation of the
the transport of nutrients into the disc, resulting
 prosthesis should mimic the natural location of the
in chondrocyte death and disc degeneration.
center of rotation (Le et al. 2004).
Increases in range of motion and facet joint 
As with other joint prostheses, titanium (or tita-
loads can result in ligamentous and synovial
nium alloy), stainless steel, and cobalt-chromium
hypertrophy.
(CoCr) have each been used to manufacture of
While there are several studies that document
TDA implants. Metal-on-metal, metal-on-plastic
preservation of range of motion at the operated
(polyethylene, ultrahigh-molecular-weight poly-
site following TDA (McAfee et al. 2003; Pickett
ethylene), ceramic-on-ceramic, and ceramic-on-
et al. 2005; Chang et al. 2007a,b; Snyder et al.
plastic implants have been described (Hofstetter
2007; Barrey et al. 2009), there is only one study
et al. 2009). In addition, the full range of constraint
that has evaluated the incidence of adjacent
(constrained, semiconstrained, and unconstrained)
 site disc degeneration folowing TDA (Harrop
has been utilized, although classification of con-
et al. 2008). That study was a systematic review
straint has not been consistent throughout the lit-
of the literature evaluating f
the incidence
of
erature, even for a particular prosthesis (Le et al.
adjacent site lumbar disc degeneration (radio-
2004; Bertagnoli et al. 2005a,b; Chang et al. 2007a;
 graphic or symptomatic) following either arthrod-
Barrey et al. 2009). For constrained prostheses, the
esis (fusion) or TDA. Based on logistic regression
center of rotation is fixed during motion. There are
 analysis, patient age and time to follow-up were
three degrees of freedom of motion with a con
significant factors in the incidence of adjacent
strained prosthesis: bending, flexion/extension,
site degeneration; however, 14% of arthrodesis
and rotation. Constrained prostheses require more
 patients (1732 patients) and 1% of arthroplasty
 precise implantation in order to mimic the axes of
patients (758 patients) developed adjacent site
rotation.(Barrey et al. 2009) Unconstrained pros-
degeneration.
The difference was statistically
theses allow the above mentioned motions, in
sigmificant.
addition to translation, resulting in six degrees of
 The three main indications for TDA in humans
freedom of motion (Pickett et al. 2005; Hofstetter
 are (1) radiculopathy secondary to disc herniation
et al. 2009; Figure 13.1). Further, the description of
 or foraminal stenosis; (2) myelopathy secondary
intervertebral motion must also include coupled
to disc herniation; and (3) any combination of
 motion, which should be matched by the prosthe-
radiculopathy and myelopathy (Pracyk
pue
sis (Le et al. 2004). Coupled motion is the motion
Traynelis 2005). Total disc replacement (TDR) is
in a plane that is secondary to the plane of primary
not indicated in cases of vertebral canal stenosis
motion. For example, when lateral bending force
Emerging Arthroplasties  201
permission from Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins) (B) Mediolateral cervical radiograph of an implanted Bryan prosthesis. Note
the offset of the metallic endplates (arrows), indicating translation, which is consistent with the unconstrained nature of this
prosthesis. (Reproduced from Goffin et al. [2002|, with permission from Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins)
(the primary motion) is applied to the cervical
spine, the coupled motion of axial rotation occurs
 in the same direction as the lateral bending.
 When reviewing reported range of motion, it is
important to be aware of how the data are reported.
For example, some researchers will report leff
lateral and right lateral bending separately, while
others will report only a total from right to left
(Chang et al. 2007a; Barrey et al. 2009). At C5-C6,
in the intact human spine, range of motion in
flexion/extension is roughly 10 degrees, lateral
bending is roughly 6 degrees, and axial rotation is
roughly 5 degrees (Pickett et al. 2005; Chang et al.
2007a,b; Barrey et al. 2009). The coupled axial
motion that occurs during lateral bending is
approximately 34% of the primary motion. With a
primary axial motion, the coupled motion for
lateral bending is approximately 56% of the
Figure 13.2 The Pro-Disc C (Synthes, Solothurn,
primary motion (Barrey et al. 2009). An additional
Switzerland) prosthesis, a semiconstrained, ball-and-socket
value that is considered in implant desigm is the
design. (Reproduced from Pracyk and Traynelis [2005],
neutral zone (NZ), or the arc of movement with
with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health)
 no applied load. The NZ is a descriptor of laxity.
The NZ of the intact human spine is roughly 6, 3,
which is the cervical disc version of the ProDisc
and 4.5 degrees in flexion/extension, lateral
(Synthes) lumbar prosthesis; (4) PCM prosthesis
 bending, and axial rotation, respectively (Wilke 
(Cervitech, Rockaway, NY); and (5) Bryan pro-
et al. 1998).
sthesis (Medtronic). Constrained (Discoserv) and
Cervical disc replacement implants with most
semiconstrained (Prestige, ProDisc-C, Discoserv)
peer-reviewed data include the following: (1) Dis-
 are ball-and-socket type designs (Figure 13.2) and
coserv (Scient'x, Voisins-le-Bretonneux, France);
allow minimal translation. The PCM is not
(2) Prestige (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN); (3)
described as ball-and-socket, but its appearance
ProDisc-C (Synthes, Solothurn, Switzerland),
 suggests otherwise, and it is reportedly minimally
202
constrained (McAfee et al. 2003). The Bryan pros-
thesis is unconstrained. It is implanted as a single
unit and has titanium endplates connected by a
flexible polyethylene membrane that surrounds
the polyurethane-filled nucleus (Figure 13.1;
Pickett et al. 2005). A cohort study of patients
receiving the Bryan prosthesis and patients with
ACDF with plating found that the Bryan prosthe-
sis was associated with a significantly lower inci-
dence of adjacent site ossification 2 and 4 years
after surgery (Garrito et al. 2011).
Regardless of the form of constraint, kinematic
evaluation of each of the implants mentioned
above suggest that they each closely mimic the
range of motion of the intact, normal spinal
segment. In a study comparing the ProDisc-C and
Prestige prostheses, implantation of either pros-
a ie uonou jo auei pasearu ui pamsan sisa
Figure 13.3 The PCM (Cervitech, Rockaway, NY)
 uou jo aui pasaap pue as pauu
prosthesis with screw fixation for cases in which there is
adjacent sites (Chang et al. 2007b). This is actually
dissection of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Screw
the reverse of the changes that occur following
fixation prevents posterior migration. (Reproduced from
ACDF. One may, therefore, suspect that adjacent
McAfee et al. [2003l, with permission from Wolters Kluwer
sites would consequently be protected from
Mealth)
degeneration. However, increased motion at the
implanted site could have deleterious effects on
ence of a portion of the implant anterior to
the posterior (dorsal in the dog) compartment of
the disc space. Other authors have not expressed
the joint. For example, increased range of motion
concern regarding incision or thinming (using a
could results in synovial hypertrophy surround-
high-speed bur) of the PLL in order to retrieve disc
ing the articular facets. Additionally, one study
material from the spinal canal (Chang et al. 2007a).
reported that constrained implants result in a
 Simulator testing, as well as prosthesis retriev-
'e a Kanreg) Supeol jaoey remogie u aseaiap
als from 11 Bryan prostheses (of over 5
5500
2009), while another found the opposite (Chung et
implanted) and 3 Prestige prostheses (of over
 al. 2009). Variation in experimental methodologies
300 implanted) suggest wear characteristics that
has yielded opposing results and the long-term
would support a 40-year fatigue life of the implants
dinical implications of cervical TDA remain to be
(Anderson et al. 2004). The wear predicted by
seer.
 simulator testing was 5-10 times greater than the
 The PCM prosthesis is unique in that it is avail-
wear seen in retrieved specimens and the sur-
 able with or without anterior screw fixation (Figure
rounding soft tissues did not demonstrate the
13.3). In the study by McAfee et al. (2003), the
inflammatory response typically seen surround-
authors concluded that screw fixation is indicated
 ing failed diarthrodial joints.
Several complications of TDA have been
ment (PLL) is a necessary component of the
 reported. These complications include, but are not
Td ioeu ue p pazisaoq a ms
limited to, ankylosis of adjacent vertebrae, lordo-
maintains the prosthesis within the disc space.
 sis, kyphosis, heterotopic ossification (HO), facet
PLL removal may be necessary when disc material
pain, expansion of osteophytes, implant loosen-
sisasnd au ien ls a m pan si
 ing, and implant migration.
without screw anchorage is described as low
Fibrosis, as well as ligamentous and synovial
profile, with the advantage of minimizing the 
hypertrophy, can result in loss of range of motion
potential for mechanical irritation from the pres-
over time. This can occur as a consequence of
Emerging Arthroplasties  203
excessive range of motion (i.e., instability) or
decompression in people. Subchondral bone expo-
increased articular facet loading (Barrey et al.
sure may also occur as a result of excessive bone
2009; Chung et al. 2009). Facet loading may be
removal at the endplate.
increased by the position of the implant within the
Lordosis can occur at the surgical site as a result
disc space. In people, the center of rotation of the
of incomplete seating of the implant. Incomplete
spinal segment is located in the posterior half of
seating can be a consequence of surgical error or
the disc space, although, due to translation, it is
from partial ankylosis, which does not allow com-
not fixed. Additionally, the center of rotation is less
plete seating. Conversely, segmental kyphosis can
 posterior in the more distal cervical vertebral seg-
develop following TDA and can be associated
ments (Pickett et al. 2005). If the center of motion
with prosthesis migration (Gwymedd et al. 2006).
of the prosthesis is in the anterior portion of the
A finite element analysis (FEA) model of TDA
disc space, facet loads will be increased (Dooris et
predicted that the altered stresses produced by
al. 2001; Chung et al. 2009).
various implants, as well as the elastic modulus
 Implant sizing must be appropriate for mainte-
mismatch between the vertebral endplate and the
nance of range of motion, independent of implant 
 prosthesis, will result in vertebral body destruc-
design. An undersized implant can result in insta-
tion with subsequent subsidence and loosening of
bility with secondary fibrosis and capsular and
the prosthesis (Chung et al. 2009). While the pre-
ligamentous hypertrophy, ultimately resulting in
diction of the FEA study is supported by a few
a decrease in the range of motion at the surgical
case reports, subsidence and loosening appear to
site (Buchowski et al. 2009; Roberto et al. 2010). An
be uncommon (van Ooij et al. 2003).
 oversized implant causes a diminished range of
Articular facet pain has been reported as a con-
motion and increases stress at adjacent disc sites.
sequence of malposition of ball-and-socket types
 Unfortunately, oversizing of implants is occasion-
of prosthesis. This is a consequence of asymmetri-
ally utilized by surgeons in order to improve
cal loading (Pickett et al. 2005).
foraminal decompression (Roberto et al. 2010).
HO is one of the more commonly reported com-
Osteophytes 1
reportedly
atrophy
following
plications following TDA. However, while some
ACDF, but can grow following cervical disc arthro-
reports consider this to be of minimal clinical sig-
plasty (Roberto et al. 2010). Growth of osteophytes
rificance (Tu et al. 2011), others report the devel-
 may be a response to increased range of motion or
opment of ankylosis as a consequence of the
instability. Development of foraminal osteophytes
presence of HO (Gwynedd et al. 2006). In the
may result in recurrence of radiculopathy and the
study that found no clinical implication for
need for additional surgery. Roberto et al. found
the development of HO, the incidence of HO was
found to be 48%, based on computed tomography
(CT) scan findings (Tu et al. 20i1). The pathogen-
 resection in prosthesis-implanted cadavers. They
esis of HO is unclear. It appears to be prevented
concluded that the PLL could be safely resected
by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
 and bilateral foraminotomies performed in cases
ndde aaenadeu au Aq Aarssod pue asn
of recurrent radiculopathy following TDA.
of bone wax (Gwymedd et al. 2006; Barbagallo et
 In addition to implant design and placement,
al. 2010; Tu et al. 2011). The location of HO is gen-
the implantation procedure must minimize the
erally at the anterolateral surface of the vertebral
risk of future ankylosis as well as loss of disc space
bodies (Barbagallo et al. 2010).
width (subsidence). The risk of ankylosis is mini-
Findings from several studies suggest that
 mized by maintenance of normal range of motion.
short-term and long-term (>2 years) outcomes are
When implantation of the
prosthesis leaves
 similar for TDA and ACDF (Bertagnoli et al. 2005a;
exposed subchondral bone at the endplates, the
Buchowski et al. 2009; Roberto et al. 2010). TDA
disc space may be prone to ankylosis (Buchowski
will have a significant advantage over ACDF if
sxa aq    a
may
future studies corroborate the lower incidence of
occur when the uncinate process (not present in
adjacent site degeneration shown in the study that
dogs) needs to be removed to provide foraminal
evaluated the Bryan prosthesis.
204Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Disc arthroplasty in small animals
spine, and additional studies are necessary for use
in the development of designs of lumbar or lum-
   n  Ad a
bosacral disc prostheses for dogs.
patients would likely be disc-associated Wobbler's
An in vitro pilot study for the first TDA for vet-
syndrome and, possibly, dorsal longitudinal liga-
erinary use was published recently (Adamo et al.
ment hypertrophy.
2007). The prosthesis is a stainless steel, metal-on-
Hofstetter et al. (2009) evaluated range of motion
 metal ball-and-socket design. It is semiconstrained
of the canine C4-C5 cervical spine segment. The
(unconstrained in rotation) and allows 30 degrees
mean range of motion was roughly 8, 7, and 1
 of motion in flexion /extension, as well as in lateral
degrees for flexion/extension, lateral bending.
bending. This range is substantially greater than
 and axial rotation, respectively Interestingly, Hof-
the range reported for the intact canine cervical
stetter et al. found that coupled motion for lateral
spine (Hofstetter et al. 2009). In this study, the
bending (primary motion of axial rotation) was
range of motion of the TDA implanted site and
172% of the primary motion and coupled motion
adjacent sites was compared with ventral slot, as
for axial rotation (primary motion of lateral
well as pinsand polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA).
bending) was 356% of the primary motion and no
While the disc replacement prosthesis was more
 coupled motion with flexion/extension. This sug-
similar to intact spine than either ventral slot or
gests that dogs have a much greater coupled
pins and PMMA, there was decreased range of
motion than humans. However, the authors of the
 motion in flexion/extension and in lateral bending
canine study acknowledged that variation mea-
compared with the intact spine at the implanted
surement methods for their study, compared with
site. Torsional range of motion was similar to the
the human study, may have substantially altered
 intact spine. There was a decrease in the range of
the results. Additional evaluation of coupled
motion at the disc space caudal to the implanted
motion in the canine cervical spine is warranted.
site. The study did not evaluate coupled motion.
The NZ for the canine cervical spine, as evaluated
If the development of TDA prostheses yields
by Hofstetter et al., was 1.4, 0.7, and 1.3 degrees
protection against adjacent site degeneration in
for flexion/extension, lateral bending, and axial
dogs with disc-associated Wobbler's syndrome, a
rotation, respectively.
veterinary market for such prostheses likely exists.
When designing an implant for the canine spine,
The prosthesis developed by Adamo (2011) has
 one must also consider morphological differences
been implanted in two clinical cases (Figure 13.4).
compared with humans. The morphological dif-
Clinical signs of myelopathy and nerve root
ferences at least partially explain differences in
compression resolved following surgery. However,
range of motion. Hofstetter et al. found that larger
vertebral segment range of motion was not pre-
dogs had relatively wider disc spaces than smaller
served on one case and was preserved only tem-
dogs and that the ventrodorsal width of the cranial
porarily in the other case. Therefore, although
endplate, disc thickness, and horizontal width of
clinical signs of adjacent site disease did not occur
the caudal endplate had a negative correlation
in these two cases during the study, this TDA
with range of motion in flexion/extension. Addi-
carmot be considered as an effective means to
tionally, dogs have proportionally smaller end-
 prevent adjacent site degeneration. It appears that
plates than humans, allowing 
greater
the prosthesis had an effect similar to an interbody
motion (Breit and Kunzel 2002).
methylmethacrylate plug. As can be expected,
Three-dimensional motion and morphometry
additional
studies are
necessary
to optimize
of the canine lumbar spine, from L4 through S1.
implants and techniques and to evaluate the safety
has also been evaluated (Benninger et al. 2006).
and efficacy of TDA prostheses for veterinary use.
However, the intent of that study was not an
investigation into the feasibility of lumbar or lum-
bosacral disc replacement. Rather, the intent was
Shoulder arthroplasty
to evaluate the dog as a model for degenerative
disc disease in people. Range of motion was not
Total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA) was first per-
evaluated as described above for the cervical
formed by Péan in 1893, 25 years before the first
Emerging Arthroplasties 205
Figure 13.4 (A) The canine cervical disc prosthesis. (B) Mediolateral radiograph of two-level implantation of the canine
cervical disc prosthesis. (Adamo artificial disc prosthesis [Patent #US2008/0306597])
reported total hip arthroplasty (Wirth and Rock-
with complications with constrained prostheses
-dde len pea1dsapim 1aaamoH (9661 po0m
were
 mechanical loosening, i
instability, and
cation of TSA, using commercial implants began
implant failure. Post et al. published reports based
in the 1970s.
on the same patient cohort in both 1979 and 1983
Indications for implantation of TSA, or hemiar-
and reported implant failure rates of 33% and 48%,
throplasty, include shoulder disability secondary
respectively. (Post et al. 1979; Post and Jablon
to rotator cuff arthropathy, primary osteoarthritis,
1983) Clearly, longer follow-up led to higher
traumatic osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and
failure rates. With the exception of a few forms of
tumor resection (Wirth and Rockwood 1996;
salvage procedures, constrained TSA prostheses
Hasan et al. 2002; Fox et al. 2009).
have, for the most part, been abandoned.
Since TSA was initially performed primarily
Based on the unacceptably high failure rates of
for shoulder instability secondary to rotator cuff
constrained prostheses, kinematic studies were
insufficiency, prostheses aimed to provide a maxi-
performed in an attempt to improve prosthetic
mally stable joint. This was achieved with various
design. It was determined that semiconstrained
forms of constrained prostheses (Wirth and Rock-
prostheses would result in less shear stress on the
wood 1996). Implant developers felt that a fully
implants, the glenoid component in particular,
constrained prosthesis was necessary due to the
and improve prosthesis survival (Wirth and Rock-
ineffective rotator cuff and kinematic studies
wood 1996). Additionally, one surprising finding
were not utilized in prosthesis development. This
was that shoulder joint reaction forces approxi-
resulted in a nonanatomical prosthesis. The con-
mate body weight when elevating the arm above
strained implants were fixed-fulcrum or semiful-
the level of the shoulder (Wirth et al. 2001).
crum concentric ball-and-socket components.
Unconstrained prostheses have had greater
Fixed-fulcrum  resulted  in  maximal  constraint
success than constrained prostheses. In uncon-
with coupling of humeral and scapular motion,
strained prostheses, mismatch between the diam-
whereas semifulcrum designs more closely mimic
eter of the humeral head and the diameter of the
typical THA components. Constraint was likely
glenoid fossa allows glenohumeral translation
the cause of most of the complications with early
and, therefore, unconstrained motion. The Neer
prostheses. Constrained prostheses met
with
prosthesis, and its subsequent generations, are the
limited success, with reported complication rates
most commonly encountered in the human litera-
of 100% and revision rates of up to 54% in case
ture (Brenner et al. 1989; Sperling et al. 2004; Fox
series with the longest follow-up (Wirth and
et al. 2009). However,
，the complication rate
Rockwood 1996). The top three factors associated
remains relatively high and several aspects of their
206Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
design are continuing to evolve, particularly for
first at 2-6 years follow-up, then again at an
the glenoid component. The largest systematic
average of 12 years after surgery, lucency was
review of the TSA literature included 41 case series
    %    s  
from 1975 to 1993 (Wirth and Rockwood 1996).
years. At the later follow-up, 44% of cases had
The complications associated with unconstrained
 definite loosening, including shifting of the glenoid
prostheses, in decreasing order of frequency, were
component (Cofield 1984; Torchia et al. 1997).
component loosening (nearly always the glenoid
Virtually all TSA components have a metallic
component), glenohumeral instability, rotator cuff
humeral head that articulates with a polyethylene
tear, periprosthetic fracture, infection, implant
glenoid surface. The glenoid component can be
failure, and deltoid dysfumction. Recent advances 
 metal backed or all polyethylene (Chin et al. 2006;
have led some authors to comment that complica-
Pelletier et al. 2008; Fox et al. 2009). Both cemented
tion rates are clearly decreasing and, with recent
 and press-fit components have been described for
changes in prosthesis design, the types of compli-
both the humerus and the glenoid.
'[ a uu) Apnis goz  'paueuo aae suon
Since the greatest source of complications with
 2006) did not include glenoid component loosen-
TSA, including both constrained and uncon-
ing in the top three complications seen and listed
strained prostheses, is glenoid component loosen-
 an overall major complication rate of 7.4%.
ing (Wirth and Rockwood 1996; Chin et al. 2006;
Lucency surrounding the glenoid component
 Fox et al. 2009), much attention has been given to
IaaN) saseo Jo %06 01 dn uI paiioda1 uaaq seu
developing and comparing complication rates
et al. 1982; Wirth and Rockwood 1996; Wirth et al.
between different forms of glenoid prostheses.
2001; Groh 2010; Figure 13.5); however, Neer, who
Three glenoid considerations have been given the
developed the prosthesis, reported that this
 most attention: keeled versus peg anchorage,
finding is rarely of clinical significance (Neer et al.
metal backed versus all polyethylene, and
1982). Others have found that the lucency was
cemented versus cementless (Figure 13.5).
frequently associated with diminished function
 Beginning with the Neer I total shoulder replace-
and pain (Hasan et al. 2002). In two case series that
ment, keeled glenoid designs have been the stan-
included the same cases at different time points,
dard. Both cemented and press-fit designs have
Figure 13.5 (A) Loosening of a keeled glenoid prosthesis. Note the lucent line surrounding the glenoid component (arrow).
oa asoi e jo us ( pue g) (asla y uissad ym lol e na ues soy nid)
component to a hemiarthroplasty. (Reproduced from Sperling et al. [2007l, with permission from Elsevier)
Emerging Arthroplasties  207
Figure 13.6 Keeled (A) and peg (B) glenoid components used in a canine study. While the peg implant is described as
(aasl woy uoissad ym 'llool ie na yu wy pnidaa) pauawa aie sad yoous eudad au ssuua
been utilized. More recently, designs have included
a central peg, either press-fit or cemented, with
 sd s ad a ro om
et al. 2001; Groh 2010; Figure 13.6). In a study
using a weight-bearing, canine model, an unce-
mented peg prosthesis was compared with a
cemented, keeled prosthesis (Wirth et al. 2001).
The central peg of the peg prosthesis had circum-
ferential fins or flanges, providing space for bone
ingrowth for long-term stability. Although the peg
prosthesis was referred to as uncemented, the
three peripheral pegs, but not the central peg.
and did not have flanges. Twenty-eight dogs were
included in this study, half assigmed to the keeled
group, half to the peg. Half of the dogs in each
Figure 13.7 Histological appearance of bone ingrowth
group were sacrificed at 3 months and half at 6
into the central, fluted peg of the glenoid prosthesis from
months. After euthianasia, an implant was placed
Figure 13.6. (Reproduced from Wirth et al. [2001l, with
in the opposite shoulder to allow a time O evalua-
permission from Elsevier)
tion. The mean initial pullout strengths were
165.5 ± 84 N for keeled implants and 102.7 ± 33N
for pegged implants. From time 0 to 6 months, the
and histologically, bony ingrowth was evident
pullout strength of keeled implants decreased by
between flanges in the peg design and lucent lines
more than 90%, while the pullout strength
1of
were seen at 3 and 6 months in the keeled designi
pegged implants increased by over 300%. Failure
(Figure 13.7).
of keeled implants occurred at the cement-keel
 In a study using a similar design to the canine
interface and failure of pegged implants was at the
model above, no periprosthetic lucency was
 peg-glenoid interface (i.e., failure of the implant
evident at 2-year radiographic follow-up in a
rather than failure of fixation). Radiographically
series of 83 TSAs (Groh 2010). Based on the studies
208Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
performed to date, it appears that pegged glenoid
designs used in both cemented and uncemented
prostheses have less radiolucency than keeled
fashion. A recent study compared cemented versus
designs. However, follow-up
time available
for the newer pegged prostheses is more limited
randomized, prospective, double-blinded study
and long-term follow-up is necessary before a
found that cemented humeral implants resulted in
cdlear determination of superiority can be made
better function, comfort, and strength over a
(Gartsman et al. 2005).
 2-year follow-up period (Litchfield et al. 2011).
Glenoid prostheses that are all polyethylene
Several other modifications and surgical tech-
 result in greater load transfer to trabecular bone,
 niques have been implemented in order to increase
whereas  metal-backed
d prostheses have greater
survival of the glenoid component. Mismatch of
lboad transfer to cortical bone (Boileau et al. 2002;
the diameter of the glenoid and the humeral head,
Pelletier et al. 2008). It is unknown which form of
with a greater radius of curvature for the glenoid,
load transfer is more physiological or longer
decreases glenoid rim contact with the humeral
lasting; however, in studies comparing survival
head during translation. The decreased contact
of
decreases loading of the glenoid rim and, conse-
of allpolyethylene glenoid prostheses, the all-
quently, decreases polyethylene deformation and
polyethylene components fare consistently better.
subsequent loosening. Preservation of the sub-
Unfortunately, there is inconsistency in metal-
chondral bone of the glenoid has also led to
backed versus all-polyethylene comparisons. For
improved glenoid component fixation and dimin-
example, one study compared an uncemented,
ished subsidence (Wirth et al. 2001). The use of
keeled, metal-backed component with a cemented,
concentric reaming techniques, improved bone
pegged component (Pelletier et al. 2008). Certainly,
 ingrowth materials, and plasma spraying of pros-
in that study, it is difficult to distinguish the effect
theses have also been described as methods to
of cemented versus cementless, keeled versus
improve
fixation of the glenoid component
 pegged, and metal backed versus all polyethylene.
(Cofield and Daly 1992; Wirth et al. 2001).
Fox et al. reported that metal-backed glenoid pros-
Glenohumeral instability is the second most
theses have a significantly higher failure rate than
common complication of TSA, with a reported
all-polyethylene designs (Fox et al. 2009). The all-
 incidence of 29%. The normal passive constraints
polyethylene designs evaluated in this study were
that aid in shoulder stability are disrupted by TSA.
cemented. The authors described three reasons for
 The passive constraints include the architecture of
this increased complication rate with metal-backed
the joint surface, fixed joint volume, and the
glenoid components: (1) increased generation of
adhesive/cohesive properties of the joint fluid
wear debris (both metallic and polyethylene); (2)
(Wirth and Rockwood 1995, 1996; Sidaway et al.
 increased incidence of component loosening.
2004). The deltoid muscles and the rotator cuff, as
likely secondary to the increase in wear debris, as
well as the joint capsule and bony architecture,
well as increased polyethylene stress in a metal-
which balance moderate and large loads, respec-
backed prosthesis; and (3) higher incidence of gle-
tively, are also disrupted by TSA. Glenohumeral
nohumeralinstability associated with asymmetrical
instability can be described in four different direc-
polyethylene wear, as well as development
of
tions: anterior,
posterior,
superior,
ori
inferior
Bankart-like lesions (Fox et al. 2009).
Bankart
Anterior instability is typically the result of poor
lesions are labral tears of the glenoid that are asso-
 surgical technique and complete luxation cannot
ciated with trauma and cause instability. Addi-
occur without a torn subscapularis tendon. Sub-
tional risk factors for glenoid componentloosening
scapularis tendon tears can result for poor sutur-
identified in the Fox study included TSA for avas-
ing technique or use of oversized implants that
cular necrosis or for posttraumatic arthritis, as 
stress the subscapularis suture line (Wirth and
well as being a male.
Rockwood 1996; Wirth et al. 2001). Poor implant
Although cemented and uncemented glenoid,
positioning, specifically decreased retroversion of
as well as humeral, prostheses have beer described,
the humeral head, can also lead to anterior insta-
and are in clinical use, there has not been a clear
Ai si  () r 
comparison made between similar glenoid implant
a consequence of the combination of a strong
Emerging Arthroplasties  209
deltoid muscle and a weak rotator cuff. Superior
drugs. The most common management choice
instability may not be associated with pain, but
after infection is resection arthroplasty (Wirth and
often leads to eccentric glenoid loading and sub-
Rockwood 1996).
sequent glenoid loosening (Collins et al. 1992).
Nerve injury is another reported complication
Posterior instability is less frequently reported, but
of TSA. This typically involves neurapraxia of the
can be a consequence of excessive (>20 degrees)
axillary nerve, but can also affect the median,
retroversion of the glenoid component or exces-
ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves, as well as
sive retroversion (>45 degrees) of the humeral
 generalized brachial plexus injury. The neuro-
component (Brewer et al. 1986). Posterior instabil-
praxia is typically self-limiting (Wirth and Rock-
ity can also result from posterior glenoid erosion,
wood 1996). Interestingly, suprascapular nerve
which can lead the surgeon to place the glenoid
injury was not described. Axillary nerve injury can
component in excessive retroversion. Bone graft of
cause deltoid muscle dysfunction, which can lead
the posterior glenoid has been recommended in
to glenohumeral instability.
cases of severe posterior glenoid erosion (Neer
Complications related to implant failure are
 and Morrison 1988). Inferior instability is usually
infrequent, but several are (
described. These
a complication associated with the use of TSA for
include displacement of the polyethylene insert
the treatment of proximal humeral fractures or
from the glenoid tray, fracture of the glenoid keel,
rheumatoid arthritis. These conditions can result
screw fracture (for glenoid with screw fixation),
in collapse or shortening of the proximal humerus
and disassociation of a modular humeral compo-
and cause a decrease in resting deltoid and rotator
cuff tension (Wirth and Rockwood 1996).
1990; Wirth and Rockwood 1996).
Rotator cuff tears are the third most common
Hemiarthroplasty with a humeral component,
complication of TSA, comprising approximately
but no glenoid prosthesis, is commonly used in
2% of TSA cases. Unfortunately, revision is typi-
patients with proximal humeral fractures and a
cally of limited benefit and recurrence of tears is
normal glenoid (Matsen et al. 2005). Hemiarthro-
likely (Wall et al. 2007). Salvage revisions for cases
plasty has also been utilized in an attempt to avoid
with rotator cuff tears include reverse arthroplasty,
complications associated with glenoid prosthesis
to be discussed later.
loosening, as well as a salvage or revision proce-
Periprosthetic fractures, including intraopera-
dure in cases with a failed glenoid component
tive and postoperative fractures, are the fourth
(Figure 13.5; Wirth and Rockwood 1996; Sperling
most common TSA complication. However, one
et al. 2004, 2007; Matsen et al. 2005). Findings from
case series found them to be the most common
studies comparing outcomes of TSA versus hemi-
complication (Chin et al. 2006). Most fractures
arthroplasty have varied. Studies have not noted
are of the humerus and occur at the time of
significant differences in pain relief or range of
surgery. They are often secondary to intraopera-
motion (Hasan et al. 2002; Sperling et al. 2007).
While several reports have described higher revi-
impaction, and manipulation of the upper extrem-
sion rates and higher unsatisfactory outcome rates
ity during exposure of the glenoid (Wirth and
with hemiarthroplasty than with TSA, the differ-
Rockwood 1996; Chin et al. 2006). When postop-
ences have not usually been statistically signifi-
erative fractures occur, they are most common in
cant. One study did find an increased incidence of
older patients with osteoporotic or osteopenic
radiolucency surrounding the humeral compo-
 bone or rheumatoid arthritis. Open reduction and
nent in the TSA group, compared with the hemi-
stabilization is typically required (Groh et al.
arthroplasty group. The same study concluded,
2008).
however, that TSA was a better choice than hemi-
Infection rates with TSA are similar to other
 arthroplasty for patients under 50 years of age
joint arthroplasties, at a reported rate of 0.5%-3.9%
(Sperling et al. 2004). The most common complica-
(Fox et al. 2009). The risk of infection is increased
tions reported with hemiarthroplasty are posterior
in patients with diabetes mellitus,
, rheumatoid
glenoid erosion and painful glenoid arthrosis
arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, distant
infection, and patients using immunosuppressive
Matsen et al. 2005).
Figure 13.8  Hemiarthroplasty with concentric reaming of
the canine glenoid at time 0 (A) and 24 weeks (B). Note the
smooth, concave, fibrous tissue lined cavity at 24 weeks.
Bar: 10 mm. (Reproduced from Matsen et al. [2005], with
Figure 13.9  Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty. Note that
permission from Wiley-Blackwell)
the hemispherical component is on the scapular side, rather
than the humeral side. Reverse TSA is performed primarily
in rotator cuff-deficient shoulders. (Radiograph courtesy of
Since posterior glenoid erosion is a major factor
Jewett Orthopedic Clinic, Winter Park, FL)
in either failure or unsatisfactory outcomes with
hemiarthroplasty, Matsen et al. performed a hemi-
 maximizes stability but limits function; however,
arthroplasty study using concentric reaming in a
recent modifications allow for more degrees of
canine model (Matsen et al. 2005). The authors
freedom of motion (Figure 13.9). The reverse TSA
hypothesized that concentric, spherical reaming
has primarily been used for cases with rotator cuff
would result in improved load transfer and
 arthropathy, but has also been used for revisions
improved stability of the glenohumeral articula-
and following tumor resections, as well as cases
tion. The study included 12 dogs with a mean
where glenoid deformity precludes anchorage of
body weight of approximately 50lb. Based on
a keeled or peg component. In general, the reverse
radiographic and histological evaluation at 10
TSA is used in patients with the expectation of
weeks (six dogs) and 24 weeks (six dogs), the
"limited goals rehabilitation" (Wall et al. 2007).
authors concluded that concentric, spherical
The best results, considering the limited expecta-
 glenoid reaming resulted in consistent healing of 
tions, are seen in patients with rotator cuff tears;
the glenoid, lines with living fibrocartilage with a
however, the revision rate is fairly high (20%-70%)
congruent curvature that matched the prosthetic
and appears to depend on case selection.
humeral head (Figure 13.8).
Reverse TSA was first described by Grammont
dno ay auaaod e sazn pue n u
Arthroplasty of the shoulder
with a cemented or uncemented stem, and a
in small animals
metallic, hemispherical glenoid component (Wall
et al. 2007). Reverse TSA is typically a more con-
The two studies utilizing canine models, discussed
strained, full-hinge type of prosthesis, which
earlier in this section, provide useful information
Emerging Arthroplasties  211
for the future development of a canine TSA or
9.9 mm long, with a 13.1-mm base (Wirth et al.
hemiarthroplasty procedure/prosthesis. Both the
2001).
TSA and the hemiarthroplasty studies utilized a
 In the canine hemiarthroplasty study, following
lateral approach and required an osteotomy of the
its curettage, the glenoid was reamed with a
greater tubercle. The TSA study also incorporated
15-mm l
hemispherical
reamer and 
extended
an osteotomy of the lesser tubercle, as pilot studies
through the subchondral plate. The metallic
indicated that primary repair of a subscapularis
humeral head had a 14-mm radius of curvature
tenotomy consistently failed (Wirth et al. 2001).
and the stem was press-fit; however, stem loosen-
Osteotomies were repaired using either Kirschner
wires and a figure-of-eight tension band, or with
ated, and stem design was not described (Matsen
Dacron suture. The subscapularis insertion was
et al. 2005).
protected in the hemiarthroplasty study and,
therefore, did not require tenotomy (Matsen et al.
2005). In the TSA study, the authors found it
imperative to avoid disruption of the biceps
Arthroplasty of the carpus
tendon for postoperative stability; however, in the
hemiarthroplasty study, the biceps was freed from
The first attempt at total wrist arthroplasty (TWA)
the intertubercular groove by transection of the
  u  u  q pad sm
transverse humeral ligament that was repaired at
utilized an ivory prosthesis. The outcome was
the conclusion of surgery. In a study by Sidaway
unsuccessful and TWA did not begin to gain
et al., the authors found that the canine biceps
acceptance until Swanson introduced a silicone
tendon contributes to passive shoulder stability,
prosthesis in 1967 (Taljanovic et al. 2003; Cavaliere
especially in neutral and flexed positions, and con-
and Chung 2008a; Gupta 2008).
 tributes to medial stability during shoulder flexion.
The most common indication for TWA is rheu-
The Sidaway study also found that complete luxa-
matoid arthritis (Taljanovic et al. 2003). However,
tion of the canine shoulder will not occur without
some authors believe that, as advances in prosthe-
transection of the medial glenohumeral ligament
ses are seen, TWA, rather than arthrodesis or
Anis Aiseidorne aa un (ooz te ia Aemps)
partial arthrodesis, will be used in more posttrau-
was the tendon of origin of the biceps disrupted.
matic arthritis (Gupta 2008). Several studies have
Each of the studies placed subjects in a Velpeau
compared outcomes between TWA and arthrode-
sling for 1-2 weeks after surgery. The reader is
sis (Palmer et al. 1985; Taljanovic et al. 2003;
encouraged to refer to each of the canine shoulder
Cavaliere and Chung 2008a,b, 2010). While TWA
arthroplasty studies for a detailed description of
generally
 offers improved function, revision,
the surgical approach and procedure.
residual pain, and complication rates are higher
Each of the studies using canine models utilized
with TWA than with arthrodesis. Maintenance of
 medium- to large-breed dogs and implant dimen-
sions were taken from measurements on cadavers.
tage of TWA over arthrodesis. Reported angles
For the TSA study, the dimensions of the articulat-
for functional range of motion are inconsistent;
ing component of the glenoid 
 prosthesis were
however, angles reported by Palmer et al. (1985)
the same for both the keeled and peg implants.
are commonly referenced. Palmer reported func-
The glenoid was oval, with
 dimensions
tional angles as follows: 5 degrees flexion, 30
20.3mm × 22.9mm, a radius of
curvature
degrees extension, 10 degrees radial deviation
14.5mm, and a thickness of 2.5mm. For the peg
(i.e., varus motion), and 10 degrees ulnar devia-
 implant, the central peg length was 12.6mm, with
tion (i.e., valgus motion). By comparison, with
 a core diameter of 3.6 mm and four circumferential
straight extension considered as 180 degrees,
fins having an outside diameter of 7.6mm and a
normal carpal extension and flexion angles of
thickness of 0.6mm. Each of the fins was 1.3mm
dogs at a walk have been recently reported
apart. The three peripheral pegs were each 5.6 mm
between 200 and 239 degrees and 128 and 130
long and had diameters of 3.9mm. The keeled
degrees, respectively (Feeney et al. 2007; Holler
component had a keel that was 3mm thick and
et al. 2010).
212
There are several contraindications for TWA.
 motion that is preserved is of value for quality of
These include sensory or motor neurological dys-
life. This may be an important consideration in the
function, infection, poor bone quality, chronic or
design of a veterinary prosthesis. The Biaxial
severe volar (palmar) and ulnar subluxation, and
 implants can be used as press-fit or cemented, but
probably the most relevant contraindication with
a higher failure rate has been seen in patients with
regard to a possible veterinary prosthesis, the
severe bone loss receiving uncemented prostheses,
 need for weight bearing across the joint. In people,
including patients with advanced rheumatoid
weight bearing would be necessary in patients
 arthritis. In 2008, one author commented that the
that utilize a cane or a walker (Taljanovic et al.
Biaxial prosthesis was discontinued (Gupta 2008);
2003).
however, the DePuy website still lists the prosthe-
The silicone Swanson prosthesis, developed in
 sis at the time of this writing.
1967, was a double-stemmed, flexible hinge that
The Universal 2 TWA (Integra Lifesciences)
was ultimately stabilized by scar tissue. It had a
differs from the Biaxial prosthesis in that the poly-
very high complication rate, with silicone disinte-
ethylene is on the carpal side. The articulating
gration and an associated inflammatory response.
 surfaces are ellipsoid. The carpal component is
In the 1970s, ball-and-socket prostheses
were
stabilized using a cemented central peg in the
introduced. These prostheses were meant to be
scaphoid and two peripheral screws. Luxation is
unconstrained, but impingement rendered them
the most common complication with the Univer-
functionally constrained (Taljanovic et al. 2003).
sal 2 prosthesis (Menon 1998).
Modifications of the ball-and-socket led to the
Two additional TWA prostheses are now avail-
development of semiconstrained prostheses with
able: Maestro (Biomet, Warsaw, IN) and ReMotion
ellipsoid articulating surfaces and range of motion
(Small Bone Innovations, Morrisville, PA). Both
similar to the normal wrist. However, loosening of
 have limited or no published follow-up. However,
the distal (i.e., carpal) component remained a sig-
the ReMotion has an interesting modification. The
nificant problem. The Swanson prosthesis, as well
 polyethylene, which is on the carpal component,
as the ball-and-socket prostheses, was progres-
 can pivot approximately 10 degrees in either direc-
sivelya
abandoned due to high failure rates.
tion on the carpal plate. This is meant to diminish
However, forms of the silicone prostheses are
torque transmission to the carpal component and
used, to some extent, in interphalangeal joints.
is somewhat similar to the "mobile bearing" type
 In the 1980s and 1990s the Biaxial (DePuy,
 of implant discussed in the "Total Ankle Arthro-
Warsaw, IN; Figure 13.10) and Universal prosthe-
 plasty" section. It will be important to monitor the
ses (Integra Lifesciences, Plainsboro, NJ; Figure
development of wear debris on long-term follow-
up. In one case series, authored by the inventor of
These are the prostheses most currently in use
the prosthesis, no significant complications were
that have a body of literature describing outcomes.
reported (Gupta 2008). In another, however, 4 out
Both of these prostheses are cobalt-chromium
 of 20 wrists had a fair or poor outcome (Herzberg
 alloys. The Biaxial TWA is an unconstrained pros-
 2011). In one study (Cavaliere and Chung 2008a),
thesis with a rounded articular face and the radial
third-generation TWA prostheses had no better
component of the prosthesis was shifted to a more
rate of satisfactory results than first-generation
volar (palmar) position to diminish impingement
prostheses. To date, the superiority of TWA over
seen with other prostheses. The polyethylene
arthrodesis has not beern established and arthrod-
surface is on the radial side (Cobb and Becken-
esis remains much more broadly accepted than
 baugh 1996). In a study with a mean follw-up
TWA.
time of 52 months, there was a 26% clinical failure
rate. Functional range of motion was achieved in
fewer than 50% of patients; however, this has
Arthroplasty of the carpus for small animals
much to do with the preexisting severity of bone
destruction (Takwale et al. 2002). Additionally,
It has been recommended that a TWA should be
 many patients with a range of motion below what
able to withstand a load of 200N during daily
is considered functional still feel that the range of
activities (Youm and Flatt 1984). However, it is not
Emerging Arthroplasties  213
Figure 13.10 (A) The Biaxial total wrist prosthesis (DePuy, Warsaw, IN) dorsopalmar radiograph. (B) Mediolateral
radiograph of a patient with rheumatoid arthritis affecting the wrist. (C) Mediolateral radiograph of the Biaxial total wrist
prosthesis. (Reproduced from Rizzo and Beckenbaugh [2003], with permission from Elsevier)
dlear from which direction the load is to be applied.
2010). Another study found PVF of the forelimb,
In most recent veterinary reports, the ground reac-
at a trot, to be between 105% and 115% of body
 tion forces of a limb using force plate or pressure-
weight (Lascelles et al. 2006). Certainly, these
sensitive walkway analysis are expressed, in a
 parameters, in addition to the joint angles through
normalized fashion, as a percent of body weight
which the force is applied, must be considered in
(Lascelles et al. 2006; Voss et al. 2010). However, in
the desigm of a prosthesis for veterinary use.
Apoq ueau e wim ssop jo dnoi8 e 1oy Xpnis auo
 In addition to range of motion and the load
 requirements of TWA prostheses, intact triangu-
at a trot for the forelimb was 437N (Voss et al.
development of designs for human TWA prosthe-
ses is of value.
There are no published reports of the use of
small animals as a model for TWA. There are also
no reports of a custom TWA used in companion
animals.
Total ankle arthroplasty
Total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) has been per-
formed since the 1970s. Early prostheses were
cemented and highly constrained and suffered
failure rates in excess of 70% (Kitaoka et al. 1994;
Gougoulias et al. 2009). This history is similar to
that described for both shoulder and wrist arthro-
plasties above.
The most common indications for TAA are post-
traumatic arthritis and inflammatory (e.g., rheu-
matoid) arthritis (Gougoulias et al. 2009, 2010). As
with TWA, substantial controversy exists regard-
ing the advantages and disadvantages of TAA
versus arthrodesis. The loss of tibiotalar motion
with arthrodesis is associated with development
of adjacent joint arthritis, specifically, stifle arthri-
tis and subtalar (intertarsal) arthritis (Gougoulias
et al. 2009; Saltzman et al. 2009; Krause et al. 2011).
Prevention of adjacent joint arthritis is one of the
primary justifications for TAA. Successful TAA
should result in normal or near normal kinematics
of the hip and knee (Doets et al. 2007). However,
restoration of normal tarsal range of motion is not
 an expectation with TAA. In fact, the goal is to
Figure 13.11
The Universal total wrist arthroplasty.
preserve, or slightly improve, existing range of
(Radiograph courtesy of Jewett Orthopedic Clinic, Winter
motion. Various studies report an improvement in
Park, FL)
the dorsoplantar range of motion of 4-14 degrees
(Hvid et al. 1985). An overall dorsoplantar range
necessary for support in patients with TWA (Gupta
of motion of 23-27 degrees is considered adequate
2008).
The palmar fibrocartilage is typically
for walking. In patients with chronic restriction of
 damaged or nonfunctional in veterinary patients
motion, lengthening of the Achilles tendon may be
 with carpal hyperextension injury.
necessary to permit an adequate range of motion
The most common veterinary indications for a
(Wood and Deakin 2003).
-os Xmu uoisujxaadu aq on Aall are vML
In addition to arthritis of adjacent joints, non-
minuted articular fractures, erosive arthritis/
 uion, persistent pain, wound complications, and
polyarthritis, and limb sparing. Unfortunately,
 malalignment are common complications follow-
weight bearing across the joint is critical for vet-
 ing arthrodesis (Gougoulias et al. 2009; Saltzman
erinary patients and current design rationale
et al. 2009; Krause et al. 2011). A systematic review
for human TWA prostheses will need to be sub-
comparing outcomes with arthrodesis with out-
stantially altered for a veterinary prosthesis.
comes with TAA reported revision rates of 9% and
Regardless, an overview of the progression and
7%, respectively, and fair to poor outcomes in 26%
Emerging Arthroplasties  215
A
B
Polyethylene
Talar component
Figure 13.12 Schematic rendering of two-component (A) and three-component (B) ankle replacements. Note that the
polyethylene component in panel B is independent of both the tibial and talar components.
and 29%, respectively (Haddad et al. 2007). Most
second-generation prostheses, the polyethylene is
arthrodesis revisions were for nonunion. Despite
on the tibial side (Gougoulias et al. 2009). Further,
a higher complication rate, patient satisfaction
the trend has clearly been toward minimal con-
has reportedly been higher after TAA than after
straint designs (Wood and Deakin 2003; Doets et
arthrodesis.
al. 2006; Espinosa et al. 2010; Krause et al. 2011).
Absolute contraindications for TAA include
As with other joints, more constrained prostheses
 acute and chronic infection, neurological deficits,
led to implant loosening, secondary to increased
severe angular deformities, Charcot's arthropathy
implant-bone or cement-bone interface stresses.
(joint changes secondary to loss of sensation), and
An additional trend in TAA prosthesis design
avascular necrosis of the talus (Gougoulias et al.
is the use of a three-component, rather than
2009). There have been a few case reports of
two-component, prosthesis (Figure 13.12). Two-
talus replacement combined with TAA in patients
component designs are generally polyethylene-
with talar destruction or avascular necrosis of
1 articulations, with the polyethylene
on-metal
the talus (Tsukamoto et al. 2010); therefore, avas-
component fixed to the tibial component. Three-
cular necrosis of the talus may be a relative
component designs are also referred to as mobile-
contraindication.
bearing designs, with the polyethylene component
Relative contraindications for TAA, based on
able to move independent of both the tibial and
reported outcomes to date, are younger age.
talar components, acting as a meniscus (Gougou-
obesity, and physically demanding work (Gou-
 goulias et al. 2009). In addition, if the patient has
2011).
ipsilateral knee arthritis, it is recommended to
 In recent years, two-component designs have
correct the stifle pathology first.
primarily been used in the United States, and
Very few of the first-generation TAA implants
three-component (
designs have been used in
are still in use. One of the more popular early TAA
Europe. 
 No three-component design prostheses
 designs, the Mayo Ankle, had a greater-than-40%
were approved by the FDA until 2009. In fact,
failure rate after 10 years. In a long-term study
some European three-component prostheses were
conducted at the Mayo Clinic, the study authors
modified as two-component prostheses for the
did not advise its use, especially in patients under
U.S. market (Stengel and Bauwens 2005; Krause et
57 years of age (Kitaoka et al. 1994). The Mayo
 al. 2011). Three-component prostheses have report-
Ankle is no longer in use.
edly had
I superior initial results. It has been
The tibial component of early designs was all
hypothesized that the freedom of motion of the
polyethylene. Current designs generally consist of
polyethylene meniscus would dampen both the
a metal-backed tibial component with both the
contact stresses applied to the polyethylene, as
tibial and talar components uncemented.
In
wella
asf
the shear stresses applied
l tothe
216Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
implant-bone interface. These improvements
prostheses that have excessive constraint (Wood
should, in turn, decrease polyethylene wear and
and Deakin 2003; Doets et al. 2006; Gougoulias et
mechanical loosening, respectively.
al. 2009). Excessive polyethylene loading, as well
As noted above, no current TAA implants utilize
as edge (asymmetrical) loading, also results in
cement fixation. The methiod of fixation of the
greater polyethylene wear and subsequent loosen-
components is either press-fit or screw fixation, or
ing. Excessive polyethylene loading and edge
 both. Tibial anchorage is accomplished using one
loading are typically a consequence of either
 of the following: stem, flange, pegs, or screws.
failure to recognize or correct preexisting limb
Talar anchorage utilizes either keel or peg. Fixa-
deviation or due to implant misaligmment during
tion by means other than screws is by press-fit
surgery. Preoperative ankle aligmment can
1be
(Gougoulias et al. 2009). The human talus
is
affected by traumatic osteoarthritis, in which case
approximately 40% stronger in compression that
the deviation is typically varus. Immune-mediated
is the distal tibia. At a distance of 1-1.5cm from
Ai pe  i o r s
the joint, tibial bone is mostly loose, fatty bone
results in valgus deviation (Wood and Deakin
and does not provide stable fixation. Therefore,
 2003). Some authors consider a preoperative ankle
minimal bone resection (<4mm) is advised
in
 malalignment of greater than 10-15 degrees a rela-
order to minimize the risk of subsidence (Hvid
tive contraindication for TAA and require correc-
et al. 1985). Implants that incorporate a long tibial
tive osteotomy prior to TAA (Wood and Deakin
stem risk excessive load transmission to the rela-
2003; Doets et al. 2006).
tively weak anterior tibial cortex. Talar component
Espinosa et al. evaluated the effect of malalign-
loosening is less frequent than tibial component
 ment on polyethylene wear (Espinosa et al. 2010).
loosening because of this difference in bone
They found that the yield stress of polyethylene
strength (Kofoed and Saltzman 2004).
(18-20MPa) is exceeded when the tibial or talar
There are several common complications fol-
components arei
implanted at greater than 5
lowing TAA, including delayed wound healing.
degrees of eversion (Figure 13.13). That study also
deep infection, malleolar fracture, aseptic loosen-
found that the lower kinematic constraint of three-
mg, misalignment, edge loading, and
1gutter
component designs results in a more even pres-
impingement. Gutter impingement occurs when
sure distribution than two-component designs.
the talar component impact the malleoli with
Furthermore, the study noted that, even with
either varus or valgus stress (Wood and Deakin
appropriate implant placement, two-component
2003; Gougoulias et al. 2009).
prostheses exceeded polyethylene yield stress.
While wound healing is consistently among the 
The long-term effect of the independent move-
most
common complications,
most
authors
ment of the polyethylene meniscus in three-
comment that it is also the complication that most
component prostheses on the development of
consistently decreases in frequency with greater
 polyethylene wear debris is unknown.
experience. Similarly, deep infection, which gener-
An additional reported contributor to the inci-
ally results in implant loosening
and
either
 dence of aseptic loosening is the type of implant
revision or explantation, generally decreases in
coating. Nearly all current prostheses are cobalt-
incidence with operator experience (Wood and
chrome alloys. The incidence of aseptic loosening
Deakin 2003; Espinosa et al. 2010).
 decreased when the type of coating of implants
Fracture of either the medial or lateral malleolus
changed from a single-layer
hydroxyapatite
coating to a dual coating of plasma-sprayed tita-
fractures have been associated with
1 excessive
s a s d w pe u
 bone resection, gutter impingement, and the use 
common to a variety of prostheses in the late 1990s
of oversized talar implants. Malleolar fractures
(Wood and Deakin 2003).
that occur after surgery
are often managed
Various two-component prostheses designs are
conservatively.
in use, including Agility, INBONE (Inbone Tech-
Aseptic loosening is frequently associated with
nologies, Boulder, CO), Salto (Tornier, St. Ismier,
 Excessive shear stress applied to either the poly-
France), and Eclipse (Kineticos Medical, Carlsbad,
ethylene or the implant-bone interface 
with
CA). The most commonly used two-component
Emerging Arthroplasties  217
10° eversion of
tibial component
R
10° eversion of
talar component
Figure 13.13 (A) Malalignment associated with eversion of tibial component. (B) Malalignment associated with eversion of
the talar component. (lmage by Derek Fox)
prosthesis is the Agility Total Ankle Replacement
(DePuy; Figure 13.14), which was the only FDA-
approved TAA until 2007 (Knecht et al. 2004; Gou-
Syndesmosis screw
 goulias et al. 2009; Espinosa et al. 2010). The Agility
 prosthesis is semiconstrained. A space between the
medial and lateral sides of the talar component
and the malleoli allow the talus to slide side-
Polyethylene'fixed
to-side. In addition to application of the TAA
to tibial component
implants, the Agility prosthesis required creation
of a tibiofibular syndesmosis via screw fixation
(Figure 13.14). Delayed symdesmosis is one of the
Talar component
more common complications with the Agility
prosthesis and is often associated with lysis sur-
Frontal Plane
rounding the tibial component (Knecht et al. 2004;
Alvine and Conti 2006; Gougoulias et al. 2009).
Figure 13.14 The Agility (DePuy, Warsaw, IN) total ankle.
 Delayed syndesmosis is reported in approximately
Note the screw placed for tibiofibular syndemosis.
10% of cases. A specialized radiographic projec-
(Reproduced from Gougoulias et al. [2009], with
permission from Oxford University Press)
tion, termed the mortise view, is used to evaluate
the syndesmosis (Knecht et al. 2004). Reported
complication rates, revision rates, and failure rates
Figure 13.15), prosthesis (Gougoulias et al. 2009).
vary widely. Failure rates reportedly range from
The BP, Salto, Scandinavian Total Ankle Replace-
6% to 31% (Pyevich et al. 1998; Knecht et al. 2004;
ment (STAR, Waldemar Link, Hamburg, Germany;
Alvine and Conti 2006). The first three-component
Figure 13.16), and Mobility prostheses are the most
TAA design was the Low-Contact-Stress, or LCS,
commonly encountered in the literature. The Salto
prosthesis. The LCS design evolved into the
Talaris (Tornier, Bloomington, MN) was developed
Buechel-Pappas, or BP (Endotec, Orange, NJ;
as a three-component prosthesis in Europe, but
Tibial stem
"Mobile"
polyethylene
Allows
inversion-eversion
Peg for talar fixation
Sulcus
Talar
component
Frontalplane
Sagittal plane
Figure 13.15 The Buechel-Pappas (BP) (Endotec, Orange, NJ) total ankle, a three-component system with a tibial fixation 
peg.(Reproduced from Gougoulias et al. [2009l, with permission from Oxford University Press)
Bars for tibial
fixation
"Mobile"
polyethylene
(no inversion/
eversionallowed)
Talar
component
 Frontal plane
Sagittal plane
Figure 13.16
The STAR (Waldemar Link, Hamburg, Germany) total ankle, a three-component system with cylindrical bars
for tibial fixation. (Reproduced from Gougoulias et al. [2009l, with permission from Oxford University Press)
218
Emerging Arthroplasties 219
modified as a two-component prosthesis in the
forms of TAA in people (Gougoulias et al. 2009),
United States due to FDA restrictions. The BP pros-
a transarticular external fixator may be applied
thesis is an unconstrained design with a flat upper
during healing from a TAA.
(tibial) surface allowing inversion (pronation) and
eversion (supination). The distal meniscal surface
has a sulcus, making it congruent with the talar
component. This meniscal desigm is described as
References
having a flat upper surface and a congruent distal
surface. The tibial component is anchored with a
Adamo PF. Cervical arthroplasty in two dogs with disc-
stem, which has been a concern due to the previ-
associated cervical spondylomyelopathy. J Am Vet
ously described weak distal tibia (Doets et al.
Med Assoc 2011;239:808-817.
2006). Studies evaluating the most recent genera-
Adamo PF, Kobayashi H, Markel M, Vanderby R Jr.
tion of BP prostheses report a 90% 12-year pros-
In vitro biomechanical comparison of cervical disk
thesis survival rate. Of the TAA_ prostheses
arthroplasty, ventral slot procedure, and smooth pins
 mentioned in this chapter, only the BP prosthesis
adjacent canine cervical motion units. Vet Surg
is titanium. The other TAA prostheses are CoCr,
2007;36(8):729-741.
uo  paids-snd a Au yno
Alvine FG, Conti SF. The AGILITY ankle: Mid- and long-
 The STAR prosthesisis the first three-component
term results. Orthopaede 2006;35(5):521-526.
TAA to receive FDA approval. T
 The meniscal
Anderson PA, Rouleau JP, Toth JM, et al. A comparison
of simulator-tested and retrieved cervical disc pros-
design is similar to the BP prosthesis. The tibial
theses: Invited submission from the joint section
 component is anchored with two bars (Wood and
meeting on disorders of the spine and peripheral
Deakin 2003). Success rates for the STAR prosthe-
nerves. J Neurosurg Spine 2004;1(2):202-210.
sis are similar to those described for the BP
Barbagallo GM, Corbino LA, Olindo G, Albanese V.
prosthesis.
Heterotopic ossification in cervical disc arthroplasty:
Is it clinically relevant? Evid Based Spinal Care J
2010;1(1):15-20.
Tarsal arthroplasty in small animals
Barrey C, Mosnier T, Jund J, et al. In vitro evaluation
 of a ball-and-socket cervical disc prosthesis with
CTranial geometric center. J Neurosurg Spine 2009;11(5):
Likely indications for tarsal arthroplasty in veteri-
538549.
nary patients include traumatic arthritis, degen-
 Benninger MI, Seiler GS, Robinson LE, et al. Effects of
erative joint disease secondary to developmental
anatomic conformation on three-dimensional motion
abnormalities (e.g., talar ridge osteochondritis dis-
of the caudal lumbar and lumbosacral portions of the
secans [OCD]), and erosive immune-mediated
vertebral column of dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006;67(1):
43-50.
polyarthritis. Two canine studies have helped
Bertagnoli R, Yue JI, Pfeiffer F, et al. Early results after
establish normal range of motion angles in flexion/
ProDisc-C cervical disc replacement. J Neurosurg
 extension and extermal/internal rotation. Through
Spine 2005a;2(4):403-410.
a swing-stance cycle, the tarsal joint angle tra-
Bertagnoli R, Yue JJ, Shah RV, et al. The treatment of
adde u ar rudosno e ssiaa
disabling single-level lumbar discogenic low back
115 through 140 degrees and an internal/external
pain with total disc arthroplasty utilizing the prodisc
range from approximately -5 to -15 degrees (Kim
prosthesis. Spine 2005b;30(19):2230-2236.
Boileau P, Avidor C, Krishnan SG, et al. Cemented poly-
et al. 2008; Fu et al. 2010). As noted in the section
ethylene versus uncemented metal-backed glenoid
on TWA, hyperextension injury of the canine
components in total shoulder arthroplasty: A prospec-
carpus typically disrupts the palmar fibrocartilage
tive, double-blind, randomized study. J Shoulder
 in addition to the palmar carpal ligaments. Trauma
Elbow Surg 2002;11(4):351-359.
affecting the tibiotarsal joint in small animals does
Breit S, Kunzel W. Shape and orientation of articular
facets of cervical vertebrae C3-C7 in dogs denoting
not have a similar issue. However, TAA does
require intact collateral ligaments and ligamen-
axial rotational ability: An osteological study. Eur J
Morphol 2002;40:43-51.
tous  reconstruction and appropriate
healing
Brenner BC, Ferlic DC, Clayton ML, Denmis DA. Survi-
would likely be necessary prior to performing
vorship of unconstrained total shoulder arthroplasty.
TAA. Alternatively, as has been reported in some
J Bone Joint Surg Am 1989;71(9):1289-1296.
220 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Brewer BJ, Wubben RC, Carrera GF. Excessive retrover-
 Dooris AP, Goel VK, Grosland NM, et al. Load-sharing
sion of the glenoid cavity: A cause of non-traumatic
 between anterior and posterior elements in a lumbar
posterior instability of the shoulder. J Bone Joint Surg
motion segment implanted with an artificial disc.
Am 1986;68(5):724-731.
Spine 2001;26(6):E122-E129.
Buchowski JM, Anderson PA, Sekhon L, Riew KD.
 Espinosa N, Walti M, Favre P, Snedeker JG. Misalign-
Cervical disc arthroplasty compared with arthrodesis
ment of total ankle components can induce high joint
for treatment of myelopathy: Surgical technique.
contact pressures. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2010;92(5):
J Bone Joint Surg Am 2009,91(2):223-232.
1179-1187.
Cavaliere. CM and Chung KC. A systematic review of
Feeney LC, Cheng-Feng L, Marcellin-Little DJ, et al.
total wrist arthroplasty compared with total wrist
Validation of two-dimensional kinematic analysis of
arthrodesis for rheumatoid arthritis. Plast Reconstr
walk and sit-to-stand motion in dogs. Am J Vet Res
Surg 2008a; 122(3):813-825.
2007;68(3):277-282.
Cavaliere CM, Chung KC. Total wrist arthroplasty and
Fox TJ, Cil A, Sperling JW, et al. Survival of the glenoid
total wrist arthrodesis in rheumatoid arthritis: A deci-
component in shoulder arthroplasty. J Shoulder Elbow
sion analysis from the hand surgeon's perspective.
Surg 2009;18(6):859-863.
J Hand Surgery 2008b;33(10):1699-1674.
Fu YC, Torres BT, Budsberg SC. Evaluation of a three-
Cavaliere. CM and Chung KC. A cost-utility analysis of
dimensional kinematic model for canine gait analysis.
non-surgical management, total wrist arthroplasty
Am J Vet Res 2010;71(10):1118-1122.
and total wrist arthrodesis in rheumatoid arthritis.
Garrito BJ, Wilhite J, Nakano M, et al. Adjacent-level
J Hand Surg 2010; 35(3):379-391.
cervical ossification after Bryan cervical disc arthro-
Chang U-K, Kim DH, Lee MC, et al. Changes in adjacent-
plasty compared with anterior cervical discectomy
level disc pressure and facet joint force after cervical
and fusion. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2011,93(13):
arthroplasty compared with cervical discectomy and
1185-1189.
fusion. J Neurosurg Spine 2007a;7(1):33-39.
Gartsman G, Elkousy H, Warnock K, Edwards T,
Chang U-K, Kim DH, Lee MC, et al. Range of motion
Connor D. Radiographic comparison of pegged and
change after cervical arthroplasty with ProDisc-C
keeled glenoid coponents. J Shoulder Elbow Surg
and Prestige artificial discs compared with anterior
2005;14(3):252-257.
cervical discectomy and fusion. J Neurosurg Spine
Goffin J, Casey A, Kehr P, et al. Preliminary experience
2007b;7(1):40-46.
with the Bryan cervical disc prosthesis. Neurosurgery
Chin PYK, Sperling JW, Cofield RH, et al. Complications
2002;51(3):840-847.
of total shoulder arthroplasty: Are they fewer or dif-
Goffin J, Geusens E, Vantomme N, et al. Long-term
ferent? J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2006;15(1):19-22.
follow-up after interbody fusion of the cervical spine.
Chung SK, Kim YE, Wang KC. Biomechanical effect
J Spinal Disord Tech 2004;17(2):79-85.
 o r    o
Gougoulias N, Khanna A, Maffulli N. History and evo
A
study with finite element analysis.
 Spine
lution in total ankle arthroplasty. British Med Bull
2009;34(12):1281-1286.
2009;89(1):111-151.
Cobb TK, Beckenbaugh RD. Biaxial total-wrist arthro-
Gougoulias NE, Khanma A, Maffulli N. How successful
plasty. J Hand Surg Am 1996;21(6):1011-1021.
are current ankle replacements: A systematic review
Cofield RH. Total shoulder arthroplasty with the Neer
of the literature. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2010;468(1):
 prosthesis. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1984;66(6):899-906.
199-208.
Cofield RH, Daly PJ. Total shoulder arthroplasty with a
 Groh GI. Survival and radiographic analysis of a glenoid
tissue-ingrowth glenoid component. J Shoulder Elbow
Surg 1992;1(2):77-85.
J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2010;19(8):1265-1268.
Collins D, Tencer A, Sidles J, Matsen F Edge displace-
Groh GI, Heckman MM, Curtis RJ, et al. Treatment of
ment and deformation of glenoid components in
 fractures adjacent to humeral prosthesis. J Shoulder
response to eccentric loading. The effect of prepara-
Elbow Surg 2008;17(1):85-89.
tion of the glenoid bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am
Gupta A. Total wrist arthroplasty. Am J Orthop
1992;74(7):501-507.
2008;8(Suppl.):12-16.
da Costa RC. Cervical spondylomyelopathy (Wobbler's)
Gwynedd PE, Sekhon LH, Sears WR, Duggal N. Com-
in dogs. Vet Clin N Am Sm Anim Pract (Small Animal)
plications with cervical disc arthroplasty. J Neurosurg
2010;40(5):881-913.
Spine 2006;4(2):98-105.
Doets HC, Brand R, Nelissen RG. Total ankle arthro-
Haddad SL, Coetzee JC, Estok R, et al. Intermediate
plasty in inflarmmatory joint disease with use of
and long-term outcomes of total ankle arthroplasty
two mobile-bearing designs. J Bone Joint Surg Am
and ankle arthrodesis: A systematic review of the
2006;88(6):1272-1283.
literature. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2007;89(9):1899-
Doets HC, van Middelkoop M, Houdijk H, et al. Gait
1905.
analysis after successful mobile bearing total ankle
Harrop JS, Youssef JA, Maltenfort M, et al. Lumbar
replacement. Foot Ankle Int 2007;28(3):313-322.
adjacent segment degeneration and disease after
Emerging Arthroplasties 221
arthrodesis
5 and total disc arthroplasty.
Spine
Menon J. Universal total wrist implant: Experience with
2008;33(15):1701-1707.
a carpal component fixed with three screws. J Arthro-
Hasan SS, Leith JM, Campbell B, et al. Characteristics of
plasty 1998;13(5):515-523.
umsatisfactory shoulder arthroplasties. J Shoulder
Neer CS, Morrison DS. Glenoid bone-grafting in total
Elbow Surg 2002;11(5):431-441.
shoulder arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am
Herzberg G. Prospective study of a new total wrist
1988;70(8):1154-1162.
arthroplasty: Short-term results. Chirurgie de la main
 Neer CS, Watson KC, Stanton FJ. Recent experience in
2011;30(1):20-25.
total shoulder replacement. J Bone Joint Surg Am
Hofstetter M, Gédet P, Doherr M, et al. Biomechanical
1982;64(3):319-337.
analysis of the three-dimensional motion patterm of
van Ooij A, Oner FC, Verbout AJ. Complications of arti-
the canine cervical spine segment C4-C5. Vet Surg
ficial disc replacement: A report of27 patients with the
2009;38(1):49-58.
Charite disc. Spine 2003;28(0):369-383.
Holler PJ, Brazda V, Dal-Bianco B, et al. Kinematic
Palmer AK, Wermer FW, Murphy D, Glisson R. Func-
motion analysis of the joints of the forelimbs and hind
tional wrist motion: A biomechanical study. J Hand
limbs of dogs during walking exercise regimens. Am
Surg Am 1985;10(1):39.
J Vet Res 2010;71(7):734-740.
Pelletier MH, Langdown A, Gllies RM. Photoelastic
Hvid I, Rasmussen O, Jensen NC, Nielsen S. Trabecular
comparison of strains in the underlying glenoid with
bone strength profiles at the ankle joint. Clin Orthop
metal-backed and all-polyethylene implants. J Shoul-
Relat Res 1985;199:306-312.
der Elbow Surg 2008;17(5):779-783.
Kim J, Rietdyk S, Breur G. Comparison of two-
 Pickett GE, Rouleau JP, Duggal N. Kinematic analysis of
 dimensional and three-dimensional systems for kine-
the cervical spine following implantation of an artifi-
matic analysis of the sagittal motion of canine
cial cervical disc. Spine 2005;30(17):1949-1954.
hindlimbs during walking. Am J Vet Res 2008;69(9):
Post M, Jablon M. Constrained total shoulder arthro-
1116-1122.
plasty: Long-term follow-up observations. Clin
Kitaoka HB, Patzer GL, Ilstrup DM, et al. Survivorship
Orthop Relat Res 1983;173:109-116.
analysis of the Mayo total ankle arthroplasty. J Bone
Post M, Jablon M, Miller H, Singh M. Constrained total
Joint Surg Am 1994;76(7):974-979.
shoulder joint replacement: A critical review. Clin
Knecht SI, Estin M, Callaghan JI, et al. The Agility total
Orthop Relat Res 1979;144:135-150.
ankle arthroplasty. Seven to sixteen-year follow-up.
 Pracyk JB, Traynelis VC. Treatment of the painful motion
J Bone Joint Surg Am 2004;86(6):1161-1171.
segment: Cervical arthroplasty. Spine 2005;30(16S):
Kofoed H, Saltzman C. Scandinavian 
Total Ankle
S23-S32.
Replacement 
(STAR).
Clin Orthop
Relat Res
Pyevich MT, Saltzman CL, Callaghan JI, Alvine FG. Total
2004;424:73-80.
ankle arthroplasty: A unique design. Two to twelve-
Krause FG, Windolf M, Bora B, et al. Impact of complica-
year follow-up. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1998;80(10):
tions in total ankle replacement and arthrodesis.
1410-1420.
J Bone Joint Surg Am 2011;93(9):830-839.
Rizzo M, Beckenbaugh R. Results of biaxial total wrist
Lascelles BDX, Roe SC, Smith E, et al. Evaluation of a
arthroplasty with a modified (long) metacarpal stem.
pressure walkway system for measurement of vertical
J Hand Surg 2003;28(4):577-584.
limb forces in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res
Roberto RF, McDonald T, Curtiss S, et al. Kinematics
2006;67(2):277-282
of progressive circumferential ligament resection
Le H, Thongtrangan I, Kim DH. Historical review of
(decompression) in conjunction with cervical disc
cervical arthroplasty. Neurosurg Focus 2004;17(3):
E1-E9.
2010;35(18):1676-1683.
Litchfield RB, McKee MD, Balyk R, et al. Cemented
Saltzman CL, Mann RA, Ahrens J, et al. Prospective
suuodus ieaunu jo ux paquauaun snsiaa
controlled trial of STAR total ankle replacement
in total shoulder arthroplasty for osteoarthritis of the
versus ankle fusion: Initial results. Foot Ankle Int
shoulder: A prospective, randomized, double-blind
2009;30(7):579-593.
clinical trial-A JOINTs Canada Project. J Shoulder
 Sidaway BK, McLaughlin RM, Elder SH, et al. Role of
Elbow Surg 2011;20(4):529-536.
the tendons of the biceps brachi and infraspinatus
Matsen FA, Clark JM, Titelman RM, et al. Healing of
muscles and the medial glenohumeral ligament in the
reamed glenoid bone articulating with a metal
maintenance of passive shoulder joint stability in
humeral arthroplasty: A canine model. J Orthop Res
dogs. Am J Vet Res 2004;65(9):1216-1222.
2005;23(1):18-26.
Snyder JT, Tzermiadianos MN, Ghanayem AJ, et al.
McAfee PC, Cunningham B, Dmitriev A, et al. Cervical
Effect of uncovertebral joint excision on the motion
disc replacement—porous coated motion prosthesis:
response of the cervical spine after total disc replace-
A comparative biomechanical analysis showing the
ment. Spine 2007;32(26):2965-2969.
key role of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Spine
Sperling JW, Cofield RH, Rowland C. Minimum fifteen-
2003;28(20S):S176-S185.
year follow-up of Neer hemiarthroplasty and total
222 Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
ro sr  pe sd u ise ri
ground reaction force in trotting dogs. Vet Surg
younger. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2004;13(6):604-613.
2010;39(7):863-869.
Sperling JW, Cofield RH, Schleck CD, et al. Total shoul-
Wall B, Nove-Josserand L, O'Connor DP, et al.
der arthroplasty versus hemiarthroplasty for rheuma-
Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty: A review of
 toid arthritis of the shoulder: Results of 303 consecutive
results according to etiology. J Bone Joint Surg Am
cases. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2007;16(6):683-690.
2007;89(7):1476-1485.
Stengel D, Bauwens K. Ekkermkamp A and Cramer J.
Wilke HJ, Wenger K, Claes L. Testing criteria for spinal
 Efficacy of total ankle replacement with meniscal-
implants: Recommendations for the standardization
bearing devices: A systematic review and meta-
of in vitro stability testing of spinal implants. Eur
  1   '
Spine J 1998;7(2):148-154.
109-119.
Wirth MA, Rockwood
CA Jr.Current concepts
Takwale VJ, Nuttall D, Trail IA, Stanley JK. Biaxial total
review—Complications of total shoulder-replacement
arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
1996;78(4):
tis. J Bone Joint Surg (Br) 2002;84:692-699.
603-616.
Taljanovic MS, Jones MD, Hunter TB, et al. Joint arthro-
Wirth MA, Rockwood CA Jr. Glenohumeral instability
plasties and prostheses. Radiographics 2003;23(5):
following
shoulder
 arthroplasty.
.Orthop
Trans
1295-1314.
1995;19(4):459.
Torchia ME, Cofield RH, Settergren CR. Neer total
Wirth MA,Korvick DL, Basamania CJ, et al. Radiologic,
shoulder arthroplasty: Long-term results. J Shoulder
mechanical, and histologic evaluation of 2 glenoid
Elbow Surg 1997;6(6):495-505.
prosthesis designs in a canine model. J Shoulder
Tsukamoto S, Tanaka Y, Maegawa N, et al. Total talar
Elbow Surg 2001;10(2):140-148.
replacement following the collapse of the talar body
Wood PL, Deakin S. Total ankle replacement: The results
as a complication of total ankle arthroplasty. J Bone
in 200 ankles. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2003;85(3):
Joint Surg (Am) 2010,92(11):2115-2120.
334-341.
Tu TH, Wu JC, Huang WC, et al. Heterotopic ossification
Woolson ST, Pottorff GT. Disassembly of a modular
after cervical total disc replacement: Determination by
femoral prosthesis after dislocation of the femoral
CT and effects on clinical outcomes. J Neurosurg
component. A case report. J Bone Joint Surg Am
Spine 2011;14(4):1-3.
1990;72(4):624-625.
Voss K, Galeandro L, Wiestmer T, et al. Relationship of
 Youm Y, Flatt AE. Design of a total wrist prosthesis. Ann
body weight, body size, subject velocity, and vertical
Biomed Eng 1984;12(3):247-262.
14
Custom Total Joint Arthroplasty
Denis J. Marcellin-Little and Ola L.A. Harrysson
Custom orthopedic implants are primarily used to
unique implant designed and fabricated for a
manage complex orthopedic situations. For total
 specific patient and situation.
joint arthroplasties, custom implants are used to
 Because the desigm and fabrication of custom
manage bone loss, abnormalities in bone shape or
implants is time-consuming, technically demand-
structure, or unusual bone sizes. Custom implants
ing, and costly, commercial implants, when avail-
may be used as part of limb-sparing procedures,
able, are always preferred over custom implants.
to fill large bone defects, or to replace a missing
Patients that receive custom implants may be
 adeuo s jo asodmd au juaas qu ro aog
 particularly small or large, or may have bones of
is to describe the rationale, features, fabrication,
an unusual shape because of previous injury or
and applications of custom implants for use in
 disease or because of their breed or species.
 companion animals.
 Custom implants may be used to fil large bone
 defects (Liska et al. 2007), where they represent an
alternative to intercalary allografts, autoclaved
The need for custom orthopedic
autografts, extracorporeally irradiated autografts,
implants
vascularized autografts, or distraction osteogene-
sis (Kiatisevi et al. 2009).
Custom implants are intended for the manage-
ment of unusual patients or unusual situations,
where conventional commercial implants cannot
Fabrication of custom implants
 ssad e n saar ,s,  a s aq
is customized to a specific application or patient.
Custom metal implants are generally designed
 In some instances, a custom total joint replacement
and fabricated by bioengineers within commercial
refers to the use of commercially available compo-
 or academic laboratories. Some commercial fabri-
nents that are combined in a manner that 
is
cation laboratories are freestanding, others are
patient-specific (Sporer and Della Valle 2010). In
part of large medical implant companies. In vet-
other instances, a custom implant refers to a
erinary medicine, several companies offer custom
Adoances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
223
224Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
Table 14.1
 Implant companies offering custom orthopedic implants to veterinarians
Company
BioMedtrix LLC
INNOPLANT
Synthes Vet (WWest
Veterinary
(Boonton, N)
(Hannover, Germany)
Chester, PA}
Instrumentation
Limited
(Sheffield, U.K.)
Custom division
BioMedtrix-Customs
INNOPLANT
Surgeon Response
V.1. Custom
Medizintechnik
Group (SRG)
Implants
Creation date
1989
2005
2007
1985
Design
In house
In house
In house
In house
 capabilities
Fabrication and 
In house and business
In house
In house or approved
 In house
finishing
association with
vendors
multiple human
implant vendors
Quality control
In house
In house
In house
In house
Products
Total joints and
Custom metal, plastic,
Implants with FDA
Plates and
trauma forveterinary
or bioresorbable
clearance (510K or
screws
 applications
implants for the
other)
management of
Modification of almost
deformities, trauma,
any implant from the 
 and neoplasia
Synthes catalog
Most common
Total hip replacements
Custom hip
 Arthrodesis implants,
Medial
products
(cemented and
prostheses for humans
design and production
pantarsal bone
cementless), elbow
of special surgical
plates
replacements, knee
instruments
replacements, and
intramedullary fixator
 system
Particular
Biomechanical
Custom total hip
Patient-specific
Custom hybrid
expertise
analysis for the
prostheses
 implants for 
joint arthrodesis
development of
craniomaxillofacial
plates
medical prostheses
(CMF) applications 
Aeujaan pue ueuny u! sueldu! woisno Supioid sajuedwos lle jo is!l e jou s! siul apio jeageudie u! pas!le
medicine.
implants, including BioMedtrix (Boonton, NJ),
be used to manipulate and modify 3D computer
INNOPLANT
(Harnover,
Germany),
Kyon
models to create implants. These implants may
Pharma (Boston, MA), Synthes Vet (West Chester,
have complex features and geometries. Haptic
PA), and Veterinary Instrumentation (Sheffield,
devices have been used to sculpt cranial implants
U.K.) (Table 14.1).
and for oral implant surgery (Ai et al. 2006;
Custom implants are often based on patient
Kusumoto et al. 2006). Our research group uses a
 imaging, usually computed tomography (CT) scan
haptic pen (PHANTOM Omni, SensAbie Tech-
nologies, Woburn, MA) to shape freeform implants
dimensional (3D) computer models that are then
(Figure 14.2; Marcellin-Little et al. 2010b). Implants
 exported into modeling or computer-aided design
 -u aq Aeu sapow randon (e woy pauaisap
(CAD) software (Marcellin-Little et al. 2008,
ufactured by adding thin layers of material to each
 2010b). Implants are thenn created using CAD soft-
other. This process, described below, is named
ware (Figure 14.1). Haptic feedback devices may
direct metal fabrication.
Custom Total Joint Arthroplasty 225
beam that repeatedly melts thin layers of metal
A
powder to construct 3D objects (Marcellin-Little
et al. 2010a). Layer thicknesses may be as thin as
50 μm. Electron beam melting (EBM) was first
reported as part of Morgan Larsson's Master of
Science thesis at Chalmers University (Goteborg.
Sweden). Arcam AB (Molndal, Sweden) first com-
mercialized an EBM machine in 2003. Approxi-
mately 85 machines are in use worldwide and
B
more than one-third of them are used for implant
fabrication (Wohlers 2011). As an alternative, laser-
based processes have been developed to a point
where metal parts can be fabricated by lasers.
These processes include selective laser melting
(SLM; 3D Systems, Rock Hill, SC), laser engineered
net shaping (LENS; Optomec, Albuquerque, NM),
and direct metal laser sintering (DMLS; EOS
GmbH, Krailling, Germany). Selective laser sinter-
ing (SLS) machines were first introduced in 1990.
These machines could only be used with polymer
 materials. Later, the first metal applications of SLS
produced porous parts that could not be used for
implants. The first solid metal implants produced
Figure 14.1   Three-dimensional computer models
using the SLS/DMLS process were made in 2000.
representing lateral(A) and ventral (B) views of the
mandible of a cat with a gingival fibrosarcoma located on
The material properties required for orthopedic
the labial side of the base of the third lower left incisor
implants, however, were not achieved until a few
(tooth #303). The fibrosarcoma is not visible on the images.
years later. Direct metal fabrication processes
As part of the surgical excision of that fibrosarcoma, a
based on the DMLS concept are currently pro-
rostral mandibulectomy is planned and a custom implant
vided by a number of companies around the world
(in purple) has been designed to replace the missing portion
and there are approximately 600 machines in use
of the mandible. The rostral mandibulectomy includes the
worldwide. Implants made by use of direct metal
removal of the lower incisors, canines, and one left lower
premolar (#307). The cranial aspect of the implant is solid
fabrication may have solid and porous portions
and the caudal aspects of the implant have flanges that
that have structural and nonstructural roles. Direct
extend on the ventral and labial sides of the hemiman-
metal fabrication may be used to make metal
dibles. The screw holes in the implants are placed so that
plates with shapes that match the bone surface.
they do not interfere with tooth roots.
Our research group has, for research purposes,
assessed the biocompatibility of EBM-processed
titanium alloy (Haslauer et al. 2010) and has fab-
Implants intended to replace cortical bone or to
ricated custom titanium alloy plates that fit the
sustain high mechanical loads are named struc-
surfaces of the distal aspect of the femur and the
tural implants. They most often have a solid metal
proximal aspect of the tibia (Marcellin-Little et al.
core. Solid custom implants are most often made
2008, 2010b). These plates had acceptable mechan-
of titanium alloy (Ti6Al4V), but they may be made
ical properties when evaluated n vitro. Clinically,
of cobalt-chromium alloy (CoCr), commercially
our group has made EBM-processed and DMLS-
pure (CP) titanium, or less commonly, of stainless
processed implants placed on the maxilla, the
steel. Structural implants may be machined, cast,
radius, the tibia, and the calcaneus of dogs and
forged, or may be made using direct metal fabrica-
cats. The clinical performances of these implants
tion, also know as freeform fabrication, additive
have been satisfactory based on their proper fit
manufacturing, or layered manufacturing. Direct
and the absence of infection, inflammatory
metal fabrication relies on an electron or laser
response, or mecharical failure.
Figure 14.2 A dog presented with a large, chronic oronasal fistula secondary to head trauma (A). The bone defect is visible
on a 3D rendering based on a CT scan (B), highlighted with small spheres. A haptic pen is used to create a plate into that
e uo pay pue suiaw weag uopaa suisn apew s! aeld aul (i) aeld aui ainas oi papuaui saloy aneld pue (a) aeld
polymer replica of the skull (F). The plate is then implanted into the patient (G). On radiographs made 3 months after
surgery, the plate is stable (H).
Fabrication of structural implants
 Investment casting is a high-precision casting
process that is commonly used for implant fabrica-
There are three main manufacturing processes
tion (Eufinger and Wehmoller 1998). A tool is used
used in the fabrication of commercial implants:
 to create wax patterns that are placed on a casting
forging, investment casting, and machining.
tree. The wax tree is dipped in ceramic slurry.
Forging is a process where metal is "smashed"
 creating a thin shell. The tree is fired in a furnace,
between two tool halves to form the desired shape.
 melting the wax and increasing the strength of the
The development time for forging tools is mea-
ceramic. Molten metal is cast into the ceramic
sured in months. Forging is costly and is primarily
shell, which is broken after the metal has solidified
used for mass production. While the forging
to retrieve the implants. The casting process can
process results in implants with the highest 
 handle complex geometries, but if the wax pattern
strength, some of the common implant metals are
 is made using a mold, then the same geometrical
very hard and require very high forces during
 restrictions as forging apply. One disadvantage of
their production. This makes implant production 
the investment casting process is the reduced
more challenging. One disadvantage of forging is
 material properties of the implants produced,
that implants cannot have any undercut geome-
 compared with wrought (forged) material. The
tries, which limits their design. Forged implant 
 use of additive manufacturing to produce the wax
 components usually require secondary finishing
pattern would be required to make custom
steps before they can be used.
implants using investment casting, otherwise the
Custom Total Joint Arthroplasty 227
cost and lead time would be too long. Secondary
preventing contamination and in preventing the
finishing is needed after investment casting.
 construct from cooling down during the building
Machining (manual or computer numerical
process. Both EBM and DMLS processes claim to
control [CNC]) is a process where metal material
 meet the American Society for Testing and Materi-
is removed using a sharp tool that is either rotat-
als (ASTM) standards for chemical composition
ing (milling) or stationary (turming). Machining
 of final parts as well as mechanical properties,
can be used to fabricate metal implants from bar
that have been verified by independent sources
stock or for the finishing process of cast or forged
(Harrysson et al. 2008).
i Suuou ON paads-uo Kepo sundu
used to mass-produce metal implants. There are
some geometrical limitations to machining pro-
Fabrication of nonstructural implants
cesses, so the complexity of machined implants
is limited. Another disadvantage of machining
Molding(polymethyimethacrylate)
complex implants from bar stock is that most of
-s m s se n a  n 
Cranial implants are used to fill skull defects
resulting from traumatic injuries to the head. Since
cantly increases costs when biocompatible metals
cranial defects are different for each patient, these
 are used. The fabrication of custom implants using
machining is often easier than using forging or
implants are all custom-made. The conventional
process for the production of implants includes
casting but modern CNC machines need to be pro-
the use of a polymer additive process to fabricate
grammed and the more complex the geometry is,
a model of the patient's skull based on a CT scan.
the more difficult the programming will be. Pro-
A wax implant is hand-shaped, using the skull
gramming costs per implant are small when
model as a base, and a silicone mold is created.
implants are mass-produced, but these costs are
Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) is cast into the
much higher for custom implants.
silicone mold and sterilized before implantation.
Freeform fabrication, described earlier in the
A more modern fabrication process uses a CT scan
text, is the additive process where thin layers of
of the patient to design a cranial implant that will
material are added to each other to build struc-
be printed on a polymer-based additive manufac-
tures. Titanium alloy (Ti6Al4V), cobalt-chromium,
turing process and used as master for the silicone
 and stainless steel implants have been made using
rubber mold. This approach removes the hand-
freeform fabrication. Freeform fabrication has
shaping step and seems to improve the accuracy
several key advantages over other fabrication
of the process and reduce fabrication time. A
methods. It may be used to fabricate implants with
polymer-based SLS process to fabricate cranial
complex shapes and with solid and porous por-
implants directly from PMMA powder (OXPEKK-
tions (Harrysson et al. 2008). Freeform fabrication
IG OsteoFab, Oxford Performance Materials,
is less labor intensive than investment casting for
South Windsor, CT) has recently been approved
custom implants. In one report, the preparation of
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This
a custom implant using EBM took 25 hours, com-
pared with 78 hours for the preparation of an iden-
process is expected to reduce the number of
tical implant using investment casting. DMLS
process steps, to decrease production time, and to
 appears better suited to the production of small
increase accuracy.
implants than EBM because DMLS implants have
Porous metal implants
a finer texture (i.e., lower surface roughness) that
requires less finishing (Figure 14.3).2 However, the
Several types of porous metal implants are com-
titanium alloy powder used for DMLS fabrication
mercially available. These materials have a high
is finer than the powder used for EBM fabrication.
 porosity, ranging from 60% to 80%, and a low
The finer powder costs approximately twice as
modulus of elasticity that resembles cancellous
much as the coarser powder. The EBM system con-
bone (Levine 2008). Some porous metals blur
structs the implant under vacuum, while the
the line between cancellous and cortical bone.
DMLS system uses an inert gas that varies based
Regenerex (Biomet, Warsaw, IN), for example,
on the alloy being used. The vacuum assists in
has a reported compressive strength that is
Figure 14.3F
Photographs of unfinished custom implants intended for the cat in Figure 14.1. The implants were made with 
direct metal laser sintering (DMLS; A) or electron beam melting (EBM; B). The surface finish and hole geometry of the DMLS
implant (C) is smoother and more accurate than the EBM implant (D). Magnifications bars are 1-mm long. When evaluated
with a 3D microscope, the surface profile of the DMLS implant is smoother for the DMLS implant (mean surface roughness:
' wm z1 sauynoi aens ueaw) uedw Wa3 ayi ueui (3 um 6
228
Custom Total Joint Arthroplasty 229
Figure 14.4 Tridimensional rendering (A) and mediolateral radiograph made immediately after surgery (B) showing a
tibia. The tibial implant has porous portions that are visible as darker bands on the rendering and as bands with low
uaag sey lueldwi aul 'yloouypai sujaw weag uopala luisn apew sem jueldui aul 'ydeisopei aui uo Amedoipe
combined with a commercial total knee implant. Thirteen plaster beads containing cisplatin have been placed on the tissue,
caudal to the prosthetic tibia.
approximately 150MPa, halfway between cortical
porous portions are included directly on the
bone (270MPa) and cancellous bone (20MPa)
implant (Figure 14.4; Harrysson et al. 2008). Porous
(Wirtz et al. 2000).
portions may be used for bone ingrowth or to
 Porous tantalum is made by a chemical vapor
decrease the modulus of elasticity or weight of
infiltration process, during which pure tantalum
implants.
metal is precipitated onto a reticulated vitreous
the RVC within the tantalum (Zardiackas et al.
Applications of custom implants
2001). Porous titanium meshes may be made by
fixing pure titanium on a polyurethane foam scaf-
Custom orthopedic implants may have a struc-
fold (later removed) to form a porous structure
tural role of buttressing a bone or neutralizing the
that resembles cancellous bone (Klika et al. 2007).
forces placed on that bone. Nonstructural implants
Refer to Chapter 3 for additional information. For
 are usually made of porous metal. They may be
implants made by use of freeform fabrication,
used to fill defects in bones, often in conjunction
230Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
with a joint replacement or a limb-sparing proce-
years (Osagie et al. 2012). However, 21% of the
dure, after trauma or tumor removal.
procedures required revision at the time of follow-
Custom implants are, by definition, produced in
up. Custom stems have also been used to manage
limited numbers. They may be made in small
d Ard pany rae sso aoq m saed
batches, for example, for the reconstruction of the
arthroplasty. One report described 17 patients
 acetabulum with bone loss after aseptic loosening
who
0received custom hydroxyapatite-coated
asau “(otoz alea eaa pue 1anods) sumy u
 cementless stems with two 6.5-mm-diameter distal
small-batch implants may be used in areas of the
 cross-locking screws (Sotereanos et al. 2006). Mean
body with consistent anatomical features, such as
follow-up duration was 5.3 years. The mean func-
long bones. Alternatively, custom implants may be
(29-s1 auei) 5 wony paaoidu anoss diu leuog
patient-specific, N-of-1 products. Patient-specific
to 76 (range: 40-87) over the study period.
custom implants are used in areas of the body
Structural custom implants have been used in
where an exact fit is deemed necessary.
craniomaxillofacial surgery for the reconstruction
 Custom-designed implants have been available
of bone defects (Singare et al. 2006). As discussed
for decades, but modern customization started in
above, most cranial implants are made of PMMA.
the early 1990s, after the introduction of software
The infection rate associated with the use of
packages for conversion of medical images. The 
PMMA cranial implants is relatively high and may
Ard u pasn puend woisno rendod isou
 require implant removal. In a series of 99 patients
arthroplasty has been the prosthetic hip stem.
with warfare-related craniectomy defect recon-
Custom prosthetic stems were introduced in the
struction, successful reconstruction was achieved
late 1980s. These stems were based on 3D CT mod-
in 95% of patients (Kumar et al. 2011). The com-
eling (Robertson et al. 1987; Aldinger et al. 1988)
plication rate was 27% and the reoperation rate
or on a mold of the intramedullary cavity pre-
was 18%. Five implants were removed because of
pared during surgery (Mulier et al. 1989; Robinson 
 infections. This infection rate was low compared
and Clark 1996). Custom femoral cups and stems
with the rate after placement of bone flaps from
have been used in large patient cohorts. One
bone banks in thie theater of war or the infection
report mentioned that 1123 custom hip stems were
rate from previous reports. This lower infection
implanted between 1992 and 1994 and described
rate was considered to be the result of stringent
p eisndsp d m sud ans 1
were less than 40 years old at the time of surgery
(Figure 14.5; Akbar et al. 2009). Seventy-two
cementless custom cups and stems were implanted
R
and followed for 10-16 years (mean: 14 years).
 Over the study period, 70 stems (97%) and 67 cups
(93%) remained stable (i.e., free of loosening or
revision).
The Identifit system (DePuy, Warsaw, IN) gave
asad anra  e a ss
femoral offset, version, and height and to achieve
a high-percentage canal fill. However, the results
 of 53 primary Identifit prostheses were deemed
disappointing, with 17% of the stems requiring
revision after a mean follow-up period of only 30
months (Robinson and Clark 1996). Custom stems
have been used in patients with severe skeletal
deformities. In a small case series of 14 primary
hip arthroplasties for nine patients with skeletal
Figure 14.5 Radiograph of a 60-year-old female made 21
years after implantation of a custom prosthetic stem.
dysplasia, the mean functional hip score (Haris
Osseointegration of the stem and low cup wear are visible.
hip score) increased from 45 (range: 24-58) to 72
(Image courtesy of Dr. Peter Aldinger, Protestant-Clinical-
(range: 47-89) over a mean follow-up period of 3
Center, Stuttgart, Germany, reproduced with permission)
Custom Total Joint Arthroplasty 231
enrollment criteria, including excellent soft tissue
A
coverage, no preoperative clinical, biochemical
(based on erythrocyte sedimentation rate), or
radiographic evidence of infection (based on CT
evaluation). Since metal (titanium) implants have
a lower infection rate than PMMA implants,
research aimed at the fabrication of cranial
implants using direct metal additive manufactur-
ing is ongoing. Because solid cranial metal
implants may be heavy and
may
ycause
discomfort, titanium mesh implants have been
used (Tadros and Costantino 2008). Custom
 implants that may be made of PMMA or titanium
have also been used to fill orbitofacial defects
(Scholz et al. 2007). In a case series of nine consecu-
tive patients with orbitofacial defects, with a mean
follow-up of 4.3 years (range: 6 months to 10
years), no significant complications occurred
(Groth et al. 2006).
 implanted in the 1970s. They appear to have good
subjective long-term benefits. In one report involv-
ing 32 patients, 25% of the implants were removed
within 10 years and the remaining 75% were sat-
isfactory (Vinnars et al. 2002). In another report,
however, lytic bone lesions, as a result of silicone
synovitis, were identified in 37 of 39 patients who
had received silicone scaphoid or lunate implants,
and the authors recommended not performing
Figure 14.6 Titanium prostheses made to replace the
replacement of carpal bones with silicone implants
scaphoid (A) and lunate (B) carpal bones. The prostheses
(Egloff et al. 1993). Structural carpal lunate and
are made of polished titanium. These prostheses are
scaphoid prostheses made of titanium have been
used (Swanson titanium carpal lunate and carpal
Technology Inc., Arlington, TN, reproduced with
scaphoid implants, Wright Medical Technology.
permission)
Arlington, TN; Figure 14.6). The long-term success
 of these implants has been satisfactory (Swanson
 deformation, and lower peak plate strains (Guillou
et al. 1997).
et al. 2008, 2011).
 In veterinary medicine, specialized implants
A custom feline total knee implant that was also
aua ae siaqunu lus u pannpod ae je
 intended for use as a human metacarpophalangeal
For example, bone plates with shapes that
joint prosthesis was described in the early 1980s
match the surface of the proximal portion of the
(Walker et al. 1983). A custom total knee replace-
tibia are available from several manufacturers
ment implant was implanted in a dog in June 2005
(Langenbach and Marcellin-Litfle 2010). Synthes
(Liska et al. 2007). The dog had a chronic, highly
Vet, for example, has six plates that cover the
comminuted femoral condylar fracture resulting
 range of tibial sizes seen in companion animals
sm juedn wosn v 'pumom jousmo e wo
(Figure 14.7). Specialized plates are also available
for carpal and tarsal arthrodeses (Figure 14.8;
in titanium alloy (Ti6Al4V) (Figure 14.9). The
McKee et al. 2004). These plates have mechanical
augment had porous proximal, distal, medial, and
advantages over conventional bone plates, includ-
lateral surfaces. The augment was cemented to a
ing lower construct compliance, less angular
conventional femoral component. The procedure
In hip replacement, a custom hip stem was used
A
for limb sparing in a dog with osteosarcoma of the
proximal portion of the femur. The long stem was
fixed to an allograft of the proximal portion of the
femur and to the host femoral shaft using PMMA
(Liptak et al. 2005). Our research group has
designed and fabricated custom hip stems for the
canine femur. These porous stems with a low
modulus of elasticity were designed for research
purposes with the intent to create a stem that
would decrease bone strain in the proximal portion
of the femur when the joints are loaded (Figure
14.11; Harrysson et al. 2008; Marcellin-Litle et al.
s    rs  
could be used to make prosthetic stems for very
B
large or small patients or for patients with femora
with an abnormal shape.
Structural custom metal implants have been
used in a few companion animals. In one report,
a custom metal implant was used to replace a frac-
euoon pumouana e u auoq jesien [enuan paiml 
et al. 1988). A metal block was cut from square-
stock titanium alloy, machined, and hand-finished.
The block was fixed with a bone screw inserted
mediolaterally into the fourth tarsal bone. The dog
returned to racing 14 weeks after surgery and
raced successfully for 7 months afterward.
Transdermal  osseointegrated  implants
shave
 been placed in companion animals (Drygas et al.
 implants are designed to replace the distal portion
Figure 14.7E
Bones plates intended for placement on the
of the thoracic or pelvic limb. Transdermal osseo-
proximal portion of the tibia of companion animals. The
array of plates (A) shows plates that receive screws
 animals and clinical application in humans 
measuring 2.0, 2.4, 2.7, or 3.5 mm. These plates have
is
configurations for the left or right tibia. On the 3.5-mm
expanding (Sullivan et al. 2003; Lundberg et al.
plate (B), the contour of the proximal portion of the plate is
 2011). Since 2005, our research group has implanted
visible. Three types of holes are seen. They are intended for
nine transdermal osseointegrated implants on the
nonlocking screws or for either a locking or nonlocking
radius, tibia, or calcaneus of cats and dogs. Our
screw with a side-by-side configuration (large arrowhead)
implants are custom-made to match the inner or
Or a stacked configuration (small arrowheads). (Pictures
outer surfaces of the recipient bones (Figures
courtesy of Synthes, reproduced with permission)
14.12-14.15). The initial postoperative fixation of
 implants may be achieved through press-fit aug-
mented by bolts or screws. The long-term bone
was clinically successful and a loss of stability of
fixation may be achieved through bone growth
the bone-cement or cement-implant interfaces
 into porous metal surfaces, including plasma-
was not identified on follow-up radiographs made
sprayed titanium, porous tantalum, or porous tita-
4 years after surgery (Figure 14.10). Other custom
nium. The skin-implant interface may have a
total knee implants have been implanted more
locking flange used to prevent skin retraction.
recently in cats and dogs in the United Kingdom,
The transfer of autogenous mucosal tissue has
 Germany, and in the United States.?-s
been proposed as an alternative to the simple
R
Figure 14.8 This bone plate (A), intended for pantarsal arthrodesis (B), may be placed on the medial or lateral aspects of 
the tibia and tarsus. The plate is shaped so that its proximal and distal portions form a 139-degree angle. The plate has
3.5-mm holes proximally and 2.7-mm holes distally. It has nine dynamic compression holes allowing interfragmentary
compression, and one round hole used to place a screw in the talus (small arrowhead; A). The increased distance between
screws on the distal aspect of the tibia (large arrowhead; A) allows the placement of a screw from the caudal aspect of the
calcaneus to the tibia. (Adapted from McKee et al. [2004l, BM] Group, London, U.K., reproduced with permission)
Figure 14.9 Tridimensional rendering (left), computer model of the bone and prosthetic component (center), and custom
gunshot wound. The customization includes a machined titanium alloy augment that is fixed to the conventional femoral
component using polymethylmethacrylate. (From Liska et al. [2007l, John Wiley & Sons, Malden, MA, reproduced with
permission)
233
Figure 14.10 Mediolateral (A) and craniocaudal (B) radiographs of the custom canine prosthetic stifle joint in Figure 14.9
  s ae s e pe a a ai   e sr  
along the femoral and tibial shaft are not noted, with the exception of focal cortical atrophy, present on the distal and 
 cranial aspect of the femur. The atrophy appears unchanged, compared with the atrophy present on radiographs made 30
monthsearlier.
234
Figure 14.11  A custom prosthetic femoral stem has been made using electron beam melting. The stem is made of titanium
[eixoid aul wg'l x z'l Alaewixoidde sunseaw sllan uopauesaop 2igwoui jo apew s! Apog sll (tla!li ole
portion of the stem is 0.50 ± 0.25-mm wider than its distal portion to enable press-fit implantation, matching the shape of
arrowheads. Magnification bar: 10mm. The cell size and geometry may be adjusted to change the stiffness of the implant.
235
Figure 14.12 A custom implant intended for transdermal osseointegration has been made of titanium alloy using electron 
beam melting. The implant is contoured to the surface of the distal portion of the radius. The dog had sustained a traumatic
amputation of the manus when he was a few weeks old. The implant has a contoured mesh basket used for the fixation of
musculoskeletal soft tissues, subcutaneous tissues, and skin. The implant has been affixed to a polymer replica of the bone.
236
Figure 14.13  Postoperative radiographs after implantation of the transdermal osseointegrated implant shown in Figure
14.12. The soft tissues have been attached within and outside the mesh basket. A perforated titanium alloy ring has been
placed on the threaded portion of the transdermal implant to hold skin sutures.
Figure 14.15F
 Photograph of the dog in Figures 14.13 and
14.14. The dog is walking with a training foot made using a
Figure 14.14Photograph of the skin-implant interface of
ball filled with polyurethane.
the dog in Figure 14.13, made 3 months after surgery. The
scar tissue is associated in part with the dog's initial
injuries. There is no drainage at the skin-implant interface.
237
apposition of skin to a smooth or textured metal
been used to repair maxillary and mandibular
rod.° The clinical results of transdermal osseointe-
 fractures (Boudrieau 2004). Custom implants may
grated implants appear promising and should be
be beneficial to fill voids with complex geometry
validated through a larger case series followed
(Figure 14.2).
 prospectively for a longer period of time.
Porous metal augments have been used to fill
 For small dogs and cats, clinicians often use
bone defects in humans undergoing revision
small commercial implants, including miniplates
 arthroplasties or limb sparing. The commercially
and 1.1 mm or 1.5mm bone screws. Subjectively,
available porous metal implants include Trita-
 small patients seem more vulnerable to atrophic
nium Dimensionalized MetalTM (Stryker Ortho-
 nonunions and bone resorption that results from
paedics, Mahwah, NJ), Regenerex, Stiktite (Smith 
limb disuse, immobilization, or stress protection.
& Nephew, Memphis, TN), and Trabecular Metal
The resulting bone loss greatly complicates
(Zimmer, Warsaw, IN) (Levine 2008). The most
the management of their orthopedic problems.
common use of porous metal implants is preman-
Custom implants may be beneficial because they
ufactured metal augments used to enhance the
may allow fragment stabilization and fill bone
fixation of the acetabular cup in humans with peri-
defects. In the example illustrated below, a young
 prosthetic bone loss. These augments may be pos-
Pomeranian was referred with an infected atro-
terosuperior augments, in patients with loss of
phic nonunion with severe radial bone loss. The
acetabular dome (i.e., the human equivalent of the
dog had chronic limb disuse with loss of carpal
dorsal rim), or anterior medial augments, in
motion. A CT scan of the forelimbs was made. The
 patients with segmental bone loss of the anterior
radius scan of the nonfractured forelimb was used
 or posterior columns (i.e., the human equivalent
to design a custom titanium bone plate. The plate
of the ilium or ischium) (Sporer and Della Valle
filled the radial defect and achieved a pancarpal
2010).
arthrodesis (Figure 14.16). Skull and mandibular
In veterinary medicine, a porous tantalum
fractures are also challenging in small dogs and
augment was used in a dog with radial osteosar-
cats. Human craniomaxillofacial implants have
ampanond Suds-q e go ed se 'eon
Figure 14.16 A papillon was presented with a septic atrophic nonunion after management of a radial fracture with a plate,
a sm pue ( pue g) pauisp sem aeld wnsn  pagosai pey sni aul () aeny uexy ieuaxa ue Ag pamo
using direct metal laser sintering. The plate was placed on a CT-based photopolymer replica of the antebrachium (D and E)
nonweight-bearing lameness.
Custom Total Joint Arthroplasty 239
(MacDonald and Schiller 2010). A low-grade sur-
References
gical site infection was diagnosed 80 days after
V Xpaaneaiasuoo paseueu sem l pue Kiasins
Abou-ElFetouh A,1
Barakat A,Abdel-Ghany
K
pulmonary lesion consistent with metastatic
rog sanerduan padoiond-piden papin-ianduo
disease was diagnosed on thoracic radiographs
segmental mandibular osteotomies: A preliminary
248 days after surgery. The owner described the
report. Int J Med Robot 2011;7:187-192.
dog's quality of life as very good 332 days after
Ai Z, Evenhouse R, Leigh J, et al. New tools for sculpt-
ing cranial implants in a shared haptic augmented
surgery.
reality environment. Stud Health Technol Inform
 Patient-specific drill guides or osteotomy guides
2006;119:7-12.
may also be prepared when ostectomies are
Akbar M, Aldinger G, Krahmer K, et al. Custom stems 
plarmed. In an in vitro study involving proximal
for fermoral deformity in patients less than 40 years of
tibial leveling osteotomies in bone models, custom
age: 70 hips followed for an average of 14 years. Acta
guides increased the accuracy of these osteotomies
Orthop 2009;80:420-425.
 Aldinger G, De Pellegrin M, Kusswetter W. The person-
and increased the mechanical properties of the
      
resulting constructs (Marcellin-Little et al. 2008). A
1988;14:429433.
custom osteotomy guide was used during the sur-
 Boudrieau RJ. Miniplate reconstruction of severely com-
gical correction of an antebrachial osteotomy in
minuted maxillary fractures in two dogs. Vet Surg
one dog (Crosse and Worth 2010). In humans,
2004;33:154-163.
Crosse KR, Worth AJ. Computer-assisted surgical cor-
custom osteotomy guides for total knee arthro-
rection of an antebrachial deformity in a dog. Vet
plasty are commercially available (TruMatch,
DePuy). Custom osteotomy guides for segmental
Comp Orthop Traumatol 2010;23:354-361
Drygas KA, Taylor R, Sidebotham CG, et al. Transcuta-
 mandibular osteotomies, hip joint surface arthro-
neous tibial implants: A surgical procedure for restor-
plasty, and intra-articular distal radial malunions
ing ambulation after amputation of the distal aspect
have also been reported (Oka et al. 2008; Raaij-
of the tibia in a dog. Vet Surg 2008;37:322-327.
maakers et al. 2010; Abou-ElFetouh et al. 2011).
Egloff DV, Varadi G, Narakas A, et al. Silastic implants
of the scaphoid and lunate. A long-term clinical study
with a mean follow-up of 13 years. J Hand Surg Br
1993;18:687-692.
Endnotes
Eufinger H, Wehmoller M. Individual prefabricated tita-
nium implants in reconstructive craniofacial surgery:
Clinical and technical aspects of the first 22 cases.
1. Harrysson OLA, Cormier DR, Marcellin-Little DJ,
Plast Reconstr Surg 1998;102:300-308.
et al. Direct fabrication of metal orthopedic implants
-  a  sd    d
using electron beam technology. In: Proceedings of
ous transcutaneous amputation prosthesis (ITAP) for
the Sotid Freeform Fabrication Symposium.Austin, TX,
2003, p. 439.
Groth MJ, Bhatmagar A, Clearihue WJ, et al. Long-term
2. Cansizoglu O, Marcellin-Little D, Harrysson OLA.
efficacy of biomodeled polymethyl methacrylate
Comparison of direct metal fabrication technologies
implants for orbitofacial defects. Arch Facial Plast
for production of medical implants. In: Proceedings of
Surg 2006;8:381-389.
the RAPID 2009 Conference and Exposition. Schaum-
Guillou RP, Frank JD, Sinmott MT, et al. In vitro mechani-
burg, IL, 2009.
cal evaluation of medial plating for pantarsal arthrod-
3. Fitzpatrick N, Ash K, Meswania J, et al. Constrained
esis in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2008;69:1406-1412.
 total knee replacement, a novel prosthesis for salvage
Guillou RP, Demianiuk RM, Sinmott MT, et al. In vitro
arthroplasty in the dog and cat. In: Proceedings of the
mechanical evaluation of a limited contact dynamic
World Veterirury Orthopedic Conference. Bologna, Italy,
compression plate and hybrid carpal arthrodesis plate
2010, pp. 566-567.
for canine pancarpal arthrodesis. Vet Comp Orthop
4. Arbabian M, Berhend A. Personal communication,
Traumato1 2011;25:408-417.
2012.
Harrysson OLA, Cansizoglu O, Marcellin-Little DJ, et al.
5. Breed AG. Tubby tabby gets revolutionary new knee
 Direct metal fabrication of titanium implants with tai-
joint. Associated Press, January 27, 2012.
lored materials and mechanical properties using elec-
6. DVM Newsmagazine. Advancing medicine: Dr. Erick
tron beam melting technology. Mater Sci Eng C
Mau e Sursn Aiasins inyssaons e inoqe sel iassg
2008;28:366-373.
prosthetic limb procedure under testing at Colorado
Haslauer CM, Springer JC, Harrysson OLA, et al. In vitro
State University. October 1, 2008.
biocompatibility of titanium alloy discs made using
240Advances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement
direct metal fabrication. Med Eng Phys 2010;32:
Oka K, Moritomo H, Goto A, et al. Corrective osteotomy
645-652.
for malunited intra-articular fracture of the distal
Kiatisevi P, Witoonchart K, Pattarabanjird N, et al. Pal-
radius using a custom-made surgical guide based on
liative limb salvage using a retrograde nail-cement
three-dimensional computer sinmulation: Case report.
 composite after intercalary resection of a distal femoral
J Hand Surg Am 2008;33:835-840.
osteosarcoma: A case report. J Orthop Surg (Hong
Osagie L, Figgie M, Bostrom M. Custom total hip
Kong) 2009;17:383-387.
arthroplasty in skeletal dysplasia. Int Orthop
Klika AK, Murray TG, Darwiche H, et al. Options for
2012;36:527-531.
acetabular fixation surfaces. J Long Term Eff Med
Raaijmaakers M, Gelaude F, De Smedt K, et al. A
Implants 2007;17:187-192.
custom-made guide-wire positioning device for
Kumar AR, Bradley JP, Harshbarger R, et al. Warfare-
hip surface replacement arthroplasty: Description
related craniectomy
defect
t reconstruction: Early
and first results. BMC Musculoskelet Disord
success using custom alloplast implants. Plast Recon-
2010;11:161.
str Surg 2011;127:1279-1287.
Robertson DD, Walker PS, Granholm JW, et al. Desigm
Kusumoto N, Sohmura T, Yamada S, et al. Application
of custom hip stem prostheses using three-dimensional
of virtual reality force feedback haptic device for
CT:
modeling. J Comput Assist Tomogr 1987;11:
804-809.
2006;17:708-713.
 Robinson RP, Clark JE. Uncemented press-fit total hip
Langenbach A, Marcellin-Litle DJ. Management of
arthroplasty using the Identifit custom-molding tech-
concurrent patellar luxation and cranial cruciate liga-
ment rupture using modified tibial plateau levelling.
study. J Arthroplasty 1996;11:247-254.
J Small Anim Pract 2010;51:97-103.
Scholz M, Wehmoller M, Lehmbrock J, et al. Recon-
Levine B. A new era in porous metals: Applications in
struction of the temporal contour for traumatic tissue
orthopaedics. Adv Engin Biomat 2008;10:788-792.
loss using a  CAD/CAM-prefabricated
1titanium
Liptak JM, Pluhar GE, Dermell WS, et al. Limb-sparing
implant-case report. J Craniomaxillofac Surg 2007;35:
surgery in a dog with osteosarcoma of the proximal
388-392.
femur. Vet Surg 2005;34:71-77.
Singare S, Yaxiong L, Dichen L, et al. Fabrication of cus-
Liska WD, Marcellin-Little DJ, Eskelinen EV, et al.
tomised maxillo-facial prosthesis using computer-
Custom total kmee replacement in a dog with femoral
aided design and rapid prototyping techniques. Rapid
condylar bone 1oss. Vet Surg 2007;36:293-301.
Prototyping J 2006;12:206-213.
Lundberg M, Hagberg K, Bullington J. My prosthesis as
Sotereanos N, Sewecke J, Raukar GJ, et al. Revision total
a part of me: A qualitative analysis of living with an
hip arthroplasty with a custom cementless stem with
distal cross-locking screws. Early results in femora
2011;35:207-214.
with large proximal segmental deficiencies. J Bone
MacDonald TL, Schiller TD. Limb-sparing surgery
Joint Surg Am 2006;88:1079-1084.
using tantalum metal endoprosthesis in a dog with
Sporer SM, Della Valle C. Porous metal augments: Big
osteosarcoma of the distal radius. Can Vet J 2010;51:
hopes for big holes. Orthopedics 2010;33:651.
497-500.
Sullivan J, Uden M, Robinson KP, et al. Rehabilitation of
Marcellin-Little DJ, Harrysson OLA, Cansizoglu O.
the trans-femoral amputee with an osseointegrated
In vitro evaluation of a custom cutting jig and custom
 prosthesis: The United Kingdom experience. Prosthet 
plate for canine tibial plateau leveling. Am J Vet Res
Orthot Int 2003;27:114-120.
2008;69:961-966.
Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G, et al. Carpal bone
Marcellin-Little DJ, Cansizoglu O, Harrysson OLA, et al.
titanium implant arthroplasty. 10 years' experience.
In vitro evaluation of a low-modulus mesh canine
Clin Orthop Relat Res 1997;342:46-58.
       
Tadros M, Costantino PD. Advances in cranioplasty: A
1089-1095.
simplified algorithm to guide cranial reconstruction
Marcellin-Little DJ, Sutherland BJ, Harrysson OLA, et al.
of acquired defects. Facial Plast Surg 2008;24:
In vitro evaluation of free-form biodegradable bone
135-145.
plates for fixation of distal femoral physeal fractures
Vinmars B, Adamsson L, Af Ekenstam F, et al. Patient-
in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2010b;71:1508-1515.
rating of long term results of silicone implant arthro-
McKee WM, May C, Macias C, et al. Pantarsal arthrod-
plasty of the scaphoid. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg
esis with a customised medial or lateral bone plate in
Hand Surg 2002;36:39-45.
13 dogs. Vet Rec 2004;154:165-170.
Walker PS, Nunamaker D, Huiskes R, et al. A new
           
approach to the fixation of a metacarpophalangeal
produce intraoperatively custorn femoral prosthesis
joint prosthesis. Eng Med 1983;12:135-140.
from measurements taken during the surgical proce-
Wirtz DC, Schiffers N, Pandorf T, et al. Critical evalua-
dure. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1989;249:97-112.
tion of known bone material properties to realize
Custom Total Joint Arthroplasty 241
anisotropic FE-simulation of the proximal femur.
Yocham GD, Sanderson C, Rounds P, et al. Central tarsal
J Biomech 2000;33:1325-1330.
implant in a racing greyhound. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
Wohlers T. Additive Manufacturing and 3D Printing
1988;193:840-842.
State of the Industry. ArnualWorldwide Progress
Zardiackas LD, Parsell DE, Dillon LD, et al. Structure,
Report. Fort Collins, CO: Wohlers Associates,
metallurgy, and mechanical properties of a porous
2011.
tantalum foam. J Biomed Mater Res 2001;58:180-187.
Note: Page numbers in bold refer to tables; those in italics refer to figures.
Abduction, 136
Anatomical stem, 44, 66, 69
Abrasive wear,58,59,63,64,65,66,145
Anconeal process of the ulna, 166, 166, 167, 171, 177
Acetabular cup
Angle of lateral opening, acetabular cup, 54, 55, 63, 83,
equator, 45, 101
84, 87, 87,100, 100, 101, 104, 114, 115, 115,116, 116
failure, loosening, 3, 4, 83
 Angular position, 131
metal-backed, 34, 54, 58, 59, 95
Annealing, 32
pole, 45
Annular ligament, elbow joint, 167
polyethylene,3,5,6,7,8,23,54,57,69
Antibiotic-impregnated polymethylmethacrylate, 126
tantalum, 23, 23
Anibiotics, 25, 42
Acetabular cup impaction, 88
Argon, 63
Acetabular cup positioner, 88, 89, 100
Army-Navy retractor, 100
Acetabular labrum, 53
Arthrodesis, 69, 151, 152, 197,200, 231, 233
Acetabulum, 53
Arthroscopy, 153
Acetate template, 74, 157
Articular facets, 200, 202
Achilles tendon, 214
Aseptic 1oosening, 3,4, 5, 7,35, 39,42, 49, 83, 123, 135,
Acid etching, 13, 25
139, 146,203, 205, 206, 208,216, 230
Adduction, 136,
Aseptic lymphocyte-dominated vasculitis-associated
Adductor muscle, 55, 56,121
lesion, 35
Adhesive wear, 58, 145
Autogenous graft, 113, 117, 120, 183, 187, 189, 190, 223,
Alendronate, 124
232
Allergic reaction, 35
Avascular necrosis of the femoral head, 71, 72
Allograft, 112, 126, 223, 232
Avulsion
Alumina, 34, 36, 144
prosthetic cup, 117
 American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
prosthetic stem, 97, 116
standard, 13,14
Axis of rotation, elbow joint, 169, 188
Amorphous carbon, 33, 34
Amputation, 69, 82,114, 151, 161, 194, 195, 197
Bacterial cell wall, 26
Amputee, 81
Bactericidal surface, 26
Anatomical axis, stifle joint, 134, 135, 135
Bead blasting, 20, 41
Adoances in Small Animal Total Joint Replacement, First Edition. Edited by Jeffrey N. Peck and Denis J. Marcellin-Little.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
243
244Index
Bearing surfaces, 24, 33
Cement restrictor plug, 42, 43, 60, 61, 92, 93, 94
Biceps brachi muscle, 211
Cement-bone interface, 41, 59, 71, 74, 83, 118, 142, 145,
Bicortical screw, 80,97,102, 110, 116
173, 182, 232
Biocompatibility, 22, 225
Cement-in-cement revision, 123
Biofilm, 26
Cemented implant fixation, 39,40, 49,59,79,144,172,
Biomaterials, 39
173,206,212,216
Biphosphonate, 25
Cement-implant interface, 41, 59, 83, 94, 118, 145, 174,
Biplanar fluoroscopy, 147, 168, 168
232
Bisphosphonate, 124, 126
Cementing technique,41, 49, 60, 60, 83, 89,94, 181, 191
Blankart lesion, 208
Cementless implant fixation, 39, 42, 49, 144, 172, 174
Bonding strength, 25
Center of rotation, hip joint, 62
Bone cement, 6,7, 41,85, 87,89, 92, 114, 153, 159, 181,
Central tarsal bone, 232
182
Centralization, implant, 60, 61, 94
Advanced Cement Mixing System, 42
Centralizer mold, 89
Bone cement mantle, 20, 42, 59, 60, 85, 110, 118, 121,
Centrifugation, 42, 60, 61
147,173
Ceramic bearing surface, 31, 34,58, 63,144
 Bone cement polymerization, 42, 61
Ceramic-on-ceramic bearing surface, 35, 58, 63, 200
Bone defect, 25, 223
Ceramic-on-polyethylene bearing surface, 35, 63, 200
Bone densitometry, 147
Ceramic slurry, 12, 226
Bone density, 66
Cerclage wire, 93, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 120, 121, 123,
Bone ingrowth, 5, 6,8,14,21,26, 44,45,61,65,66, 69,
125
70, 74, 81, 82, 96, 114, 175, 191,232
Cervical disc arthroplasty, 199
 Bone morphogenetic protein, 25, 126
Cervical disc prosthesis, canine, Adamo prosthesis,
Bone ongrowth, 42, 45, 47, 61, 66,96
204, 205
 Bone remodeling, 66
Cervical disc prosthesis, human
Bone resorption, 5,7, 24, 33, 40, 58, 60, 121, 123, 124,
Bryan prosthesis, 201, 202
126, 145, 176
 Discoserv prosthesis, 201
Bone stock, 109, 110, 112
PCM prosthesis, 201
Bone wax, 203
Prestige prosthesis, 201
Border lubrification, 63
ProDisc-C, Synthes, 201
 Boundary lubrification, 63
Champagne fluted femur, 74, 92
Broach, femoral, 91, 94
Chromium, 13,35,63
Bur, 98, 120, 123, 188
Clean room, 18
 Clinical trial, uncontrolled
Cable cerclage bands, 120
total elbow replacement, 7
Calcium ion, 25
total hip replacement, 3, 4, 5, 7
Calcium-phosphate coating, 14, 216
total knee replacement, 144, 147, 160
Calibrated radiograph, 74, 75
Closed cup, 54
Canal fill, 45, 82
Cobalt, 35
femur, 74
Cobalt chromium, implant, 4,5, 6, 7,8, 9, 13, 21,23, 33,
Canal flare, femur, 82
39,44,44, 60,63, 65,67,122, 144, 153,176, 184,
Cancellous bone,24, 57,60,91, 92,126, 143,144, 145,
200, 212, 219,225
229
Coffin lid osteotomy, 116, 119, 121, 121, 123
Capitulum, humerus, 164, 165
Cold weld, 119, 121
Carbon, 13
Collar, stem, 42, 64, 85, 92, 93
Carbon fiber-reinforced polyethylene, 32
Collarless, stem, 66
Cartridge component system, 45
 Composite beam model, prosthetic femoral stem, 64
Casting, 14, 63,226,227
Compression molding, 23, 63
Cat, 71, 71
Compressive stress
Caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy, 199
bone cement, 64
Caudal cruciate ligament, 134, 136, 139
bone-implant interface, 40
Cavitation, 58
Computed tomography, 85,168, 182, 182,185,203, 224,
Cell membrane, 27
226,227,238
Cement gun, 41
Computer numerical control (CNC), 12, 227
Cement pressurization, 42, 49, 60, 61, 64, 65, 94
Computer-aided design, 224
Index245
Condyle, humerus, 164, 165,188
Direct metal laser sintering, 225, 228, 238
Conformity, bearing surfaces, 59, 142, 172, 172
Disc hermiation, 200
Constrained prosthesis, 7, 152, 200, 201, 205, 210, 214
 Dodecahedron open cells, 22, 235
linked,139, 140,151,163,172,172
Domino lesion, 200
umlinked, 139, 140, 172
Dorsal acetabular rim wear, 74, 87, 119, 120
Contact pressure distribution, stifle joint, 137, 137, 142
Dorsal longitudinal ligament, 204
Contact stresses, polyethylene, knee prosthesis, 142
Double-loop cerclage wire, 93, 109, 112, 117, 125
Corrosion, 13,63, 65,67
Dril1 bit, 88, 89, 91, 98, 98, 99, 101, 102, 192
Corrosive wear, 58
Drive distance, femoral stem, 93
Cortical bone, 57, 60, 229
 Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, 66
Cotyloid cavity,53
Ductility, 12, 13
Coupled motion, spine, 200, 201, 204
Crack coalescence/propagation, 57, 58
Eburmated bone, 85, 88
Cracking,32, 36
Edge loading, 144
Cranial cortex, femur, 91, 93, 157
 Electron beam, 225
Cranial cruciate ligament, 73, 73, 134, 136, 139, 151,
irradiation, 32
153
melting, 225, 229, 235,236, 237
Cranio-caudal radiographic view
Elution, biphosphonate, 25
femur, 74, 75, 76, 96, 193
Endurance limit, 57, 60
stifle joint, 156
Erosive wear, 58
Craniodistal chamfer, 147
Etching, 13, 25
Creep, 60, 64
Ethylene oxide sterilization, 63
Crimp, 153
Etidronate, 124
Cross-linking polyethylene, 32, 63, 64
Excision arthroplasty, 69, 74
Cup anteversion,54, 62, 100, 100, 104,114, 116
Explantation, 4,5, 8, 84, 110, 112, 127, 128
Cup inclination, 54, 55
Extended trochanteric osteotomy, 120, 121, 121, 125
Cup lateralization, 62
Extermnal fixator pin, 27
Cup retroversion, 54, 83, 87, 87
Extermal forces, 132
Curette, 124
Extermal obturator muscle, 56,56
Custom implants, 223,225, 226, 228, 229, 230, 232, 233
External rotator muscles, 81, 114
Custom implants, Veterinary,
Extracapsular stabilization, stifle joint, 153
BioMedtrix-Customs, 224, 224
Extramedullary tibial alignment guide, 157, 158
INNOPLANT Medizintechnik, 224, 224
Kyon Pharma, 224
Fatigue failure, 57, 57, 58, 60, 119, 121, 122, 145,202
Surgeon Response Group, 224, 224
Fatigue resistance, implant, 13, 14
V.1. Custom Implants, 224, 224
Femoral cutting block, 158, 158, 159, 159
Custom osteotomy guide, 239
Femoral head, 53
 Custom total hip replacement, human, Identifit
Femoral head ostectomy, 74, 112
system, 230
Femoral neck anteversion, 53, 62
Customization, 66, 74
Femoral neck inclination, 47,53, 54,97
Cytokines,5,32,58,123
Femoral neck version, 47
Femoral offset, 53, 54, 55, 62
Debonding, 20,40, 60, 83, 94,121, 125
Femoral trochlea, 139
Degenerative myelopathy, 72
Fibrous tissue, 24, 24
Delamination, 32, 64, 145
Files, fenmoral canal, 98, 98, 99, 99
Denervation, 69
Finger packing, polymethylmethacrylate, 60
Densitometry, bone, 147
Finishing reamer, 86, 87, 88
Deoxypyridinoline, 126
Finite element analysis, 20,58, 97, 137,142, 143,203
Diameter, femoral head, 70, 79, 97, 117
Fissure, 5, 82, 83, 92, 110
Diamond-like carbon, 33, 34, 63, 97
Fluid film lubrification, 63
Diaphysis, femur, 74, 77, 92, 126
Foraminal stenosis, 200
Diffusion bonding, 13, 22
Foreign-body giant cell, 24
Digital radiograph, 74
Forging, 12, 14, 63, 226
Digita1 template, 74, 77, 186, 186
Freeform fabrication, 225, 226, 227, 229, 236, 238
Direct metal fabrication, 224, 225, 231
Freer elevator, 103
246 Index
Fretting, 33, 65
Implant
Friction
biological properties, 11
bearing surface, 31, 36, 59, 97
fatigue resistance, 13
bone-implant interface, 40, 61
manufacturing processes, 11
mechanical properties, 11
Gait analysis, 70, 131, 168
metallurgy, 11
Galvanic series, 58
porous, 225, 227, 229, 229
Gamma irradiation, 32
porous coating, 13, 24, 66
sterilization, 63
Inclination, acetabulum, 54
Gas-plasma sterilization, 63
Infection
Gelpi retractor, 100
hematogenous, 26
Gemelli muscle, 56, 56
 intraoperative contamination, 26
Gentamicin, 27
total joint replacement, 3, 4, 83, 84, 183, 185, 195, 215,
Glenohumeral instability, 208, 209
230, 239
Gluteal muscle, 55,56,56,81,95,101
Inflammatory mediators, 5, 32,58, 123, 145
Gracilis muscle, 55, 56
Injection molding, 14
Gravimetric analysis, 31, 36
Interface, bone-implant, 40, 74, 142, 145
Greater trochanter, 72, 75, 77, 82, 89, 91, 92, 93, 95, 110,
 Interface strength, 25, 41
110, 115
Intermal forces, 132
Greater tubercle, 211
Intermal obturator muscle, 56, 56, 98, 103
Grit blasting, 20, 41,42
Interphalangeal joint, 212
Groove, implant surface, 41
 Intradiscal pressure, 200
Ground reaction force, 132, 133, 136
 Intramedullary pin, 90
Grout, polymethylmethacrylate, 60
 Intramedullary plug, 41
Growth plate,72
 Investment casting, 12
Iradiation, 32, 223
Haptic feedback device, PHANTOM Omni, 224,
Ivory, 151, 211
226
Hardness, bearing surface, 36
Jig, femoral stem fixation screws, 101, 102
Harris hip score, 35, 230
Joint capsule, 85, 88, 95, 100, 139, 140, 153
Hatt spoon, 80
Joint reaction force, 54, 59, 132, 134, 134
Head-neck ratio, femur, 53
Jumping distance, 62, 62, 63
Helical implant, 47
Hemiarthroplasty, 205, 209
Keel for implant fixation, 206, 207
Hemispheric acetabular cup, 63, 65
Keyhole, acetabulum, 88, 89, 114
Heterotopic ossification, 202, 203
Kinematics, 131, 132, 147,172, 204
Hip abductor muscles, 53, 54, 62
Kinetic analysis, 82, 84, 153,181, 182, 184, 184, 192, 192,
Histiocyte, 24
194, 194, 213
Histology, 20,24, 83, 97, 146, 207
Kyphosis, 202,203
Hohmanm retractor, 89, 98, 98, 100, 101, 103, 115, 157,
158
Laser beam, 225
Hot isostatic pressing, 12, 34
Lateral collateral ligament
Howmedica canine PCA system, 5, 44, 69, 124
elbow joint, 164, 165, 167,171, 181, 186, 192
Hybrid total hip arthroplasty, 49
stifle joint, 136, 139, 140, 153,
Hydroxyapatite, 25,42, 184, 185,216, 230
Lateral cortex, femur, 47, 49, 66
Hylamer, 32
Lateral epicondyle, humerus, 164, 165, 165
Hypersensitivity, 35, 67
Lateral femoral condyle,133,134, 159
HyProtect silver coating, 27
Lateral radiographic view, pelvis, 74, 75, 77, 96, 103
Laxity, 114
Iliofemoral suture, 82, 114, 115
Lesser trochanter, 75, 93, 98, 110, 77, 97, 110
liopsoas muscle,55, 56, 100
Lesser tubercle, 211
Impingement, 32, 36,58, 62, 82, 86,87,88,95, 100,103,
Ligaments, stifle joint, 136
114
Load transfer, 57, 132, 132, 139, 142
Implant polishing, 18
Locking screw, 45, 46,47, 66, 70, 79, 80, 103, 187,
Implant porosity, 21, 23, 42
193
Index247
Long digital extensor muscle, 153, 157, 158
Metallosis, 35
Loosening, implant, 3,4, 5, 7,35, 39,61, 83,123,135,
Metaphysis, femur, 74, 126, 77
139,146, 203,205, 206, 208, 216
Metatarsal bones, 136
Lordosis,202,203
Meyerding retractor, 85
Low-modulus metal,22,58,227,232,235
Microinterlock, 61
Low-viscosity bone cement, 42
Micromotion, interfacial, 42, 47, 61, 123, 145, 174
Lubrification
Microseparation edge loading, 62
of bearing surface, 31, 63
Microtexturing, 25, 26
fluid film, 34, 36, 63
Migration of particular debris, 24, 25
mixed film, 63
Minimally constrained prosthesis, 140, 169, 172, 182,
thin film, 63
200, 215
 Lumbar disc arthroplasty, 199
Mobile bearing implant, 212,215, 215
Lumbar disc prosthesis, human, ProDisc, 201
Modulus of elasticity, 14, 23, 34, 58, 97, 203, 227
Lumbosacral disease, 72
Molecular bonds, 12
Luxation, hip joint, 71, 72, 81
Molybdenum, 13, 35
Moment, 133, 133,136
Machine finishing, 12, 226, 227
Monocortical screw, 80, 97, 110, 116
Machining, 12, 14, 63, 225
Morphogenetic protein, 25
Macrophage, 5,7, 33,35
Morse taper, 97, 209
Malignancy, 35
Mortise radiographic view, 217, 218
Mathematical model, stifle joint, 134
Mechanical axis, 134, 135, 135, 144, 170, 170
Nanolayer, 26
deviation, 135, 136, 170, 170
 National registry, 49
Mechanical failure, 59, 109
Neck length, femoral stem, 62, 64, 70, 80, 82,83, 95, 97,
Medial acetabular wall, 45, 86, 87, 100, 117, 118
103, 114, 116
Medial collateral ligament
Neoplasia, 74, 81, 84, 139, 205, 210, 214, 225, 229, 232
elbow joint, 164, 164, 167, 171
Neurapraxia, 4, 84, 100, 209
stifle joint, 136, 139, 140, 153, 161
Neurovascular injury, 65
Medial cortex, femur, 47, 66, 91, 93,98, 116
Neutral zone, spine, 201, 204
 Medial epicondyle
Neutralization plate, 110, 111, 112, 116
humerus, 164, 165, 165
Nickel, 13
osteotomy, 184, 188, 189, 191, 191
Niobium, 14
Medial femoral condyle, 133, 134, 135, 159
Nitric acid, 13
Medial patellar luxation, 73, 84, 139, 151
Nitrogen, 13, 63
Mediolateral radiographic view, of the stifle joint, 156
Nobility, metal, 58
Medullary infarction, 4, 81, 84
Nonconstrained prosthesis, 7, 8, 140, 169, 182, 200, 205,
Menisci, 138, 139, 153, 157
212
 Metacarpophalangeal joint prosthesis, 231
Nuclear arthrography, 124
Metal
Nuclear scintigraphy, 85, 124
austenitic phase, 13
ferritic phase, 13
Open cup, 54, 115
polishing, 13
Open-leg lateral radiographic view, femur, 74, 76, 96, 103
rolling, 12
Orthoview software, 77
Metal alloy, 12
Osseointegration, 20, 39,42,45,61,74,97,118,123,
 Metal annealing, 12
126, 196, 230, 232
 Metal bearing surface, 31, 58
Oste0arthritis, 70, 73, 86,147, 151,153,154, 156,156,
Metal-on-ceramic bearing surface, 35, 58, 63
160, 161, 163, 173,175,176, 184, 192,194, 205,214
Metal cold working, 12, 14
Osteoblast,25, 26, 27
Metal grain size, 12
Osteochondritis dissecans, 153
Metal hot working, 12
Osteoclast apoptosis, 25
Metal implants, 11, 83
Osteoconduction, 25, 26
Metal-on-metal bearing surface, 35,58, 63, 152,200,
Osteoinduction, 25
204
Osteolysis, 5,7,20,24, 31,35, 42,58, 59,60, 64,121,
Metal nobility, 58
123, 195
Metal-on-polyethylene bearing surface, 35, 63, 152, 200
Osteonecrosis, 123
248Index
Osteophyte removal,86,86,88,89,95,100,114,188,
 Porous metal augment 
189,203
Dimensionalized Metal, 238
Osteosarcoma, 81, 84, 232
Regenerex,238
Osteotome, 114
Trabecular Metal, 238
Oxidation, polyethylene, 63, 121
Positioning board, 80, 87, 88
Oxidative wear, 32,58
 Posterior longitudinal ligament, 202
Oxidized zirconium, 34
Postirradiation melting, 32
Oxygen-derived free radicals, 123
Press-fit implant fixation, 5,6, 9, 21,39,40, 42,44, 45,
Oxygen free radicals, 32
46, 65, 78, 79, 80, 91,93, 101, 115,117,152, 175,
191, 206, 212,216, 232
Patellar luxation, 73, 84, 139
Pressure sensitive walkway, 82
Patellar resurfacing, 141, 152
Pronation, 164,165, 166, 167,169, 171, 173
Patellar tendon, 136, 139, 140
Pulsatile lavage, 42, 60, 94
 PC-Fix plating system, 47
Pectineus muscle, 55, 56, 103, 207
Quadratus femoris muscle, 56, 56
Peg for implant fixation, 23, 182, 183, 184, 206, 207,216
Pentoxifylline, 126
Radiation therapy, 14, 74
Perforated implant surface for bone ingrowth, 23, 79,
Radiculopathy, 200, 203
80, 96
 Radiographic assessment
Periarticular fibrosis, 131
Periosteal bone formation, 60, 124, 125
196
Periprosthetic cavity, 24, 24
total hip replacement, 70, 95, 96, 103, 103, 124
Periprosthetic fibrous membrane, 123, 125
total knee replacement, 155, 156, 160, 161, 234
 Phosphate ion, 25
Radiographic magmification, 74, 153
Physical rehabilitation, 81, 82, 151, 153, 155, 160, 189,
Radiolabeled white blood cells, 124
191
Radiolucency, linear, 124
Piriformis muscle, 55, 56
Radiostereometric analysis, 132, 168
Pitting, 58, 145
Radius of curvature, femoral component, 138, 138,
Plasma spraying, 14, 25, 174, 208
140
Plasma stream, 22
Ram extrusion, polyethylene, 63
Plasma-sprayed implant surface, 17, 22, 22, 42, 66, 79,
Range of motion
96,97,216,232
carpus, 211, 212
Polyethylene
elbow, 168, 169, 177,188, 194
acetabular cup, 5, 6, 65
hip,56, 81,95
amorphous form, 32
spine,200, 201,202,204
carbon fiber reinforced, 32
stifle, 131, 132, 132, 153, 159
crystalline form, 32
tarsus, 214, 219
highly cross-linked, 32, 64
Rasp, fenmoral, 91, 92, 93, 94
particulate wear debris, 5, 7,20,24, 25,32, 33,58, 65,
Reamer, 84, 86, 87, 90, 120
145, 208, 212
Reamer, acetabular, 45, 84, 85, 86, 87, 87,88, 89, 89, 90,
ultrahigh-molecular-weight, 32, 33, 36, 39, 45, 58, 63,
90, 91, 92,94, 100, 100, 120
64, 96, 138, 140,144, 153,172, 181, 183, 184, 200
Reamer, femoral, 90, 90, 91
Polyethylene bearing surface, 31, 57, 58, 142, 212, 215
Reaming, acetabulum, 85
Polyethylene button, 141
Rectus femoris muscle, 55, 56, 81
Polymer, SiOxCy, 27, 27
Reduction hook, total hip replacement, 103
Polymer replica, 225, 226, 227
Reflective markers, 131
Polymethylmethacrylate, 14,39,41,42, 49,58,60, 64,
Retroversion, acetabular cup, 62
114,124,153,159,173,204, 227,230, 231
Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty, 210, 210
implant precoating, 20, 41, 64
Revision, surgical procedure, 25, 36, 80, 83, 84, 111, 113,
Polyurethane, 202, 237
117,118, 118, 120, 121, 121, 125, 127, 128, 147,205,
Popliteal tendon, 139
209,214, 230
Pore size, 21, 22, 23, 44
Revision cup, Zurich cementless, 115, 116, 117
Porous coating, 5, 8, 13, 40, 174, 193, 232
Rheumatoid arthritis, 205, 209,211, 212, 213, 214
beads,5,8,14,20,22,22,23,42,144,152
Risedronate, 124, 126
fiber wire / mesh, 13,21, 22,23,42, 66, 69
Rongeur, 90, 94, 95, 98, 114, 188
Index249
Rotator cuff, 205, 208,209, 210
Stiffness, 58, 59, 60
Roughened implant surface, 20, 25, 41, 47, 64
Stiffmness ratio between materials, 40, 57
Stovepipe femur, 79, 110
 Saddle-shaped pelvis, 116
Strain, 57, 64
Sand blasting, 20, 41
Strain, bone surface, 45
Sciatic neurapraxia, 4, 84, 100
Strength, metal, 13
Sclerosis, bone, 72, 112
Stress (force / unit area), 57
Scratching, 58
Stress concentration, 14, 64
Screw fixation,6,8,21,23,45,61,65,66,70,75,79,97,
Stress shielding, 24, 40, 60, 66, 97, 124, 126, 147,
98, 101, 110, 116, 117, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122,
176
144, 161, 183,188, 202,216,230, 232, 233
Stress strain curve, 57
Selective laser melting, 225, 228
Stress versus Log (S/N) curve, 57
Semiconstrained prosthesis, 7, 8, 140, 153, 163, 164,
Subluxation, hip joint, 62,72, 83, 72
181, 182,200, 201, 204, 205, 212
Subsidence, stem, 45,64, 82,91, 93, 109, 111, 116, 118,
Septic arthritis, 74
120
 Serpigenous opacities, 84
Subsurface stress, polyethylene, 142
 Serum metal level, 36
Subtraction arthrography, 124
Shear strength, 23
Supination, 164, 165, 166, 169, 171, 173
Shear stress
Surface conformity, 136, 152
bearing surfaces, 58, 170
Surface fatigue, 58
bone-implant interface, 40, 41, 47, 64, 152
Surface oxide, 13
Silicone, 211,231
Surface roughness, 26, 40
Silver coating, 25,26
Surgical robot, 7
Silver ion, 27
Surgical techmique, total hip replacement, 85
Silver particles, 25, 26, 27
 Swanson titanium carpal lunate and carpal scaphoid
Sintered beads, 5,8, 14,22, 23,42, 44,45, 153
implants, 231, 231
Sintering, 13, 21
Swing phase, 131
 Sliding distance, bearing surfaces, 59, 59, 63
Synovial fluid, 145
Soft tissue balance, 144
Synovial hypertrophy, 200, 202
Solid-phase welding, 58
 Squeaking, bearing surface, 34, 36
Tantalum, 14,21, 22,23, 116, 229,231, 232
Stainless steel
Tantalum augment, 116, 126, 238
hip stem, 3, 204
Tantalum beads, 132
implant,3,8,12,13,27,27,33,63,200,225
Taper, stem, 64, 66
Stance phase, 131
Taper slip design, prosthetic femoral stem, 64
Staphylococcus aureus,26
Technetium pertechnetate, 124 
Staphylococcus epidermidis,27
Templating, 74, 75,77, 77,78,91, 156, 156,185, 186,
Staphylococcus sp., 26,27, 82
186
Starter reamer, 86, 87, 88
Tensile strain, 45, 64
Stem, fixed-head, 3, 4, 69, 79, 79
Tensile strength, implant, 13, 14, 32
Stem, hip
Tensor fascia lata muscle, 55, 56
breakage, 4
Thermal conductivity, 34, 35
cemented, 3,4, 5,6,8, 70, 75
Thermal oxidation of bearing surfaces, 34
explantation, 4,5, 8, 84, 110, 112
Thickness, bearing surface, 59
failure,loosening,4,5,24,47,49, 59,60, 66, 116, 118,
Thigh pain, 66
121, 123,124,126, 128
Thin film lubrification, 63
fixed-head,3,4
Third-body wear, 32,33, 58,59, 67
inmplantation technique, 20
Threaded acetabular component, 14, 14, 47, 65
smooth surface, 24, 24
Tibial component, total knee, 142
stainless stee1, 3
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, 153
Stem, modular, 4, 5,58, 62, 65, 66, 67, 69,70
Tibial plateau slope, 157
Stem anteversion, 90,91, 93,98, 102,102, 118
Tibial tuberosity advancement, 153
Stem centralizer, 20, 60, 61, 89
Tissue necrosis, 36
Stem fit, 74
Titanium, commercially pure (CP) / unalloyed,
Sterilization, 63
implant, 6, 13, 96, 97,225
250 Index
Titanium alloy (Ti6A14V), implant, 5, 6, 7, 12, 14, 21,
Total hip replacement system, canine
26,33,39,44, 44,45,47,60, 63,65,67,69,97,119,
BioMedtrix BFX system, 5, 6, 14, 15, 17, 22,44, 45,
122,144, 176, 200, 219, 225, 231
46, 70, 71,77,78, 80,85, 92, 93, 96, 103,109,113,
Titanium-coated cobalt-chromium implant, 144, 145,
117, 118, 119, 111, 120, 235
219
BioMedtrix Universal system, 70, 78, 78, 80, 85
Titanium mesh implant, 231
Gorman System, 6
Titanium nitride, 32, 33, 33,63
Helica Canine Cementless Hip, 14, 16, 47, 83, 48
Toluidine blue, 20, 24
PCA system, 5, 44, 69, 70, 81, 124
Total ankle arthroplasty, 214
Richards II system, 3, 4
 Total ankle arthroplasty, human
VI Hip, 16
Agility, 217, 217
Zurich system, 6, 16, 18, 33,45, 46,47, 47, 70, 75,77,
Buechel-Pappas, 217, 218
77, 78, 79, 80, 80, 95, 96, 110, 112, 113, 115, 119
Eclipse, 216
Total hip replacement system, canine/feline
INBONE prosthesis, 216
BioMedtrix CFX total hip replacement system, 4, 5,
Salto, 216
6,14,15,41,41,71,77,78,80,85,92,93,96,103,
STAR, 217
110, 113,117, 118, 119, 121
Total disc arthroplasty, 199
Micro Total Hip System, 78, 81, 79
Total elbow replacement, 7, 163, 179
Nano Total Hip System, 79, 79
Total elbow replacement, complication
Total knee replacement, 8, 131, 151
fracture, 192,193, 194,195, 196
Total knee replacement, complication
infection, 192, 194, 195
collateral ligament damage, 160, 161
lateral luxation, 192, 193, 193
fracture, 139, 152
Total elbow replacement, uncontrolled clinical trial, 7,
infection, 139, 152, 153, 155, 160
163, 179, 181, 183, 184, 192, 193,
loosening, 139, 152
Total elbow replacement system, canine
 Total knee replacement, postmortem retrieval, 145, 146
BioMedtrix (Iowa State) system, 8, 49, 163, 165, 171,
Total knee replacement, uncontrolled clinical trial, 144,
172,174, 175, 176, 180, 181, 181, 185, 186, 187
147, 160
BioMedtrix TATE system, 7, 45, 163, 165, 171, 172,
Total knee replacement system, canine
174,175,176,180,185, 185, 186,187,188, 188,189,
BioMedtrix total knee system, 9, 15, 138, 141, 144,
189, 190, 191, 229, 233
153, 155,156, 158, 159, 160, 161, 231
Canine Unicompartmental Elbow, 164, 174
GenuSys Knee System, 141, 144, 145, 146
Sirius system, 164, 174, 175, 180
Total knee replacement system, human, Geomedic
Total hip replacement, 3, 53, 69, 109
prosthesis, 152
Total hip replacement, cemented, 4, 5, 60
Total shoulder arthroplasty, 204
Total hip replacement, complication
Total wrist arthroplasty, human
acetabular fracture, 113
Biaxial prosthesis, 212, 213
aseptic 1oosening, 3,4,5,7,65,83,84,118, 123
Maestro, 212
extraosseous cement granuloma, 4
ReMotion, 212
femoral fissure, 5, 82, 83, 92, 118
Universal 2, 212, 214
femoral fracture, 4, 5, 7, 82, 83, 84, 109, 111, 112, 113,
Trabecular bone,24, 57, 60, 91,92, 126, 143, 144, 145, 229
118, 123
Transcortical plugs for bone ingrowth, 21, 22
femoral medullary infarction, 4, 81, 84, 99
Transdermal osseointegrated implant, 232, 236, 237, 238
infection, 3,4, 83, 84
Translation, stifle joint, 132, 136, 138, 138, 140
intrapelvic hematoma, 4
Transverse acetabular ligament, 54, 85, 85, 100
luxation,4,5,6,7,62,63,67,70,72,81,82,83,84,
Trial reduction, 94, 95, 95, 101, 103, 159, 159
103, 111, 114, 115, 116, 118
Tribology, 31
osteosarcoma, 4, 81, 84
Triple pelvic osteotomy, 82
pulmonary enbolism, 4, 84, 85
Trochanteric fossa, 89, 89, 90, 94, 98
sciatic neurapraxia, 4, 65, 82, 83, 84, 100
Trochlea, humerus, 164, 165
septic loosening, 123, 126
Trunion, stem, 67, 95, 97, 101, 119
Total hip replacement, explantation, 4, 5, 8, 84, 110, 112
Tumor necrosis factor, 123, 126
Total hip replacement, postmortem retrieval, 5, 58, 83
Two-body wear, 58
Total hip replacement, uncemented, 5, 6
Total hip replacement, uncontrolled clinical trial, 3, 4,
Uberschwinger artifact, 124
5,7,81, 82,83
Ulnar ostectomy, 182
Index251
Ulnar osteotomy, 182, 187
Wax mold, 12
Ultimate strength, 57, 60
Wear debris,31, 32,34, 35,36, 58,60, 121,124,145, 208,
Unicondylar knee arthroplasty, 142, 152
212
 Uniplanar fluoroscopy, 147, 195
metal, 36, 59
Urine metal level, 36
polyethylene,5,7,20,24,25,32,33,58,59
Wear
Vacuum, 63
of bearing surfaces, 31, 32, 33, 34, 121, 172,
Vacuum cement mixing, 42, 42, 60, 61
174
Valgus, 72, 72, 90, 116, 118, 136, 139,142, 144, 161
implant,58,59,145
Vanadium, 14
polyethylene, 66, 121, 124, 140, 144
Vancomycin, 26, 27
Wear rate, of bearing surface, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36
Vancouver classification, periprosthetic fracture, 109,
Weight shift, 73
110
Western Ontario and McMasters Arthritis Index
Vapor deposition, 22, 27
(WOMAC), 35
Varus, 90, 91, 92,93, 98,135, 135, 136, 139, 142, 144,
Wobbler's syndrome, 204
169, 169, 170, 171, 175
Wolff's law, 147, 176
Vastus lateralis muscle, 80, 95, 110
Woven bone, 61
Velpeau sling, 211
Wrought cobalt-chromium, 14, 226
Ventro-dorsal radiographic view, pelvis, 74, 75, 77, 96
Version, acetabulum, 54, 55, 62
Yield strength, implant, 12, 13
Version, stem, 90, 91
Yield stress, 216
Viscoelasticity, 57, 60, 64, 66, 67
Yttrium, 35
Vitamin E annealing, 32
Vitreous carbon, 14, 22, 229
Zirconium, 14, 34, 35, 144
Volumetric wear, 31, 35, 59
Zolendronate, 124
von Willebrand factor, 74
Zolendronic acid, 25